These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by the teaching company.
The Great Courses covered a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks. Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you
spend just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lectures are university professors carefully selected by the teaching company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled, Building Great Sentences, Exploring the Writers' Craft, Part 1.
The lecture is Brooks Landon, Professor of English and Collegiate Fellow at the University
of Iowa and Director of the University of Iowa General Education Literature Program.
From 1999 to 2005, Professor Landon served as Chair of the Iowa English Department.
He received his BA in English from Center College in Kentucky and his MA and PhD from
the University of Texas at Austin.
Professor Landon has published widely in the fields of science fiction and contemporary
American literature.
His books include Science Fiction after 1900, From the Steam Man to the Stars, The Aesthetics
of Ambivalence, Rethinking Science Fiction in the Age of Electronic Reproduction, and
Thomas Berger.
He researched, wrote, hosted, and co-produced Watch the Sky, the American science fiction
movie, a 13-week series on science fiction film that was produced and broadcast by Iowa
Public Television in 1983.
He is a member of the Executive Committee of the University of Iowa's Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology Institute.
He has taught courses in contemporary American fiction, literature, and culture of 20th century
America, modern fiction, hypertext fiction and scholarship, science fiction, non-fiction
writing, and electronic textuality.
Since 1978, he has regularly offered a prose style course focused on the sentence.
He is the recipient of a 2001 alumnus election to Phi Beta Kappa at Center College, the 2001
International Association for the Fantastic in the Arts Distinguished Scholarship Award,
and the 1996 University of Iowa ML Hewitt Teaching Award.
Professor Landon has prepared the course guidebook that comes with these lectures.
The course guidebook includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a timeline, a glossary, biographical
notes, and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 A Sequence of Words
Just Sentences This is a course that will run through all
the ways sentences get longer and sometimes shorter and how control of those ways can
improve our writing.
Our goal will be to learn about how sentences work, what they do, how we can think and talk
about them in the ways that will help both our own writing and our understanding of prose
style.
Part of our concern will be with stretching our sense of options.
All the things a sentence can be or do, and part with the notion of style itself.
In other words, this is a course in which we will dance with language, not a course in
which we will trudge toward remedial correctness.
This is a course designed to help you write better sentences.
Sentences are shaped by specific context and driven by specific purpose, so no rules or
mechanical protocols can prepare us for the infinite number of tasks our sentences must
accomplish.
But there are a number of basic strategies or moves we can learn that help make our sentences
more effective no matter what the specific task.
This course will concentrate on a broad range of effective moves or strategies, many of
them associated with the cumulative sentence, a particularly useful syntax employed by professional
writers, and best understood in terms first laid out by composition theorist Francis Christensen
back in the 1960s.
But before we can work with a specific syntax such as the cumulative or its opposite, the
suspensive, we need to understand the basic principles that guide the creation and use
of all sentences.
Accordingly, this course will look closely and carefully at sentences from a number of
different angles, starting with their underlying logic and moving through the reasons why we
cannot rigorously separate the form of a sentence from its content, its meaning from its style.
We will look at the way sentences work, whether the most basic and minimal kernel sentences
that are nothing more than a subject joined with a verb to the most elaborate and extended
master sentences, some stretching to lengths of more than a hundred words.
This will be a course devoted to understanding some of the secrets of prose style.
It will have as its goal and reason for being the double challenge of understanding elegant
and effective writing and of learning some of the ways in which we can produce it.
But I have to start with an acknowledgement, if not an admission.
Even though the nature of prose style has been a subject of heated debate for at least
a couple of thousand years, we find ourselves today with no clear definition of what we
mean by style and no agreement on any but the most subjective standards for judging
when style is effective, much less elegant.
Anyone who writes about prose style explicitly or implicitly advances a particular view of
it and each view reflects the personal values and preferences of that particular writer.
Yet, somehow, we generally agree that there is something called prose style.
We generally agree on a number of aspects of writing that seem to have something to
do with style, and we generally agree that there are some writers ranging from Shakespeare
to Virginia Woolf, Joan Didion to John Updike, Don DeLillo to Marilyn Robinson, who just
seem to be better at it than others.
Accordingly, this course can't begin to explain all or even very many of the mysteries of
prose style, nor can it offer universally agreed-upon standards for writing that is
elegant or effective, that former term always a matter of personal taste, and the latter
term always a combination of personal taste with the particular requirements of a specific
rhetorical situation.
What this course can do is look closely and carefully at sentences, the most important
blocks of prose, the foundation of written communication, and always the essential units
of prose style.
This is what I mean when I call myself a writer, writes novelist Don DeLillo, I construct sentences.
Thomas Berger, the author of Little Big Man and a writer like DeLillo, long celebrated
for the vitality of his language, makes much the same point when he terms the sentence
the cell beyond which the life of the book cannot be traced, a novel being a structure
of such cells.
In another sense, Berger explains, only the sentence exists or at any rate can be proved
to exist.
Even at the stage of the paragraph, things are becoming theoretical and arbitrary.
A novel is an utter hallucination, no definition of it, for example, can really distinguish
it from a laundry list, but a sentence, there you have something essential to which nothing
can be added and from which nothing can be taken.
I think I know why DeLillo and Berger declare their passionate allegiance to the sentence,
and while I don't pretend to understand and certainly can't write sentences as well
as either of them, I think I do understand that the sentence is where we must start if
we hope to understand why some writing captivates us and other writing leaves us unmoved, uninterested.
I think I do understand that to be better writers, we must first and foremost write
better sentences, and I'm absolutely certain that whatever elegant and effective writing
may be, the secret to achieving it has largely to do with learning how to write elegant and
effective sentences.
So as I said before, this will be a course about sentences.
Even more bluntly, this will be a course about how to make sentences longer.
Now why longer?
It's hard to improve on any of the well-known, justly celebrated one and two-word sentence
classics our culture has enshrined.
Jesus wept the shortest verse in the New Testament comes to mind.
S. does nuts.
The famous reply offered by General Anthony McAuliffe, acting commander of the 101st
Airborne when the Germans demanded his surrender during the Battle of the Bulge.
But no one can really teach how to write one and two-word sentences, and most of us will
go a lifetime without being presented with the opportunity for crafting stunning short
sentences.
So for reasons I hope to make clear as the course proceeds, this is a course about how
we make sentences longer, and a course based on my assumption that longer sentences, and
this is important, longer sentences when carefully crafted and tightly controlled are essential
keys to elegant and effective writing.
Which is to say that I find Joseph Conrad's elegantly balanced and extended sentence describing
a native woman in a heart of darkness, and I love this sentence.
She was savage and superb, wild-eyed and magnificent.
There was something ominous and stately in her deliberate progress.
I find that sentence more interesting as a sentence than either nuts or Jesus wept.
And I can show you the writing principles that underlie Conrad's celebrated sentence,
while nuts or Jesus wept were both dictated by unique situations quite beyond the study
of prose style.
My assumption that longer sentences are the keys to elegant and effective writing crucially
and inextricably rests on yet another assumption.
One unfortunately best expressed in an old advertising slogan originally made famous
by a cigarette manufacturer, and quickly appropriated by wags to refer to something
other than cigarettes.
It's not how long you make it, but how you make it long accordingly.
This course will not be about making sentences longer nearly as much as it will be about
the ways in which we can do that.
Why should a sequence of words be anything but a pleasure is a saying attributed to Gertrude
Stein?
And certainly the sequences of words we identify as sentences are capable of providing pleasure
just as surely as they are capable of conveying crucial information.
Sometime the most important information sentences convey is pleasure as they unfold their meanings
in ways that tease, surprise, test, and satisfy.
Sometime the way sentences unfold their meaning is the most important meaning they offer.
Let's start by thinking about what a sentence is and how it works, and let's start with
that sentence from Gertrude Stein.
Why should a sequence of words be anything but a pleasure?
We know sentences can function as exclamations, imperatives, declarations, or interrogatives.
And this one seems at first glance to be an interrogative.
It asks a question.
It's a simple question, or is it?
Isn't it really a declaration that a sequence of words should be a pleasure, or is it?
Or is it an invitation to list the numerous occasions when a sequence of words is definitely
not a pleasure?
I have a case of stomach flu, comes to mind, or the Internal Revenue Service has selected
your return from last year for an audit.
Not much pleasure there.
Or is it an argument that language should do nothing but give pleasure?
Does it almost have the force of an exclamation saying, in effect, words in sequence always
a pleasure?
What, in point of fact, does this seemingly simple sequence of words actually mean?
How does it actually work?
Insofar as we think we understand what Stein meant with the above phrase, what are some
of the ways she could have gotten that meaning across with different sentences?
Just think of a few of the many, many different ways she might have written this sentence.
Why should a sequence of words not be a pleasure?
Why should a sequence of words not give pleasure?
Shouldn't a sequence of words always give pleasure?
A sequence of words should always be a pleasure.
A sequence of words should always be pleasurable.
Words in sequence should always give pleasure.
We should always find pleasure in a sequence of words.
Or why should a sequence of words not always give us pleasure?
And so on and on and on and on.
Stein's question, of course, is a sentence itself a sequence of words, but it is a sequence
of words that can be understood in a number of different ways.
And I want us to think about some of the important things we can learn about sentences just from
thinking carefully about Stein's question.
Now sentences are sequences of words, but just adding words together to make a sequence
does not create a sentence.
Teacher yellow September swims hungry is a sequence of words, but it's not a sentence
because it lacks a subject and a predicate and therefore does not express a proposition.
I am a teacher is a sequence of words that is a sentence because it contains a subject
I and a predicate am a teacher and thus it does advance a proposition.
The subject is who or what is spoken of or talked about and the predicate is what is
said about the subject.
Usually the subject of a sentence will be a noun or noun phrase or pronoun and the predicate
will contain some form of verb.
A proposition which is usually expressed in the form of a sentence is a statement about
reality that can be accepted or rejected.
The relationship between propositions and sentences is a little hard to pin down since
a sentence will always advance or express one or more propositions and a proposition
will always be in the form of a sentence.
The key here is to think of a sentence as being a visible piece of writing and the propositions
it advances as assumptions and ideas not necessarily written out.
The easiest way about thinking about this relationship is to say that a written sentence
usually rests on or contains or combines a number of underlying propositions most of
which the sentence simply assumes and which would be too basic or simple sounding to actually
write out.
I like to think of the written sentence as the part of the iceberg you see above water
while many of its underlying propositions remain out of sight underwater.
Put another way propositions are the atoms from which the molecule of the sentence is
constructed.
Most propositions usually contain several smaller or constituent propositions.
As we see in the proposition I mentioned a moment ago I am a teacher which contains within
it the proposition that I exist there is an I and that there is something we call a teacher
there is a thing called teacher and that I am one of those things.
Also while many of us have been taught that a sentence is a sequence of words containing
a subject and a predicate that expresses an idea it's actually the case that most sentences
express or imply a number of ideas.
I like hamburgers expresses a thought but what exactly do I mean by like?
What kind of hamburger am I thinking of and why do I want someone to know this about my
taste habits?
As is frequently the case a number of questions can be asked about this simple declaration
and each question reminds us of unspoken unwritten propositions that may underlie the surface
of this seemingly simple and clear sentence and we all know that sentences can convey
a host of meanings both intended and unintended just as the manner of conveying any meaning
may differ along a continuum of emotional impacts described by one stylistic theorist
Walker Gibson is ranging from tough style to sweet style to stuffy style.
For instance I might have said you better believe I like hamburgers which would be tough style
or don't you just think hamburgers are fabulous which would be a sweet style or my gastronomic
preferences include but are not limited to that peculiarly American version of the sandwich
known as a hamburger definitely a stuffy style.
If we return for a moment to Gertrude Stein's sentence why should a sequence of words be
anything but a pleasure?
We can see that it actually advances a number of propositions including there are these
things we call words.
Words can be put together in a sequence.
Words in a sequence can give pleasure.
Words in a sequence ought to give pleasure.
Words in a sequence should give nothing but pleasure and are there reasons why words
in a sequence should not be a pleasure?
The point here is simply that the basic unit of writing is the proposition not the word
or even a sequence of words and we build sentences by putting propositions together.
The style of our sentences is determined by the ways in which we combine not words but
the propositions those words stand for or refer to.
Sentences convey information organizing it into propositions or statements and then combining
those propositions through syntactical arrangements that establish the logical relationships between
and among them.
So one of our first goals will be to understand how sentences combine propositions to present
information and how we can use our knowledge of the ways in which sentences put propositions
together to present our own ideas more effectively.
Each sentence we write reflects three main kinds of choices we make.
Number one, what to write about and what we want to accomplish writing about it.
Number two, which words to use.
And number three, what order to put those words in.
Now there's not much that I or any other writing teacher can do in this or any other
writing course to help you choose your subject matter or propositional content or to help
you decide what you want your writing to do.
But I can address some important things you'll want to keep in mind as you choose the words
you use, particularly the degree of precision in your vocabulary choices.
And I can address some even more important concerns in the way you put together the words
you choose.
Now we call that order syntax and the order in which our sentences unfold or hit the reader
is entirely within our control.
Even better, syntactical choices can actually help us increase the precision of our writing,
bringing what we say into sharper focus, even if we don't have command of the most precise
vocabulary.
Sometimes we refer to the choice of words we use as paradigmatic choices and to the
choices about the order we put them in as syntagmatic choices.
In this sense we might imagine that each sentence we write results from paradigmatic choices
we make along a vertical axis of alternate vocabulary choices we might make for each
word in the sentence.
And each sentence we write results from syntagmatic choices we make along a horizontal axis we
read from left to right deciding whether to put the verb early or late in the sentence,
deciding where to put modifying phrases, deciding whether the information in the sentence will
be coordinated, adding phrases like cars to a train or subordinated, one piece of information
made a clarifying helper to a more important piece of information.
The terms paradigmatic and syntagmatic are not in themselves important for us to remember,
but they help us understand two of the most important variables in our writing.
Add the large factor of subject and purpose, which as I pointed out may not always be within
our control, and the sentences we write combine three kinds of choices, the propositions we
want to advance, the vocabulary we choose, and the syntax or order in which we want our
readers to experience our propositions.
Paying closer attention to the precision and syntax of the sentences we write can dramatically
sharpen or improve propositional content.
Now going back to Steins, why should a sequence of words be anything but a pleasure?
We can see that in place of sequence of words, she might have said string of words, or series
of words, or bunch of words, or combination of words, or number of words, or she might
just have said why should words be anything but a pleasure, leaving out sequence altogether.
She chose the word sequence over a number of other possibilities, just as she chose
to use the word pleasure over gratification, satisfaction, joy, delight, or any number of
other words suggesting a positive experience.
This reminds us that any word we write is chosen from a list of synonyms, or a list
of words that are either more or less abstract.
When I write, I got into my car, for instance, I could have used a much more abstract word
such as vehicle or transportation, I got in my vehicle, I got in my transportation, or
I could have used a less abstract word such as sedan or minivan, I got in my sedan, I
got in my minivan, or I could have chosen an even less abstract, more precise word or
term such as Ford or Ford fusion, I got in my Ford fusion.
In this sense, each word we write in a sentence represents a choice from what we might think
of as a vertical series of words above the word we choose, which would be more abstract,
or below the word we choose, which would be more precise.
Sematicists refer to this as the latter of abstraction, and it reminds us that one of
the important variables in our writing is the degree of precision in our choice of the
words that we use.
The other choice we make when we write a sentence is the order in which we arrange the words
we choose.
For example, Stein could just as easily have made her question, why should we get anything
but pleasure from a sequence of words?
We might think of the order in which words appear in a sentence as choices made along
that horizontal axis, that horizontal axis we call syntax.
Now that we've identified the three main factors that determine the style and effectiveness
of our writing, propositional content, word choice, and syntax, let's go back to our
sentence from Gertrude Stein one more time to see the most important assumption underlying
this course, that the same words in different order have different meanings, or to put this
another way, that style is content.
Most of us have been taught to think of style and meaning, or form and content, as two different
things, and indeed it is almost impossible to talk about language without resorting to
this binary opposition.
We think of content as the ideas or information our writing conveys, and we think of style
as the way in which we present these ideas.
Many aphorisms and metaphors have been used through the years to describe style, ranging
from style as the man himself to style is the dress of thought.
Now most of these metaphors confuse our understanding of style as much or more than they clarify
it.
If we have to use a metaphor to explain style, we might think of the onion, which consists
of numerous layers of onion, we can peel away until there's nothing left.
The onion is its layers, and those layers don't contain a core of onion-ness, but they are
themselves the onion.
Similarly, when we write a sentence, the way we choose to order its propositional content
subtly affects that content, so that the meaning changes ever so slightly with every vocabulary
and syntactical choice we make.
It's probably safe to say that all of us can agree that the point of Stein's Why Should
a Sequence of Words Be Anything but a Pleasure is that words should do more than just convey
information, that language is itself an experience worth considering quite apart from its reference.
But do we really believe that Why Should a Sequence of Words Be Anything but a Pleasure
means exactly the same as Why Shouldn't Words and Sequence Always Be a Pleasure?
Shouldn't a sequence of words be always a pleasure?
A sequence of words should always be a pleasure, or my favorite, the Yoda variant, always a
pleasure words and sequence should be.
We read these sentences differently.
Each reflects different stylistic choices, and each hits the reader just a little bit
differently than does Stein's original sentence, which is dismissive of opposition as only
Gertrude Stein could be.
Another way of looking at this assumption that form is content, style is meaning, is
to say that when we write, we are doing something with our sentences, and what we do unfolds
in time, whether to our reader's eyes or ears.
The summarizable or paraphrasable information conveyed in our sentences is only a part of
their meaning since what they do to a reader, the way they direct the reader's thinking
and unfold information, may be s or more important than the information they contain.
And the point of all of this is simply to remind us of something we never forget in
speaking to one another, that the way we say things may be s or more important than what
we say, but it's something we frequently forget when we are writing.
However, when we write, we need to remember that the style of a sentence is its content.
This inseparability of form from content was what poet Archibald MacLeish was trying to
explain in his poem, Ars Poetica, when he famously noted that a poem should not mean
but be, and the same is true of sentences.
Or to put this another way, the informational or propositional content of a sentence is not
the same as the sentence's meaning, since the sentence doesn't just carry information
like putting objects in a canister, but it does things with it and to it shaping it to
particular purposes and affects.
And this important sense, sentences work like verbs, doing things, taking action rather
than like nouns that only name.
Understanding how sentences put propositions together is the first step in understanding
how they do things, the ways in which they work, the ways they present information and
the ways they unfold their meanings, and to learn how to make them work for us.
We will do this by studying the ways in which sentences combine information by coordinating
it, subordinating it, or subsuming it in modification.
We will look at the difference between sentences that combine information through loose syntax
that puts the subject and the verb near the beginning of the sentence and those that do
so through periodic syntax, delaying the unfolding of the sentence's most important news until
the very end, creating a sense of suspense that demands the reader's attention, sometimes
to that very last word.
In the 18th century, this syntax of delay was seen as the gold standard of fine writing,
a sign of the writer's care, control, and sophistication.
Indeed, masterful 18th century writers such as Dr. Samuel Johnson referred to the sentences
they wrote not as sentences but as periods.
To escape that historical prejudice which hangs on in many composition manuals but no
longer holds true for our understanding and evaluation of sentence structure, I'll usually
refer to periodic sentences, those sentences that delay the delivery of their most important
information to the very end as suspensive sentences.
We will pay particular attention to the cumulative sentence, a special kind of loose syntax that
can also function suspensively because it offers powerful generative or heuristic advantages
to the writer who understands its forms.
We will study the sentence as a thing in motion, a thing alive, considering the strategies
writers can use to give sentences pace and rhythm, particularly the duple rhythms of
balance and the three beat rhythms of serial constructions.
In short, this course will reveal some of the syntactic strategies professional writers
regularly employ.
These are also strategies we can use in our writing to ensure that our sentences will
be effective and possibly even elegant.
Lecture 2 Grammar and Rhetoric
In the first lecture we took a broad overview of the assumptions that will underlie this
course, the goals that will pursue for improving writing, and some of the terms that will
employ as we try to understand how sentences work and how we can make them work better.
In this lecture, we'll look a bit more closely at key terms we'll be using, not because those
terms are important in their own right, but because they give us better tools for describing
sentences and for helping us understand and control the choices we make when we write.
I've always been fond of a distinction drawn by John Steinbeck and his introduction to
the log from the Sea of Cortez, a little book describing a marine specimen collecting trip
that Steinbeck and his friend Ed Ricketts made in 1940.
There, Steinbeck considers what it means to go on an expedition and how each expedition
inevitably shapes the reality it hopes to study.
More specifically, he notes that one of the processes at the heart of studying marine
biology, naming the parts of a fish and cataloging a fish in terms of its structure, doesn't
actually tell the full story.
As he explains, a fish can be rigorously identified by counting its spines, quote, for example,
the Mexican Sierra has Roman numeral 17 dash Arabic numeral 15 dash Roman numeral 9 spines
in the dorsal fin.
These can be easily counted, but if the Sierra strikes hard on the line so that our hands
are burned, if the fish sounds and nearly escapes and finally comes in over the rail,
his colors pulsing and his tail beating the air, a whole new relational externality has
come into being, an entity which is more than the sum of the fish plus the fisherman.
The only way to count the spines of the Sierra unaffected by this second relational reality
is to sit in a laboratory, open an evil smelling jar, remove a stiff colorless fish from formalin
solution, count the spines and write the truth, D, Roman numeral 17, Arabic numeral 15, Roman
numeral 9.
There, you have recorded a reality which cannot be assailed, probably the least important
reality concerning either the fish or yourself.
Sure, Steinbeck is slanting the case to stress the subjective relational reality we might
have with a living fish over the quite technical objective way we might need to categorize
or specifically identify the fish, but I love his reminder about the great differences
that exist between the way we encounter and experience a live fish in nature and the way
we might encounter or experience a quite dead fish in the laboratory.
And his point seems to me to also apply equally to sentences and not just because they can
also be slippery, most of the terms we use to identify sentences or to label their parts
treat the sentence as something dead, to be dissected, its parts identified.
This ignores the fact that what Steinbeck terms a relational reality exists between sentences
and readers just as surely and much more frequently with much more usually at stake than exists
between a fisherman and a fish.
Sentences are alive.
We experience them in time and we react to their unfolding as they twist and turn, challenging
us, teasing us, surprising us, sometimes boring or confusing us as we read them.
Accordingly, whenever possible, I will use terms in this course that focus on the sentence
as a thing in motion, an experience, something with which we form a relational reality when
we read rather than as something stiff and lifeless whose parts can be counted or named.
As I'll try to explain more fully in a moment, I see this distinction as primarily between
viewing the sentence as a grammatical phenomenon or as a rhetorical phenomenon.
Before I get to the distinctions I see between grammatical and rhetorical concerns, I want
to look at the phrase elegant and effective writing.
Both of those modifiers have everything to do with what Steinbeck was talking about when
he described the relational reality someone might have with a living fish and not much
at all to do with labeling and categorizing with objective rigor.
What one reader or writer may find elegant is not the same as what another reader or
writer may find elegant and while we may be able to measure effectiveness a bit more objectively
than we can measure elegance, determining how effective writing is also remains largely
a matter of personal taste.
So let me tell you what I mean by these two important terms.
First effective.
For me, effective writing is writing that anticipates, shapes and satisfies a reader's
need for information.
Effective writing gives the reader the information necessary for thoughtful consideration of
the writer's purpose in introducing a subject, it anticipates the obvious questions an interested
reader may form and it accomplishes both the informational and emotional goals of the
writer.
Effective writing guides the reader's thinking, satisfies the reader's need for essential
information and implicitly assures the reader that he or she is in good hands reading prose
by a writer who anticipates both the reader's informational and the reader's emotional needs.
Accordingly, one of the assumptions shaping my approach to teaching writing is that unless
the situation demands otherwise, sentences that convey more information are more effective
than those that convey less.
Sentences that anticipate and answer more questions that a reader might have are better
than those that answer fewer questions.
Sentences that bring ideas and images into clearer focus by adding more useful details
and explanation are generally more effective than those that are less clearly focused and
that offer fewer details.
In practice, this means that I generally value longer sentences over shorter sentences
as long as the length accomplishes some of those important goals I've just mentioned.
Many of us have been exposed over the years to the idea that effective writing is simple
and direct, a term generally associated with Strunk and White's legendary guidebook The
Elements of Style.
Or we remember some of the slogans from that book such as omit needless words.
Unfortunately, it's a lot harder for us to remember that Strunk concluded his discussion
of the mandate to omit needless words with this all-important qualifier.
Quote, this requires not that the writer make all sentences short or that he avoid all detail
and treat subjects only in outline, but that every word tell.
End of quote.
Indeed, Strunk's concern is specifically with words and phrases that do not add propositions
to the sentence.
Phrase is like, the reason why is that used in place of because or owing to the fact that
in place of sense.
It's far easier to remember the term simple and direct as a summary of Jacques Barzun's
advice in his simple and direct a rhetoric for writers than it is to remember that simple
does not mean simplistic, direct does not mean short, and simple and direct does not
mean that we should all write like Ernest Hemingway in a hurry.
That needless words is great advice, but not when it gets reduced to the belief that shorter
is always better, or that needless means any word without which the sentence can still
make sense.
And for those of us hypnotized and maddened by a recent TV advertisement for a headache
remedy that just repeats its claim three times, apply directly to the forehead, apply directly
to the forehead, apply directly to the forehead.
We should remember that this odd and grating rhetorical strategy comes directly from the
lecture practice of Professor Will Strunk circa 1919, as E. B. White reminds us in his
introduction to Strunk's rules for plain English.
So while I don't intend any advice I give about writing sentences to contradict the
generally quite useful advice we can find in Strunk and White, I do want to suggest
that it presents a very subjective aesthetic as well as rules for better writing.
I like Faulkner as well as I like Hemingway, and I'd like to believe that even Professor
Will Strunk and certainly E. B. White would not have tried to edit Faulkner out of existence.
When Hemingway writes of an old waiter in a clean, well-lighted place, quote, he disliked
bars and bodegas, few of us would argue that his sentence is not simple and direct and
not free of needless words.
But when Faulkner writes about the boy who's the protagonist in Barn Burning, it's hard
to see how Strunk and White might apply, quote, the boy crouched on his nail keg at the back
of the crowded room.
Knew he smelled cheese and more.
From where he sat he could see the ranked shelves close packed with the solid squat dynamic
shapes of tin cans whose labels his stomach red, not from the lettering which meant nothing
to his mind, but from the scarlet devils and the silver curve of fish, this, the cheese
which he knew he smelled and the hermetic meat which his intestines believed he smelled
coming in intermittent gusts momentary and brief between the other constant one, the
smell and scents, just a little of fear because mostly of despair and grief, the old fierce
pull of the blood.
I'm not so sure about what may or may not be needless in this particular sentence, but
simple and direct it most certainly is not.
Now both writers Faulkner and Hemingway introduces to the thinking of their characters, but just
as the thinking of Hemingway's old waiter is infinitely more tired and less active than
the thinking of Faulkner's boy, the sentence each writer constructs is intended to hit
us in very different ways for very different reasons.
Start cutting out words and simplifying the syntax in Faulkner's sentence and will miss
the complex thinking that haunts the boy throughout the story and leads him ultimately
to betray his father to keep him from burning another barn, but even Hemingway, the poster
boy for simple and direct, reminds us that a simple and direct sentence is not the same
as one that is simplistic and short as we can see from another sentence, an earlier sentence
from a clean, well-lighted place.
In the daytime the street was dusty, but at night the dew settled the dust, and the old
man liked to sit late because he was deaf, and now at night it was quiet, and he felt
the difference.
Or to put this another way, Strunk and White do a great job of reminding us to avoid needless
words, but they don't begin to consider all of the ways in which more words might actually
be needed.
My goal will be to explain why in many cases we need to add words to improve our writing,
as Faulkner so frequently does, rather than trying to pair our writing down to some kind
of telegraphic minimum as is frequently the case with Hemingway.
And while I'm mentioning Strunk and White, let me suggest that we could all do a lot
worse than digging out that tattered copy we've had since high school or college and
giving it a fresh read.
Then, let me suggest you acquire and put on your bookshelf right next to Strunk and White's
The Elements of Style, Bill Walsh's The Elephants of Style, subtitled A Trunkload of Tips
on the Big Issues and Gray Areas of Contemporary American English.
Walsh, a writer for The Washington Post, offers a number of useful tips about writing, most
of which are a whole lot funnier than the tips served up by Will Strunk and E.B. White.
Now, elegant.
Effective writing is largely determined by how well the writer's efforts respond to
the situation that occasioned the writing, the writer's purpose in writing, and the reader's
needs.
Most of us can agree whether writing is effective or not, although we may disagree widely about
whether one kind of effective writing is preferable to another.
Elegant writing is much harder for us to agree upon, and indeed the implication of Strunk
and White and of a number of other guidebooks about writing might be that elegant writing
is gaudy writing, overly lush, opulent, and mannered, and therefore should be avoided.
Indeed in his celebrated modern English usage, H.W. Fowler specifically warned against elegant
variation in prose style, what he characterized as the tendency of second-rate writers to
concentrate more on expressing themselves prettily than on conveying their meaning clearly.
Now, I don't want to argue with Fowler any more than I want to argue with Strunk and
White, so I need to state that I'm referring to elegant prose style in the same way mathematicians
refer to the elegant solution to a math problem.
In fact, elegant solutions in math are the most direct routes to solving a problem,
making the fewest number of steps, offering the solution which is seen as the simplest,
neatest, or cleanest response to a problem no matter how complex the problem is.
It's crucial that we understand, however, that writing problems are very different from
mathematical problems.
As Jacques Barzun reminds us, quote, language is not an algebra, and there is no single
right answer to any given predicament with words, end of quote.
In writing, elegance is indeed a matter of efficiency, but we need to remember that the
problems a writer attempts to solve have an emotional or affective dimension not generally
associated with mathematics.
Accordingly, elegant sentences are those that efficiently accomplish what the writer wants
them to accomplish, and while there may be only one elegant solution to a math problem,
there may be many different elegant solutions to a problem we address with language.
All of which is simply to say that there may not be that much difference between writing
we find affective and writing we find elegant, and the two terms, much as is the case with
form and content, may actually be inextricably wrapped up with each other.
Indeed we might think of elegant writing as writing that is unusually affective.
Both terms, however, are subjectively relational, having to do with the impact writing has on
a reader with the way the reader experiences writing rather than objectively describable
or prescribable.
When we refer to sentences as effective or as elegant, we refer to what they do rather
than to the parts they consist of, and no amount of sophisticated vocabulary or complicated
syntax can make a sentence effective or elegant unless that sentence accomplishes the task
it was intended to accomplish.
Both Hemingway and Faulkner strike me as elegant writers because they're so good at
accomplishing what they set out to do.
It's hard to imagine the writer who could out Hemingway Hemingway or who could out Faulkner
Faulkner and attempts to do so generally seem humorous as each found the elegant solution
to the problems he wanted to write about.
A reminder of this can be found in the best of bad Faulkner.
Choice entries from the full Faulkner contest, a collection of Faulkner parodies including
one by John Rumler entitled Brand Burning.
In it we find a sentence that is vaguely familiar.
Quote,
He could see through the square of the glass into the oven, and though he could not read
the recipe on the counter, the black lettering meant nothing to him like history.
He knew he smelled in the steady wash of warm air and unwashed family another smell,
a scent of fear and decay and grief.
For he was a full-blooded snopes blind to the truth and chained to the past whether
he knew it or not, and the rush of blood to his head made him woozy like his brother's
heck in IOU who were anxious to confess their guilt and leave the kitchen where no good
ever originated, not the way their mother cooked, and to run to town for Coca-Cola's
and ding-dong's and some conversation at Homer Barron's 7-Eleven, which was only open
9 a.m. till 7 p.m. when Homer went home for supper, but their father would not let up
not for one minute, for he fancied himself wisest Solomon who never put to death an honest
man for who among us is honest or ever was except him who died on the cross.
Effective?
Yes, as a parody.
Elegant?
Not so much.
The final two terms I want to discuss in this lecture, grammatical and rhetorical, are both
easier to define than are effective and elegant, and they're both more important.
If we remember Steinbeck's discussion of different ways of looking at and thinking about the
Mexican Sierra, we might say that grammatical descriptions of the sentence are primarily
concerned with identifying its parts, while rhetorical descriptions of the sentence are
primarily concerned with identifying that relational reality established when a reader
reads or hears the sentence.
Grammar has to do with relationships among words largely irrespective of their meaning.
Grammar has to do with classifying words by their function in a sentence, by what part
of speech a word may be, how we refer to its tense if it's a verb, whether a noun is singular
or plural and agrees with the verb.
The doctor is a woman, the swimmers are men.
So grammar deals with the rules underlying our understanding and use of language.
Most of these rules we've unconsciously known ever since we learned to speak.
Some of these rules are not rules at all, but simply reflect majority values or practices
and can be broken without any real harm to making ourselves understood, as in a phrase
frequently attributed to Winston Churchill.
The story goes that Churchill slyly reminded us how silly it is to make a rule that we
have to obey that precludes ending a sentence with a preposition, as Churchill put it,
by referring to the things up with which he would not put.
Now, the Harbury's College Handbook I was required to purchase as a college freshman
contains a glossary of grammatical terms that runs on for some 24 pages, included our terms
such as parts of speech, nouns, pronouns, verbs, adverbs, adjectives, prepositions,
participles, conjunctions, gerunds, and so on.
Also included are grammatical terms that refer to groups of words such as clauses, phrases,
subordinate clauses, predicates, and so on.
Most of us will recognize and we regularly use most of these grammatical phenomena every
day, although only a few of us can remember or keep in mind all of the specifics of each
definition or all of the rules governing the correct use of each of them, nor do we really
need to.
The dirty little secret of correct grammar is that it allows a writer to avoid grammatical
mistakes, but the most perfect adherence to all the rules of grammar will not necessarily
produce writing that is either effective or elegant.
Grammar describes the machinery of the sentence, but it doesn't teach us how to make the sentence
go anywhere or do anything.
In other words, grammar is more than a little bit like counting the spines of a dead fish.
Now, I'll use some grammatical terms as this course proceeds simply because that's the
easiest way for me to suggest how to get our sentences to do some of the things we want
them to do.
But knowing grammar backwards and forwards is not in itself a step toward better writing.
In fact, it can and frequently does lead to boring or ineffective writing that is grammatically
correct but not good for much of anything else.
My interest has to do much, much more with rhetoric.
Through a history that no doubt dates from our earliest use of language but that has
been recorded from the 5th century BC, rhetoric has been associated with persuasion.
For my purposes, rhetoric unlike grammar has to do with both motive and impact, the reasons
why we use language to accomplish certain goals and the extent to which it accomplishes
them.
Or to put this another way, grammar has to do with words while rhetoric has to do with
the way we do things with words.
Rhetoric focuses on the producer of language, in our case the speaker or writer, and on the
receiver of language, the listener or reader.
Grammar has to do with words as objects which can be labeled and classified while rhetoric
has to do with the purposes to which we put language and to the consequences of our efforts.
Richard Lanham, Maverick Reterition and author of Style and Anti-Textbook, a book to which
we'll return later in the course, Lanham is trying to get at this crucial aspect of
rhetoric when he rehearses the many different understandings of the term rhetoric over its
2,500 year history.
Only to conclude that a contemporary understanding of rhetoric best describes it as the quote
science of human attention structures.
Rhetoric is about the best ways of getting and holding attention with language and shaping
that attention to achieve particular outcomes.
Whenever possible, the terms I use in this course will refer to rhetorical phenomena,
which is having to do with the way sentences work rather than with grammatical phenomena,
what we label the parts of a sentence and how we understand the relationships among
those parts.
We've generated a lot of labels that are grammatical such as categorizing sentences by the number
and kinds of clauses they contain, leading us to describe sentences as simple, compound
or complex.
But a simple sentence can create an incredibly complex reaction in a reader, and a complex
sentence may have only a very simple impact.
Accordingly, we will rely more on terms or labels that direct our attention to the ways
in which sentences deliver their goods, remembering that what they deliver is emotional impact
as well as information.
To be honest, some of the terms I'll use to describe the way sentences work, for example,
referring to suspensive, intensive or interruptive sentences, are terms I made up simply because
I couldn't find existing terms that directed our attention to the rhetorical phenomena
I wanted to discuss.
The main point to remember here is that effectiveness and elegance in writing are both rhetorical
issues, and grammar alone can lead us to neither.
Oh yes, there's one other term I really ought to mention, although having gone this far
without discussing it, I'm tempted to see if I can get away with not discussing it at
all.
That term is, of course, style.
Style is a concept so rich, so expansive, so subjective, and so contested that any attempt
to define it immediately encounters resistance if not outright hostility.
We refer to the style of a period, the style of a literary form or genre, the style of
a nation, the style of an individual writer, the style of a work by an individual writer,
the style of a particular period in a writer's career, as in early or late Henry James, the
style of a group or movement of writers, the style of a particular period in a movement,
as in early or late modernism, the style of a particular kind of sentence, and so on.
Obviously, style means something different in each of these cases, not to mention that
it can refer to features consciously chosen by the writer or consciously sought for and
found by the reader.
Just one word used to describe or focus our attention on so many different aspects of
writing.
So with a mixture of desperation and ingenuity, I've come up with the definition of style
that I use when talking about sentences.
Style is what the writer writes and or what the reader reads.
That's about as inclusive a definition of style as one can get.
It's also a definition that refuses to distinguish style from content or meaning.
I made the case earlier for the notion that style is content, but while we've been referring
to Strunk and White, let me add E.B. White's considerable authority to this argument.
In his brief essay, An Approach to Style, which he appended to Will Strunk's rules,
White admits that there is no satisfactory explanation of style, but does make clear
his belief, quote, young writers often suppose that style is a garnish for the meat of prose,
a sauce by which a dull dish is made palatable.
Style has no such separate entity.
It is non-detachable, unfilterable, end of quote.
As our course progresses, I'll try to show why I so strongly agree with White and why
I believe this assumption is central to any serious attempt to improve our writing.
In 1926, H.W. Fowler, the legendary English lexicographer and philologist, writing in
his authoritative modern English usage, complained vociferously that proposition was a jack-of-all-trades
word that had come to be used in so many different ways that it really had no meaning.
Disdainfully noting that misuse of this term had apparently spread from America to England,
Fowler thundered, quote, it won its popularity partly because it combined the charms of novelty
and length.
There is less trouble in using it than in choosing a more suitable word from the dozen
or so whose places it is apt to usurp, end quote.
What so bothered Fowler was that this term, so clearly tied to propounding or setting
forth an idea and philosophy, had come to be used to refer to commercial proposals,
tasks, jobs, problems, occupations, trade, opponent, prospect, enterprise, worth undertaking,
area field, and most galling of all when used as a verb to make a, quote, amatory advance.
I mentioned Fowler's diatribe simply to give some context to the way I will use this term
when talking about sentences.
In the study of logic, a proposition is a statement in which the subject is affirmed
or denied by the predicate.
In the first lecture, I suggested that for my purposes a proposition, which is usually
expressed in the form of a sentence, is a statement about reality that can be accepted or rejected.
In so far as possible, I like to think of a proposition as a kind of basic or elementary
statement that can't easily be broken down into constituent propositions.
I live is thus a proposition, but I am tired and hungry actually expresses two basic propositions,
I am tired and I am hungry.
Moreover, in rigorous logical or philosophical terms, each of those propositions can actually
be broken down further into propositions that there's something called an eye that
I am in the category of those somethings, that there's a category of physical or emotional
condition known as being tired, that my physical or emotional condition falls into that category,
and so on.
But this kind of rigor will make us crazy and doesn't help us to write better sentences.
So I generally won't push things past identifying the propositions directly indicated by visible
words in a sentence.
So I'll call I am tired a proposition, I am hungry a proposition, and say that the sentence
I am tired and hungry expresses two propositions.
And these two propositions can be expressed or advanced a number of different ways.
I might say I who am tired am also hungry, or I being tired am also hungry, or might boil
the two propositions down to single word modifiers that let me start a sentence with
tired and hungry, and then take it from there, tired and hungry, just back from a week in
the bush, I limped into the mess hall hoping the food lines were still open.
Now that's a sentence that advances a bunch of propositions, and one I think is a big
improvement on just saying I am tired and hungry, much more on this later.
Now Fowler probably wouldn't approve of the way I'm using the term proposition, but
Noam Chomsky probably would.
In 1966 Chomsky famously made a 17th century discussion of propositions by the Port Royal
Grammarians, one of the central arguments for his theory of deep structure and transformational
grammar.
Chomsky's Cartesian linguistics, a chapter in the history of rationalist thought, claimed
that the loose association of 17th century French scholars, known as the Port Royal Logicians
or Grammarians, had developed the framework for his discussion of language formation in
terms of deep and surface structure, and the transformative steps that lead from the former
to the latter.
Chomsky's claims in Cartesian linguistics were immediately challenged, and his linguistic
theories remain a sight of controversy.
For my purposes, however, those controversies are beside the point, since my concern is
not with linguistic theories about the formation of language, a process that seems to take
place largely at the unconscious level, but with theories of composition that focus on
conscious decisions we make when we write sentences.
For my purposes, what matters in Chomsky's discussion is the example of the relation
between a sentence and its underlying propositions, as he cites from the Port Royal Grammar published
in 1660.
The sentence Chomsky cites is, Dieu en visable accrer le monde visable.
My forays into French are always an adventure as you can tell, but this sentence in English
is Invisible God Created the Visible World.
The Port Royal Grammar noted that this sentence actually advanced not just one, but three
different propositions, that God is invisible, that God created the world, and that the world
is visible, with the second proposition that God created the world being the most important.
As Chomsky summed up his argument, quote, in other words, the deep structure underlying
the proposition Invisible God Created the Visible World consists of three abstract propositions,
each expressing a certain simple judgment, although its surface form expresses only the
subject-attribute structure, end of quote.
Or as he puts it another way, there exists a deep structure, an unwritten or unspoken
underlying mental reality, the unwritten propositions, below the surface structure of the spoken
or written form of the sentence.
He concludes that, quote, the deep structure consists of a system of propositions, and it
does not receive a direct point-by-point expression in the actual physical object, the sentence
that is produced.
As I noted before, I'm borrowing Chomsky's example and applying it to the conscious choices
we make in writing sentences, and I'm neither endorsing nor challenging his theories of
transformational grammar.
His concerns are quite different from mine.
The key here is to think of a sentence as being a visible piece of writing and the propositions
it advances as assumptions and ideas not necessarily visible or written out.
As I previously suggested, the easiest way of thinking about this relationship is to
say that a written sentence usually rests on or contains a number of underlying propositions,
most of which the sentence simply assumes and which would be too basic or simple sounding
to actually write out.
As I've noted before, I like to think of the written sentence as the part of the iceberg
you see above the water, while many of its underlying propositions remain out of sight
underwater.
The point here is simply that the basic unit of writing sentences is the proposition, not
the word, or even a sequence of words, and we build sentences by putting propositions
together.
The style of our sentences is determined by the ways in which we combine not words, but
the propositions those words stand for or refer to.
Sentences convey information, organizing it into propositions or statements, and then
combining those propositions through syntactical arrangements that establish the logical relationships
between and among them.
Thus, sentences join together propositions, sometimes just coordinating them by putting
them side by side.
I like to read, and I like to write, sometimes by subordinating one to another.
I, who like to write, also like to read, and sometimes marking temporal or causal relationships
because I like to write, I like to read, or after I enjoy reading something, I like to
start writing.
Let's return to that sentence from the Port Royal Grammar, Invisible God Created the
Visible World.
Chomsky, like the authors of the Port Royal Grammar, argued that this sentence actually
puts forward three propositions, that God is invisible, that God created the world, and
that the world is visible.
But let's look a bit more closely at the underlying propositions, neither Chomsky nor the Port
Royal Grammarians thought deserving of mention.
First, that God exists, there is a God, and that the world exists, there is a world.
Certainly, that first proposition remains a subject of some debate today, and at least
among some philosophies, the proposition that the world exists also remains an active question.
And underlying the notion that God created the world is the proposition that God is powerful
enough to have done so.
Okay, I'm stretching a point.
But what I hope you'll see is that the sentence Invisible God Created the Visible World actually
rests upon a number of unstated, unwritten propositions.
Moreover, those propositions might have been implied or acknowledged by writing this sentence
in a number of different ways.
For instance, the sentence might have been written, God is invisible, and the world is
visible, and God created the world.
Or, God is invisible, and God created the world, and the world is visible.
Or, God who is invisible created the world, which is visible.
Or, God being invisible created the world, it being visible.
Or, being invisible God created the world, which is visible.
Or we could have shifted the focus of the sentence from God to the world.
The world is visible and it was created by God and God is invisible.
The world is visible and God is invisible and the world was created by God.
The visible world was created by invisible God.
The world, which is visible, was created by God who is invisible.
Or being visible, the world was created by invisible God and so on.
Or even more of the underlying propositions might have been brought to the surface of
the sentence.
For instance, there is a God and God is invisible and God created the world.
There is a world and the world is visible and there is a God and God is invisible and
God created the world.
Or there is a God who is invisible and God created the world which is visible.
Or there is a God who is invisible and there is a world which is visible and God created
the world.
Or there is a world which is visible and the world was created by God who is invisible.
Now there's no way to predict all the differences in how these variations might actually hit
a reader.
And it seems safe to assume that a sentence mentioning God three times in the world once
will have a slightly different impact on a reader than a sentence that mentions the world
three times and God twice.
And there surely must be some difference between a sentence that simply assumes God exists
and one that chooses to make that claim explicitly.
But let's leave the theologically complicated territory of this particular sentence to see
how E.B. White approached the same phenomenon in his afterward to William Strunk's Elements
of Style.
White suggests to his readers, quote, if you doubt that style is something of a mystery,
try rewriting a familiar sentence and see what happens.
The sentence he chooses is Thomas Paine's famous These Are The Times That Try Men's Souls.
And the variations he considers are times like these try men's souls, or how trying
it is to live in these times, or these are trying times for men's souls and my favorite
soul wise these are trying times.
White dryly concludes, quote, it seems unlikely that Thomas Paine could have made his sentiment
stick if he had couched it in any of these forms, end quote.
Or to consider these variations in the terms we've been developing in this lecture, while
each different form of Thomas Paine's celebrated sentence seems to advance the same underlying
propositions and all could be summarized in pretty much the same way.
Each sentence hits us differently and only Paine's version has the power that makes it
appeal to our ears and stick in our minds.
Now let's take one step further.
The idea that a written sentence is the surface expression of one or more underlying and unwritten
propositions.
Let's see how the order in which those underlying propositions are advanced by the written sentence
can make a big difference in the way the sentence works.
This is an important step for writers to take because once it becomes clear that the order
in which propositions appear in a sentence directly affects the way the sentence works,
writers can take conscious control of that order to better accomplish their purpose for
the sentence.
Consider this sentence, he drove the car carefully, his shaggy hair whipped by the wind, his eyes
hidden behind wraparound mirror shades, his mouth set in a grim smile, a 38 police special
on the seat beside him, the corpse stuffed in the trunk.
I think most of us would agree that the punch of this sentence comes at the end and that
the most significant proposition it advances is that there's a corpse in the trunk.
But that's only one of the propositions the sentence advances.
Those propositions in the order in which they appear are, he drove the car, he drove carefully,
he had shaggy hair, the wind whipped his shaggy hair, his eyes were hidden, wraparound mirror
shades hid them, his mouth was set in a smile, the smile was grim, there was a 38 police special,
it was on the seat by him, and finally there was a corpse in the trunk.
Now we could argue about whether he drove the car carefully should count as one proposition
or as two, or whether a grim smile suggests one proposition or two, or whether the detail
that the corpse in the trunk had been stuffed there should add another proposition.
But these distinctions don't really matter and shouldn't bother us.
The point is that this sentence rests on a bunch of propositions, one of which seems
considerably more significant and certainly is more dramatic than are the others, that
such a more dramatic proposition is not revealed until the very end of the sentence builds
suspense and might almost be thought of as a surprise ending.
If we look at the surface of the sentence we see that it reveals or unfolds its underlying
propositions, however many we choose to count, through six distinct steps or chunks or discrete
sequences of words.
One clause, he drove the car carefully, followed by five modifying phrases.
He drove the car carefully, there's the base clause, his shaggy hair whipped by the wind,
a modifying phrase, his eyes hidden behind wrap around mirror shades, another modifying
phrase, his mouth set in a grim smile, a 38 police special on the seat beside him, the
corpse stuffed in the trunk.
The clause, he drove the car carefully, contains a subject, he and a verb drove and could stand
alone as a sentence.
Each modifying phrase contains or suggests a verb form but not an active verb and none
of the modifying phrases can stand by itself as a sentence even though each represents
one of the propositions underlying the sentence.
Because these particular modifying phrases can be moved around and still make sense,
that's because all of them modify some aspect of the base clause, we call them free modifiers.
Like Legos, free modifiers can be stuck together lots of different ways.
For instance, our sentence might be rearranged by moving the base clause deeper but keeping
the modifying phrases in their original order.
His shaggy hair whipped by the wind, he drove the car carefully, his eyes hidden behind
wrap around mirror shades, his mouth set in a grim smile, a 38 police special on the seat
beside him, the corpse stuffed in the trunk.
Or we can move it deeper still, his shaggy hair whipped by the wind, his eyes hidden
behind wrap around mirror shades, he drove the car carefully, his mouth set in a grim
smile, a 38 police special on the seat beside him, the corpse stuffed in the trunk.
And so on, moving the base clause step by step deeper into the sentence until we finally
get to his shaggy hair whipped by the wind, his eyes hidden behind wrap around mirror shades,
his mouth set in a grim smile, a 38 police special on the seat beside him, the corpse
stuffed in the trunk, he drove the car carefully.
We might switch around the order of the modifying phrases.
He drove the car carefully, his eyes hidden behind wrap around mirror shades, his shaggy
hair whipped by the wind, his mouth set in a grim smile, a 38 police special on the seat
beside him, the corpse stuffed in the trunk.
Or he drove the car carefully, the corpse stuffed in the trunk, a 38 police special on the seat
beside him, his shaggy hair whipped by the wind, his eyes hidden behind wrap around mirror
shades, his mouth set in a grim smile, and so on.
In fact, if I remember the formula for possible combinations of items correctly, and if we
think of this base clause plus five modifying phrases as consisting of six items, we could
write six factorial or 720 variations on this sentence, representing 720 different orders
in which we might arrange its propositions.
But let's not try that, while everything I know about prose style tells me that each
of those ever so slightly different word orders would ever so slightly change the emphasis
and the impact of the sentence.
I think I can make the point I hope to make with just two variations.
The first is the sentence we started with.
He drove the car carefully, his shaggy hair whipped by the wind, his eyes hidden behind
wrap around mirror shades, his mouth set in a grim smile, a 38 police special on the seat
beside him, the corpse stuffed in the trunk.
Now the second would invert the order of the sentence, placing the final modifying phrase
first and putting the base clause last.
The corpse stuffed in the trunk, a 38 police special on the seat beside him, his mouth
set in a grim smile, his eyes hidden behind wrap around mirror shades, his shaggy hair
whipped by the wind, he drove the car carefully.
No doubt it's a matter of personal taste, but I enjoy or appreciate that first sentence
where the corpse in the trunk comes as a complete surprise, a lot more than I enjoy
or appreciate the second one, where the first thing we learn is that there is a corpse in
the trunk and the last thing we learn is that someone drove carefully, indeed I don't think
my preference is idiosyncratic, since even Professor Strunk suggests, quote, the proper
place in the sentence for the word or group of words that the writer desires to make most
prominent is usually the end, end quote.
Put in the context of whatever sentences might precede our corpse in the trunk sentence
and whatever sentences might follow it, that second version might actually be more appropriate,
but I somehow doubt that it would ever be more effective.
When a sentence works like a mini narrative telling a kind of story that has a surprise
ending, I think it will almost always catch a reader's attention and remind the reader
of the creative mind that crafted that sentence, and that's one of the functions of style to
remind us of the mind behind the sentences we read.
The point I think most important here is not that the end of the sentence is where we should
place the word or words we most want to emphasize, but that the power of underlying propositions
is not tied to the traditional ways we look at sentences.
Most of us have been taught that the base clause of a sentence, the sentences subject
and predicate, is responsible for advancing its most important proposition, and this is
simply not the case.
Propositions carry emotional or affective impact that have nothing to do with the grammatical
expression or surface structure that advances that proposition in a sentence, and only when
we consider the emotional affect of the way we order and combine the propositions that
underlie the sentences we speak or write, only then can we consider ourselves in control
of our writing.
Or to locate this phenomenon in the terminology I discussed in the last lecture, the way we
give voice to the propositions that underlie the tip of the iceberg we see as a sentence
has to do with a sentence's rhetorical functioning much more than with its grammatical description.
Perhaps an example from Joseph Conrad's The Secret Shareer can suggest the way underlying
propositions may actually carry more weight or have a greater impact on the reception
of a sentence than does its surface.
In an article Literature as Sentences published in College English in 1966, Richard Oman chose
the noteworthy final sentence from Conrad's celebrated story to make the case that apprehension
of a literary work begins with sentences, that sentence structures have a good deal to
do with our experience of a literary work, and roughly following Chomsky's lead that
quote, most sentences directly and obliquely put more linguistic apparatus into operation
than is readily apparent end of quote.
And illustrates his argument with the striking final sentence of The Secret Shareer.
Walking to the taff rail, I was in time to make out on the very edge of a darkness thrown
by a towering black mass like the very gateway of Erebus, yes I was in time to catch an evanescent
glimpse of my white hat left behind to mark the spot where The Secret Shareer of my cabin
and of my thoughts as though he were my second self had lowered himself into the water to
take his punishment, a free man, a proud swimmer striking out for a new destiny.
We can almost hear the music swell as Conrad's narrator marks the departure of Leggett whom
the narrator has helped escape formal trial for a murder at sea having decided that Leggett's
action was justified by an extreme set of circumstances, an early brief for situational
ethics.
Oman sees in this sentence a just representation of its author's mind quote, energetically stretching
to subdue a dazzling experience outside the self, end of quote.
Oman then notes that the base clause of this sentence, I was in time, which is repeated,
is expanded by the embedded or supporting propositions I walked to the taff rail I made
out and I caught, ostensibly focusing our attention on the narrator who is the subject
of those five clauses.
Not so fast says Oman who calls our attention to the fact that no less than seven of the
embedded sentences underlying propositions have share as grammatical subject.
In another three, the subject is now linked to sharer by the copula of B verb.
In two, sharer is the direct object and in two more, share is actually the verb.
Thus as Oman sees it, 13 propositions go to the semantic emphasis on the secret sharer
even though the surface of the sentence seems to emphasize the narrator's agency.
In a fundamental way, Oman concludes, the sentence is mainly about legged, although
the surface structure indicates otherwise.
Yet the surface structure does not simply throw a false scent, Oman quickly notes, since
its syntactic focus shifts from I in seven underlying propositions to hat, also the focus
of seven propositions, to finally arrive at sharer, quote, this progression in the deep
structure, Oman suggests, rather precisely mirrors both the rhetorical movement of the
sentence from the narrator to legged via the hat that links them and the thematic effect
of the sentence which is to transfer legged's experience to the narrator via the narrator's
vicarious and actual experience and it, end of quote.
Now Oman never claims that this kind of propositional analysis is necessary for us to understand
Conrad's style, nor do I want to claim that writers need to be this aware of the propositions
underlying their sentences to give those sentences more effective shape.
But it is a useful reminder that the surface structure of a sentence may rest on a large
number of unwritten propositions and that the style of a sentence includes the way it
invokes, suggests, or assumes some of those propositions as well as the way it explicitly
represents others.
Nor will we always agree on how those underlying propositions affect surface meaning.
For example, I look at the same propositional unpacking that Oman offers for this sentence
and what I notice is that the narrator seems to want to hold on to the idea of the sharer
as long as he can as we frequently do with our most elaborate fantasies.
When I teach this story, I focus on the clear evidence that our narrator has an active imagination
and get my students to at least consider how convenient legged is as a kind of imaginary
friend at precisely the moment our narrator most needs one.
And now, I think I'll start using Oman's analysis as another bit of evidence that might
support such a reading.
Mainly, I offer Oman's reading of this sentence to call attention one more time to the way
written sentences represent the combination of underlying propositions, not all of which
are directly apparent in the surface of the sentence.
He refers to the propositional underpinning of this sentence as one of extraordinary density
and density is precisely one of the writing values I will argue for in this course.
In the next lecture, we'll focus on the surprisingly few basic ways in which we can combine propositions
in our writing to achieve greater density of the positive kind highlighted by Oman.
One final note.
The sentence about that corpse in the trunk I've discussed at such length, although remember
I did spare you at least some of its 720 variations, it represents a kind of loose sentence we
call cumulative.
The cumulative sentence generally posits a brief base clause, he drove the car carefully,
then follows it with free modifying phrases that really carry the sentences most useful
or most informative propositions.
I like everything that a cumulative sentence does from the way it allows us to add detail
or information to a base clause to the way its distinctive rhythm calls attention to
the sentence as a thing in motion, making it particularly effective for capturing actions.
It's no accident that sports writers and writers of hardboiled detective stories use cumulative
syntax for all that it's worth.
I think cumulative syntax gives the writer an invaluable and multifaceted tool.
For my money, cumulative syntax is the Swiss army knife of sentence structure and in subsequent
lectures I'll attempt to show why I think that mastering cumulative syntax is the first
and singly most important step we can take toward improving our writing.
This is the lecture in which we really get down to the business of seeing how sentences
grow or to be even more precise how we can grow our sentences.
That agricultural metaphor is actually appropriate because sentence growth starts with what we'll
call a kernel sentence.
And here I go again, introducing a term that's a little confusing because we will use it
to refer to several different situations.
Each presenting the sentence in a different way.
Or to put the case another way, we'll use the term kernel sentence, not to refer to
the formal characteristics of a sentence such as length or degree of complexity or the number
of the propositions the sentence advances.
Instead, we'll use this term to refer to different situations in which the kernel is the initial
building block to which we will add information.
Confused yet?
I am just a little bit and it's my term.
But here's what I mean by different situations in which the kernel sentence is the starting
point for building longer and more effective sentences.
A kernel sentence may consist of but a single word, remember General McCullough's answer
of nuts to the German demand that he surrendered during the Battle of the Bulge?
But McCullough's single word reply obviously worked as a sentence and not just as a noun.
I'm not sure whether his message to the Germans was meant to be understood as, you must be
nuts to think I'm going to surrender or nuts to you or something similar, but his celebrated
answer reminds us that a kernel sentence can contain only a single word.
We probably shouldn't mess with kernel sentences of the single word variety since they almost
certainly are most important and most effective precisely because of their dramatic terceness.
In a slightly different situation, the kernel sentence is simply about as short as it can
be and each proposition we add to it seems to turn the sentence in a new direction with
it taking several of these turns before it becomes clear what the sentence is trying
to do.
For example, given the kernel sentence, they slept.
Almost anything we add to it will make it more satisfying in terms of propositional information.
They slept having finally found a campsite sheltered from the freezing rain.
They slept, the man simply collapsing on the bed, the woman first seeing what TV channels
were available.
They slept and they dreamed or they slept a sleep deeper and more relaxing than they
had even dreamed possible, a sleep that was itself undisturbed by dreams or they who had
never before considered sleep a luxury slept.
In these cases, the kernel sentence only advances a kernel of information.
So what we might add to the sentence can turn it in a number of different directions.
Frankly, kernel sentences this short and this stark also probably serve a dramatic function
that's more important than adding information might be.
But it is good to remember that a sentence so short it can't be made any shorter they
slept is the most extreme example of a kernel sentence.
In yet another situation, the kernel sentence gives us more propositional information and
follows the common sentence pattern of providing a subject, a verb and an object.
The girl raised the flag.
In this case, the kernel sentence provides us with four obvious opportunities to provide
more propositional information.
Information focused on the entire base clause, the girl raised the flag, on its subject,
the girl on its verb raised or on its object flag.
Adding to this kernel, we might get the girl raised the flag because she knew that doing
so would inspire her compatriots or the girl who had just realized she was the only survivor
raised the flag or the girl raised the flag triumphantly racing it up to the top of the
flag pole.
Or the girl raised the flag, its green striped fabric tattered and torn by bullets.
Or finally, the girl raised the flag and was proud to see it waving once again over the
town square.
In this situation, a kernel sentence provides us great starting points for elaboration and
clarification.
It's this second sense of the term kernel sentence we will face most frequently as we
improve our writing.
Here, the kernel sentence serves as an invitation for more propositional content, implying questions
about the subject, the verb or the object, and when we answer any of those implicit questions
by adding information to the sentence, we will make it more effective.
And still another situation exists at the opposite end of the continuum from those irreducibly
short kernel sentences such as they slept.
As a matter of fact, this last main situation is one most frequently faced by writers who
hope to improve their sentences.
This is the situation of almost any sentence, of almost any length or complexity.
This sentence may already advance a number of propositions, but it advances propositions
to which we can still add useful detail or clarification.
The fact is that most of the sentences we write aren't actually that long or that complicated.
Most can be improved by adding propositions that help explain the sentence or by adding
details that clarify information it advances.
In this sense, a relatively lengthy and complicated sentence should not necessarily discourage
us from making it even longer and even more complicated as long as the additions we make
are helpful, logical, and easy to follow.
Consider the sentence, cumulative sentences fascinate me with their ability to add information
that actually makes the sentence easier to read and more satisfying, flying in the face
of the received idea that cutting words rather than adding them is the most effective way
to improve writing.
Now this rather complicated sentence of over 40 words becomes a kernel sentence if we use
it as the starting point for an even longer sentence that advances even more propositions.
Thus we might build from this kernel sentence the following.
Cumulative sentences, those loose sentences that quickly posit a base clause and then
elaborate it by adding modifying words and phrases fascinate me with their ability to
add information that actually makes the sentence easier to read and more satisfying, answering
questions as it provides more detail and explanation, flying in the face of the received idea
that cutting words rather than adding them is the most effective way to improve writing.
Or we might write, cumulative sentences that start with a brief base clause and then start
picking up new information much as a snowball gets larger as it rolls downhill fascinate
me with their ability to add information that actually makes the sentence easier to read
and more satisfying because it starts answering questions as quickly as an inquisitive reader
might think of them using each modifying phrase to clarify what has gone before and to reduce
the need for subsequent explanatory sentences, flying in the face of the received idea that
cutting words rather than adding them is the most effective way to improve writing, reminding
us that while in some cases less is indeed more, in many cases more is more and more
is what our writing needs.
I can't prove that either of those extended examples is actually a better sentence than
the one we started with, but I would argue that neither is hard to follow and both contain
extra propositional information which adds to their effectiveness.
But that's neither here nor there.
The point is that both of these examples build from a kernel sentence that functions as a
kernel by being the starting point for adding propositions.
We need the term kernel in this situation only to remind us of the sentence we started
with accordingly.
Depending on the situation, a kernel sentence may be number one, the shortest possible sentence
possibly consisting of only one or two words, usually a sentence so dependent on its brevity
for drama that we don't really want to add to it.
Two, a very brief sentence containing a subject and a verb that may need to remain brief for
dramatic effect, but that calls for at least some development in subsequent sentences before
it makes much sense.
Three, a predicative sentence that has a subject, a verb, and possibly an object, but nothing
more.
This is a sentence that invites development because it leaves so much unsaid.
Or four, a sentence of any length that we take as a starting point for adding information,
for developing the sentence by elaborating on the steps it already takes.
So kernel sentence is one of those multitasking terms we can't seem to avoid when talking
about sentence style, a term that can refer to quite different sentences depending on
the situation of their use.
Kernel sentences can themselves create a kind of writing style.
In fact, we might think of this style as the starting point for all other styles.
Kernel sentences that simply posit information without detail or explanation offer the most
basic form of predication.
These sentences state something and then leave it to subsequent sentences to add information
if indeed information is ever going to be added.
Highly predicative prose isn't long on explanations and has a kind of take it or leave it quality.
This is macho speak that bluntly posits information without reflecting upon it or elaborating
it and we find it exactly where we might expect to find it.
His name was Rambo and he was just some nothing kid for all anybody knew standing by the pump
of a gas station at the outskirts of Madison, Kentucky.
He had a long, heavy beard and his hair was hanging down over his ears to his neck and
he had a handout trying to thumb a ride from a car that was stopped at the pump.
This is how David Morell began his 1972 novel First Blood and his famous protagonist shares
his narrator's preference for simple declarations.
Later in the novel when Rambo briefly considers surrendering to the authorities who are hunting
him, he quickly dismisses the thought.
Then he would throw down his rifle and hold up his hands and yell that he was surrendering.
The idea revolted him.
He couldn't let himself merely stand and wait for them.
He'd never done it before.
It was disgusting.
We refer to these short simple sentences and simple compound sentences as being predicative
and they are characteristic of the style Walker Gibson calls tough, a style frequently associated
with some of Ernest Hemingway's best known fiction.
In his 1966 study, Tough, Sweet and Stuffy, an essay on modern American prose styles,
Gibson closely examines the celebrated first paragraph of Hemingway's A Farewell to Arms.
In the late summer of that year, we lived in a house in a village that looked across
the river and the plain to the mountains.
In the bed of the river, there were pebbles and boulders, dry and white in the sun and
the water was clear and swiftly moving and blue in the channels.
Troops went by the house and down the road and the dust they raised powdered the leaves
of the trees.
The trunks of the trees were dusty and the leaves fell early that year and we saw the
troops marching along the road and the dust rising and leaves stirred by the breeze falling
and the soldiers marching and afterward the road bare and white except for the leaves.
Gibson explains this highly predicative style is tough because its speaker Frederick Henry
Hemingway's protagonist says only what he could see or directly experience during a
limited period of time, linking observations primarily with conjunctions, stating information
without processing it.
This predicative style is very effective when creating tough guy characters, men and women
who act but don't think much about what they do.
It's a style that Will Strunk would be hard pressed to criticize although I doubt he ever
wanted any of his students to write exactly this way.
Needless to say, the strongly predicative style is not one I'll be advocating for effective
writing unless you want to write tough guy narratives.
The highly predicative style seems to me to introduce the reader to a mind that is amazingly
unreflective, almost anesthetized or so focused on one purpose that it simply refuses to think
about anything else or consider alternate points of view.
Now that mindset is great for Rambo but I don't think that's the mind we most want to
introduce to our readers unless our goal is to intimidate them.
Accordingly, I'm much more concerned with how we move beyond a highly predicative style
than I am with offering it as a goal and the rest of this lecture will focus on the ways
in which we can move beyond the tough guy rhetoric of strong predication.
Once we have a kernel sentence of any length, there are three and only three basic approaches
we can take to building it.
We can add propositional information simply by using conjunctions or other connective
words to add to the sentence in much the same way we might add more boxcars to a train.
We can add propositional information by subordinating some parts of the sentence to other parts
or we can add propositional information by using modifying words and phrases that turn
underlying propositions into modifiers.
Our earlier discussion of kernel sentences has already given us examples of these three
fundamental strategies.
Given that kernel sentence, the girl raised the flag, we can see an example of the first
strategy in the sentence, the girl raised the flag and was proud to see it waving once
again over the town square.
The conjunction and here adds a new proposition that the girl was proud to see the flag waving
once again over the town square to give us a compound sentence.
Similarly, we might use a connective word such as because to get a new extended sentence
that not only advances the proposition that she raised the flag, but also explains why
the girl raised the flag because she knew that doing so would inspire her compatriots.
Sentences we build using this strategy simply add on information and we can call our syntactic
strategy or move connective.
The second strategy for building a sentence is to add new information but to make it subordinate
to information in the kernel.
So given the kernel, the girl raised the flag, we can add the proposition that the girl had
just realized she was the only survivor.
By putting that information in a subordinate relative clause, the girl who had just realized
she was the only survivor raised the flag.
Similarly, we might have added new information about the flag by putting it in a subordinate
relative clause.
The girl raised the flag that had long been a symbol of the resistance movement.
When we subordinate information by putting it in clauses introduced by relative pronouns
such as who or which or that, we create sentences in which we can call our syntactic strategy
subordinateive.
And the third main strategy for building a sentence is to add new information to it by
boiling that information down to a single modifying word or to a modifying phrase.
For instance, we can add the proposition that the girl was young simply by writing the young
girl raised the flag.
Or we can add information and modifying phrases that follow the base clause.
The girl raised the flag, a triumphant grin on her face, the flag's green striped fabric
tattered and torn by bullets, her bravery and inspiration to her compatriots.
When we extend a sentence primarily by adding modifying words and phrases, we adopt a syntactic
strategy we might call adjectival.
Of course, we can and usually do combine two or even all three of these strategies when
we build a longer sentence.
But it's fascinating to me that there are only three main ways in which we can build
more effective sentences and we term those three main strategies, connective, subordinateive
and adjectival.
Now as it happens, most of my emphasis in this course will be on learning to use adjectival
strategies to write more effectively.
But I think it's very important that adjectival strategies are only one of three main ways
in which we can build longer sentences.
Now let's try to put this notion of three main strategies for lengthening sentences
toward an even more useful sense of how sentences work.
These three strategies point toward three different ways that a sentence can take a
step forward, making new information a part of the way we experience it.
Pioneering poet and style theorist Josephine Miles, the first woman to gain tenure in the
English department at Berkeley, has given a lot of thought to the way in which we might
think of sentences as a series of steps.
And I am greatly indebted to her for this important insight.
In her 1967 book, Style and Proportion, The Language of Pros and Poetry, Miles herself
employed a stunning sentence to introduce us to a new way of thinking about sentences.
Pros proceeds forward in time by steps less closely measured, she wrote, but not less
propelling than the steps of verse.
She explained, quote, while every few feet verse reverses, repeats, and reassesses the
pattern of its progression.
Pros picks up momentum toward its forward goal in strides, variably adapted to its burdens
and purposes.
Both use steps, neither merely flows, each may be perceived and followed by its own stages
of articulation, end of quote.
Leave it to a poet to literalize the practice of measuring poetic meter in terms of feet,
and to remind us, yes, that feet take steps.
More important, Miles reminds us that the language of pros moves forward in time.
One word following another, just as surely as does the language of poetry.
Poetry calls attention to its movement by meter, by line stops, by sentences, by rhyme
schemes, by stanzas, while pros measures its unfolding in ways much less obvious, but no
less certain.
She offers as an example the following sentence, early in the morning in a small town near
the highway, because he was hungry and though he was in danger, the young boy looking neither
to left nor to right climbed the path to the city hall.
Miles marks the steps this sentence takes typographically, putting spaces between its
steps.
Early in the morning, in a small town near the highway, because he was hungry and though
he was in danger, the young boy looking neither to left nor to right climbed the path to the
city hall.
She then analyzes the way this sentence moves forward, as she says, the sentence takes a
step.
Its verb locates itself in time and relation.
The boy climbed the path, subject acts upon object in past tense.
The rest of the material of the sentence is additional, specifically linked by the links
in, near, because, though, neither, nor, to.
The only other terms not so linked are the words of modification.
The single adverbs and adjectives, early, small, happy, looking, young.
First we get one of these, the single word, early, then a phrase of time, then two phrases
of place, then two contrasting clauses of consequence.
Then the subject qualified, first by an adjective and then by a participle controlling two disjunctive
alternative phrases, finally the verb and its object with a qualifying phrase of location.
All this variety can be ordered into three parts, the basic section, the predication
of subject, the boy climbed the path, the qualifying phrases and clauses signalized by connectives
in, near, because, and so on, and the adjectives that assume rather than predicate.
That description is fairly technical and it is a bit hard to follow but Miles then translates
her analysis into the underlying propositions it describes and by now this move to unpack
unwritten propositions should feel pretty familiar to us.
She notes that if the qualifiers and connectives in this sentence are transformed back to their
root predications, we would read, the time was early, the time was morning, the place
was a town, the town was small, the town was near the highway, the boy was young, the boy
was hungry, the boy was in danger, the boy did not look to the left, the boy did not
look to the right, the boy climbed the path, the path belonged to the city hall.
Indeed, Miles explains what she's doing by referring to, you guessed it, that celebrated
sentence from the Port Royal Grammarians, Invisible God created the visible world.
That results from her propositional unpacking is, of course, a highly predicate version.
At the other extreme, she shows what might happen if the phrases and clauses of this
sentence were to be reduced to qualifiers resulting in a highly adjectival style.
Early this morning in a small highway town, hungry and in danger, the young boy looking
neither left nor right climbed the city hall path.
Miles characterizes the version of this sentence we started with as a mixture of connective
and subordinative strategies.
Accordingly, she suggests that we can think of prose as having three primary modes of
progression, three primary ways in which it takes its steps, the predicative, the connective
subordinative, and the adjectival.
In other words, these represent different modes of progression for a sentence in which,
quote, a defining feature is the delivery of the goods, end of quote.
Now I've slightly modified Miles' overview by calling the predicative style the starting
point from which we build longer sentences, and then stating that there are three main
ways in which we can go about that building or growing, choosing among and or mixing three
strategies for adding propositional information, those strategies being the connective, the
subordinative, or the adjectival.
Miles starts from her idea that sentences proceed forward in time by taking syntactic
steps to develop a very complicated typology of prose styles described by the proportion
of parts of speech in the sentence, counting the ratio of adjective to noun to verb to
connective.
She then analyzes larger units of prose from various writers in various periods in history,
using her proportional findings to characterize the style of a historical period.
However, since our concern is with building better sentences rather than characterizing
the typical sentence structure of 17th or 19th century English, I mention that only
in passing.
What I want to take away from Miles' approach to sentence style is simply the idea that
the sentence unfolds in time by taking steps and that these steps broadly fall into three
strategies of adding propositional information.
In future lectures, I'll focus on the particular kind of steps the cumulative sentence takes
and try to make my case for the advantages it offers the writer.
For now, you might want to experiment with each broad strategy to see how natural or
unnatural it feels.
By the way, these exercises are in your guidebook.
Generate a single step or kernel sentence then generate three more single step or kernel
sentences that add information to your original sentence.
That will give you four predicative sentences.
Your task then is to join these four kernel sentences in as many ways possible within
the framework of our broad categories of connective, subordinative, and adjectival
modes of progression.
Of course, you may also want to consider the possibilities when you create sentences that
employ various combinations of these strategies.
The point of such an exercise is simply to focus your attention on the fact that we make
sentences longer not just by adding words but by choosing among these three broad syntactic
strategies.
Now here's an example of how this might go.
You start with a kernel sentence, my shoes are nikes, and then you add, my nikes are
designed for playing tennis, my nikes have air soles, I like their weight.
Here's another example.
You start with a kernel breakfast is my favorite meal, and for additions you add, I like hot
food for breakfast, I prefer eggs and bacon to oatmeal, a good breakfast always starts
my day off right.
You'll probably discover that some of these propositions just don't lend themselves to
adjectival combination, but there's almost always a workaround that lets us express a
proposition as a modifying phrase, and it's well worth our trouble to find that option.
Since these workarounds soon become familiar to us and we unconsciously add them to the
tools we bring to our writing.
Lecture five, adjectival steps.
Google long sentences and you get some fascinating results.
Read out the websites that refer to long sentences of the prison term time behind bars type,
and there must still be over half a million web pages that focus on long sentences in
writing, almost all of which share the general view that long sentences are bad, and indeed
many are, but the point these zillions of web pages obscure is that while many long
sentences are bad, it's usually the case that bad sentences are long, or to put this
another way, what's usually bad about a long sentence is not its length, but its logic
or lack thereof, more on this in a moment or two.
Now one website offers a 630 word example from a document describing the plans of a
borough council in the United Kingdom to move a path, now to save my life I couldn't tell
you whether they want to move it just a few meters or to the other side of town, equally
unreadable is a 516 word sentence from a legal contract, but this website assures us both
of these horrific long sentences are pikers when compared to a sentence from Jonathan
Koh's 2001 novel, The Rotters Club, which stakes its claim to being the longest sentence
in English, coming in at 13,955 words, and then there are those seven or eight humongous
sentences that make up Molly Bloom's soliloquy in Ulysses, one of which we're told contains
4,491 words. I haven't read The Rotters Club, but I'll guarantee that 13,955 word sentences
simply lack punctuation. I have read Molly's soliloquy, and I know that's the case there.
Faulkner's Absalom Absalom, this website claims, contains the longest properly punctuated
sentence, a whopper of 1,287 words, and that may well be true, although something tells
me that a sentence a thousand words long has stopped being a sentence and has become something
we don't have a word for. It comes as no surprise that this website is the official voice of
something called the Plain English Campaign, the crusading life work of one Chrissy Mayer,
a spirited 69-year-old community organizer whose advice to writers is, you should always
try to avoid long sentences. Another webpage devoted to overly long sentences tells us
that, quote, a recommended sentence length is anywhere from 17 to 24 words, end quote,
and assures us that sentences of over 40 words are generally ineffective. There's even a
poem titled, The Very Long Sentence, which rambles on for some 412 words. Clearly, something
about long sentences seems to catch our attention, and it's equally clear that writers are being
warned to avoid them. But that advice doesn't make much sense if we think about it. In the
first place, if stylistic theory doesn't agree on much else, it does agree that sentence length
is simply not a very useful index to style. The length of a sentence doesn't take into
account the relative complexity or sophistication or even the length of the words that make
up that sentence, and vocabulary choice could make a huge difference in the sentences'
readability or effectiveness. Moreover, to think in terms of the average length of a
sentence is sheer madness. Take a monster like the 630-word sentence about moving a path
I mentioned earlier. Follow it with an extremely short sentence such as, Jesus wept, and Jesus
might well have wept had he ever read a 630-word sentence, and you have two sentences that add
up to 632 words for an average sentence length of 316 words. Now, that average might point
to something worth knowing about the length of one of those two sentences, but it completely
misses the point and effectiveness of the short sentence, Jesus wept. More important,
it misses what stylistic theory says is much more important than sentence length, and that
is that writers should vary the length of their sentences, avoiding long strings of short
sentences just as surely as they might want to avoid long strings of long sentences. And
if variety of sentence length is deemed important, and I agree that it is important, don't we
need to know how to write effective long sentences so we can throw them in and mix them up with
all those short sentences we're being encouraged to go for. So let's just stop thinking about
the average length of our sentences, and in particular, let's forget that bit of hoo-ha
that says that a sentence of over 40 words is generally ineffective. I don't know who
came up with that magic number, and I can't begin to imagine how it was arrived at, but
I can tell you that this advice is completely arbitrary, way too simplistic, and it actually
discourages some of the skills an effective writer needs to develop. I'm with Ursula K.
Le Guin when it comes to the subject of long sentences. Le Guin herself, one of our finest
writers, devotes an entire chapter to sentence length and complexity in her fine and wonderfully
titled Creative Writing Guidebook, Steering the Craft, Exercises and Discussions on Story
Writing for the Lone Navigator or the Mutantist Crew. In that chapter, which celebrates the
glories of long and complicated sentences, Le Guin writes, teachers trying to get school kids to
write clearly, and journalists with their weird rules of writing have filled a lot of heads with
the notion that the only good sentence is a short sentence. This is true for convicted criminals.
She goes on to deflate the myth that short sentence prose is more like the way we speak and
concludes, quote, to avoid long sentences and the marvelously supple connections of a complex
syntax is to deprive your prose of an essential quality.
Now that I've made several strong claims about sentence length, let me offer a few examples
to support those claims. Ask anyone who's read much Hemingway, whether his sentences were
characteristically long or characteristically short, and the odds are they'll choose short.
Indeed, Hemingway has become something of the poster child for short sentences. Okay, the
image most of us have of grizzled Papa Hemingway doesn't fit the poster child metaphor all that
well. But consider this sentence from death in the afternoon.
Once I remember Gertrude Stein talking of bullfights, spoke of her admiration for Joselito,
and showed me some pictures of him in the ring and of herself and Alice Tucklis sitting in the
first row of the wooden Barreras at the bull ring at Valencia with Joselito and his brother
Gallo below. And I had just come from the Near East where the Greeks broke the legs of their
baggage and transport animals and drove and shoved them off the K into the shallow water when
they abandoned the city of Smyrna. And I remember saying that I did not like the bullfights
because of the poor horses. Now for any of you who are counting, that's 108 words. And here's
another celebrated Hemingway sentence that left that supposed upper limit of 40 words in the
rear view mirror. So far about morals, I know only that what is moral is what you feel good
after. And what is immoral is what you feel bad after and judged by these moral standards, which
I do not defend. The bullfight is very moral to me because I feel very fine while it's going on
and have a feeling of life and death and mortality and immortality. And after it is over, I feel
very sad, but very fine. Those Hemingway sentences were clearly written under the influence of
Gertrude Stein. But here's one that's pure action. George was coming down in the telemarked
position kneeling one leg forward and bent the other trailing his sticks hanging like some insects
thin legs kicking up puffs of snow. And finally the whole kneeling trailing figure coming around
in a beautiful right curve crouching the leg shot forward and back the body leaning out against the
swing the sticks accenting the curve like points of light all in a wild cloud of snow.
My point is simply that Hemingway wrote tons of long sentences. It's just that most of them
aren't particularly memorable. Indeed, it may be precisely those long sentences he wrote that make
us remember the short ones. Similarly, William Faulkner wrote tons of short sentences, but it's
the long ones we tend to remember. What matters most in the case of both writers is not the length
of their sentences, but the ways in which they made their sentences long. For instance, there's
almost a sense of exhilarating speed and ease to that Hemingway sentence about skiing for the simple
reason that it relies exclusively on free modifying phrases that seem to race downhill after a short
base clause. This great example of cumulative syntax is 74 words long. But I doubt that
anyone on hearing it or on reading it would think of this as a long sentence. This is a fast
sentence. What has given long sentences such a bad rep is not their length, but their overreliance
on bound modifiers rather than the free modifiers used so very effectively by Hemingway. Virginia
Tufty calls attention to this problem in her fine study, Artful Sentences Syntax S Style.
She offers the example of a sentence that relies too heavily on bound modifiers in prepositional
phrases and in long noun phrases. Here we go. Neglect of this rich mind of information is due
in part to the difficulty one faces in attempting to establish a suitable model in this area for
modern quantification techniques that have contributed immeasurably to the formulation
of historic generalizations in such areas as economic history and voting patterns.
My eyes glaze over. My ears glaze over. Later Tufty gives us three more examples
of the unfortunate results of relying on bound modifiers to advance the propositional content
of a sentence. Here we go again. The control of these fundamental protective systems and the
channeling of them into team play an individual effort that possess logic and reason acceptable
to the individual's culture represent the mental hygiene of athletic endeavor. Here's another.
It is encouraging to note the progress made by beekeeping to meet the challenging times,
particularly in connection with the difficult problem of pesticides as they relate to the
keeping of bees in the highly cultivated areas where bees are needed for pollination and at the
time I surveyed a major portion of the work written on gene structure and I was struck by the numerous
instances of independent discovery periods of obscurity and spurious philosophic attitudes
that subsisted underneath the apparently smooth transition of ideas and experimental progress
that reviews and texts alike tend to produce. Now, admittedly, these sentences lack the clear
action and time focus of the Hemingway sentence as they advance ideas rather than action,
but they make those ideas almost painful to think about. As Tufty explains, these sentences are bad
mostly because of what goes into them, not because of how much there is.
Part of the problem is that when we try to figure out the base clause at the heart of each,
we find that the subject of the sentence is not a single word or two, but a lengthy noun phrase
containing numerous propositions. For instance, the subject of that sentence about athletic injuries
is the noun phrase, quote, the control of these fundamental protective systems and the channeling
of them into team play and individual effort that possess logic and reason acceptable to the
individual's culture, end of quote. This means that of the sentences 35 words, I know it seemed
like more, didn't it? Of those 35 words, its subject required 28 words. When a subject takes 28
words, what's left for a predicate to do? Sentences so clotted up by bound modifiers with embedded
prepositional phrases and relative clauses are really beyond help. These are sentences not even
a mother could love and the only real way to improve them is to start over trying to figure
a relatively short base clause at the heart of each and then ways of expanding and explaining
that base clause with modifying phrases. Nevertheless, we can make them a little easier to read by
trying to rethink them as a short sentence followed by modifying information. In this way,
we might rewrite that first sentence about athletic injuries. Remember it read the control
of these fundamental protective systems and the channeling of them into team play and individual
effort that possess logic and reason acceptable to the individual's culture represent the mental
hygiene of athletic endeavor. We might rewrite this. This is the mental hygiene of athletic endeavor
controlling these fundamental protective systems channeling them into team play and individual
effort, both possessing logic, both acceptable to the individual's culture.
That's sentence about beekeeping. Remember it. It is encouraging to note the progress made by
beekeeping to meet the challenging times, particularly in connection with the difficult
problem of pesticides as they relate to the keeping of bees in the highly cultivated areas
where bees are needed for pollination. We might rewrite this one to read beekeeping is making
encouraging progress, responding to challenging times, facing challenges such as the difficult
problem of pesticides, the problem being to keep bees in the highly cultivated areas where bees
are needed for pollination. And that's sentence about gene structure. Remember it.
At the time I surveyed a major portion of the work written on gene structure and I was struck
by the numerous instances of independent discovery periods of obscurity and spurious
philosophic attitudes that subsisted underneath the apparently smooth transition of ideas and
experimental progress that reviews and texts alike tend to produce. We could rewrite that one to read.
When I surveyed a major portion of the work written on gene structure,
I was struck by numerous instances of independent discovery periods of obscurity and spurious
philosophic attitudes, all subsisting underneath the apparently smooth transition of ideas and
experimental progress, a smooth transition that reviews and texts both tended to produce.
Now, I've attempted to typographically represent the fact that rewriting these sentences to get as
much of their information as possible into free modifying phrases that follow a relatively simple
base clause makes it much more clear when each sentence takes a step forward. These steps are
more signs of logical progression than of unfolding actions in a sequence, but they remind us that
a sentence can give us a sense of movement even when it is not describing motion. In fact,
that's what was wrong with those original versions. There was no sense of movement. You couldn't tell
when the sentence was taking a step. In fact, those original sentences were so cramped up,
they didn't seem to take any steps at all. So, the first step in writing long sentences
is to start from a relatively short and simple base clause and then build the longer sentence
around it. Chris Anderson emphasizes this point in his really helpful writing text Freestyle,
a direct approach to writing. Like me and like Virginia Tufty, Anderson is a fan of cumulative
sentences and puts at the center of his advice for improving writing, quote,
say things directly, the subject first, and then what the subject is doing, then trail the
modifiers, putting the modifying phrases at the end of the straightforward declarations,
expanding and contracting them, adjusting their rhythm as you need to, creating texture,
refining with detail, end of quote. As that last sentence so effectively illustrates,
Anderson practices what he preaches and his formula for the cumulative sentence,
centered on adding free modifying phrases to a short base clause, both explains how the cumulative
creates both a conceptual and a sound pattern, his sentence doing precisely what it describes.
The second step is to remember that almost any relative clause can be boiled down to a modifying
phrase that, if not shorter, is easier to follow than a series of clauses calling our
attention to information tied to that or to who or to whom or to which. It may be helpful here
to remember that classic mother goose poem, This is the house that Jack built. This is the house
that Jack built. This is the malt that lay in the house that Jack built. This is the rat that ate
the malt that lay in the house that Jack built. This is the cat that killed the rat that ate the
malt that lay in the house that Jack built. This is the dog that worried the cat that killed the
rat that ate the malt that lay in the house that Jack built. And so on, until we reach a final
verse that could stand as an ode to the relative clause. This is the farmer sowing his corn that
kept the cock that crowed in the morn that waked the priest all shaven and shorn, that married
the man all tattered and torn, that kissed the maiden all forlorn, that milked the cow with a
crumpled horn, that tossed the dog that worried the cat that killed the rat that ate the malt that
lay in the house that Jack built. I d love to know whether or not the unknown author of that poem
was a frustrated writing teacher. But its cascade of that clauses certainly suggests that the author
had gotten his or her fill of relative clauses. And so should we. Instead of relying on little
clauses that have who or that or which as their subject, and then tell us something about the
subject, we should boil that relative clause down to a modifying word or phrase. Indeed,
the author of This is the House that Jack built starts doing this, whether out of inspiration
desperation in the poem s final stanza. Instead of This is the farmer that sows his corn,
we get This is the farmer sowing his corn. Instead of that waked the priest that was all
shaven and shorn, or the man that was all tattered and torn, or the maiden that was all
forlorn, we get modifiers that omit both the relative pronoun and the verb. It s important to
remember as Virginia Tufty points out, using a sentence from Charles W. Morton, that relative
clauses can kill the movement of a sentence by being too long, just as surely as they can
by being too numerous. Tufty offers the example. I still count the little preamble that begins as
the house lights go down and the foot lights glow and goes on to accompany the slow rise of the
curtain on the opening scene of Carmen as the most cunningly contrived passage of descriptive music
I have ever heard. It seems that there are a number of ways in which relative clauses can
go amiss, and their main claim to utility is that they seem committed to specification.
While specification is generally a fine goal in writing, we should remember that the rhetoric of
specification is the rhetoric of the law and of legal documents. In her 1971 book,
Grammarist Style Exercises in Creativity, Virginia Tufty challenged writers to use
free modifiers to craft a sentence from the raw material of the six following propositions.
He went to speak to Mrs. Bean. She was tiny among the pillows. Her small toothless mouth was open
like an O. Her skin was stretched thin and white over her bones. Her huge eye sockets and eyes were
in a fixed infant-like stare, and her sparse white hair was short and straggling over her brow.
If those propositions sound unusually specific to you, it's because Tufty had extracted them
from a sentence in Memento Mori by Muriel Spark that sentence reads, He went to speak to Mrs.
Bean, tiny among the pillows. Her small toothless mouth opened like an O. Her skin stretched thin
and white over her bones. Her huge eye sockets and eyes in a fixed infant-like stare, and her sparse
white hair short and straggling over her brow. Tufty, probably our most accomplished current
student of sentence structure, is a big fan of adding propositions to sentences by adding
free modifying words and phrases following a short base clause, noting again and again in her
writing how this technique allows us to write sentences that can grow to considerable length
without becoming hard to follow or unpleasant to the ear.
So, to sum up, if we have a number of propositions concerning a boy who sits down at a table,
we can reduce all or at least most of those propositions to modifiers and probably improve
our writing if we do so. If we want to work with these propositions, the boy sat down at the table,
the boy was young, the boy was out of breath from running, he sat down quickly, he sat down
dramatically, he plopped into his chair, the table was covered with steaming dishes of food,
the table was made of heavy oak, the boy looked around the room. We might be tempted to write
something semi-barbarous along the lines of the boy who was young and who was out of breath from
running sat down at the table whose heavy oak surface was covered with dishes of food that
were steaming, plopping into his chair in a way that was quick and dramatic and then looked around
the room. Now, that's not a terrible sentence, but a much better one would be, out of breath from
running, plopping into his chair quickly, dramatically, the young boy sat down at the table,
its heavy oak surface covered by steaming dishes of food only then looking around the room.
You'll notice that I've fudged the recommended form just a bit placing several modifiers before
the base clause, but as I'll explain in a subsequent lecture, the beauty of free modifiers is that they
can be placed at the beginning of a sentence or in the middle of a sentence just as well as at its
end. The only requirement being that the placement makes sense by being close enough to what it
modifies as to preclude confusion. Not all propositions can be effectively boiled down to
single modifying words or short modifying phrases, but many can and this boiling down process allows
us to pack more information into each sentence much like chefs boil down cooking liquids to create
more taste packed reductions. So while it is not important that we make our sentences shorter,
it is important that we make their constituent elements or steps as short as possible whenever
doing so doesn't conflict with some other goal. For example, there may be very good reasons for
not boiling down the man who had always believed that violence was not a solution to any problem
clenched his fist and headed back into the bar and we might not want to boil this down to
the pacifist clenched his fist and headed back into the bar somehow reducing the noun phrase the man
who had always believed that violence was not a solution to any problem reducing that to the
single word pacifist just doesn't seem to do justice to the drama of the situation of this
sentence. Generally speaking, however, turning relative clauses into modifying words and phrases
and then stringing those modifiers together around a base clause will allow us to write longer
sentences that are more effective because their length results from detail and explanation that
add propositional content both satisfying the reader's desire to learn and gratifying the
reader's confidence that he or she is in the good hands of a thoughtful writer. Years ago there was
an advertising jingle I think for some brand of cigarettes that went it's not how long you make
it but how you make it long at the risk of reminding us how this jingle was almost immediately
reappropriated by WAGs as sex advice I want to suggest that we remember it when we construct
longer sentences. The way to make our sentences longer is with free modifiers and the resulting
cumulative syntax has a number of other advantages for the writer advantages I'll describe in upcoming
lectures.
Lecture 6 The Rhythm of Cumulative Syntax
Finally, this is the lecture I've been waiting for, the one where I get to introduce the structure
of cumulative sentences, the syntax at the very heart of my approach to teaching writing.
Of course it's misleading to say that I'm about to introduce you to the cumulative syntax
since I've been peppering the preceding lectures with references to cumulatives
and with examples of what they can do. If I haven't yet managed to clearly establish the form
these sentences take I bet I have managed to alert your ears to their characteristic rhythms
just listen to a few of the cumulative sentences I've used in previous lectures.
George was coming down in the telemarked position kneeling one leg forward and bent
the other trailing his sticks hanging like some insects thin legs kicking up puffs of snow and
finally the whole kneeling trailing figure coming around in a beautiful right curve crouching the
legs shot forward and back the body leaning out against the swing the sticks accenting the curve
like points of light all in a wild cloud of snow. He went to speak to Mrs. Bean tiny among the
pillows her small toothless mouth open like an o her skin stretched thin and white over her bones
her huge eye sockets and eyes and a fixed infant like stare and her sparse white hair short and
straggling over her brow. Out of breath from running plopping into his chair quickly dramatically
the young boy sat down at the table its heavy oak surface covered by steaming dishes of food
only then looking around the room or they slept the man simply collapsing on the bed the woman
first seeing what TV channels were available. He drove the car carefully his shaggy hair whipped
by the wind his eyes hidden behind wraparound mirror shades his mouth set in a grim smile a 38
police special on the seat beside him the corpse stuffed in the trunk. Here are a couple of new
ones from Faulkner's barn burning. Again he could not see whirling there was a face in a red haze
moon like bigger than the full moon the owner of it half again his size he leaping in the red haze
toward the face feeling no blow feeling no shock when his head struck the earth scrabbling up and
leaping again feeling no blow this time either and tasting no blood scrabbling up to see the other
boy in full flight and himself already leaping into pursuit as his father's hand jerked him back
the harsh cold voice speaking above him go get in the wagon or another one from Faulkner
his father struck him with a flat of his hand on the side of the head hard but without heat
exactly as he had struck the two mules at the store exactly as he would strike either of them
with any stick in order to kill a horsefly his voice still without heat or anger
and here are a couple of sentences from Don Delillo starting with a great description of a laugh
he crossed his arms on his midsection bent against the wall laughing it was a staccato laugh
building on itself broadening in the end to a breathless gasp the laughter that marks a pause
in the progress of the world the laughter we hear once in 20 years and then a delillo description of
wind some nights the wind never stops beginning in a clean shrill pitch that broadens and deepens
to a careless and suspenseful force rattling shutters knocking things off balconies creating
a pause in one's mind awaiting for the full force to hit i love the sound of these sentences
i love the stop and go rhythms they set up with each syntactic step they take
moving us forward preparing our ears for what will come next just as they add to our knowledge of
what came before and the examples i've just read contain rhythms within rhythms setting up parallels
and repetitions balancing sound against sound the product not of conscious choice so much
as it is the natural benefit of the cumulative syntax itself a rhythm so powerful
that it encourages us to find other rhythms within it after a while you can almost hear these rhythms
coming knowing that a free modifying phrase starting with a participle usually an ing form of a verb
might come next or an adverb such as an ly word or a phrase started with a possessive pronoun
his or her or its or a phrase that back tracks picking up and repeating a word from the base
clause before adding new information in this way we get cumulative rhythms such as the chef prepared
the fish carefully stuffing it with wild rice sauteing it briefly its sweet aroma blending
smoothly with the other enticing odors in the kitchen the fish becoming more than a food item
ascending to the status of art work with cumulative sentences and soon their rhythms
becomes seductive urging us to keep adding modifying phrases their very sound reminding us
of the limitless detail and explanation we can add to each sentence we write
that we now know so much about the cumulative syntax is a tribute to the pioneering work of
frances christensen an english professor at usc who in the 1960s stopped repeating
received truths about what made for good writing and actually started looking at the way professional
writers wrote christensen who died in 1970 was an incredibly influential reticent and his impact
on the teaching of writing has been profound and much of his influence can be traced back to a
single essay a generative rhetoric of the sentence first published in college composition and
communication back in 1963 and then republished in christensen's collection of essays notes toward a
new rhetoric six essays for teachers published in 1967 what's so distinguished christensen's
approach to teaching writing was first the belief that writing should really matter and second
that writing improves most obviously and most quickly when we add information to our sentences
in free modifiers following or surrounding a base clause when i say that christensen's thought that
writing really mattered i mean that he saw sentences as means to a crucial end much more
important than clarity or effectiveness as he put it quote the end is to enhance life to give the
self the soul body by wetting it to the world to give the world life by wetting it to the self
or more simply to teach to see for that as konrad maintained is everything end of quote
his second and more instrumental belief was that traditional writing instruction had missed the
point by advocating the subordinate clause and the complex sentence and that quote we should
concentrate instead on the senate's modifier or free modifiers end of quote and equally important
to his approach to teaching writing was his concern with sound as he noted that the rhythm of good
modern prose comes about equally from the multiple tracking of coordinate constructions
and the downshifting and backtracking of free modifiers what a great description
downshifting and backtracking of free modifiers if you'll think back to those cumulative sentences
i read just a moment ago you can hear that their rhythm is indeed one of downshifting
and backtracking the free modifiers point back to the base clause and shift down to a greater
level of detail or specificity they backtrack by picking up and expanding on some aspect of the
base clause giving the sentence as christensen points out quote a flowing and ebbing movement
advancing to a new position and then pausing to consolidate it leaping and lingering as the popular
ballad does end of quote christensen seems to have found inspiration for his approach to the
cumulative sentence in a little known essay by the novelist and educator john urskine a long time
professor of literature at columbia urskine had been largely responsible for the development of
columbia's signature humanities course a great books course that has been the model for many
general education literature courses across the country in 1946 urskine had contributed an essay
the craft of writing to a collection of essays titled 20th century english edited by william s
nickerbocker neither urskine's essay nor the collection in which it appeared is remembered
much today but in his essay urskine struck a note that served as the foundation for christensen's
theory of the cumulative sentence almost as a throwaway observation urskine wrote let me
suggest here one principle of the writer's craft which though known to practitioners i have never
seen discussed in print the principle is this when you write you make a point not by subtracting as
though you sharpened a pencil but by adding when you put one word after another your statement should
be more precise the more you add if the result is otherwise you've added the wrong thing or you've
added more than was needed urskine then noted that while grammar loosely concedes that speech
is a process of addition it then confuses things by making it seem that the substantive
noun since it can stand alone is more important than the adjective that the verb is more important
than the adverb that the main clause is more important than the subordinate not so wrote urskine
what you wish to say is found not in the noun but in what you add to qualify the noun the
noun is only a grappling iron to hit your mind to the readers the noun by itself adds nothing
to the reader's information it is the name of something he knows already and if he does not
know it you cannot do business with him the noun the verb and the main clause serve
merely as a base on which meaning will rise the modifier is the essential part of any sentence
in practice therefore the sentence proceeds from something the reader may be expected to know
already toward whatever new thing we wish to tell him we proceed by addition and in a wonderfully
sliced swipe at those writing gurus who put all their weight behind omitting all modifiers and
confining ourselves to nouns pronouns and verbs urskine notes that quote the best tombstone
and monumental descriptions follow this style but here it should be noted the intention is to
commemorate to remind rather than to say anything new from urskine's observation about the importance
of adding information through the use of modifiers christensen developed four principles for understanding
and writing cumulative sentences and he emphasized that these principles were intended as a
heuristic as a prompt to the writer to inspire more effective writing rather than as rules for
writing that was simply utilitarian and error-free and this way he saw his approach to the cumulative
sentence as a generative rhetoric a means of spurring on and producing better sentences
his first principle is that composition is essentially a process of addition to a base
clause such as they turned on the radio we add information such as ceaselessly turning the
dial back and forth trying to find a clear station hoping for some news of the election
the second principle is that the information we add to sentences and modifying phrases gives
the sentence a direction of modification or a direction of movement as christensen explains
quote the main clause which may or may not have a sentence modifier before it advances the discussion
but the additions move backward as in this clause to modify the statement of the main
clause or more often to explicate or exemplify it so that the sentence has a flowing and ebbing
movement advancing to a new position and then pausing to consolidate it leaping and lingering
as the popular ballad does end of quote this principle of direction of modification has
sometimes been suggested by others who use the term left branching sentence to describe
modification that comes to the left of or before the main clause or right branching sentence to
describe modification that comes to the right of or after the main clause in the left branching
sentence the movement of modification is forward in the right branching sentence it is backward
the cumulative sentence makes good use of both movements but the cumulative sentences christensen
focuses the most attention on have modifiers that generally point or move backward as he puts it
the additions stay with the same idea probing its bearings and implications exemplifying it or
seeking an analogy or metaphor for it or reducing it to details thus the mere form of the sentence
generates ideas it serves the needs of both the writer and the reader the writer by compelling
him to examine his thought the reader by letting him into the writer's thought i'd put this a bit
differently noting that the cumulative form urges the writer to give more information to the reader
and it suggests to the reader that the writer is doing her or his best to make things as clear
and as satisfying as possible this is a syntax that sends the signal that the writer is doing her
or his level best to communicate fully and effectively trying harder than other writers
the third principle is that cumulative sentences tend to develop by downshifting through increasingly
detailed or specific levels of generality or levels of abstraction several lectures ago
i noted that every word in a sentence is chosen from an imaginary vertical or paradigmatic axis
along which each word is more precise than a number of alternate choices above it
on the ladder of abstraction at less precise than choices below it cumulative sentences
tend to extend this principle to the entire sentence usually modifying the base clause
with a phrase that gives it more precision and then frequently downshifting once again to a
second level modifying phrase that adds precision to the first one as christensen explains this
quote with the main clause stated the forward movement of the senate stops the writer shifts
down to a lower level of generality or abstraction or to singular terms and goes back over the same
ground at this lower level end of quote we can see how this principle operates in a
sentence where the base clause introduces a compound subject and subsequent modifying clauses
break it down into its constituent parts as in they sat down the young man cautiously as if he
might decide not to sit at all the young woman hurriedly as if this were something she wanted
to finish as quickly as possible or we can see it in a sentence in which each new layer
remember that each new layer or modifying phrase can be thought of as a step the senate's takes
as each new step refines the information of the preceding step this room looks like a disaster
area its walls pocked with holes holes that suggest the room had been the site of a violent
fight a fight in which sledgehammers had been the weapons of choice or using a rough form of
diagramming to indicate sentence levels with the base clause always the first level we might write
cumulative sentences can take any number of forms detailing both frozen or static scenes
and moving processes their insistent rhythm always asking for another modifying phrase
allowing us to achieve ever greater degrees of specificity and precision a process of focusing
the sentence in much the same way a movie camera can focus and refocus on a scene zooming in for
a close-up to reveal almost microscopic detail panning back to offer a wide-angle panorama
offering new angles or perspectives from which to examine a scene or consider an idea
christensen's fourth principle is that cumulative sentences add texture to the propositional content
of a sentence you may remember that one of the key assumptions underlying this course is my belief
that greater texture or density of information is one of the most important keys to better writing
the plain style that has been the goal of so much writing instruction is a style that devalues
texture in favor of simplicity christensen notes quote the writing of most of our students is thin
even threadbare but if he adds frequently or much or both to his nouns verbs and main clauses
the texture may be said to be dense or rich one of the marks of an effective style especially in
narrative is variety in the texture the texture varying with the change in pace the variation
in texture producing the change in pace in our classes we have to work for greater density and
variety in texture and greater concreteness and particularity in what is added end of quote
the cumulative sentence encourages us to do exactly this and pretty much without stopping to think
about what we need to do christensen points to a striking example of this kind of texture
in a magnificent sentence by lauren isley that warns of unbridled atomic power developing that
warning through six memorable levels of generality producing a sentence that unfolds in 11 distinct
steps it is with the coming of man that a vast hole seems to open in nature a vast black whirlpool
spinning faster and faster consuming flesh stones soiled minerals sucking down the lightning
wrenching power from the atom until the ancient sounds of nature are drowned out in the cacophony
of something which is no longer nature something instead which is loose and knocking at the world's
heart something demonic and no longer planned escaped it may be spewed out of nature contending
in a final giants game against its master and there you have it a generative rhetoric of the
cumulative sentence based on just four principles addition movement levels of generality and texture
consider the cumulative syntax in the terms of the steps suggested by josephine miles and we get
the idea of a sentence that takes a new step with each modifying phrase we add that adds a new level
or degree of specificity or clarity with each of these steps consequently we can start thinking
about improving the effectiveness of our sentences just by adding a single new modifying level by
making our sentences more effective still with each new modifying level we add beyond that
christensen said of his own teaching quote i try and narrative sentences to push to level
after level not just two or three but four five or six even more as far as the students powers of
observation will take them i want them to become sentence acrobats to dazzle by their syntactic
dexterity end of quote i couldn't agree more what a great goal for writers to become sentence
acrobats to dazzle by their syntactic dexterity and what makes me such a fan of the cumulative
syntax is that this goal can be achieved so easily just by practicing the basic moves of the cumulative
sentence until we internalize its rhythms and start to produce them without thinking in the next two
or three lectures i'll be focusing specifically on those rhythms on the basic moves we can make
with cumulatives for now i just want to leave you with their sound with how easy this syntax
makes it for us to add information to our sentences to make them longer but to make them more satisfying
as we do so the following examples are sentences composed by students over the years and they are
sentences of which any writer should be proud they sat down at the table he residedly slumping
into the straightbacked chair his tired face a picture of dejection his hands shaking uncontrollably
she's stiffly taking her seat with exaggerated formality her eyes cold and hard and locked on his
her thin-lipped smile at once triumphant and condescending the table piled high with stock
reports and financial statements its surface completely covered with documents of desperation
its jumble of information now completely useless the overall scene suggesting an abandoned
battleground here's another monique went down the stairs walking on tiptoe trying to keep her
weight evenly distributed trying not to touch the walls muttering vector forces breathing
in sharply every time she heard a noise hoping desperately that the building was not going to
collapse and another he stepped up to home plate the chalk lines barely visible wiping the sweat
from his face taking one last deep breath of the crisp autumn air a look of determination in his eyes
the crowd rhythmically chanting his name knowing that he represented the last ray of hope for his
team another one we navigated nashville's back roads hooping ourselves horse up and over the
hills feeling our weight alternately light and heavy in our seats leaning right and left as the
roads forked wondering if we would ever escape the shade of the trees laughing at the clock longing
for the north star or a lamp was burning on the table flickering slightly casting a dim light on
the shabby room leaving the corners dark providing no comfort to the lonesome inhabitant of this
shelter promising him nothing she called him picking up the phone hoping he would be home
scared of what he would say praying that they would work things out wishing he'd call her first
trying to get a grip on her emotions and here's an even cooler thing about cumulative they build
upon each other setting up an insistent rhythm among as well as within sentences here are just
a couple of examples of what i refer to as cumulative clumps several cumulative sentences
in a row that feed on each other build on each other i asked my students to use some of these
cumulative clumps to write about prying write about crying and here's some of what i got
i forced the knife through the onion exposing its flesh releasing a distinct aroma into my hallway
of a kitchen seconds later my eyeballs began to burn tiny fires blazing each time i blinked
a watery film coating the insides of my eyelids my vision blurred causing me to blindly put down
the knife leaving me no option other than to stumble to the freezer and stick my entire head
inside remembering the onion remedy i once saw in a magazine here's another the little girl is
standing in the aisle hands on hips foot tapping bottom lip twitching up and down with a brow
scrunched together her small arms wrapping themselves as far around the doll still in the
box as possible slowly one by one tiny tears roll out of the corners of her eyes bright blue eyes
staring up at her father the tears start out quiet almost silent quickly turning into a
foot stomping tantrum doll on the ground arms smacking the sides of her thighs ponytail flopping
as her head rocks back and forth the tears having stopped somewhere in the middle have turned to an
all-encompassing fit of rage and finally the old man waited for the music to begin gazing over
the crowd his eyes meeting none of theirs shifting his weight from hip to hip with the first notes
of the procession reverberating off the high ceiling he took the first steps down the long aisle
the crowd now standing faces turning smiling eyes meeting pouring into one another a sensation of
weightlessness growing in his stomach engulfing his chest clutching his throat inhaling only
short stilted huffs as though anticipating a sneeze procuring a handkerchief he dabbed the
perspiration from his forehead and the tears from the tip of his nose walking with his granddaughter
the bride to be the writers of these sentences have learned some of the seductive secrets of
cumulative syntax and now you know too
lecture seven direction of modification
in the last lecture i outlined what i believe are the broad advantages of cumulative syntax
focusing both on the clarity of logical relations this syntax establishes
among parts of sentences and on the ebb and flow rhythms it promotes almost guaranteeing
that cumulative prose will appeal to the ear perhaps most important i showed how the cumulative
syntax functions heuristically prompting writers to make sentences more satisfying and effective
by adding detail and explanation and free modifying phrases the cumulative is as
frances christensen suggested a generative syntax in the sense that it encourages writers to add
information to their sentences relying on free modifying phrases after the base clause
each new phrase a step forward for the sentence each new phrase sharpening the sentence by adding
new details or offering clarification or explanation for propositions advanced in the base clause
or proceeding modifying phrase one useful way of thinking of this feature of the cumulative
is to see each new modifying phrase as answering a question that a reader might have about the
preceding clause or phrase thus if we start with a base clause he was afraid we might well
expect a reader to wonder who he is and why he might be afraid both questions anticipated and
answered by adding free modifying phrases that would give us the sentence he was afraid a little
boy separated from his mother in a large department store fearing that he would never find her
feeling lost and abandoned in a world of strange and scary faces now my assumption here is that
most of us start thinking about our sentences with fairly simple subject verb base clauses
or kernel sentences that might not be a stark as he was afraid but are very rarely as developed
he was afraid a little boy separated from his mother in a large department store
fearing that he would never find her feeling lost and abandoned in a world of strange and
scary faces in this and subsequent lectures i'll continue to try to point out the many reasons
why i think cumulative syntax is the greatest thing since sliced bread and the surest way
for writers to immediately improve the effectiveness of their sentences but first
we need to backtrack just a bit and be sure we understand the technical aspects of cumulative
syntax i'm going to try to keep grammatical descriptions to a minimum here but i will need
to review some grammar to help us distinguish cumulative sentences from those that are not
cumulative so for the next few minutes you may feel like you're back in a ninth or tenth grade
english class but odds are that ninth or tenth grade english class was never this useful i know
mine weren't and i deeply regret that i was not introduced to the cumulative sentence until i was
in grad school so here goes a cumulative sentence gets its name from the fact that it accumulates
information gathering new details as it goes like a snowball that gets bigger and bigger and bigger
as you roll it through snow to write a cumulative sentence all you have to do is turn the period
at the end of one of your sentences into a comma and start adding modifiers as you add modifying
details you will bring your writing into focus making your point sharper and sharper your meaning
more and more clear a cumulative sentence has two main parts the first part is called the base clause
a base clause contains the sentences main subject and main verb a base clause can be thought of as
a short boiled down sentence for example the boy fainted the verb in a base clause is called a
finite verb verbs express an action or state of being state of being verbs are also called linking
verbs an action verb expresses something that can be done a linking verb points to more information
that is it must be followed by another word that completes its information true linking verbs
include all forms of state of being verbs in state of being verbs include all the forms of the verb
be these are heavily used in our writing as in he is i am we are it was they were it has been
we might have been i will become it seems and so on now you'll notice that none of the above
combinations of a subject and a linking verb offer any really useful information that's because each
linking verb needs a verb complement that explains the specific nature of a particular state of being
thus he is hungry i am eating we are singing it has been educational i seem to have lost my
billfold and so on forms of be state of being verbs are almost always linking verbs although very
rarely they can function independently signaling being as existence as in i think therefore i am
but we also have a group of verbs that can function either as linking verbs needing a
complement to complete their meaning or that can function independently as action verbs
the context of the sentence the way they function in the sentence will determine whether they are
action or linking verbs there are too many of these multitasking verbs to list but the category
includes such verbs as appear which can be used interchangeably with the linking verb seem or
feel which can be used in many cases as we might use the linking verb am i am sick or i feel sick
and so on a number of verbs in this category are very close to linking verbs and meaning
for example verbs such as remain or continue clearly can refer to states of being but can
function independently as action verbs as in the building remains or the drama continues
action verbs also can be subdivided into those that need an object to complete their meaning
and those that do not if the verb requires or even if it just can be used with a direct object
we call it a transitive verb if the verb cannot take a direct object we call it an in transitive
verb here's some examples the boy fainted action verb intransitive the boy is tired linking verb
the boy kicked the ball action verb transitive there are almost an infinite number of both
kinds of verbs and many verbs can function either intransitively as in he eats or he is eating
or transitively as in he eats lasagna or he is eating lunch now so much for the base clause
the second part of a cumulative sentence consists of one or more modifying phrases
unlike a clause a phrase does not contain a subject and a verb and it cannot stand alone
as a sentence here's some examples of phrases his face turning white
a goofy looking sixth grader muscles turning to jelly most modifying phrases can be classified as
participial phrases jaren phrases infinitive phrases or prepositional phrases
participial phrases are particularly important for cumulative sentences and we'll consider them
more fully in just a moment to start with however going back to those four categories of phrases
participial phrases contain a verb that has been turned into an adjective for example
the boy fainted exhausted by his long run or the boy fainted feigning as if he had been shot
or the boy fainted slumping to the ground or the boy fainted stricken with grief
the boy fainted lost for the rest of the race the boy fainted his face turning a sickly white
now for the second kind of phrase jaren phrases are somewhat similar to participial phrases
with the difference that they contain a verb that's been turned into a noun eating ice cream
too fast makes my forehead hurt eating ice cream too fast is what i always try to avoid
his eating ice cream proved to be his undoing in much the same way that a participle is a verb
drained of power a gerund is a verb that has been turned into a noun by adding ing to a verb
and using it as we use a noun to name a person place or thing just as a noun functions a gerund
a gerund can be the subject of a sentence the direct object of the verb in a sentence a subject
compliment or the object of a preposition here's some examples first of all gerund is subject
cheating might become a habit now gerund as direct object they do not understand my cheating
gerund is subject compliment my biggest problem is cheating or gerund is object of a preposition
the coach chewed him out for cheating gerund's can serve in cumulative modifying phrases as
a positives substitutes for previous nouns or pronouns and they can serve in combination
with participles as in fainting having become something of a problem for troops in formation
the general tried to finish his inspection as quickly as possible now infinitive phrases
the boy wanted to faint fainting is the problem to be overcome to faint or not to faint was the
question infinitives function much like gerund's and frequently appear in cumulative modifying
levels accompanied by a participle thinking he needed to find a job the x superhero started
scouring the one ads and finally prepositional phrases the boy fainted after finishing the race
the boy fainted as his shocked parents watched the boy fainted in front of his parents
or the boy fainted with no warning common prepositions that begin prepositional phrases are
across after as at because of before between by for from in in front of in regard to
like near of on over through to together with under until up and with
the crucial point here is that all four kinds of phrases can appear as steps in cumulative
sentences but it is crucial that these phrases contain verbals and not active or passive verbs
we might think of verbals as verbs light or as verbs drained of their power to make anything
happen serving only to modify something now backed participle phrases since
participles are in effect adjectives made from verbs participle phrases function in a sentence
in all the ways an adjective might function primarily modifying nouns or pronouns
participles that refer to ongoing actions or processes are called present participles
participles that refer to past or completed actions or processes are called past participles
present participles and an ing past participles can take more forms but generally are verbs that
can function as verbals in their forms ending in D E D E N T or N as in the words confused
marked eaten recovered dealt and written here's some examples the boy slumped to the floor
dropping his books dropping as a present participle the boy slumped to the floor
scared witless by what he saw scared as a past participle the boy slumped to the floor
driven past his physical limits another past participle modifying phrases may add information
about the subject or the verb of the base clause or the object if it contains an object or they may
simply add to our understanding of the entire base clause example the boy kicked the ball
hitting it squarely with the toe of his soccer shoe another example the boy kicked the ball
a tattered and worn old football the boy kicked the ball grim determination clear in his every move
the boy kicked the ball his friends yelling their encouragement so base clause plus modifying phrases
makes a cumulative sentence and we get us a result something like the boy fainted a goofy looking
sixth grader his face turning white muscles turning to jelly dropping his books uttering a
kind of pain squeak scared witless by what he saw now this cumulative sentence packs a lot of
information indeed when we unpack its underlying propositions we see that it does the work of at
least seven different sentences number one the boy fainted number two the boy was a goofy looking
sixth grader number three when he fainted the boy's face turned white number four
when he fainted the boy's muscle turned to jelly five when he fainted the boy dropped his books
six when he fainted the boy uttered a kind of pain squeak and seven the boy fainted because
he was scared witless by what he saw because the cumulative sentence does pack so much detail
and because it is easy to follow professional writers use it very frequently in fact it has
been estimated that professional writers put their modifiers at the end of their sentences
two thirds of the time okay that was a basic description of cumulative syntax i've actually
used that description to try to explain the cumulative to students in a junior high class
without much success i have to admit but i also use it in my pro style class at iowa
frequently discovering that my english majors have never been taught the difference between a clause
and a phrase now that distinction is crucial since students trying to write cumulatives for the first
time often produce comma splices following the base clause with a comma but then adding another
base clause rather than a modifying phrase thus instead of getting the cumulative sentence the
boy fainted his face turning white we get something like the boy fainted his face turned white
which is called a comma splice because a comma is simply not a strong enough mark of punctuation
to join together two base clauses the crucial difference between these two sentences is that
the cumulative sentence follows the subject and verb of the base clause with a verbal and a modifying
phrase to stay with the example i started with the boy fainted his face turning white now the
difference between his face turned white and his face turning white becomes pretty clear when we
remember that his face turned white could stand alone as a sentence in its own right a sure sign
that it is a clause while his face turning white cannot stand alone as a sentence a sure sign that
it is a phrase now let's try to think about the technical aspects of the cumulative sentence in
somewhat more sophisticated terms as i noted in the last lecture the philosophy of the cumulative
sentence was codified by francis christensen in his a generative rhetoric of the sentence first
published in college composition and communication in october 1963 but christensen credited novelist
john urskine with inspiring this philosophy in a 1946 essay published in 20th century english
that essay entitled a note on the writer's craft directly challenged the simple and direct
school of composition that stressed the pairing down of writing and championed modification instead
as i noted in the last lecture urskine took the unique tack of arguing quote when you write
you make a point not by subtracting as though you sharpened a pencil but by adding end of quote
and this insight led him to his radical conclusion that quote the modifier is the essential part
of any sentence end of quote with its emphasis on modifying phrases the cumulative sentence might
be thought of as a major kind of adjectival sentence to use the terms suggested by josephine
miles the main feature of this sentence pattern is that it packages modifiers as unbound words or
phrases that is in ways that will usually allow them to appear in the sentence in different positions
rather than bound to the word or words they modify in this way the cumulative modifying
phrase may open close or appear in the middle of the sentence for example given boy as the
object of modification and crying loudly as the modifying phrase we might construct a sentence
with that phrase in the initial slot crying loudly the boy left the final slot the boy left
crying loudly or the medial slot the boy crying loudly left as i previously noted some writing
scholars such as virginia tufti described the positioning of modifying phrases as left branching
or right branching if the modifying phrase comes before the base clause or to the left of it on
the page it's called a left branching sentence if the modifying phrase comes after the base clause
or to the right of it on the page it is called a right branching sentence and if the modifying
phrase comes in the middle of the base clause it is called mid branching but what's important here
is not the terminology, but that a free modifying phrase can be placed in each of these three
positions. That's the point of calling them free modifiers. They are free to be moved
around. And they are free to be mixed and matched since we can write cumulative sentences
that feature modifying phrases in all three positions at once. For example, having cleared
customs, the elegantly dressed old man, a gleeful smile on his face, hailed a cab, instructing
its driver to take him to the nearest casino. It is important to note, however, that cumulative
sentences featuring modifying phrases in the initial or medial positions carry a couple
of risks. Initial modifying phrases run the risk of becoming misplaced modifiers. We have
a misplaced modifier, sometimes called a dangling modifier or a dangling participle, when the
modifying phrase doesn't match up with what it tells about. I bet more than a few of us
remember the classic example of a misplaced modifier. Having eaten lunch, the bus left
the station. Now, obviously, the bus did not eat lunch, but that's what this sentence suggests.
The problem is that the modifying phrase doesn't really have a logical object of modification
in the base clause. People eat lunch. Buses don't. More specifically, the people who
were riding on the bus ate lunch. But the base clause, the bus left the station, doesn't
mention people, doesn't mention bus riders, doesn't mention anyone who could conceivably
eat anything. What this sentence fails to do is to provide logical agents who could be
modified by the phrase having eaten lunch. In other words, the base clause lacks any
clue to who did the eating. Now, once we figure out that the sentence fails to provide a logical
object of modification for the modifying phrase, we realize that the term that is usually applied
to this mistake, misplaced modifier, is itself not really correct. Misplaced suggests that
the sentence can be corrected simply by moving the modifying phrase to the correct or logical
place in the sentence, but no such place exists. The bus left the station having eaten lunch
doesn't make a bit more sense, nor does the bus having eaten lunch left the station.
The problem with this sentence is not placement of the modifying phrase, but is that there's
nothing for that phrase to modify. So to clean this sentence up, we would need to add a word or
phrase to the base clause that would provide an object of modification, or in the terms I've
suggested that might provide something that the modifying phrase can answer a question about,
in this case, who ate lunch? Consequently, a satisfying and logical cumulative sentence might read
after the passengers ate lunch, the bus left the station. Remember, a misplaced or dangling
modifier is a word or phrase that modifies a word not clearly stated in the sentence.
These modifiers aren't actually misplaced. They need something to modify. Frequently,
a misplaced modifier modifies an agent, someone doing something, but that agent
is not specified in the sentence. For example, after running the race so well, fainting was a
disappointment. Cumulative sentences are all about specificity, and both the agents responsible for
action in a cumulative sentence and the objects of action must be clearly identified. We need to
know who it was that faded. Having forgetfully left his backpack in the restaurant, his absent
mindedness caused his friends to make fun of him, or having forgetfully left his backpack in the
restaurant, the hapless freshman invited the ridicule of his friends. In the first sentence,
there's no clear indication of who or what is performing the action expressed in the
participial phrase, having forgetfully left his backpack in the restaurant. Having forgetfully
left can't logically modify his or his absent mindedness or his forgetfulness or anything else.
And since there is no clearly specified object for having forgetfully left his backpack to
modify, we call this a misplaced modifier or a dangling modifier. And we might think of
dangling modifiers as a participial phrase that's all dressed up with no place to go,
since there's nothing specifically present in the sentence for it to point to.
Now, so-called misplaced modifiers can occur anywhere in the sentence. But for some reason,
I don't understand starting a sentence with an initial modifying phrase or left branching sentences
seems to particularly lead writers to make this mistake. So whenever you begin a sentence with
a modifying phrase, be sure that the base clause contains a word or words that phrase
can logically modify. And if possible, put that object of modification as close to the
start of the base clause as possible. And there's also a risk we need to be aware of when we put
modifying phrases in the medial position, usually interposing them between the subject of the base
clause and its verb. If we only separate subject from verb by a single modifying word or phrase,
there's no problem. However, if we start dumping modifying phrases in the middle of a base clause,
we run the risk of either making the sentence hard to follow or of transforming it into a
suspensive sentence where delaying its completion becomes the dominant aspect, sacrificing the
strong sense of cumulative movement for a sense that the sentence is putting off whatever may be
at its end, either to build suspense or to add maximum emphasis to its final word. Here's an
example of what can happen. The bus, an ancient yellow relic, a vehicle so old and undependable
that even our strapped for cash school district would no longer use it. A monument to questionable
design in its beginnings and to poor maintenance near the end of its service left the station.
Now, there's nothing really wrong with that sentence, and it is grammatically cumulative,
but its cumulative modifying phrases add motion with no movement, its rhythm somehow stuck,
and the reason for using cumulative form not at all clear. To sum up, the cumulative sentence
is most typical and probably appears most frequently when the modifying phrase or phrases
appear in the final position. Since the whole idea behind the cumulative sentence is that it
quickly posits a somewhat stark or kernel like base clause, subject and verb, subject, verb, object,
then presents much more information about that base clause in subsequent modifying phrases.
For example, they drank their coffees, the old man downing his in one quick gulp spilling
several drops on his faded shirt, the finally dressed young woman nursing hers along quite
slowly, carefully raising and lowering the cup to her lips as if it contains nitroglycerin rather
than coffee, a stiffly mechanical process that suggested her nervousness more than her control.
We've seen that cumulative modifying phrases can start a sentence, can interrupt a base clause
by coming between the subject and the verb, or can follow the base clause. And of course,
there's no reason why a single cumulative sentence can't use modifying phrases in all three positions.
And remember, to give any sentence more of a cumulative form, simply replace its period
with a comma and start adding modifying phrases. Just like that, you're on your way.
We've seen that cumulative sentences can be described in terms of whether their free
modifying phrases come at the beginning of the sentence before the base clause in the
initial or left branching position in the medial position between the subject and the verb of
the base clause at the end of the sentence after the base clause in the final or right branching
position or in some combination of these three positions. It may help to think of this aspect
of cumulative form as being syntagmatic, a term we previously applied to the way in which a sentence
unfolds its meaning horizontally to the eye of the reader from the left of the page to the right.
There's also what can be called a paradigmatic or vertical aspect of cumulative sentences.
This aspect is conceptual or logical rather than visual as it focuses on the discursive
relationship between and among cumulative free modifying phrases, irrespective of their placement.
Or to put this another way, the syntagmatic aspect or characteristic of cumulative sentences
is strictly formal, determined by where a modifying phrase is placed while the paradigmatic
aspect is strictly functional, determined by what each modifying phrase does.
I realize this may sound both a little confusing and unnecessarily technical,
but it really does help us understand how to build cumulative sentences if we understand
these two important aspects. Each cumulative modifying phrase means that the sentence
takes another step, but we need to realize that each step itself has two aspects or dimensions
or purposes. Each step moves the sentence toward the period at the sentences end,
but each step also adds a new level of detail or explanation.
I think an example can really help here. Consider the sentence,
having sold all of her boxes of cookies, the elated girl scout went home.
Now, in syntagmatic terms, we would describe this cumulative sentence as having its modifying
phrase having sold all of her boxes of cookies in the initial or left branching position.
In paradigmatic terms, we would describe this cumulative sentence as having two levels,
the first being the base clause, the second being its single modifying phrase having sold
all of her boxes of cookies. Each level of a cumulative sentence adds to its information,
making the sentence both more specific and more intellectually satisfying.
So far so good. I'm pretty sure the previous example helps us understand the difference
between the syntagmatic and the paradigmatic aspects of cumulative sentences,
but now we need to look at another example that may complicate things again.
Consider a more extended or elaborated version of our Girl Scout cookie sentence.
Instead of just having one modifying phrase having sold all of her boxes of cookies,
the elated girl scout went home. Let's give our reader more information. Let's say
having sold all of her boxes of cookies, the elated girl scout went home. So excited she
could barely explain her success to her mother. In syntagmatic terms, we now have a sentence
with cumulative modifying phrases in both the initial and the final position, but in paradigmatic
terms, we now have a sentence with two second level modifying phrases.
Let's try to diagram this relation using a simple diagramming scheme I introduced several lectures
ago. In this scheme, the base clause of the sentence is always the first level and we indicate this
by starting at our left margin and putting a one before the base clause wherever it appears in the
sentence and any modifying phrase that modifies a part or all of the base clause is a second level
and we indicate this by indenting and putting a two before that modifying phrase and before
however many other modifying phrases there may be that also modify a part of or all of the base clause.
Accordingly, we could visually represent our original sentence as second level having sold
all of her boxes of cookies, base clause first level, the elated girl scout went home and our
extended sentence would look like this. Second level having sold all of her boxes of cookies,
the elated girl scout went home, another second level, so excited she could barely explain her
success to her mother. As long as our modifying phrases all point to or modify a part or all of
the base clause, we just repeat this pattern no matter how many second level phrases there are.
For instance, we could have second level having sold all of her boxes of cookies, another second
level having knocked on every door in her neighborhood, base clause the elated girl scout
went home, another second level, so excited she could barely explain her success to her
mother or another second level so proud of her accomplishment she immediately wanted to get
more cookies to sell. Now, we still have a two level cumulative but now with four second level
modifying phrases and here's where we need a new term. We call a cumulative sentence with
more than one second level modifying phrase a coordinate cumulative sentence. All of its modifying
phrases point back to the base clause and any one of them would make sense if moved to any of the
three syntagmatic positions, the initial before the base clause, the medial in the middle of the
base clause or the final just after the base clause. So we could rearrange the steps of the
above sentence in more ways than I'm about to demonstrate but just to give you an idea of the
possibilities, we might write first level the elated girl scout went home, second level having
sold all of her boxes of cookies, another second level having knocked on every door in her neighborhood,
another second level so excited she could barely explain her success to her mother and another
second level so proud of her accomplishment she immediately wanted to get more cookies to sell
or we could do it this way, second level having sold all of her boxes of cookies,
another second level having knocked on every door in her neighborhood, another second level
so excited she could barely explain her success to her mother, another second level so proud of
her accomplishment she immediately wanted to get more cookies to sell and then finally the base
clause the elated girl scout went home or there are all sorts of variations that would be in between
these extremes such as having sold all of her boxes of cookies having knocked on every door in her
neighborhood so excited she could barely explain her success to her mother the elated girl scout
went home so proud of her accomplishment she immediately wanted to get more cookies to sell
no matter how much we rearrange the syntagmatic order of the sentences steps the paradigmatic
order remains the same it's a two level sentence with four second level modifying phrases okay
so why is this important to know first of all we need to call this pattern something
because cumulative syntax also makes possible two other patterns of logical relationships
among base clauses and modifying phrases and each pattern is more effective in some situations
and for some purposes than it is for others the three paradigmatic patterns of the cumulative
sentence are called coordinate subordinate and mixed in coordinate patterns all modifying phrases
refer back to the base clause in subordinate patterns each modifying phrase refers to the
immediately preceding clause or phrase and we can mix these two patterns by adding subordinate
levels to coordinate patterns or coordinate levels to subordinate patterns with one or the other
pattern predominating secondly what's true of both patterns is that they show us how to add
levels of new meaning to our sentences you'll remember that a coordinate cumulative sentence
looks like this when diagramed first level the elated girl scout went home second level having
sold all of her boxes of cookies second level having knocked on every door in her neighborhood
second level so excited she could barely explain her success to her mother second level so proud
of her accomplishment she immediately wanted to get more cookies to sell the subordinate pattern
goes a little bit different base clause the elated girl scout went home second level having
sold all of her boxes of cookies third level those inescapable icons of capitalism fourth level
it's methods and assumptions hardwiring our children to value the power of selling in almost
their every activity and a fifth level methods and assumptions championed by some and resisted by
others now you'll notice that both of these sentences take four steps after the base clause
but each step in the first sentence just gives it another second level while each step in the
second sentence adds a new level of meaning ultimately developing the sentence through
five levels of specificity and of course for the mixed version of a cumulative sentence we would
get a first level the elated girl scout went home second level so excited she could barely explain
her success to her mother another second level having sold all of her boxes of cookies a third
level those inescapable icons of capitalism another third level those irresistible sugar bombs
back to a second level having knocked on every door in her neighborhood another third level
recognizing some who came to their doors as friends of her parents another third level
remembering some houses where she had gotten particularly wonderful halloween treats and
now fourth level figuring both categories of potential buyers would find it hard to say no
to a cute little girl participating in one of america's best established cultural rituals
so now that you've seen what these three patterns look like when roughly diagrammed in terms of
their levels let's describe them and think about them a little bit more thoroughly
coordinate levels can be thought of as modifying the entire base clause or as focusing on one of
its elements given a base clause containing a subject a verb and a direct object the coordinate
modifying levels may sharpen or focus on the whole clause on its subject on its verb or on
its object coordinate levels keep the sentence running in place as more information is added
to its load i've used some of these examples before but now i hope you'll see them in a new light
representing not just the cumulative sentence but the coordinate cumulative sentence here's some
examples he drove the car carefully never speeding never running red lights always
looking both ways at intersections always defensive he drove the car turning down the
old country road shifting into first gear as his speed slowed absently glancing at the farms on
either side of him desperately wondering what to do next he drove the car his shaggy hair whipped
by the wind his eyes hidden behind wraparound mirror shades his mouth set in a grim smile a
38 police special on the seat beside him and you know what's stuffed in that trunk he drove the car
a rusted old yellow and cream colored rambler a relic from the days when a car's weight meant as
much as did its mileage a purchase he had often questioned an impulse by he had never really
understood but had never regretted and of course if we add information to the base clause if we
had more information to it we give ourselves more targets for modification more opportunities for
adding modifying phrases as we would get if the base clause for instance instead of reading he
drove carefully would read he carefully drove the rented car back toward town subordinate levels
move the focus of the senate's forward moving from general to specific zooming in like a movie
camera they can also break a hole into its constituent parts accomplishing the same
end as do some uses of the colon subordinate levels can also lead us into new thoughts nudging us to be
ever more specific to refine and or detail whatever we have just written however these
subordinate levels can also run amok taking us away from our subject diverting attention to
subsidiary incidental even irrelevant details details for which we have no real need or use
being ever mindful of our readers time and patience patience we run the risk of sorely taxing with
sentences such as this one sentences that seem to go on and on moving us further and further
from what we started to say making the subordinate form seem more and more aimless
he drove carefully trying to protect his old rambler a rusted yellow and cream colored classic
sedan one with ramblers legendary reclining seats seats intended to make driving more relaxing
a good design intention with a number of side effects some not relaxing at all side effects
that made him the envy of every boy in his high school class he drove carefully one hand on the
wheel the other hand holding a sandwich a ham and cheese fossil a strangely colored lump made
three days before by his sister a simple trusting woman someone who deserved a better life than
fate had dealt her a life of happiness if not of success the basic happiness of feeling loved
and needed he drove carefully his thoughts drifting back to other trips fondly remembered
sunday outings outings made wonderful by his mother and father warm and humorous parents
he would never see again they drove carefully he with hands on the wheel and the prescribed
position at ten and two his eyes riveted to the road a road almost invisible beyond the sheets
of rain that pelted the windshield she checking and rechecking the map calling out town names and
possible landmarks landmarks neither could possibly see both growing more tense and worried by the
minute neither able to say anything soothing or encouraging their vacation dissolving into a
nightmare of bad weather and wrong turns the main appeal and power of coordinate cumulative
construction comes from its distinctive rhythm and very simple logical relations among the steps
the sentence takes the coordinate cumulative sentence tends to be repetitive both in sound
and in sense and as Gertrude Stein rightly pointed out repetition in language takes on
an insistent quality moreover the coordinate cumulative sentences sort of like a car stopped
at a stoplight but revving its motor all the new information added by each coordinate level adds
detail to helps explain the base clause but never moves it forward call it motion without movement
the coordinate syntax is essentially static going over the same information again and again
refining it or clarifying it with each new pass or each new modifying phrase backfilling
rather than moving forward and yet a coordinate sentence whose modifying phrases follow a sequence
can seem to move indeed can display what I think is the most seductive prose rhythm
of cumulative form Christensen singles out a sentence from E.B. White to illustrate this strength
we caught two bass hauling them in briskly as though they were mackerel pulling them over the
side of the boat in a business like manner without any landing net stunning them with a blow on the
back of the head I love the sound of this sentence and I love the way it reminds me of that John
Steinbeck discussion of two ways of looking at the Mexican Sierra that I cited in my second lecture
this is clearly a sentence that evokes the experiential relationship between fish and
fishermen rather than resorting to labeling the dead stiff formal and smelling fish by counting its
spines John Didion is a master of the cumulative sentence in general and and here's a fine
coordinate cumulative sentence from her mysteriously and rather giddily splendid hidden in a grove of
sycamores just above the pacific coast highway in Malibu a commemoration of high culture so
immediately productive of crowds and jammed traffic that it can now be approached by appointment only
the 17 million dollar villa built by the late J.Paul Getty to house his antiquities and paintings
and furniture manages to strike a peculiar nerve and almost everyone who sees it the main appeal
of subordinate cumulative construction comes from its ability to advance the sentence into new
territory making it particularly effective when used to describe a process or to follow something
that unfolds in time as opposed to the rigid and unmovable logic of the coordinate cumulative
sentence where every new modifying phrase ties back to the base clause the subordinate cumulative
sentence is lucy goosey and can move on to new information of course as I mentioned before
that freedom to move forward can reach a point of diminishing returns when or if subordinate
modifying phrases move so far away from the base clause that it looks as if the sentence has run wild
now it turns out it's actually hard to find pure examples of subordinate cumulative sentences
where every new modifying phrase adds a new level to the sentence indeed christensen only came up
with a couple of examples of pure subordinate construction although his first example from
Sinclair Lewis is quite impressive he dipped his hands in the bichloride solution and shook them
a quick shake fingers down like the fingers of a pianist above the keys that's a four level
subordinate cumulative sentence pure subordinate cumulative sentences particularly those that
develop through more than three levels are difficult to find in part because the circumstances
that call for such a pure construction are as rare as they are hard to imagine accordingly most
subordinate cumulative sentences are really just dominantly or primarily subordinate rather than
exclusively so two examples the first from as buy it the second from tony morrison show what i mean
here's the buy it sentence he lit on an image a woman in a library a woman not naked but voluminously
clothed concealed in rustling silk and petticoats fingers folded over the place where the tight black
silk bodice met the springing skirts a woman whose face was sweet and sad a stiff bonnet framing
loops of thick hair and here's the tony morrison sentence the clarinets had trouble because the
brass was cut so fine not low down the way they love to do it but high and fine like a young girl
singing by the side of a creek passing time her ankles cold in the water
and the main appeal of mixed cumulative construction is that it combines the strength of both
coordinate and subordinate forms allowing the sentence to move forward in time and open up new
ideas while also maintaining its intensity and focus here's a mixed cumulative sentence from
joseph heller that shows what i mean he worked without pause taking the faucet apart spreading
all the tiny pieces out carefully counting and then studying each one interminably as though he
had never seen anything remotely similar before and then reassembling the whole small apparatus
over and over and over again with no loss of patience or interest no sign of fatigue no indication
of ever concluding it's worth noting that the mixed cumulative form can easily draw from the
sound and logical advantages of coordinate form most obviously when the mixed cumulative
sentence stresses parallelism of sound or structure in freestyle chris anderson cites a loren isley
sentence that sounds and feels more coordinate than mixed precisely because its six modifying
phrases balance three parallel second levels against three parallel third levels i used to park my car
on a hill and sit silently observant listening to the talk ringing out from neighbor to neighbor
seeing the inhabitants drowsing in their doorways taking it all in with nostalgia the sage smell
of the wind the sunlight without time the village without destiny it should be apparent to some
of your ears by now that i'm a real fan of balanced or dupal rhythms and pros i love their sound
and firmly believe that balance appeals to the mind as well as the ear it's extended parallels
and matchups easy to follow and hard to forget one of the many benefits of cumulative syntax
is that it points us toward parallel constructions and actually generates sound balances that
sentence by isley is the kind of thing that just starts happening with ever greater frequency
as we write more cumulative sentences but from my money the real master of mixed cumulative
rhythms is f scott Fitzgerald as we can hear in the following stunning sentences from the great gatsby
her face was sad and lovely with bright things in it bright eyes and a bright passionate mouth
but there was an excitement in her voice that men who had cared for her found difficult to forget
a singing compulsion a whispered listen a promise that she had done gay exciting things just a
while since and that there were gay exciting things hovering in the next hour here's another
great one slenderly languidly their hands set lightly on their hips the two young women preceded
us out onto a rosy colored porch open toward the sunset where four candles flickered on the table
in the diminished wind and another perhaps some unbelievable guest would arrive a person
infinitely rare and to be marveled at some authentically radiant young girl who with one
fresh glance at gatsby one moment of magical encounter would blot out those five years of
unwavering devotion and there was a ripe mystery about it a hint of bedrooms upstairs more beautiful
and cool than other bedrooms of gay and radiant activities taking place through its corridors
and of romances that were not musty and laid away already in lavender but fresh and breathing and
redolent of this year's shining motor cars and of dances whose flowers were scarcely withered
and believe me there are plenty more where those came from in this lecture i've tried to show how
the steps cumulative sentences take each modifying phrase a new step fall into three main categories
each category displaying different logical relations between and among the base clause
and modifying phrases each category having different rhythms and different strengths
we've looked at coordinate cumulative sentences where all the modifying phrases point back to
the base clause and any one of which makes sense if moved just before or just after the base clause
these coordinate cumulatives can be thought of as two level sentences with all of their second
level modifying phrases pointing back to the first level of the base clause if we try to
visually represent coordinate cumulative sentences numbering their levels they look like this
first level he grabbed her hand second level his heart pounding second level his knees shaking
second level his head spinning second level his palms sweating second level his fright
slowly fading away or they look like this second level the game in the entire season on the line
base clause he stepped up to the home plate second level a hulking giant who suddenly
seemed a bit smaller another one the chalk lines around the plate barely visible to his squinting
eyes his face dripping nervous sweat grim determination evident in his every move barely
hearing the crowd chant his name tightly gripping his bat all too aware that in a few moments he
would be a hero or a heel we've seen subordinate cumulative sentences where the modifying phrases
are pretty much locked in place below or after the level of the sentence they modify with modifying
phrases after the second level each taking the phrase before it to a new level of information
or explanation if we try to visually represent subordinate cumulative sentences numbering
their levels they look like this their levels looking much like stair steps first level his
business plan was a joke second little more than a childish dream first formed when he was eight
third old enough to realize the advantage of having lots of money fourth advantages such as
being able to buy every comic book in the store and a fifth level the comic store itself representing
to his young mind fabulous success and we've seen mixed cumulative sentences where some modifying
phrases follow the coordinate pattern and some follow the subordinate pattern try to imagine
how this mixed cumulative sentence would be visually represented based on the sound of each
of its steps cumulative sentences can take any number of forms detailing both frozen or static
scenes and moving processes their insistent rhythm always asking for another modifying phrase
allowing us to achieve ever greater degrees of specificity and precision a process of focusing
the sentence in much the same way a movie camera can focus and refocus on a scene zooming in for
a close-up to reveal almost microscopic detail panning back to offer a wide-angle panorama
offering new angles or perspectives from which to examine a scene or consider an idea
understanding the way each of these three cumulative patterns works makes it easier for us to write
extended cumulative sentences perhaps more important understanding the concept of sentence levels
can be very important immediately giving writers reachable goals for improving their writing it
may be a bit of an oversimplification but generally speaking one mark of inexperienced or
ineffective writing is that it relies heavily on sentences of only one or two levels just adding
one new level of information to our sentences whether the modifying phrases phrase we add
follows the coordinate or the subordinate pattern means that our sentences will contain more
information more detail better explanation in short adding even a single new level to our
characteristic sentence will make them more effective both in terms of their sound and in
terms of their sense this is as close to magic as writing gets and if we can start composing the
occasional cumulative sentence that contains several more modifying phrases and or several
new levels we start thinking and writing much more effectively and frequently much more elegantly
lecture nine coordinate cumulative sentences
the last lecture contained a lot of fairly technical discussions and used the number of
terms to describe the differing mechanics of coordinate and subordinate and mixed cumulative
sentences this lecture will be shorter on terms and descriptions and longer on considering the
kinds of writing tasks that coordinate cumulative construction seems tailor made for but the really
good news i have for those of you whose eyes glaze over when someone gets into the intricacies of
grammatical description is that you really need to remember very very few of the terms labels
definitions i've introduced in the past couple of lectures and will add to from time to time in
this and subsequent lectures i think it's easier to write cumulative sentences if we understand
their basic grammar and logical construction but one of the beauties of this syntax is that we
don't have to think very much about their design once we become familiar with their distinctive
rhythms now this is probably not what joyses steven deadless was thinking about in ulysses
when he meditated on the ineluctable modality of the visible but the point of his meditation on
the difference between sight and sound eyes and ears applies perfectly here our eyes may glaze over
when assaulted by sentence level diagram after sentence level diagram but when we read these
sentences aloud our ear picks up the rhythms formed by the logical relationships between and
among their base clause and modifying phrases or to put this another way once your ear picks up
the insistent rhythms of these sentences those very rhythms can generate new cumulative levels
now i don't mean to suggest there's anything murky or mystical about this process instead
it's really very similar to what happens when we learn to ride a bicycle we can read all the
instructions and rules in the world for riding a bicycle but nothing takes the place of actually
getting on a bike and going through the exhilarating and scary process of learning that
our body balances us without any conscious thought on our part our bodies learn the rhythm
the feel of riding a bike and once we've internalized that knowledge we never need to think about
instructions or rules for balancing on a bike again never again that is until we need to teach
our children how to ride and then we go through the frequently frustrating experience of trying to
teach them by explaining what they need to do all the while knowing we just have to push them and
let them fall until their bodies get it the way ours did all of which is to say that probably the
best and most useful advice i can give to anyone who wants to master writing cumulative sentences
is this read them aloud read every sentence you write aloud read every example of cumulative form
you find aloud read them aloud in the bathroom or in a closet if reading aloud makes you self
conscious but trust your ear to understand cumulative rhythm before you consciously
understand all the principles involved in its construction this is such a simple immediate
and surefire way to improve our writing that it amazes me every year when i have a tough time
getting all of my students to do this and it's easy to tell who does and who does not read
their sentences aloud before class when i have them read their work aloud in class it almost
never fails that they pause or stop dead at precisely the point where had they read the
sentence aloud in private their ear would have told them it needed work i just smile knowingly at
those moments and over the course of the semester these telltale moments usually diminish in frequency
and then disappear altogether as i said before there's nothing mystical about this process
your ear will detect problems or awkwardnesses or alert you to the need to add more information
to your sentences because the parts that sound clunkier go bump when you read them aloud almost
always sound bad because the logic of the sentence needs tweaking either the modifying phrase needs
a clear target or object of modification the agent of an action needs to be specified the
modifying phrase needs more overlap with the word it modifies etc how our eyes are very forgiving
and frequently fail to catch these problems but our ears almost never let us down alerting us to
something that needs fixing in the sentence even if we can't easily describe the problem
for me this most frequently means i'll think a sentence needs an extra beat an extra word to
smooth out its rhythm and it's almost always the case that what my ear hears as the need for an extra
beat turns out to be that the modifying phrase needs to be more specific or to make its connection
to the preceding phrase more clear by backtracking to point more clearly to what it modifies or
moving forward to add new information for example if i hear the following sentences i hear something
in each that doesn't quite ring true or that needs just a bit of tweaking see if you hear what i hear
a large hand grabbed my hair sharply forcing my head back jarring my neck muscles stretched
tautly the lumberjacks ax split the base toppling the tree crashing to the ground
the rough concrete tore through my jeans embedding small pieces of gravel into my knee
ruining another pair of pants a wonder they lasted this long
i started to run something large landing on my back getting nowhere now the first of these sentences
moves along nicely until that final modifying phrase a large hand grabbed my hair sharply
forcing my head back jarring my neck muscles stretched tautly that final phrase muscles
stretched tautly sounds odd because it doesn't make clear whether those taut muscles belong to the
speaker of the sentence or to the person whose large hand grabbed the speaker's hair accordingly
we need to tweak the sentence to clear up that ambiguity and we do it this way a large hand
grabbed my hair sharply forcing my head back jarring my neck tautly stretching my muscles
or even better because it picks up and reemphasizes neck with the overlapping word throat a large
hand grabbed my hair sharply forcing my head back jarring my neck tautly stretching the muscles in
my throat and better still if we honor professor strunks injunction to omit needless words and
cut both sharply and tautly since both are already implicit a large hand grabbed my hair
forcing my head back jarring my neck stretching the muscles in my throat now remember that second
sentence the lumberjacks axe split the base toppling the tree crashing to the ground it sounds a bit
odd when it gets to that final modifying phrase because crashing doesn't really have anything
to modify if it's supposed to modify axe or the entire base clause the sentence should read something
like the lumberjacks axe split the base toppling the tree the split causing it to crash to the ground
if crashing to the ground is supposed to modify base the sentence should read something like
the lumberjacks axe split the base toppling the tree sending the base crashing to the ground
or if this is really meant to be a subordinate cumulative sentence with crashing to the ground
modifying the preceding phrase toppling the tree then the sentence should read something like
the lumberjacks axe split the base toppling the tree crashing the tree to the ground
or better still because it adds important information and smooths out the rhythm a bit
the lumberjacks axe split the base toppling the tree sending the massive oak crashing to the ground
similarly and i bet you can see why i'd want to improve those last two sentences by making them
read something like this remember the original was the rough concrete tore through my jeans
embedding small pieces of gravel into my knee ruining another pair of pants a wonder they
lasted this long and i'd revise this to read the rough concrete tore through my jeans embedding
small pieces of gravel into my knee ruining another pair of pants the wonder being that they
had lasted this long remember the other original i started to run something large landing on my
back getting nowhere i'd revise this to read i started to run something large suddenly landing
on my back preventing me from escaping now these are only a few of the ways in which the original
sentences could be made to sound better the improvement in the way they sound resulting
from our tightening up the logical relationships within the sentences providing missing objects
of modification or clarifying some aspect of what is being described one of the great beauties
of the cumulative sentence is that it always presents us with a number of different workarounds
that will smooth over rough spots in the way the senate sounds or in the logical relationships
of its parts one final example of the point i'm trying to make if i hear the sentence
he became a pirate a murderous rogue i may well want to improve the sound and the sense of the
sentence by backtracking and focusing a moment longer on pirate and then making what i mean by
murderous rogue a bit more specific so i'm likely to revise my sentence to read he became a pirate
one of those scourges of the sea a murderous rogue indiscriminately killing both passengers and crew
of the ships he captured i like the sound of this extended sentence more than the sound of the one
i started with but more important this sentence now displays the kind of overlap or redundancy of
information that gives the cumulative sentence its clarity and insistent force now readers not
only see that he became a pirate but that the pirate he became was a scourge of the seas and a
murderous rogue and also learn why he might be called a murderous rogue years ago i had a wise
colleague who liked to explain that the difference between students who loved to read literature
and students who became english majors was like the difference between folks who wanted their cars
to take them places and those who insisted on knowing and understanding what was actually
under the hood i think that having at least a rough idea of what's under the hood and cumulative
sentences makes it easier to write them but i also think that recognizing the distinctive sounds
and rhythms of cumulative sentences is more than enough to allow most writers to drive them
wherever they want to go having said that it's time for us to go back under the hood
for a few more minutes more specifically let's consider some of the advantages of
coordinate cumulative sentences in the last lecture i explained that coordinate cumulative
sentences pile up a number of modifying phrases all of which point back to or modify either the
entire base clause or some part or word in the base clause given a base clause containing a subject
a verb and a direct object the coordinate modifying levels may sharpen or focus on the whole clause
its subject its verb or its object coordinate levels keep the sentence running in place
as more information is added to its load my former colleague at iowa carl claus one of the most
important influences on my understanding of pro's style and a masterful stylist in his own right
offers these examples of coordinate cumulative sentences written by his students each with
two second level modifying phrases the dog lunged toward him fangs bared eyes rolled back in anger
the guillotine falls slicing the air heads rolling on the ground
the storm raged on a brutal assault indiscriminate in its destruction
her hair hung long and loose down her back blue black in the stage lights flowing with each
animated gesture as she played the piano solo he bought a mattress at goodwill lumpy and
ancient tiny bugs hiding in its springs she served the dessert a french pastry affair
dripping with dark chocolate the armored men hurl themselves into battle metal crashing
screams fading she was a classical musician a second violinist scorned by her fiddle playing
brothers i photographed her against the sunset a goddess her white gauze robe glowing blonde
with mellow light most cumulative sentences don't have more than a couple of modifying phrases
and in some ways the cumulative sentence with two modifying phrases isn't a bad goal for writers
hoping to make their sentences more effective a cumulative sentence with only a single second
level is more satisfying than would be the sentence without a second level but a single cumulative
modifying phrase only begins to tap the advantages of cumulative syntax if a sentence only takes a
single cumulative step it can't really be said to be either coordinate or subordinate since we
need at least two modifying phrases before we can make that determination accordingly while a
cumulative sentence with only a single modifying phrase does take the important step that gives
the sentence a second level of meaning or texture such a sentence does not plug into either the sound
or logical advantages of longer more pronounced cumulative sentences however the coordinate
cumulative sentence with two second level modifying phrases such as those we just saw from carl
claus offers writers a number of opportunities for parallels and parallel rhythms for insistent
repetitions and backtracking overlaps and allows writers to make clear their control of this
important syntax like francis christensen i'd love for my writing students to become sentence
acrobats who can dazzle by their syntactic dexterity but i feel like i've given them a
valuable skill if they simply start incorporating into their writing a few cumulative sentences
with at least two modifying phrases when writers take the next step adding a third modifying
phrase to their sentences their prose becomes even more effective their control of syntax even
more impressive and the beauty of the coordinate cumulative syntax is that this next step does
not require mastery of any new principles it just asks the writers to add one more modifying
phrase similar to or even almost identical with the first two second level modifying phrases they've
used for example returning for a moment to two examples we borrowed from carl claus we can easily
add a third modifying phrase to each to the sentence the dog lunged toward him fangs bared
eyes rolled back in anger we can simply add his attack swift and unexpected to the sentence the
storm raged on a brutal assault indiscriminate in its destruction we can easily add a third
modifying phrase flattening houses as if they were made of matchsticks but adding a third cumulative
modifying phrase also gives us a chance to use that phrase as a comment on or a summing up of
the previous two phrases as we can again see in these examples provided by carl claus before the
bonfire she dips and sways to the talk of the bongos long skirt swirling snapping castanets
in time to the beat of the drums a frenzied rhythm sweeping her far into the night or i walked with
him hand in hand down the quiet neighborhood street that spring evening the air heady with the scent
of lilacs past lawn sprinklers that sounded like gentle waterfalls in love for the first time
indeed one of the most effective moves writers can make in cumulative sentences with three or more
modifying phrases is to make the final phrase either a kind of summation or make it a simile or
metaphor that nails down or drives home the idea the preceding phrase is bill toward consider these
examples each of which uses that final modifying phrase to comment on or characterize earlier
phrases he drove the car carefully never speeding never running red lights always looking both ways
at intersections always defensive the small girl rose from her seat determined head held high
demanding attention like a queen it was a heartbreaking moment both lovers feeling deep
emotion a combination of bewilderment and sadness a time when words are no use at all the awkward
silence marking a final farewell now that we've looked at and listened to a number of
coordinate cumulative sentences i'd like to briefly consider a couple of the distinctive forms they
take with which most of us are already familiar although we may not have previously thought of
them in quite these terms the first is a pattern we hear particularly during political races
since the coordinate cumulative sentence has both the repetitive parallelism
and the insistent repetition favored in political rhetoric i bet you'll recognize this pattern
or you may want to think of it as a distinctive rhythm i am proud to place in nomination the
name of one of iowa's native daughters a woman who has served this state in various public offices
for over 15 years a woman who attended the university of iowa and then drake law school
a woman whose name has become synonymous with working to keep iowa green a woman who has fought
tirelessly to protect the rights and livelihood of iowa farmers a woman who stands for all that
makes iowa great a woman who will never forget her iowa roots or her iowa values and so on
and on and on and on and on and here's another pattern or rhythm i bet will sound familiar
he raced through the airport running faster than he ever had before dodging slower moving
travelers weaving around baby carriages and wheelchairs trying to listen to departure
announcements hoping against hope that his plane was still boarding wondering what had possessed
him to have that second margarita virginia tufti offers another and distinctly more literary
example of this coordinate pattern featuring a string of second level modifying phrases
all beginning with an ing participle their trim boots prattled as they stood on the
steps of the colonnade talking quietly and gaily glancing at the clouds holding their
umbrellas at cunning angles against the few last raindrops closing them again holding their skirts
demurely okay okay you undoubtedly notice that this example from joys is portrait of the artist as
a young man actually sneaks in one subordinate third level modifying phrase closing them again
which can only make sense if it refers to the umbrellas in the preceding phrase this is a good
time for me to stress that writing pure coordinate sentences in which there are only second level
modifying phrases all modifying the base clause is almost never a goal in itself just a reminder
that the intrinsic strengths of the coordinate form are most pronounced when that pure form is
achieved and it may well be the case that a brief digression from the pure coordinate structure
as we see in Joyce's sentence makes more sense and works better than would the sentence without
that fleeting third level s is always the case in writing effective sentences specific context is
much more important than as following any abstract blueprint for a particular syntactical pattern
in the case of Joyce's sentence as Tufti points out all those ing participle phrases have a
vigorous narrative impact building our sense of an ongoing feeling or process indeed we might think
of the coordinate cumulative sentence as establishing a sense of what Gertrude Stein called the
continuous present describing a process that we know must unfold in time but presenting it as a
series of components or constituent actions that are themselves free from time markers
that would impose chronological order on them in this way coordinate cumulative sentences slow
readers down forcing them to pause as a process or action is broken down into discrete parts
the sentence lingering to deepen detail going back to elaborate the base clause rather than
moving on to completely new propositions christensen offers us another example of this effect
citing a sentence from Walter van Tilburg Clark best known for writing the oxbow incident
that memorably describes a flying predator he could sail for hours searching the blanched
grasses below him with his telescopic eyes gaining height against the wind descending and
mile long gently declining swoops when he curved and rode back never beating a wing
without making too big a point of it here i'd note that the coordinate form also lends itself to the
description of rhythmic processes as the above sentence itself seems to follow the rising and
descending motion of the bird flight it describes its sense of a kind of continuous present composed
of actions of searching gaining descending and never beating also tends to add a kind of experiential
or visceral dimension to the flat statement of the base clause that this bird could sail for hours
we have long recognized the ability of poets to have their poems seem to do what they are about
but it is equally the case that fine prose writers routinely and largely unconsciously craft sentences
whose rhythms reinforce the propositional content of the sentence adding to its impact now before we
before we move on in the next lecture to subordinate and mixed cumulative sentences
i need to offer one important reminder and one small caveat the reminder is that while the
examples of coordinate structure i've offered in this lecture have all been of right branching
sentences where the modifying phrases all come after the base clause coordinate cumulatives can
also be left branching where the modifying phrase comes before the base clause or mid branching
where the modifying phrase interrupts the base clause coming between its subject and its verb
and of course all kinds of mixes of these structures are also possible
i've limited myself to right branching examples just because they're easier to follow easier to
diagram and i hope easier to remember consider the following example rubbing his hands together
running his hungry eyes over the steaming food he sat down anticipating the feast savoring its
aromas stunned by his good fortune realizing an opportunity like this might never come again
this sentence reminds us that true coordinates second level modifying phrases are free modifiers
and can be placed in any order around the base clause and in many cases the cumulative modifying
phrases modifying phrases can come between the subject and the verb of the base clause as is
the case with this sentence kressler exhausted from having gone three days without sleep discouraged
by his failure to find even a single clue to his client's murder suspecting that he would never
be able to solve this case went home the caveat is that not all coordinate modifying phrases work
exactly in the way grammar tells us they can or should work you see even though coordinate
modifying phrases are technically free modifiers meaning we should be able to move them around
in any combination not all of them are completely free being tied to a specific place in the
sentence by the logic of their propositions most coordinate cumulative sentences work like the
example i gave above rubbing his hands together running his hungry eyes over the steaming food
he sat down anticipating the feast savoring its aromas stunned by his good fortune realizing
an opportunity like this might never come again those five coordinates second level modifying
phrases can be shuffled and reshuffled into any order around the base clause the base clause
he sat down we can write the sentence making it entirely left branching rubbing his hands
together running his hungry eyes over the steaming food so on and so on until you get to the base
clause we can make it completely right branching he sat down rubbing his hands together running
his hungry eyes over the steaming food anticipating the feast and so on and so on and so on or we
can do anything in between we can mix and match the cumulative phrases that's the way free modifiers
are supposed to work but so-called free modifiers can be stuck in particular places in the sentence
by the needs of spatial temporal causal and agential logic here's what i mean consider these
two sentences he got up early waking long before sunrise always looking for an edge always trying
harder than anyone else believing sleep a waste of time motivated by insecurity and greed and
another version he got up early waking long before sunrise going for his daily two mile run before
breakfast usually limiting his morning meal to coffee in a single piece of toast showering and
dressing quickly leaving for work shortly before 8 a.m in the first sentence we might find some
order of those coordinate modifying phrases more effective than others but the phrases are indeed
free and they can be written in any order in the second sentence the coordinate modifying phrases
are grammatically free since each of them could be placed immediately after the base clause and
make perfect sense but they are not free to be shuffled around because they're logically tied
to a chronological order the subject can't leave for work before his morning run before breakfast
etc accordingly we need to be sure that our coordinate cumulative modifiers always make sense
in the order we place them honoring progressions or sequences in time and space their order tracking
through time from large to small right to left cause before effect tying agent to action and so
on once more we're reminded that the so-called rules of grammar should really be thought of as
guidelines some of them quite loose the bottom line is that language is inherently rebellious
chafing against any authority that would attempt to limit what it can and cannot do
finding these pressure points where the rules simply don't work
is part of what makes writing so much fun
lecture 10 subordinate and mixed cumulatives
as we saw in the last lecture coordinate cumulative modifying phrases can be quite powerful
returning again and again to the base clause to add detail or explanation offering a kind of
continuous present where the senate seems to linger on a statement trying to get it fully
detailed almost as if the writer keeps remembering one more important thing to say before moving on
accordingly one of the strengths of the coordinate cumulative form is that it suggests a writer
who is very concerned with the reader and wants to give that reader a satisfying amount of information
in a senate's form that makes a lot of information easy to process
one drawback of the coordinate form however is that it calls attention to itself through its
pronounced repetitions and parallels sometimes to such an extent that writers must be careful
not to rely too heavily on the form the repetitions in a single coordinate cumulative
senate focus our attention on the base clause in a way that makes the senate stick in our minds
but as is always the danger with repetition too many coordinate cumulative sentences become
well they become repetitious and they run the risk of becoming boring
fortunately cumulative syntax provides us with almost unlimited patterns of modification
so we can avoid relying too heavily on any single pattern or rhythm if the coordinate cumulative
form represents one extreme of the cumulative syntax the extreme where the senate seems to run
in place adding more detail or explanation to the propositional content of the base clause
but not moving the focus of the senate's to new information then the subordinate cumulative pattern
represents the opposite extreme the extreme where the senate seems constantly moving forward
leaving the base clause in the dust subordinate modifying levels move the focus of the sentence
forward moving from general to specific zooming in like a movie camera they can also break a
hole into its constituent parts which is pretty much the same thing that a colon can do subordinate
levels can also lead us into new thoughts nudging us to be ever more specific to refine and or
detail whatever we've just written as I've previously noted the main appeal of subordinate
cumulative construction comes from its ability to advance the senate's into new territory
making it particularly effective when used to describe a process or to follow something that
unfolds in time as opposed to the tightly progressive logic of the coordinate cumulative
senate's where every new modifying phrase ties back to the base clause the subordinate cumulative
senate seems able to ramble moving almost randomly to new information thus we can get a
sentence like he drove carefully one hand on the wheel the other hand holding a sandwich
a ham and cheese fossil a strangely colored lump made three days before by his sister a simple
trusting woman someone who deserved a better life than fate had dealt her a life of happiness
if not of success the basic happiness of feeling loved and needed and we can easily see the movement
of this sentence if we diagram its levels number one he drove carefully two one hand on the wheel
three the other hand holding a sandwich four a ham and cheese fossil five a strangely colored
lump made three days before by his sister six a simple trusting woman seven someone who deserved
a better life than fate had dealt her eight a life of happiness if not of success nine the basic
happiness of feeling loved and needed sure that sentence is a stretch it seems to race forward
on the edge of being out of control it's hard to imagine a writing situation that would call for
such an exaggerated and extended subordinate form but it is good to know that the subordinate form
can make any single sentence tell a story moving the focus or action of the sentence forward and
just as the identifying characteristic of a coordinate cumulative sentence is that any of its
modifying phrases will make sense if placed directly before or after the base clause because
all of its second level modifying phrases point back to the base clause the identifying characteristic
of the subordinate cumulative sentence is that none of its modifying phrases after the second
level will make sense if placed directly before or after the base clause it doesn't make sense for
instance to write he drove carefully a ham and cheese fossil we can't write he drove carefully the
other hand holding a sandwich and we can't write he drove carefully the basic happiness of feeling
loved and needed the above subordinate cumulative sentence moves through nine levels of modification
and clearly pushes the form to and probably passed a point of diminishing effectiveness
but subordinate sentences of only four or five levels don't run into that problem for instance
few of us would think anything strange about a sentence that read he drove carefully one hand
on the wheel the other hand holding a sandwich a ham and cheese fossil a strangely colored lump
made three days before by his sister now that sentence clearly prepares us for a shift of
focus to the sister revealing that one of the strengths of the subordinate cumulative form
is that it provides clear transitions from one sentence to another virtually guaranteeing that
our writing will never sound choppy because it's hard to tell how it moves from one sentence to another
in an earlier lecture i pointed out that it's actually hard to find
pure examples of subordinate cumulative sentences where each new modifying phrase is
a new level in the sentence i offered one example from sin claire lewis he dipped his hands in the
bichloride solution and shook them a quick shake fingers down like the fingers of a pianist above
the keys and here are two examples from josephine miles from literal to figurative is one range
that a word may take from foot of a person to foot of a mountain a substituted or metaphoric use
in the second sentence from concrete to abstract is another range from foot to extremity stressing
one of the abstract characteristics of foot a contrast for which the terms image and symbol
as distinguished from concept are also used sentences that consist entirely of subordinate
cumulative modifying phrases particularly those that develop through more than three levels
are difficult to find in part because the circumstances that call for such a pure construction
are as rare as they are hard to imagine once again i should stress that purity of syntactic form
is rarely if ever something writers should be concerned with in real life writing situations
this is consistently the case in my approach to writing i try to present the most pure or
most extreme form of a sentence syntax only to suggest the point where the inherent strengths
or advantages of that form are at their greatest most of us most of the time will approach but rarely
reach the exaggerated limit of pure syntactic form
indeed most subordinate cumulative sentences are really just dominantly subordinate rather than
exclusively so by that i mean that their distinctive rhythm has a bit more to do with
moving the sentence forward than having it run in place as coordinate form suggests or to put
this another way writers will almost certainly rely more heavily on cumulative sentences that mix
coordinate and subordinate modifying patterns than on those that exclusively present just one form
or the other you may remember some of the mixed form cumulative sentences we've seen in earlier
lectures there was a wonderful sentence from lauren iesley that combines coordinate and subordinate
modification but does so in a way that clearly stresses the repetitions of the coordinate pattern
over the forward motion of the subordinate here's the sentence i used to park my car on a hill and
sit silently observant listening to the talk ringing out from neighbor to neighbor seeing the
inhabitants drowsing in their doorways taking it all in with nostalgia the sage smell of the wind
the sunlight without time the village without destiny and here's a mixed cumulative in which
the subordinate rhythm seems to dominate a characteristically stunning sentence from
joes of conrad's heart of darkness yet another reminder of conrad's stylistic genius the great
wall of vegetation an exuberant and entangled mass of trunks branches leaves bowels festoons
motionless in the moonlight was like a rioting invasion of soundless life a rolling wave of
plants piled up crested ready to topple over the creek to sweep every little man of us out of his
little existence as is true of so many aspects of the cumulative sentence we might not agree
which rhythm or pattern dominates in these sentences and we might not agree with the way
a sentence is diagram since in many cases there's actually some doubt about whether a modifying
phrase is subordinate or coordinate a result we get when the phrase can make sense as either
but i can't stress too strongly that disagreements such as these are beside the point they just
don't matter as long as we understand the general principles of cumulative syntax
precise labeling or classification isn't necessary for writers to use the form effectively
we should think of cumulative form much as we think of the human hand which functions in an
infinite number of ways depending on what we need it to do sentences are like hands we use
both to meet the needs of particular situations and the point is almost never how we label or
classify either our sentences when we set them to particular tasks or what a hand does when we use
it to point or pick up or squeeze or gesture or sort or hold or do any of the infinite number of
tasks a hand routinely performs the point is simply to get the job done
and now it's time for us to make sure we understand all or at least most of the ways
we can get the job done by adding cumulative modifying phrases to our sentences it is particularly
important when we write subordinate or mixed cumulative sentences that we have a good idea of
all the forms a modifying phrase can take this is so because while the coordinate cumulative form
invites repetition and may actually have greater impact or power when all of the modifying phrases
are of the same kind subordinate and mixed cumulative form rewards variety in modifying
phrases when four or five second level coordinate modifying phrases all start with for instance
an ing participial phrase the repetition and predictability of that single form strengthens
the sentence but that same degree of repetition and predictability simply won't work well in
subordinate or mixed cumulative sentences where we need variety accordingly i want to take just
a minute to review the basic patterns that a cumulative modifying phrase can take and once
again while i'll offer a brief grammatical description of each pattern you don't need to
remember the grammatical terms if you recognize and remember the way each pattern sounds indeed
i strongly urge you not to worry about the grammatical descriptions but simply to read
these patterns aloud until they become familiar to your ear remember while no set formulas can
anticipate the problems or opportunities posed by the situations in which sentences develop
there are several general patterns for adding cumulative modifying levels to base clauses
given a base clause containing a subject a verb and an object we know three immediate targets
for further modification by cumulative phrases depending on the object of modification those
cumulative phrases may appear in the initial medial or final modifying slots but as i've
done in most of my lectures the examples i offer will all appear in the final position
you'll notice that in many cases the cumulative pattern produces adjectival information that
might otherwise have been subordinated in relative clauses that in several cases the cumulative
pattern may actually subsume a relative clause and that the cumulative pattern sometimes encourages
us to figure out relationships between seemingly unrelated bits of information some of these patterns
will sound natural only when we follow them with one or more other cumulative levels
given the base clause the woman closed the door here are the 10 main possibilities for adding
second level modifying phrases to that base clause and these patterns will also work for adding
subordinate levels to preceding phrases i know that what follows will sound really repetitive
repetitive but i think the patterns are far easier to see here and understand when we use
the same base clause for all of them so here goes number one perhaps the easiest way to add
a second level is to begin the modifying phrase with a verbal this means base clause verb plus
well for easiest way to do this is base clause verb plus ing the woman closed the door closing it
with a bang we can also do it with any verb plus ing the woman closed the door catching her heel
on the step are almost any verb plus ed the woman closed the door blinded by the dust
or we can start it with almost any past participle the woman closed the door driven by the wind
number two a variation on this pattern is to begin the modifying level with a verbal plus
another modifier an adverb for instance the woman closed the door grinning crazily the woman closed
the door moving crisply the woman closed the door distracted momentarily three or you can begin
the modifying phrase with an article plus one of the nouns either the subject or the object from
the base clause the woman closed the door a door made of carved oak the woman closed the door
the door she had never before dared close the woman closed the door a woman eerily dressed
entirely in white the woman closed the door the woman the world would soon know so well
fourth pattern you can begin the modifying phrase with an article plus an adjective plus one of
the base clause nouns the woman closed the door a magnificent door the woman closed the door a
magnificent woman the woman closed the door the ominous door and the woman closed the door the
ominous woman fifth way you can begin the modifying phrase with an article plus an adjective
plus almost any noun followed by a prepositional phrase the woman closed the door a crazy grin
on her face the woman closed the door a gaping hole in its central panel the woman closed the
door the billowing snow behind her the woman closed the door an awful look in her eyes
the woman closed the door the silver doorknob between her thumb and index finger sixth way
you can begin the modifying phrase with an article plus an appositive for one of the
base clause nouns or a noun phrase appositive for the action of the clause now an appositive is
a noun substitute that refers to the same thing as the original noun or sense of the entire clause
but considers it from a somewhat different viewpoint so we'd get the woman closed the door
an enraged mother ready to confront her son's tormentors the woman closed the door a crudely
framed exit to the garage the woman closed the door the only obstacle to the mad man's rage
the woman closed the door a determined politician ready to begin work the woman closed the door
an action she would long remember and never regret the woman closed the door a clear sign
of her insistence on privacy seventh way you can begin the modifying phrase with a possessive
pronoun referring to either subject object or to the sense of the entire base clause
the woman closed the door its massive hinges creaking eerily the woman closed the door her
massive fingers choking its doorknob the woman closed the door its doorknob helpless in the
vice of her grip the woman closed the door her face a study in triumph the woman closed the door
it's closing her final act of rebellion the woman closed the door her effort little short
of heroic the woman closed the door her decision no longer a mystery eighth way you can begin the
modifying phrase with an adverb or an article plus an adverb the woman closed the door madly
fleeing the swarm of wasps the woman closed the door cheerfully determined to retype her article
the woman closed the door quietly securing its three different locks the woman closed the door
carelessly slamming it behind her the woman closed the door the soothingly quiet night luring her
into its darkness nine you can begin the modifying phrase with an article plus entirely new
information including even relative non sequiturs i'm not really sure how this works but it does
work the woman closed the door the stormy night swallowing its solid thud the woman closed the
door a radio blaring in the background the woman closed the door the ice cream cone in
her hand beginning to melt the woman closed the door a threadbare coat draped over her right
shoulder the woman closed the door an entire morning wasted by senseless meetings and at last
here's the tenth and final way of doing this you can begin the modifying phrase with almost
anything followed by a simile or metaphor that details all are part of the base clause
the woman closed the door grinning like the proverbial Cheshire cat the woman closed the door
sounding like a thunderbolt the woman closed the door her action as fresh as a wet kiss
the woman closed the door pandora with a second chance and remember each of these 10 patterns
for adding a second level can in turn be followed by one or more modifying levels that follow any
of the 10 patterns mix and match is the name of this game and there are other patterns that
modifying phrases can follow but these are the most prevalent ones i can think of now i'm pretty
sure by now you're even more tired than i am of hearing the woman closed the door but i have my
students repeat this exercise with a base clause of their own choosing simply to help them realize
just how many different ways there are to write cumulative modifying phrases my guess is that
each of us will consciously or unconsciously gravitate toward using some of the above 10
patterns much more frequently than others but what's most important is that we remember not
just how many patterns there are but that they can be combined in an almost infinite number of
variations if we write our cumulative sentences using only one or two modifying patterns our
sentences will start sounding too repetitive even sing songy but if we understand the range of
options we have available to us for crafting modifying phrases we can rely very heavily on
cumulative sentences without it ever becoming apparent how heavily we are relying on a single
syntax we've now reached the point where the possible patterns for modification and mixed
cumulative sentences are far too numerous for us to categorize them accordingly i'll just offer a
number of examples hoping to indicate the almost infinite possibilities and rhythms of the mixed
form i'll start with some prescriptive formulas i ask my students to follow on a worksheet that
presents the structural diagram for a mixed sentence without saying anything about content
i ask my students to respond to the challenge of the following structural prompts now this is going
to be a bit hard to describe if you're not looking at the exercise which is reproduced in your guide
book but i'll try to give you an idea of the prompts i then expect my students to finish on
their own adding their own modifying phrases for instance i'll give them the base clause big al
headed back into the bar first level and then i'll say okay i want two second level modifying
phrases this first starting with the word a the second starting with his and then i want
two third level modifying phrases and you can do them any way you want or i'll give them the base
clause they sat down at the table and i'll say i want a second level modifying phrase that starts
with he and then a third level that starts with his another third level that starts with his
another second level that starts with she a third level that starts with her another third level
starting with her then another second level going back to that base clause and picking
up the other part of it the table and then two third levels starting with the possessive pronoun
it's. And then finally another second level, a kind of summative thing here, the overall
scene suggesting blank and then I let them fill in the blanks. When I give this exercise,
I get fabulous sentences like these in response. I love some of these sentences. Big Al headed
back into the bar, a demented grin twisting his scarred face, his bloodshot eyes narrowed
to a fierce squint, looking around the dim and smoke filled interior, scanning the terrified
inhabitants for any of his tormentors. Here's another. Big Al headed back into the bar,
a Louisville slugger baseball bat clutched in his hands, his menacing stance better for
chopping wood than for batting practice, arms directly above his head, the bat slowly making
small circles as he decided on his target. Here's the other one. They sat down at the
table. He, resignedly slumping into the straight back chair, his tired face, a picture of dejection,
his hands shaking uncontrollably. She, stiffly taking her seat with exaggerated formality,
her eyes cold and hard and locked on his, her thin lipped smile at once triumphant and
condescending, the table piled high with stock reports and financial statements, its surface
completely covered with documents of desperation, its jumble of information now completely useless,
the overall scene suggesting an abandoned battleground. Wow, that's a sentence. Here's
another form. They sat down at the table. He, quietly awed by the restaurant's fabled
elegance, his left hand admiringly rubbing the silk tablecloth, his right hand tracing
the etching on a fine crystal goblet. She, distracted by and obviously more interested
in the other diners, her eyes drawn to tables at which sat well-known celebrities, her imagination
running wild about others she didn't recognize, the table an altar to excess, its place setting
sporting no less than four different kinds of forks, its intricately patterned china giving
off a kind of radiance, the overall scene suggesting what it might be like to dine
at a restaurant in heaven. Now, obviously, an exercise such as this has absolutely no
direct application to any real world writing situation, but almost without fail, once my
students realize they can control that much information using cumulative syntax, and once
they realize they can produce sentences that sound that good, they realize how easily they
can produce similarly complex and rhythmic sentences of their own. Once my students make
that discovery, they usually become enthusiastic and impressive masters of the cumulative syntax,
giving themselves over to its seductive rhythms, its logical strength, and its generative magic.
My hope is that their experience will become yours as well.
Lecture 11, prompts of comparison. This will be the first of two lectures suggesting
ways in which cumulative syntax can be employed to remind us of sentence moves that almost
always improve our writing. This lecture will discuss the advantages of incorporating similes
into cumulative sentences. Similes generally describe something in terms of something else,
the comparison being signaled by like or as, or the phrases as if or as though. The next
lecture will focus on the advantages of using speculative phrases, usually beginning with
words such as because or possibly or perhaps. But I'm going to throw you a wee bit of a
curve in both of these lectures because technically, most of the sentence moves I'll be describing
are not exactly cumulative. However, it ought to be clear by now that I'm a much more interested,
in the way a sentence works, the way it does what it does than in naming its parts or holding
it to strict grammatical standards. Accordingly, both this lecture and the next one will be
talking about steps a sentence can take that may not be cumulative in a strict grammatical
sense, but that work cumulatively, plugging into cumulative rhythms and offering the same
kind of overlap and repetitive emphasis we expect of cumulative modifying phrases. The
bottom line here is that no matter what we call them, these sentence moves can make our
writing more effective. Possibly more important, by adding steps to our sentences that give
our readers a new way of looking at what we are writing about, we make our writing more
distinctive, more clearly the product of a unique consciousness, our own, a reflection
of our individuality, a sign of our originality, and whatever prose style is, that's one of
its important functions. I'm sure we all remember the basic definition of a simile as one of
two primary figures of speech, similes and metaphors, both of which make comparisons,
asking us to think of something in terms that may at first seem surprising. A simile explicitly
compares two things of different kind or quality, usually introducing the comparison with like
or as. A metaphor is a kind of stealth simile, offering a comparison of two things of different
kinds or quality, but implying or assuming the comparison and not introducing it explicitly
with words such as like or as. Thus, she ran like a gazelle, is a simile, comparing a girl
to a famously fast and graceful animal, and introducing the comparison with the word like.
But she gazelles her way across the field would be a metaphor, the comparison implicit
in a verb that suggests her movement had qualities that might be associated with a gazelle. Not
every simile is a metaphor since some similes simply make comparisons and do not ask us
to think of one situation or thing as being something else, but every metaphor inherently
implies the comparison we find in a simile. Both similes and metaphors make our writing
more interesting and more effective, both quickly and powerfully suggest comparisons
that might be impossible to explain in any literal way. Years ago, S. I. Hayakawa noted
in his classic textbook, Language and Thought and Action, that similes don't actually compare
to apparently dissimilar things or situations as much as they compare our feelings toward
those two things or situations, thus offering a window onto the way we feel as well as the
way we think. As Hayakawa puts it, quote, the simile is something of a compromise stage
between the direct, unreflective expression of feeling and the report, but of course closer
to the former than the latter, end of quote. He goes on to suggest that, quote, the imaginative
process by which phrases such as these similes are coined is the same as that by which poets
arrive at poetry. In poetry, there is the same love of seeing things in scientifically
outrageous but emotionally expressive language, end of quote. I mention Hayakawa's view not
only because I think it gets directly at the way similes work in our writing, but also
because, like Josephine Miles, he reminds us that prose and poetry are not so different
in their appeals, both taking steps that have more in common than we might at first think,
with offering effective platforms for the use of similes to strengthen the relationship
between writers and their readers. For instance, he endured a firestorm of criticism, gets
and holds our attention more effectively, at least I think, than he endured intense criticism,
although what he endured didn't actually involve either smoke or fire, but the metaphor of firestorm
of criticism, or the simile, the criticism he faced hit him like a firestorm, both have
an emotional aspect that reveals something of the writer's sense of the intensity and
drama of the situation in which someone is being criticized, not just the fact that someone
is being criticized, or when we say she ran like a gazelle, we probably don't literally
mean that she was as fast as that particular animal that she ran on all fours and so on,
but we are expressing a kind of visceral admiration at the way she runs. Professional writers
rely heavily on figurative language, similes and metaphors, to make their sentences at
once more informative and more interesting, more informative by suggesting clarifying
comparisons, more interesting by turning the sentence into a more vivid, engaging or
speculative direction. In the past, you may have encountered a writing teacher who warned
you against relying heavily on similes and metaphors, apparently viewing these lively
figures of speech as, quote, mere ornament, touches that might add superficial flair to
our writing, but that make no important contribution. Indeed, E. B. White, in the list of reminders
included in his, an approach to style chapter, which he added to Professor Strunk's advice
in the combined book, The Elements of Style, seems to belong to this particular school
of thought, sounding a warning against heavy use of similes. We can almost hear him sniff
when Mr. White dismissively writes, quote, the simile is a common device and a useful
one, but similes coming in rapid fire, one right on top of another, are more distracting
than illuminating. The reader needs time to catch his breath. He can't be expected to
compare everything with something else with no relief in sight, end of quote. Now, I don't
know what kind of writers Mr. White was thinking of when he wrote this warning, but the last
thing I worry about with my writing students today is that they might use too many similes
overwhelming their readers with a cascade of comparisons. Indeed, I have to labor mightily
to get my students to use any similes. I urge them to think of the simile as an important
way to forge an emotional link with their readers, at once suggesting to readers that
the writer is doing his or her level best to make clear what he or she is trying to
describe or explain, and giving readers a glimpse into the way the writer thinks, as
opposed to just what the writer sees or reports. Our choice of similes shows how we process
information, how we think about the information we're passing along to our readers, how we
organize it, how we understand it, our attitudes toward it. As Aristotle suggested in his rhetoric,
the ability to make comparisons between things that are unlike and seemingly far apart is
quote, a sign of sound intuition in a philosopher, end of quote, one mark of a sharp and distinctive
mind. I think that in most writing situations, it is not just advantageous, but is in fact
crucial that writers reveal their distinctive individuality, their personality as sound
thinkers through their writing. Accordingly, I try to get my students to see the importance
of processing information rather than just presenting it. A security camera in a convenience
store can present what happens in front of its lens, but that security camera is just
like every other security camera in every other convenience store. We might prefer to
have the information that camera presents to not having the information, but we have
no reason whatsoever to value what it records and presents over what any other or every
other security camera would record and present. I see writing in much the same way. I think
one of the most important goals of our writing is to reveal the nature of the writer's mind
at work, a process in which the writer wants readers to value the writer's thoroughness,
accuracy and logic, but also the writer's unique way of looking at and understanding
the world. That's really what's at stake when we talk about a writer's style, and I try
to get my students to see the importance of writing with style rather than writing as
if they were an unthinking and unfeeling security camera. And cumulative syntax offers us great
opportunities to do exactly that. The cumulative sentence gives us an effective way of organizing
the information and opinion we present in our writing, suggesting to our readers that
we do take pains to keep the logical relationships clear among the propositions our sentences
advance, suggesting to our readers that we are attuned to the rhythmic pleasures of language
as well as to its utilitarian functions, forging a kind of implicit contract with our readers
in which they can be confident that we're doing our level best to communicate as fully
and clearly with them as we possibly can. And more to the point of this lecture, cumulative
syntax also gives us great opportunities to make even more distinctive similes a part
of our writing practice. Indeed, in keeping with the way in which we can think of cumulative
syntax as a generative syntax, offering us prompts, inviting us to use similes to sum
up or look back on previous information or details from a new vantage point. More important
when writers add a simile to their cumulative sentence, they give the sentence a distinctive
touch, making a comparison that may be surprising, revealing something important, individualistic,
and possibly unique about the way the writer's mind works. Listen to the striking opening
sentence of Joseph Conrad's The Secret Shareer. On my right hand, there were lines of fishing
stakes resembling a mysterious system of half-submerged bamboo fences, incomprehensible in its division
of the domain of tropical fishes, and crazy of aspect, as if abandoned forever by some
nomad tribe of fishermen now gone to the other end of the ocean, for there was no sign
of human habitation as far as the eye could reach. I've slightly repunctuated this sentence
to emphasize its cumulative rhythms, but I cite it here to note how it is only when
we get to the simile as if abandoned forever by some nomad tribe of fishermen that we fully
understand the extent to which Conrad's narrator has a very active imagination and loves to
use it to make stories out of what he sees. In other words, while mastery of coordinates,
subordinate, and mixed cumulative forms is an important goal and may tell us a lot about
a writer's syntactic skill and versatility, it doesn't do much to distinguish the skill
and versatility of one writer who writes great cumulative sentences from the skill and versatility
of another writer who also can write great cumulative sentences. However, the similes
these two writers will think of, the comparisons they will make will almost certainly be different
 each writer drawing from different knowledge, different experiences, and revealing different
interests. In this way, the similes these writers choose may tell us much more about
the way each thinks and sees the world than does the sentence structure each favors.
Whatever we understand a writer's style to be, one key to the nature of that style is
likely to be found in the writer's use of figurative language. This is an important
part of what Walker Gibson is getting at when he writes in his classic study of style,
Tough, Sweet, and Stuffy that, quote, a style is not simply a response to a particular kind
of subject matter, nor is it entirely a matter of the writer's situation and his presumed
audience. It is partly a matter of sheer individual will, a desire for a particular
kind of self-definition, no matter what the circumstances, end of quote.
Our use of figurative language is one of the acts of self-definition that goes into creating
the style of our writing. And while our use of the cumulative syntax is itself an act
of self-definition that goes toward establishing the style of our writing, that cumulative
syntax also lends itself to our using both similes and metaphors in our writing. Indeed,
the distinctive cumulative rhythm particularly invites and rewards our use of similes. Consider
the following sentences, some seen and heard before, but now see them taking a new step
with the addition of a simile. The boy sat down at the table eagerly anticipating the
feast, never suspecting it would be the last meal he would eat, acting as carefree as a
lark. Okay, I'm not at all sure that larks are really carefree, and I am sure that carefree
as a lark is a much overused cliche, but this simile adds a sense of closure to the sentence,
a final comment that sums up all that has gone before it. Imagine how much more effective
a more original simile would work here, possibly something along the lines of as unconcerned
with his future as a pig in mud, or better make that as a shark in a feeding frenzy.
Well, you get the idea. Try this one. Tired and hungry just back from a week in the bush
I limped into the mess hall hoping the food lines were still open, feeling like the fool
it seemed I had become. Or this one. The chef prepared the fish carefully, stuffing it with
wild rice, sauteing it briefly, its sweet aroma blending smoothly with the other enticing odors
in the kitchen, the fish becoming more than a food item, ascending to the status of art
as if transformed by magic. Or this. The boy fainted, a goofy looking sixth grader, his
face turning white, muscles turning to jelly, dropping his books uttering a kind of pained
squeak scared witless by what he saw, seeming to shrivel up like a deflating balloon.
Now, as it happens, I'm not proud of, or even satisfied with any of the above sentences.
The similes I've added in final modifying phrases aren't very original, they aren't
very striking, and they aren't very effective. In great part, that is the case because they
were arbitrarily tacked on to the end of already completed sentences, rather than growing out
of the logic of the sentence as it developed. I offer these examples only as a rather crude
reminder that the cumulative syntax provides an armature on which we can almost always
tack, assimilate, in much the same way that any sentence can be turned into a cumulative
sentence if we only change the period at its end to a comma and start adding free modifying
phrases. Any cumulative sentence can be summed up or clenched by adding one more modifying
phrase that contains a comparison introduced by like, or as, as if, or as though. And of
course, the simile doesn't have to come at the end of the sentence, but can be introduced
before, or after, or in the middle of the base clause, as is true of free modifying phrases
in general. Here's the way Thomas Pinchon incorporates similes into some of his
characteristically cumulative sentences in his recent novel Against the Day. They loomed
out there in black mystery above the bright interiors and the pharaoh players and insatiably
desirable girls, and sometimes shadowy figures could be seen kneeling, reaching out to touch
one of these slag piles reverently as if like some counter Christian Eucharist, it represented
the body of an otherworldly beloved. Here's another. With the sun at this angle, the keratag
looked like a stone city broken into gray crystalline repetitions of city blocks and
buildings windowless as if inhabited by that which was past sight, past light, past all
need for distinguishing outside from in. Kit found he could not look at this country
directly for more than a minute or so as if its ruling spirits might properly demand
obliquity of gaze as a condition of passage. Or she would return to her deck chair out
of breath, sweating, exhilarated for no reason as if she had just escaped some organized
threat to her safety. After running madly round and round in the same tight circle at
top speed a number of times, the vessel as if getting a grip on itself finally slowed
down easing back to vertical and steadying on to a new course southeast by east. These
sentences are noteworthy in a number of different ways. First of all, I hope you hear their
insistent cumulative rhythms even if they're not always punctuated in ways that emphasize
their essentially cumulative structure. Second, I'm pretty sure you can't miss their
essential ambiguity. None of these sentences out of context makes it clear what's going
on, but all suggest a kind of mysterious, numinous quality to the semblance of Pynchon's
novel. Each as if suggests the possibility that something is going on other than what
seems to be the case, that a report of what characters can see or seem to understand may
not be enough to capture the indeterminacy of Pynchon's world. And finally, while the
similes he uses may not be dramatic showstoppers so striking they will stick in our minds long
after we've closed the pages of Pynchon's novel, they are arguably not comparisons any
of us would have thought of, thus serving to reinforce, as if it really needed reinforcing,
the uniqueness of Thomas Pynchon's novelistic vision. Indeed, consider for just a moment
some of the other numerous similes Pynchon uses, and here both to save time and to focus
more intensely, I'll just reproduce the similes stripped from the sentences in which they appear.
As if the division between the singers were more than the width of a valley, as if they
were protecting themselves against future gringo mischief, as if in the breeze from an
undefined wing passing his face, as if emerging from the resolute blindness of history, as
if this were a message from a realm with which he had done business, as if parties to a secret
whose terrible face was somehow conveniently set to one side, as if it were not a fellow's
appearance so much as his odor she wished to appear indifferent to, as if there were
something up here to be gotten through as a point of honor. Pynchon's, against the day,
teams with similes such as these, just as it teams with elaborately extended cumulative
sentences. Indeed, I think it's safe to say that against the day contains more similes
and more cumulative sentences than has any American novel written in the past 50 years.
Of course, when we remember that against the day is a whopping 1,085 pages long, it probably
has a formidable head start in both categories, with competition possible from only a few
other massive novels such as David Foster Wallace's Infinite Jest or Neil Stevenson's
Cryptonomicon. My point is not to plug Pynchon's novel, although I think it quite remarkable
and rewarding both for students of American fiction and for students of the sentence,
but to note how his characteristic similes fit so well into his characteristically cumulative
sentences. Pynchon frequently places his similes as the last of a number of sentence
steps using that final as if, as a kind of summary comment on what has come before, but
he also uses the simile as a kind of hinge earlier in the sentence, a step which turns
the sentence in a new direction with subsequent cumulative modifying phrases pointing back
to elaborating and or explaining the simile itself. And of course, Pynchon is far from
being alone and employing similes in this fashion and to this effect. For instance,
we can see something similar going on in Joyce Carol Oates' frequently anthologized creepy
short story, Where Are You Going? Where Have You Been? There, Oates introduces the very
threatening Arnold Friend, who may be a serial killer, maybe the devil, or just an old fiend
as rearranging the letters of his name suggests. And she creates the mood of her story in part
by using simile-clenched sentences such as these. They went up through the maze of parked
and cruising cars to the bright lit, fly-infested restaurant. Their faces pleased and expectant
as if they were entering a sacred building that loomed out of the night to give them
what haven and what blessing they yearned for. He was standing in a strange way, leaning
back against the car as if he were balancing himself. He stood there, so stiffly relaxed,
pretending to be relaxed, with one hand idly on the door handle as if he were keeping himself
up that way and had no intention of ever moving again. She watched this smile come awkward
as if he were smiling from inside a mask. Once again, I want to call attention to the
way in which these similes lend themselves to cumulative rhythm, giving the sentence
another distinctive step, even when that step is not emphasized by punctuation. So far,
most of the examples of similes I've offered have introduced their explicit comparisons
with the words as if, even though we know that similes are frequently, if not most frequently,
identified by the use of like to indicate a comparison. He spoke like a robot. She looked
like a troublemaker. They huddled together like sheep. Nor have I given many examples
in which the comparison is introduced by as though, which grammatical expert after grammatical
expert assures us incorrectly, I believe, means exactly the same thing as does as if.
More on this distinction in a moment. I've focused on as if similes because they most
powerfully lend themselves to cumulative rhythm. Similes introduced by like need to be processed
a bit before they fit as well into cumulative sentences. He spoke like a robot shows no sign
of cumulative syntax, but with the addition of just a bit more information, always a good
thing in my view, the simile can become a cumulative step. He spoke slowly, mechanically, without
inflection, like a robot. We even start to plug into the strength of cumulative syntax
and a much shorter version of this sentence that would read, he spoke slowly like a robot
or better still. He spoke slowly sounding like a robot. The point I want to make here
is that similes while not always technically cumulative modifying phrases can work exactly
like a cumulative modifying phrase works. If the sentence clearly takes a step indicated
either by punctuation, usually a comma or a dash or by the distinctive rhythm of cumulative
progression, then I'm happy to call the simile a cumulative step. And I'm happier still when
I come across these steps in the writing of my students. Bottom line is that our writing
benefits when we use similes and metaphors to reveal more about the way we think or feel
about what we're writing. And I think our writing benefits even more when we incorporate
the similes we use into cumulative syntax. I should stress that I don't value similes
more than I value metaphors. Just the case that the metaphors come in so many varieties,
I can't generalize about how they might be used in conjunction with the characteristic
advantages offered the writer who controls cumulative syntax. And here, once again, we
see how the cumulative syntax can function generatively, acting as a heuristic prompt
to urge us to make our sentences more detailed, better explained, more individualistic, more
effective. I do not believe that mechanical by the number sentence construction is the
key to producing more effective sentences. But I do believe that the writer who understands
a full range of syntactic and rhetorical options is much more likely to take advantage of opportunities
where those options might apply than as the writer who does not command the full range
of tools provided by a thorough knowledge of cumulative syntax.
One of the most important assumptions of this course is that the most effective prose
establishes a relationship between writer and reader. That's a relationship between
two people, two distinct personalities. If our writing doesn't offer some glimpses of
writers as personalities, it's hard to say that it has a style, much less that its style
will appeal to readers. As I noted in the last lecture, if our writing displays no more
of the way we think, the ways in which we process information, than does objective technology
such as that we might find in a security camera at a convenience store, it probably doesn't
matter that what we write accurately records and reports information. That's the difference
between a writer and a security camera. The security camera only records what takes place
in front of its lens, while the writer thinks about, reflects upon, forms opinions about,
and frequently comments on what he or she is writing about.
Another way of putting this assumption is for me to argue that our writing is purpose-driven.
And almost always we have multiple purposes when we write. We write to accomplish a wide
variety of goals and very, very rarely is our primary goal only to record or to report.
We record and report in order to accomplish larger purposes, and those larger purposes
shape the way in which we approach the task of recording and reporting. Choosing what
to include, choosing what to exclude, organizing our presentation of information to best suit
our purposes. And one of the important purposes that we should always have in mind when we
write is as Joan Didion so powerfully put it in her celebrated essay on keeping a notebook,
remember what it was to be me. That is always the point. Now, Didion was specifically meditating
on keeping a notebook or a journal and not on writing in general, but I think her reminder
serves all writers in good stead, applying to greater or lesser degree to almost everything
we write. She was definitely not offering a brief for solipsism, even a notebook writing,
or even arguing that the writer should primarily be concerned with remembering and conveying
their personality in everything they write. She was, I believe, reminding herself and us
that writing is one of the most distinctly human activities and that like all human
knowledge, it inherently, inevitably and gloriously involves acts of interpretation. If that were
not the case, there would be no difference between the human writer and the mechanical
security camera. If we scale down this large philosophical assumption to the level of the
sentences we write, it suggests we should be concerned not just with the accuracy and
clarity of what we write, but that we should also be concerned with making our writing
a reflection of who we are, how we think, what we value. The style of our writing is determined
by a huge number of variables, but one aspect of that style should always be that our writing
present us as individual consciousnesses, as personalities who process the information
we pass on in our writing rather than as automatons who only record, report, or summarize information
as if it were being spewed out by a machine, or even worse, by a committee.
Sure, there are some writing situations where we want to submerge our individuality in the
collective prose of a committee, and there are some situations when we might want our
writing to pretend to the accuracy and objectivity of a mechanical recording device, although
I'm hard pressed to think of situations where we would want that to be the case, but here
as elsewhere in this course, I'm referring to writing as a discovery process in which
writers find out things about themselves, even as they write for specific audiences with
specific purposes in mind. My definition of writing always includes the processing of
information by the writer's mind, a requirement that distinguishes between writing and writing
and a requirement that distinguishes writing from copying, from repeating, from mere recording
and reporting. We signal that we're processing information in our writing in a number of
ways, several of which we've already been exploring in this course. The cumulative syntax
itself signals our determination to get it right, to extend the detail and explanation
in our writing further, to take one more crack at making as clear as possible what we're
trying to communicate using cumulative modifying phrases to sharpen our images and to better
reveal our reasoning. In the last lecture, I suggested that the cumulative syntax can
also prompt us to include similes and metaphors in our writing, particularly similes that
compare what we're writing about with something else, the comparison both offering another
perspective on or way of thinking about our subject and offering a window onto the way
our own thinking works, a glimpse of our intellectual personality, our individuality, our
style. Now, I want to suggest another way in which the cumulative syntax can serve to
prompt us to reveal more about our thinking, more about the characteristic ways in which
we process information. One step beyond making the comparisons as similes do between two
things or situations that are different and sometimes quite different is for us to speculate
about that which is not known. Indeed, some similes are already well on their way beyond
comparison and into speculation. As we can see in this passage from John Updike's well-known
short story, A&P, where the protagonist, Sammy, is describing a striking young girl in a
bathing suit who, along with two friends, has just entered the grocery store where he's
checking her. Quote, she didn't look around, not this queen. She just walked straight on
slowly on these long white primidonna legs. She came down a little hard on her heels as
if she didn't walk in her bare feet that much, putting down her heels and then letting the
weight move along to her toes as if she was testing the floor with every step, putting
a little deliberate extra action into it. Now, both of the as-if comparisons Updike offers
in this last sentence reveal Sammy's speculation as he tries to account for the girl's noteworthy
way of walking. Both of these similes are actually offered more tentatively than authoritatively,
presented as possible comparisons, possible explanations. Two sentences from Joyce Carol
Oates's Where Are You Going, Where Have You Been suggests the degrees of difference between
a simile that primarily advances a comparison and one that primarily advances a speculation.
She spoke in a simple lilting voice exactly as if he were reciting the words to a song.
That seems firmly grounded in an easily visualized comparison. But consider this sentence, she
looked at it for a while as if the words meant something to her that she did not yet know.
Now, that seems to be a simile of quite different sort, offering much more speculation than it
offers actual comparison. We signal such speculation in lots of different ways, but I'll just focus
on three of these signals, the words because, possibly, and perhaps. I've chosen these words
because they also lend themselves to the step logic and downshifting rhythms of the cumulative
syntax. And that also means that they lend themselves to becoming generative challenges or
heuristic prompts in the way the cumulative syntax does so distinctively and so well.
Consider these sentences, the dog froze in place, ears up to detect the slightest sound,
eyes riveted on the clump of brush, possibly sensing danger.
Or, cumulative syntax prompts us to add information to our sentences, reminding us that there's
always more to say, more detail or explanation that will make our writing more clear, possibly
serving us a silent voice, a kind of personal writing trainer, urging us to go for that extra level
of meaning, to push ourselves to anticipate a reader's possible questions about what we've
just written, always thinking about the benefits of having our sentences take that extra step.
Or, he suddenly ran off the stage, possibly because he'd forgotten his lines, possibly
because he had just noticed the audience for the first time, perhaps even because he was
in some physical distress.
Each of these sentences goes beyond stating what is known to suggest motivations or causes
that remain speculative. Each sentence attempts to explain the image, idea, or situation at
references, revealing that the writer wants to be helpful, wants to account for things
as well as possible, wants to further engage the reader in the effort to make the best sense
possible of the information provided by the sentence.
Each sentence gives us a glimpse of the way the writer thinks about the world in general
and the subject of his or her writing in particular.
My pitch is that adding speculation concerning motive behind cause of or interpretation of the
events or actions we write about helps forge the connection between reader and writer as two minds
at work. Obviously, speculations introduced by words such as possibly or perhaps will not be
appropriate in many writing situations, but knowing how well the cumulative syntax lends
itself to speculative phrases introduced by these words may prompt us to consider whether
or not to use them. After all, just knowing how easily we can add speculation to our writing
may encourage us to put a bit more of the way we think into our writing, possibly forging
a stronger relationship with a reader who appreciates our willingness to go beyond the
just-the-facts-ma'am literalness of Sergeant Joe Friday in Dragnet, perhaps signaling our readers
that it is as important to wonder why and how things happen as it is to know what happens.
Here, of course, I'm thinking of writing situations where it is as important to present our judgment,
our ability to interpret, our commitment to understanding as it is to present unprocessed
information. In this advocacy for making cumulative steps speculation an option in our writing,
I'm applying to writing the advice Margaret Atwood gives to readers in her didactic short story
Happy Endings. In that minimalist meditation on possible plots involving various relationships
among briefly sketched lovers, Atwood urges readers to focus less on plots, which she
describes as, quote, just one thing after another, a what and a what and a what, end quote.
Her advice is, quote, now try how and why. I think that's great advice for writers as
well. And in the cases when the how and why of a situation have not been and possibly cannot
be determined, it frequently benefits the writer to move beyond the known to speculate about
the likely or even just the possible. Consider these sentences.
The fire spread quickly, its flames fanned by the stiff breeze consuming the small apartment
in minutes, possibly the result of a candle left burning too close to blowing curtains.
Now some cumulative sentences place a second level modifying phrase just after the first clause
in a compound sentence and just before the second clause, as in this sentence from E.B. White,
they damned the falls, shutting out the tide and dug a pit so deep you could look down
and see China, possibly using that middle modifying phrase as a kind of hinge turning the
sentence in a new direction. Thomas Berger remains one of America's most celebrated
under red authors, a writer whose books enjoy rave reviews, but whose sales and numbers
rarely rise above respectable, possibly because his fiction consistently resists the twins'
sentimentalities of idealism and despair. Linguistic theory tells us that the last or the next to
last step or slot in the sentence generally is the place in the sentence where we want to put
the most intonational stress. As Martha Cohn explains in her chapter on
Senate's rhythm in her rhetorical grammar, grammatical choices, rhetorical effects, this
well recognized rhythm pattern is called end focus, and it gives rhythmic emphasis to
information at the end or near the end of the sentence. Indeed, Professor Strunk had already
intuited this principle in 1919 as his 22nd and final principle of composition in his little
book was place the emphatic words of a sentence at the end. I have mixed feelings about this
advice, particularly when it is used to make the claim that periodic or suspensive sentences
are somehow superior to loose or right branching cumulative sentences. The truth is we can shape
our sentences so that we can emphasize any part of them we want to, and that emphasis is
rhetorical rather than grammatical, determined by the context and purpose of the sentence
rather than by its grammatical form. To his great credit, Professor Strunk acknowledged
that truth by qualifying his end of sentence advice explaining, quote, the proper place
in the sentence for the word or group of words that the writer desires to make most prominent
is usually the end, emphasis mine. Moreover, shortly thereafter he adds that the, quote,
other prominent position in the sentence is the beginning, emphasis mine again. The point
we need to remember is that position by itself may or may not place emphasis, but the end
position does generally tend to lend itself to emphasis. And that's why in the last lecture
I suggested the advantages of using the final step of a cumulative sentence for a summative
simile or a simile that recasts previous information in more dramatic and memorable form. And that's
why in this lecture I'm suggesting the advantages of using the final step of a cumulative
sentence for speculation about motive or likely consequences or cause, speculation signaled
by the words because, possibly, or perhaps. Of these heuristic prompts, because sounds
a lot more certain than does possibly or perhaps, and because is a subordinating conjunction
almost always introducing a subordinate clause rather than a modifying phrase. But I group
these words together because they serve very similar informational functions and they so
frequently appear in combination. We can see how they work in combination in sentences such
as, the guard fainted, dropping his rifle, crumbling at the feet of the queen, perhaps
because he had been standing in the blazing sun for hours, or as in, we all dropped the
class, possibly because we couldn't see how it would help us make our fortunes, possibly
because its instructor spoke very rapidly in a shrill, high voice, possibly because we
were not convinced of the value of deconstructing old episodes of Buffy the Vampire Slayer or
possibly because it was at 7.30 in the morning. Of course, the cumulative syntax also invites
the placement of speculative phrases in the initial or medial slots of the sentence. But
as has been my practice so far, I've focused on the final slot simply to take full advantage
of the generative power of the cumulative. Its final modifying phrase always reminding
us of the option of coming up with a simile or speculation that might provide a new perspective
or offer a summation of what has gone before in the sentence. Both options also giving
us a chance to reveal more of the way we process information in our writing.
Nor do the heuristic prompts I've singled out exhaust the possibilities for introducing
such speculation. Indeed, for and as can be used interchangeably with because. He knew
that calling for help was useless, a waste of breath, because no one lived for miles
around. He knew that calling for help was useless, a waste of breath, for no one lived
for miles around. Or he knew that calling for help was useless, a waste of breath, as
no one lived for miles around. Obviously, none of these variations is a cumulative
phrase in strict grammatical sense. But if the clause introduced by because or by causal
uses of for or as come to us at the end of phrases that have established the cumulative
rhythm, they work cumulatively, plugging into the rhetorical advantages and opportunities
cumulative syntax offers us. I'm also not sure that any significant difference exists
among these three sentences, but I suspect each of us gravitates toward one of these
options more than we use the other two. And I further suspect we do so because we sense
at least connotative differences among the three. To my ear for in place of because sounds
just a bit old, archaic, possibly poetic, at the very least using for in place of because
that is using it as a conjunction may lead to some confusion if a second for appears
in the sentence, this time serving as a preposition. We can see this happen in a sentence from
Joan Didion essay on keeping a notebook responding to complaints from members of her family that
her memories of shared events are frequently an error. She acknowledges very likely they
are right for not only have I always had trouble distinguishing between what happened and
what merely might have happened, but I remain unconvinced that the distinction for my purposes
matters. As in place of because sounds a tad smug to me. She didn't come to the party as
we had not invited her. As a matter of fact, as is a word with as many different uses as to
stun those of us who don't think systematically, perhaps obsessively about language. Indeed
Fowler's modern English usage identifies a whopping 13 different ways or senses in which the word
as can be used. I mentioned this only because it is from little choices such as those concerning
our choice between as and for from which we build individual writing styles. And as much as
possible, I'd like my own writing style to be the result of conscious choices that I can if need be
explain even though those choices have become so habitual or so natural for me that I certainly am
no longer conscious of them when I write. Nor of course are possibly or perhaps the only words
we can use to signal speculation. Maybe would serve the same purpose or we might choose probably to
signal a greater degree of confidence in our speculation. And should we wish to move beyond
speculation to offer an explanation that puts distance between our thinking and apparent or
received truth, we might wish to introduce our summative cumulative modifying phrase with a word
such as likely, a phrase such as more likely or a word as insistent as actually. Here's an example.
The guard fainted dropping his rifle crumbling at the feet of the queen, likely a casualty of poor
training and poor conditioning. Another. The guard fainted dropping his rifle crumbling at the feet
of the queen, more likely a sign of his nervousness than of exhaustion. And one more. The guard
fainted dropping his rifle crumbling at the feet of the queen, actually reinforcing the view widely
held by the press that these ceremonial inspections were pointless. And of course, the verbs most
frequently associated with a kind of writerly speculation I'm advocating are seems and appears,
the verbal participial forms of both seeming and appearing custom made for introducing speculative
cumulative modifying phrases. Here's an example. Each essay explored another of the writer's fears
seeming to reveal an almost infinite number of pathologies, each appearing more threatening than the last.
Another example. She built her business slowly, opening a new store only when its success was certain,
seemingly incapable of miscalculations when assessing likely profits. Or another. The young novelist
produced bestseller after bestseller appearing to have stumbled on some magic formula for literary success.
By this point in the lecture, I must seem less and less concerned with the production and inclusion
in our writing, just of cumulative sentences, and more and more concerned with ways in which we foreground
ourselves in our writing as thinkers, developing the ethical appeal of our writing. I've only begun to skim
the surface of ways in which we can foreground ourselves in our writing as thinkers, as information
processors. Obviously, there are an almost infinite number of ways we can call attention to ourselves as
the consciousness, the personality behind what we write. We can use verbs of intellectual agency,
verbs such as I think, I believe, I know, or it seems to me. We can use phrases that self-consciously
foreground our thinking, phrases such as, in my opinion, or the way I see it, and their other ways,
probably beyond counting and certainly beyond systematic study to accomplish this important goal.
For instance, listen to the way E.B. White makes his opinion very clear about the ethics of mining companies
in this sentence from his essay, Letter from the East.
The mining companies soon milked the place dry of copper and zinc and got out the way mining companies do.
If his choice of milked as a verb didn't establish his view of mining companies, the final cumulative
modifying phrase, the way mining companies do, makes his disdain unmistakable.
Indeed, I'm betting that each of us could come up with quite a list of ways in which we can signal in our writing
the individuality of our thinking. What's more, I bet our list would be quite different, yet another tribute
to the diversity and multiplicity of language.
Perhaps I should acknowledge once again that my approach to teaching writing does value very highly the ethos aspect
of rhetorical situations, in part because those other two classic components of rhetoric, logos and pathos,
strike me as much more beyond the effective reach of writing instruction, since they are always so context dependent.
We may not be able to anticipate the logical or emotional context in which we must write, but we do always bring
the same creative consciousness to the process of writing. We can always remember, as Joan Didion put it,
what it meant to be me, or what it means to be me, and how we want to communicate to our readers, our personality,
our individuality as the creative mind behind what we write.
And we are now fast approaching an important turning point in this course.
In the next lecture, I will make a final pass at stressing the importance of the rhythm of our sentences,
particularly as cumulative syntax provides us with some fairly predictable ready-made rhythms.
But in lecture 14, we'll shift our focus from the cumulative syntax as a versatile and powerful armature on which we can
build our writing style and begin looking at other syntax opportunities, some of which can still be approached
through cumulative techniques, but some of which are nearly completely antithetical to the cumulative assumptions
and practices to which I've devoted the first half of this course.
It's time now for us to turn our attention to the delaying strategies of periodic or suspensive sentences
and to the powerful rhythmic appeal and emphatic power of balanced forms and serial constructions.
This does not mean, however, that we will suddenly abandon the cumulative moves we've been exploring.
Instead, we will discover that the versatility of the cumulative sentence can also be extended to help us master these new forms,
although cumulative syntax will now become only one of the many different means to the end of making our writing more effective.
These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled, Building Great Sentences, Exploring the Writers' Craft, Part 2.
Lecture 13, The Riddle of Pro's Rhythm
I'm really fond of the old Jerome Kern Oscar Hammerstein song that goes,
I can't dance, don't ask me. Only, as I suspect a number of you may already be thinking, that isn't exactly the way the song goes.
The title of the song is, I won't dance, and the lyrics go, I won't dance, don't ask me.
I'm not sure when I confused the lyrics or how I managed to remember can't dance from a show-stopping song and dance number performed by Fred Astaire,
who somewhat famously could dance.
Of course, it may be that my misremembering dates not from watching Astaire and Ginger Rogers in the 1935 musical Roberta,
but instead dates from the equally memorable performances by Kermit and Miss Piggy in an episode of The Muppet Show.
And after all, some confusion may be understandable here,
since it seems that the original lyrics for the Jerome Kern Oscar Hammerstein version of, I won't dance,
were completely rewritten by the songwriting team of Dorothy Fields and Jimmy McHugh,
and it's their lyrics we remember, or in my case, misremember today.
And indeed, even though it is Fred Astaire who sang the song in Roberta while spectacularly dancing,
the lyrics do at least hit it problems with dancing, including, I won't dance, why should I? I won't dance, how could I?
Now, if you're wondering why I've suddenly gone all musical trivia on you, there is a reason.
You see, I can't dance. Absolutely no sense of rhythm.
Oh, sure, I can shuffle around enough to fake it for a minute or two at weddings, bot mitzvahs, anniversary celebrations and the like,
but I simply can't dance.
And to judge from the anguished admissions I kept coming across on the internet when I was trying to track down the song whose lyrics I so tellingly misremembered,
I'm not alone. The number of my fellow sufferers, all of us rhythmically challenged, is legion.
Moreover, I was grateful to discover that I am far from being alone and misremembering I won't dance as I can't dance.
Indeed, many of the references to this song on the web make that very same mistake.
But here's the funny thing. Well, my sense of rhythm is pretty close to hopeless when it comes to dancing or even to clapping in time with music.
I think I have a very good ear for rhythm in prose. I recognize it even when reading silently.
I think I do a good job of invoking it when I read prose aloud.
And I can be equally hypnotized by the gentle and carefully crafted rhythms of prose written by Virginia Woolf,
or the sometimes manically varied prose rhythms found in the fiction of Thomas Berger.
Listen to this justly celebrated exquisitely measured passage from Virginia Woolf's Mrs. Dalloway.
Quiet descended on her, calm, content, as her needle, drawing the silk smoothly to its gentle paws,
collected the green folds together and attached them very lightly to the belt.
So on a summer's day waves collect over balance and fall, collect and fall,
and the whole world seems to be saying that is all more and more ponderously,
until even the heart in the body which lies in the sun on the beach says, too, that is all.
Fear no more, says the heart. Fear no more, says the heart,
committing its burden to some sea which sighs collectively for all sorrows and renews, begins, collects, lets fall.
And the body alone listens to the passing bee, the wave breaking, the dog barking, far away, barking and barking.
And here are two very different sounding sentences from two of Thomas Berger's novels.
The first is from his classic Little Big Man and is in the inimitable voice of Jack Crabb.
As I say, none of us understood the situation, but me and Caroline was considerably better off than the chief,
because we only looked to him for our upkeep in the foreseeable future, whereas he at last decided we was demons
and only waiting for dark to steal the wits from his head.
And while riding along he muttered prayers and incantations to bring us bad medicine,
but so ran his luck that he never saw any of the animal brothers that assisted his magic such as rattlesnake or prairie dog,
but rather only jackrabbit who had a grudge against him of long standing because he once had kept a prairie fire off his camp
by exhorting it to burn the hare's home instead.
Second example is from Berger's retelling of the matter of Britain and his Arthur Rex,
and sounds more than a little bit like Sir Thomas Mallory, but like a Mallory who has just mastered the cumulative sentence.
Now the abominable Cermeliac Grant took Guinevere to a kingdom that was not very distant from Britain,
but was cunningly concealed, tucked into a valley amongst mountains,
entrance to which could be gained only by one pass not easily found,
and before this pass was a rushing river over which was but one bridge, the narrowest in the world,
for it was made of one long sword, the weapon of a giant, the which was mounted horizontally, keen edge, upwards.
I've chosen these particular passages to share with you to suggest the range of prose rhythms we can hear
in Wolf's finely architected prose, Berger's mastery of American vernacular prose rhythms,
and Berger's ability to invoke the sound of Sir Thomas Mallory's prose, but in a book whose prose is also thoroughgoingly modern.
Notice that these passages are rhythmical, but not musical or even metrical.
The result of the way each proceeds forward in steps rather than a syllable count or meter.
As Ursula K. Le Guin reminds us in her delightful writing text Steering the Craft,
quote, the sound of language is where it all begins and what it all comes back to.
The basic elements of language are physical, the noise words make, and the rhythm of their relationships.
This is just as true of written prose as it is of poetry.
Or, as Virginia Wolf so perfectly put it in an excerpt from one of her letters, an excerpt that Le Guin cites,
style is a very simple matter. It is all rhythm.
Once you get that, you can't use the wrong words.
Now this is very profound what rhythm is and goes far deeper than words.
A sight, an emotion creates this wave in the mind long before it makes words to fit it.
My writing students may at first roll their eyes when I tell them that a sentence they've written needs an extra beat
or needs to be slowed down or speeded up, but they almost always agree with me once we start working on the sentence.
And once I get them thinking about prose rhythm, they credit that not only with helping them improve their own writing,
but also with making their reading more enjoyable as they start finding delight in writers at the level of the sentence
that may help them understand why they are attracted to a writer's larger characteristics such as plot or theme or character.
What's funny about this seeming contradiction I find myself in, no sense of rhythm when it comes to dancing,
pretty good here for rhythm when it comes to prose, is that the topic of prose rhythm is tremendously more complicated
and tremendously less understood, much less agreed upon than as the topic of rhythm and dance or music or even in poetry.
Questions about the nature of prose rhythm are even peskier than are questions about the nature of prose style.
And of course, there's every reason to suspect that prose rhythm plays a very important role in determining prose style,
whatever we decide prose style is.
Accordingly, I'm going to focus this lecture on the oh so important, but oh so unsettled topic of prose rhythm.
It's too important for me not to mention it too complicated and conflicted for me to do much more than suggest some of the complexities.
So I'm going to give a very brief overview of the history of attempts to study, measure, explain or theorize prose rhythm.
I'm going to offer a couple of ways of thinking about the importance of prose rhythm.
And finally, I'm going to offer a very modest way of thinking about prose rhythm in the cumulative sentences we've been working with,
including a very, very modest model for describing the rhythms of some cumulative sentences.
As is frequently the case with matters pertaining to rhetoric and poetics, Aristotle seems to have been one of the earliest to weigh in on the topic of prose rhythm.
Aristotle laid down a kind of golden mean law that prescribed, quote, prose should not be metrical, nor should it be without rhythm, end of quote.
As he explained this dictum, quote, metrical prose is unconvincing because it betrays artifice, end of quote.
And also because it, quote, distracts the hearer who has led to look for the recurrence of a similar metrical pattern, end of quote.
Once prose becomes metrical, it becomes predictable, Aristotle argued, leading even children to anticipate what will come next in highly metrical prose.
So far so good.
Most of us would agree with his reasoning today, even though our attitude toward artifice and language, our understanding of the range of metrical patterns,
and our sense of prose rhythms are all almost certainly quite different from those held by Aristotle.
It's what he said next that still proves problematic.
Quote, prose without rhythm is formless, and it should have form, but not meter.
The indefinite and formless is displeasing and cannot be known.
Prose then must have a rhythm, but not meter, for if it has meter, it will be a poem.
The problem is that after saying prose rhythms should not be metrical, Aristotle then goes on to discuss prose rhythms in exclusively metrical terms,
just as if he were discussing poetry, referring to the heroic rhythm driven by dactyls and spondes, the conversational rhythm built into the iambic foot,
and then to the peon with its parts in a ratio of two to three.
None of which I'm going to try to explain, because it is all hopeless hooey.
First of all, when we try to transfer Aristotle's pronouncements about rhythms in Greek prose to rhythms in English prose,
and second of all, because prose rhythms are simply too diverse, too variable, too unpredictable to be treated metrically,
at least in the same way that we analyze poetry in terms of feet and syllables, stressed and unstressed.
And yet, the history of attempts to analyze prose rhythm are largely prone to doing just that,
dividing prose passages into feet, marking accented and unaccented syllables,
and identifying the meter revealed by the scan in exactly the way we identify the meter of poetry.
Aristotle may have started us down this unproductive path, but it was British critic George Sainsbury,
who more than any other single authority doomed us to this approach with his 1912 magnum opus, History of English Prose Rhythm.
Not only did Sainsbury largely follow Aristotle's lead,
but he scoured the books for even more esoteric meters than those usually discussed in poetry
and swelled the list of possible prose rhythms with impossibly arcane meters such as amphibroc,
mellosis, proselysmatic.
Sainsbury's efforts to describe English prose rhythms marked a period in the early decades of the 20th century
during which there appeared a veritable stampede of theories and studies of rhythm in general
and a prose rhythm in particular.
Somewhat typical was Albert C. Clarke's lecture, Prose Rhythm in English, published by Oxford in 1913.
Clarke held, quote,
For the origin of prose rhythm we must go to Cicero. Nature, he tells us,
has placed in the ears a register which tells us if a rhythm is good or bad,
just as by the same means we are unable to distinguish notes and music.
Men first observed that particular sounds gave pleasure to the ear,
then they repeated them for this end.
The rhythm of prose is based on the same principle as that of verse.
This in ancient prose was the distribution of long and short syllables.
In our own tongue it is the arrangement of stressed and unstressed syllables.
A related attempt to describe prose rhythm in metrical terms
was associated with Morris W. Crowell,
whose 1919, The Cadence of English Oratorical Prose
and 1966 book Style, Rhetoric, and Rhythm
advocated identifying prose rhythms according to a typology of clause endings
used in medieval Latin.
To the Latin meters identified as plainus, tartus, velox, and trispondaeic,
Crowell added some new endings he thought he had discovered in English prose.
Once again, I hope you'll understand why I'm not going to try to explain this system.
Beyond noting its almost desperate desire to tie contemporary English prose rhythms
to the classification system used in an ancient language that was not English,
even more desperate seeming is the longing in these attempts to find a way of describing prose
as essentially regular in its rhythms with one particular beat or meter
predominating throughout a single piece of prose or the prose of a single writer.
This notwithstanding the repeated unflattering references from Aristotle to the present
to Greek audiences that found the rhythms of some Greek orators so predictable
that they did not resist beating time like dancers with a speaker
not apparently from any wish to ridicule him but unable to resist the temptation
and infection, claims Sainsbury.
While classical commentators from Aristotle to Quintillion to Cicero
seem to agree that variety should be at the heart of effective prose rhythm,
those commentators seem hopelessly tied to the notion that variety
should be at some level higher than that of the sentence
whose feet must necessarily manifest some regular meter after the matter of poetry.
Of course, today much poetry no longer regularly manifests meter
which makes it even harder to understand the persistent efforts to describe prose rhythm
in terms of poetic meter.
Apart from simply accepting and passing along the assumption that prose rhythm
is just a watered down version of poetic rhythm,
most early 20th century efforts to describe rhythm in prose
managed to agree that very little agreement exists in their enterprise.
E. A. Soninshine began his 1925 study What is Rhythm
with a somewhat discouraged observation.
Quote, the large number of works on meter and prosody
published during the recent years in Europe and America
is an eloquent testimony to the existence of a worldwide interest
in the problem of rhythm and to a deep-seated dissatisfaction
with the results hitherto arrived at by the inquirers.
For it is evident not only that there is no accepted theory of rhythm in the field,
but that there is no common understanding among inquirers
as to the very nature of the thing called rhythm.
Attempting to rectify this sad state of affairs,
Professor Soninshine finally gets around to offering his own definition of rhythm.
Quote, rhythm is that property of a sequence of events in time
which produces on the mind of an observer the impression of proportion
between the durations of the several events or groups of events
of which the sequence is composed.
End of quote.
Glad we cleared that up.
But as generally unhelpful as I find this and most other takes on rhythm,
I'm going to return to Soninshine's definition in just a minute
to consider one part I think he got very right.
The part that locates the order or pattern or structure of rhythm,
not in the language of the speaker or writer,
but locates rhythm only as that which, quote,
produces on the mind of an observer the impression of order or proportion.
End of quote.
I'm not a student of prosody,
but as far as I can tell Soninshine's description from 1925
pretty much describes the state of agreement or state of disagreement
concerning prose rhythms that we still have today,
but not to worry.
Remember that John Steinbeck quotation about spine counting?
Metrical theories of prose rhythms strike me as the worst kind of spine counting.
The good news is that they do give us labels for metrical phenomena
we can indeed find on occasion in prose.
The bad news is that those labels tell us absolutely nothing
about the way prose rhythm works,
about the relational realities it establishes between writers and readers,
and only slightly more productive are the related attempts to treat prose
essentially as song lyrics and to describe it with musical time notations.
Particularly for those of us who can't dance,
this approach is not very promising.
And while it may produce results for prose we widely recognize or identify as musical,
it has little or no descriptive power for the vast majority of prose we encounter.
Unfortunately, we don't fare a lot better when we move to the experiential end
of the descriptive continuum where descriptions of prose rhythm
invoke the rhythms of nature and the rhythms of the Bible.
The ninth edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica,
the famous scholars edition published between 1875 and 1889,
has this to say about prose rhythm.
Perhaps it may be said that deeper than all the rhythms of art is that rhythm
which art would feign catch, the rhythm of nature.
For the rhythm of nature is the rhythm of life itself.
This rhythm can be caught by prose as well as by poetry,
such prose for instance as that of the English Bible.
Being rhythm, it is of course governed by law,
but it is a law which transcends in subtlety the conscious art of the metresist
and is only caught by the poet and his most inspired moods.
A law which being part of nature's own sanctions can of course never be formulated
but only expressed as it is expressed in the melody of the bird,
in the inscrutable harmony of the entire bird chorus of a thicket,
in the whisper of the leaves of the tree,
and in the song or whale of wind and sea.
I'm not sure what I gain when I trade in my metronome
for the rhythms of birds and the wind and the sea,
although I suspect it's a step in the right direction.
And I've come across another step in the right direction of understanding prose rhythm
in another early 20th century study.
I've been fascinated by the approach and findings of William Morrison Patterson's
The Rhythm of Prose,
an experimental investigation of individual difference in the sense of rhythm.
Patterson was an English professor at Columbia
and his study, aided by the Columbia Department of Psychology,
was published by Columbia University Press in 1917.
His study was supplemented by voice photographs of the wave patterns
made by recordings of subjects uttering certain words and phrases,
including poet Amy Lowell reading from her own verse Libre poetry.
What strikes me about the Patterson study
is its emphasis not only on rhythm as an experience,
but as an inherently subjective experience,
calling rhythm, quote, one of the most individually different of human experiences,
end of quote.
Patterson explains, quote, rhythm is tangled up with our sense of time
and our sense of intensity, both of which are not only tricky, but multifarious, end of quote.
He then followed this observation with a credo that sounds both modern and right
some 90 years after he wrote it, quote,
nothing is more preposterous therefore than that an author,
the organization of whose temporal impressions is confessedly vague,
do I hear a faint hint here of I can't dance,
should undertake to present to humanity at large
a comprehensive and final statement on the art of versification.
His own particular code might easily be read with interest as a document,
but could hardly be expected to serve as a universal guide.
On the other hand, it would be equally misleading for the experiences of
an aggressively rhythmic individual with a relatively accurate sense of temporal values,
strong motor reactions and subtle powers of discrimination and pitch and stress
to be set forth as if they were thoroughly usual.
The psychologists have long since recognized that rhythm is the result of a complex process
whose operation can never be reduced to any one short formula, end of quote.
Apart from providing me with a useful and persuasive get out of jail free card
when it comes to making systematic pronouncements about prose rhythm,
Patterson also gives me a couple of terms I want to put to my own use.
You may have noticed his reference in the quotation I just read to,
quote, an aggressively rhythmic individual.
According to Patterson, rhythmic experience rather than so-called objective rhythm
is what we should be studying.
And rhythmic experience tends to vary from individual to individual
with the aggressively rhythmic individual, the one who has, quote,
the ability to organize subjectively into a sort of rhythmic tune.
Any haphazard series of sounds provided they are not too close to be distinguished
are too far apart to be held together in one wave of attention, end of quote.
Or to put this bluntly, rhythm is what we make it,
something we construct rather than something we find or something we discover.
This is what I found so promising but unfulfilled in Sonon Shine's definition of rhythm
as that property of a sequence of events and time
which produces on the mind of an observer the impression of proportion
between the durations of the several events or groups of events
of which the sequence is composed.
That's the first thing I want to borrow from Patterson,
the idea of the aggressively rhythmic individual.
I may be at sea on the dance floor, but when I read prose,
particularly when I read prose aloud,
I don the mask and cape of the aggressively rhythmic individual
and I create in my reading the rhythms I most value.
The second term I want to borrow from Patterson is one he applied apparently
in some desperation to the way Amy Lowell read her poetry.
Noting that her reading of her free verse emphasized phrases rather than feet or meter,
he suggested that her reading reminds us, quote, gently but inevitably,
this is a phrase, this is a phrase.
Lowell's free verse, Patterson concluded, lifts us necessarily out of prose experience.
What is achieved as a rule in Ms. Lowell's case, Patterson claims,
is emotional prose, emphatically phrased, excellent and moving,
spaced prose, we may call it.
You will not be surprised to learn that in Patterson's reference to Lowell's insistence,
this is a phrase, this is a phrase, as well as in his reference to her spaced prose.
I hear an opportunity to invoke once again,
both the cumulative sentence and Josephine Miles' understanding that, quote,
prose proceeds forward in time by steps less closely measured,
but not less propelling than the steps of verse, end of quote.
What I realized is that for me, prose rhythm is a matter not of feet or regular metrical beat,
but of steps.
The sound a sentence makes each time it takes a step forward with a phrase or a clause.
And of course, I made no secret of my fondness for the particular kind of step forward,
the cumulative syntax urges us to take.
And unlike my feelings on the dance floor where I always think I'm missing something everyone else is hearing,
when it comes to prose style, I think I hear, or at any rate, I think I create,
rhythms everyone else is missing.
The big difference is that my lack of a sense of rhythm and dancing comes from my perception,
right or wrong, that regularity is the name of the game and dancing.
But when it comes to prose, I figure variation is the name of the game.
And just as prose guidebook, after prose guidebook tells us that the key to effective prose rhythm
lies in varying the length of our sentences,
I think it equally true that the key to effective prose rhythm lies in varying the length of our phrases
or steps within the sentence.
And the cumulative sentence, quite apart from its distinctive backward and forward conceptual rhythm,
its ability to backtrack and downshift to greater levels of specificity and detail
invites indeed encourages variety in the length of the cumulative phrases we add to the end of the base clause.
Noted fiction writer Harold Brodke once began an essay with a wonderfully suspensive sentence,
sometimes in New York, I can create a zone of amusement and doubt around me by saying that I was a Boy Scout.
As it happens, much the same holds true for an English professor at the University of Iowa.
I mention this because the very modest way I'm about to propose for thinking about one of the prose rhythms
we find ourselves using when we write cumulative sentences is directly tied to my experience as a Boy Scout.
I could experience as a Boy Scout with Morse code.
Most of us recognize distinctive rhythms and prose but have never stopped to think about them
in terms of the relationship of the long and short steps by which our sentences move forward in time.
One way of thinking about these rhythmic relationships is to compare them with the did-da or dot dash rhythms of Morse code.
For example, writers who use cumulative modifying levels frequently alternate between long and short modifying levels
with a single word producing the effect of the Morse code dot.
Thus, slowly he opened the book, thumbing through its pages, stroking its cover.
Might be thought of as dot dash dash dash and that rhythm can be compared with that of he opened the book
slowly, thumbing through its pages, stroking its cover or dash dot dash dash.
Each rhythm slightly changes the sentence and can create almost hypnotic effects as we can see in this great sentence from The Great Gatsby.
Slenderly, languidly, their hands set lightly on their hips, the two young women proceeded us out onto a rosy colored porch
open toward the sunset where four candles flickered on the table in the diminished wind, dot dot dash dash dash.
Thus, we might get a sentence, he sprang to his feet trembling, more excited than fearful,
and we might ask ourselves how the rhythm of the sentence might actually change its meaning.
Were we to move from the dash dot dash rhythm of the version I just read to the dot dash dash version of trembling,
he sprang to his feet more excited than fearful, or the dash dash dot version he sprang to his feet more excited than fearful, trembling,
and so on through all the possible positionings.
To be honest, I'm still not completely sure what use we make of the insight that cumulative sentences seem to become more dramatic
when they alternate longer steps with very short single word steps.
But I'll guarantee that once you have this pattern pointed out to you, you'll start noticing it in more and more cases,
a device used by a wide range of writers, and you may want to start utilizing this or other simple rhythms in your own writing.
Applause
Music
Lecture 14, Cumulative Syntax to Create Suspense
Applause
Most of the sentences we've worked with so far in this course have been, in grammatical terms, loose sentences.
That means that they complete the basic pattern of subject and predicate early on, keeping subject and verb near the beginning of the sentence
and keeping subject and verb close together.
Most cumulative sentences are forms of loose syntax, quickly positing an initial base clause, then adding to it, detailing it,
clarifying it, and following modifying phrases.
A sentence is considered loose, no matter how long it is or how complex it is, if it front loads its subject and verb.
At least in grammatical terms, the opposite of a loose sentence is a periodic sentence.
Whereas the loose sentence wants to deliver its basic subject and verb information quickly, the periodic sentence wants to do just the opposite,
delaying or suspending the completion of its subject verb clause until the very end of the sentence.
So, in grammatical terms, sentences fall into just two main categories, sentences that are loose, putting the subject and verb near the beginning of the sentence,
and sentences that are periodic, delaying the unfolding of the sentence's most important news until its very end, demanding the reader's close attention,
sometimes to the very last word.
Consider Midwesner Nick Caraway's description of the East in The Great Gatsby.
Quote,
Distortion is the word with which Nick ends his sentence.
And until we get to that word, we really have no clear idea where his sentence is going.
The East could have had a quality of lots of things for Nick, despair, unreality, sadness, pessimism, boredom,
or any of an unlimited number of other negative descriptors.
But it is only when we fill in that final blank with distortion that we fully comprehend what Nick is telling us.
That's a classic periodic sentence.
Even when the East excited me most, even when I was most keenly aware of its superiority to the board sprawling,
swollen towns beyond the Ohio with their interminable inquisitions, which spared only the children in the very old,
even then it had always for me a quality of distortion.
And it's a really memorable, really emphatic sentence.
It is striking, as indeed many periodic sentences are.
And the periodic sentence seems particularly useful in philosophical discourse where if then constructions are frequently found,
arguing that the universe is not what I choose that it should be.
Bertrand Russell explains, quote,
If it is indifferent to human desires as it seems to be,
if human life is a passing episode, hardly noticeable in the vastness of cosmic processes,
if there is no superhuman purpose and no hope of ultimate salvation,
it is better to know and acknowledge this truth than to endeavor and futile self-assertion
to order the universe to be what we find comfortable, end of quote.
But before we start looking at some of the many other neat things periodic sentences can do,
let's return for a moment to that idea that sentences fall into two main grammatical categories, the loose and the periodic.
Now, if the terminology we have inherited for talking about sentences made any sense at all,
the opposite of the loose sentence would be the tight sentence, not the periodic.
And thinking of sentences as loose and tight would make it easier for us to decide which kind we prefer,
with both terms having their positive and their negative connotations.
But grammatical terminology immediately starts stacking the deck against loose syntax when its opposite is not tight,
but is periodic syntax.
Even if we have no idea what periodic means, it sounds more formal, more business-like, more impressive than loose.
And that's exactly the way most writing guides over the years have constructed this opposition,
with loose sentences being equated with, or at least associated with, simple or simplistic expression,
and periodic sentences not just associated with, but equated with, more sophisticated, more complex thinking.
Accordingly, many writing texts up until the past few years have strongly implied, if they have not openly prescribed,
that writers should aspire to the formal maturity of the periodic sentence.
Number 18 of Professor Strunk's Principles of Composition and the Elements of Style is,
avoid a succession of loose sentences.
Now surprisingly enough, Professor Strunk did acknowledge that a writer could also err by using too many periodic sentences.
He explained, quote,
an occasional loose sentence prevents the style from becoming too formal and gives the reader a certain relief, end of quote.
However, there's no mistaking the put down in his description of loose sentences as, quote,
common and easy, unstudied writing, end of quote.
And in his dismissal, that, quote, an unskilled writer will sometimes construct a whole paragraph of sentences of this kind, end of quote.
Later, in Professor Strunk's 22nd Principle of Composition, he explains that the, quote,
effectiveness of the periodic sentence arises from the prominence it gives the main statement, end of quote,
replacing it at the end of the sentence.
He offers as an example, four centuries ago, Christopher Columbus,
one of the Italian mariners whom the decline of their own republics had put at the service of the world and of adventure,
seeking for Spain, a Westford passage to the Indies to offset the achievement of Portuguese discoverers,
lighted on America.
We all know where Columbus ended up, but we're not sure where that sentence is going to end until we come to its very last word.
The main statement or base clause of the sentence is, Christopher Columbus lighted on America.
But before we get to complete that thought, we're led on a rambling detour through the history of decline of Italy,
in his desire for a Westward passage to the Indies, and a reminder that mariners from Portugal were then on a roll.
In his portion of the Elements of Style, E. B. White doesn't join Professor Strunk in warning against loose sentences,
but in this noteworthy sentence from Stuart Little, he certainly reveals his interest in periodic technique,
and he reminds us both that the periodic sentence does not have to be overly complex,
and that the suspense it builds by delaying the completion of its message may ultimately be, in fact, quite anticlimactic.
Here's the quote,
In the loveliest town of all, where the houses were white and high and the elm trees were green and higher than the houses,
where the front yards were wide and pleasant and the backyards were bushy and worth finding out about,
where the streets sloped down to the stream and the stream flowed quietly under the bridge,
where the lawns ended in orchards and the orchards ended in fields and the fields ended in pastures,
and the pastures climbed the hill and disappeared over the top toward the wonderful wide sky.
In this loveliest of all towns, Stuart stopped to get a drink of sasperilla.
In a negatively prescriptive vein similar to that adopted by Professor Strunk,
the seventh edition, urges the writer to, quote,
gain emphasis by changing loose sentences into periodic sentences, end of quote.
Apparently, the problem with the loose sentence is that, quote, it can be easily scanned
since the main idea comes toward the beginning, end of quote, while, quote,
to get the meaning of a periodic sentence, however, the reader cannot stop until he reaches the period, end of quote.
Note how both Strunk and White and the Harbury's Handbook turn up their noses at writing that is easy or easily scanned,
as if difficulty of comprehension were somehow of virtue in writing.
This is one of the bits of uncritically received writing wisdom against which Francis Christensen championed the cumulative syntax,
although, as we are about to see, the dichotomy long perceived between loose and periodic sentences is largely a false one.
In subsequent lectures, we will look at the wide range of strategies that can produce periodic sentences
and will consider some of the situations in which periodic sentences can be most effective.
For the moment, however, I want to consider the history of this term.
Then I want to complicate the binary opposition between loose and periodic sentences
by demonstrating that sentences take their place in a continuum of delay
and can best be thought of not as types, but in terms of their degree of suspensiveness.
Thinking of degrees of suspense in our writing gives us much greater control over our sentences
than does thinking of a kind of sentence that is loose and is the opposite of a kind of sentence that is periodic.
As almost any history of rhetoric will note, the word period comes from the Greek term periodos,
which had to do with cycles or coming back to or going around in a circle.
Aristotle in particular stressed the recurrent or reflexive nature of the periodic style as a style,
quote, that turns back upon itself, end of quote.
Citing as examples, quote, the antistrophes of the old poets, end of quote,
and even more strongly suggesting that a period offered an antithetical opposition,
such as we see in these examples from Aristotle.
They benefited both those who had remained at home and those who had followed them.
To the latter, they secured more land than they had possessed at home.
To the former, they left land at home, which was now adequate.
As Aristotle helpfully catalogs the antithesis or oppositions in this sentence,
those who remained at home are opposed or balanced by those who had followed them.
To the latter is opposed by to the former.
And they had possessed as opposed by left land at home,
more land as opposed by adequate, and so on.
Here's another example, several more examples actually from Aristotle.
It often happens in such cases that the wise fail and the fools succeed.
Here's another.
Those citizens by birth, they were by law deprived of citizenship.
And finally, as individuals, we use barbarians as our servants.
As citizens, we tolerate many of our allies being enslaved.
For Aristotle then, a periodic sentence was characterized by some form of turning about,
either through opposition of contrasting ideas or repetition.
Techniques which will delay our apprehension of the full meaning of the sentence
until it has completed its turn or made clear its internal oppositions.
But missing from Aristotle's view was the emphasis on interruption or delay
that we now associate with periodic form.
And also missing is the close association identified by George A. Kennedy
and his A New History of Classical Rhetoric
between periodic style and quote,
writing in long, complex sentences not easily understood when first heard.
End of quote.
As Matthew Clark points out in his 2002 study, A Matter of Style,
this identification of the periodic with antithesis,
or with what we now think of as balanced form,
seems peculiar to Aristotle since quote,
in later rhetorical theory, a period is a long sentence
that uses grammatical subordination,
especially to create some sort of suspense of meaning.
End of quote.
And all experts agree that the great classical master of the periodic sentence
and a periodic style was the Roman orator Cicero.
Ciceronian style is periodic style.
As we understand the term today, particularly as it suggests delay,
building to a dramatic conclusion at the end of the sentence.
Now I'm with Richard Lanham, who in some exasperation notes that periodic
is one of those traditional but confusing terms we ought to throw away but can't.
As he discusses in his second edition of Analyzing Pros,
Lanham reminds us that Aristotle referred to what we now call loose sentences
as strung along sentences or as running sentences.
Now the latter term actually seems to make more sense than loose
since it suggests a sentence that just goes on with no clear destination in sight
unless and until the subject matter runs out,
as opposed to the period which has to end just so.
Lanham finds fault with both of the terms we have for describing sentences,
finding running not much more helpful than periodic.
However, he notes that these terms do refer to different conceptual processes,
a basic difference in how one human intelligence presents itself to another,
if not to rigorously identifiable grammatical forms.
To imitate the mind and real-time interaction with the world
is to write in some form of running style, he suggests,
explaining, quote, such a syntax models the mind in the act of coping with the world, end of quote.
Conversely, the periodic style dramatizes, quote,
a mind which has dominated experience and reworked it to its liking,
the mind showing itself after it has reasoned on the event,
after it has sorted by concept and categorized by size,
after it has imposed on the temporal flow the shapes through which that flow
takes on a beginning, a middle, and an end, end of quote.
Now, if there seems to be an ideological ring to this description of the difference
between loose and periodic sentences, an almost imperial imperative
in which the writer is called upon to impose firm order on a messy world,
Lanham quickly disavows that implication, reminding us that, quote,
to go with the flow is as human as to oppose it,
that humankind's bewilderment before raw event is as characteristic
as the will to impose order on it, end of quote.
And you thought the difference between a loose and a periodic sentence
was just a matter of where the base clause completes itself.
In historical terms, Lanham reminds us that at the end of the Renaissance,
which he dates from about 1575, quote,
a reaction set in against periodic structure as the ideal sentence shape,
the call under the banner of science was for a new prose style
that would more accurately reflect the world as it really was,
not as it had been stuffed into the orderly and balanced mini-drama
of the periodic sentence, end of quote.
In some ways, that revolution against the periodic style at the end of the Renaissance
was only a mixed success, since while most writing guidebooks today
do warn against unrelieved strings of periodic sentences,
they still suggest that the periodic sentence is what aspiring writers should try to write.
What I've been trying to show thus far in this lecture is the somewhat odd history
on which that advice rests, and what I'll try to do in the remainder of this lecture
is to further question the bias in favor of periodic sentences
by suggesting that the chasm we've been told exists between loose and periodic sentences
is not nearly as wide as we have been led to believe.
Once again, Richard Lanham, one of the true original thinkers in rhetorical and composition theory,
reached this conclusion well before I did.
Lanham ends the chapter on the periodic style and the running style
in his 2003 second edition of Analyzing Pros,
with an acknowledgment that undercuts years of claims that periodic syntax
was the true mark of a sophisticated writer, quote.
We can reason that the periodic style, like the noun style,
shows thought to be static, organized into its component parts, and then flash frozen.
The running style, like the verb style, shows behavior still in progress,
happening in the present, not the past.
The contrast often proves a fruitful one,
but it ought not to lead us to ignore the powerful internal dynamics the period can generate.
If you add enough internal qualifications and parenthetical interruptions,
it turns into a running style.
The running style seems more naturally to represent the moody reflections of the private life.
If, however, it is pervaded by a need for compound pairing and balance for syntactic regularity,
it takes a turn toward the periodic, and even in spots toward antithetical compression or point.
Clearly, periodic and running are two defining extremes
within which the need to express action and stasis, emotion and concept,
compression and expansion finds many answerable prose patterns, end of quote.
I'm giving so much prominence to Lanham because I want to seriously question, if not to deconstruct,
the classic binary opposition between what Lanham identifies as running and periodic sentences,
or what is most frequently described as the opposition between loose and periodic syntax.
Francis Christensen has helped us challenge this opposition with his theory of the cumulative sentence,
which introduces us to one particular kind of loose sentence that grows progressively tighter,
or more like the periodic sentence, as it generates parallels, balances, even antitheses in its modifying phrases.
And one of the implications I want to avoid in this course is that by starting the course with a focus on cumulative sentences,
and then moving on to periodic syntax, I am in any way suggesting that the latter somehow represents
an advance over or refinement of or greater degree of sophistication than the former.
Indeed, I began this course with a focus on the cumulative syntax because it can provide a foundation
for thinking about periodic sentences while the reverse is simply not true.
Nor do I want to suggest that the cumulative is somehow a superior syntax to be preferred over the periodic.
My goal is to strip away several centuries of bias in favor of the periodic to celebrate these two syntaxes
for their respective glories without claiming that one shines more brightly than does the other.
In this effort, I think time is on my side, but the grip of the ancient and antique
and rhetoric and composition theory is always difficult to overcome.
There are hundreds, if not thousands, of books about writing, gathering dust on library shelves throughout the land,
and most of these books draw their examples of exemplary sentences from centuries not only before the 21st,
but from before the 20th as well.
I can't begin to prove it, but I bet that a good 75% to 85% of the examples of fine writing
or distinguished prose and all the writing books that have been published are examples of periodic style,
with most of those examples drawn from writers who lived before the 19th century.
Whatever the figure, my point is that one of the important steps we need to take in order to make our writing more effective
is to counteract the tons of bad or at least of the misleading advice that has been faithfully and uncritically passed down to us through the ages.
Cicero may have been the great master of periodic style, but the fact is, few of us want to write like Cicero.
With that said, let's look at some specific ways in which the grammatical distinction between cumulative and periodic sentences begins to break down.
Only to move us another step away from the inherited bias in favor of periodic sentences,
I'm also going to stop using the term periodic itself, substituting for it, Suspensive.
There's no difference, really, since underlying both terms is the same aesthetic of delay,
but periodic comes to us surrounded by connotations of length, complexity, and difficulty,
whereas Suspensive has a connotative clean slate, only suggesting that the syntax builds suspense
or suspends completion of the sentence's message to a greater or lesser degree.
Suspensive sentences are the hamlets of the writing world.
And indeed, one of my favorite Suspensive sentences comes from Hamlet himself.
To be or not to be, that is the question.
And under the sign of delaying tactics, one of my all-time favorite Suspensive sentences was written by one of my students years ago and says quite simply,
I was, perhaps, stalling.
In earlier lectures, I've already offered several examples of grammatically cumulative sentences that functioned Suspensively.
There was the corpse in the trunk sentence.
He drove the car, his shaggy hair whipped by the wind, his eyes hidden behind wraparound mirror shades,
his mouth set in a grim smile, a 38 police special on the seat beside him, the corpse stuffed in the trunk.
And I absolutely promise that is the last time I'll make you listen to that particular sentence.
There was also the boy sitting down to eat sentence, which is also grammatically cumulative,
at which so delays the base clause by left branching modifiers that it functions Suspensively.
Rubbing his hands together, running his hungry eyes over the steaming food, anticipating the feast, savoring its aromas,
stunned by his good fortune, realizing an opportunity like this might never come again, he sat down.
Let's take another example of a left branching cumulative sentence that delivers the goods like a Suspensive sentence to remind ourselves that suspense is always a matter of degree.
Having sharpened all of my pencils and lined them up together at least twice, having neatly placed beside my pencils a brand new yellow legal pad,
having visited the bathroom for the third time in the past 20 minutes, having reminded myself that I now compose exclusively on the computer and not with pencil on yellow legal pad,
having checked my email one final time just to be sure there wasn't a note waiting for me from the MacArthur Foundation,
having cranked up my iTunes Basil Poladora soundtrack from Conan the Barbarian as loud as it would go, having done a final few deep knee bends,
having drained my fourth cup of coffee, probably the reason for that third bathroom visit, desperately hoping that this time the magic would work,
I sat down at my computer ready to write.
That's a left branching Suspensive version of what could have been a right branching cumulative sentence or loose sentence that would have read,
I sat down at my computer ready to write having sharpened all of my pencils and lined them up together at least twice,
having neatly placed beside my pencils a brand new yellow legal pad, having visited the bathroom for the third time in the past 20 minutes,
having reminded myself that I now compose exclusively on the computer and not with pencil on yellow legal pad,
having checked my email one final time just to be sure there wasn't a note waiting for me from the MacArthur Foundation,
having cranked up my iTunes Basil Poladora soundtrack from Conan the Barbarian as loud as it would go,
having done a final few deep knee bends, having drained my fourth cup of coffee, probably the reason for that third bathroom visit,
desperately hoping that this time the magic would work.
And of course, I could reposition that base clause I sat down at my computer or its extended version I sat down at my computer ready to write,
after any of those modifying phrases, for instance, if the base clause is moved roughly to the middle of this sentence we get,
having sharpened all of my pencils and lined them up together at least twice, having neatly placed beside my pencils a brand new yellow legal pad,
having visited the bathroom for the third time in the past 20 minutes,
having reminded myself that I now compose exclusively on the computer and not with pencil on yellow legal pad,
having checked my email one final time just to be sure there wasn't a note waiting for me from the MacArthur Foundation,
I sat down at my computer ready to write, having cranked up my iTunes Basil Poladora soundtrack from Conan the Barbarian as loud as it would go,
having done a final few deep knee bends, having drained my fourth cup of coffee, probably the reason for that third bathroom visit,
desperately hoping that this time the magic would work.
Winston Weathers and Otis Winchester explore this idea of degrees of suspensiveness, of course they insist on calling it degrees of periodicity,
and they're the strategy of style, starting with the sentence, red-tailed hawks hunt my meadow,
then expanding it to on those sheet metal days in February, red-tailed hawks hunt my meadow for rabbits and field mice,
next they make it somewhat more periodic, on those sheet metal days in February when the rabbits and field mice creep out to feed red-tailed hawks hunt my meadow,
and finally they make the sentence almost wholly periodic, hunting my meadow for rabbits and field mice on those sheet metal days in February was a pair of red-tailed hawks.
The point of their variations, and of mine, is simply to remind us that any sentence can be made more or less suspensive,
and rather than think of the long-standing but essentially misleading dichotomy between loose and periodic sentences,
it may reward the writer to think of suspensiveness as a continuum along which sentences fall.
The more we are aware of this continuum, and the more we master the sentence structures that constitute it, the more effective our writing will become.
