In the philosophy of science, constructivism is the perspective that, while reality may exist
independent of our silly little human brains, scientific knowledge is socially constructed.
But definitions are boring. Vibes are far more important.
How do scientists feel about this idea? Let's examine the data.
A perverse doctrine that subordinates rationality to politics and unbridled subjectivity.
An indefensible reduction of all claims about nature to equally contingent status.
A conspiracy of leftist humanists and social scientists against both science and western
civilization. Fascinating. I'm going to go ahead and say that most scientists, you know,
I could be wrong about this, but it's the impression I get from years in the field,
extensive study on the culture of science and, you know, being a person online.
Most scientists don't find constructivism that helpful an idea. But lucky for you, I'm not
most scientists. My doctoral research was in astrophysics, but more recently I've been
publishing papers and making videos about the more social and political aspects of science.
And the whole point that I'm trying to get across is that even the hardest of the hard
sciences are still affected by messy people stuff. And I get the impression that some people are
kind of starting to come around to that idea, especially in fields like medicine or maybe
even technology, but not physics, right? Physics is just the fundamental truth about the universe.
Particles don't care about the political climate. Radiation doesn't discriminate against women.
Gravity isn't a social construct, right? In this video, I'm going to use gravity,
dark matter and a controversial, but in my opinion, compelling theory to illustrate why even the most
objective, rational, definitely not made up facts about the universe are indeed socially constructed.
And don't worry, I'm going to explain what that even means. But it's going to be a lighthearted
and fun video today. I promise this isn't going to end up being about racism or something heavy
like that about God, maybe, but not in the way you think. Just watch it. Trust me, it's going to be a good one.
Before we get into it, I want to lay out a few working definitions because I feel like a lot of
conversations about squishy human subjects like this tend to get stuck on semantics.
And social constructivism is definitely the kind of term that means different things in different
contexts. So if you're mostly here for the physics, bear with me for just a little while I talk about
sociology. Social constructivism is broadly the idea that the natural world just kind of exists,
and then scientific knowledge is what we create in our attempt to model the natural world,
but it is not the same as transcendent truth about the natural world. In other words,
knowledge is something we construct. One way to build a stronger intuition for what this means
is to consider the opposite philosophy, objectivism. Not that weird like A&Rand objectivism where
productivity is man's most noble calling or whatever. The scientific objectivist belief
that us mere mortals can in fact deduce fundamental truths about the universe
transcendent of approximations or models. But like many things in the social sciences,
these philosophies exist on a spectrum. On one end of the spectrum we have objectivism,
and on the other end strong constructivism. The two genders. Strong constructivism is where an
objective observer independent reality just doesn't exist. Or at least that us humans are
indelibly incapable of accessing it so it might as well not exist. Closer to the objectivist end,
we can consider a weak constructivism that proposes the goals of science at any given time can be
reflective of the surrounding culture or the vague claim that individual scientists work will
tend to follow the money. But somewhere between the weak and strong versions we have a whole lot
of epistemological question marks that constructivist analyses aim to answer. When does an experiment
sufficiently capture a natural phenomenon? What happens when theories conflict with each other?
How are unexpected outlying data points interpreted? And critically, how are any of these things
influenced by the people who are doing them? I've talked in videos before about the strong
constructivist end and the weak constructivist end, so today I'm concerning myself with this middle
area that's less about the nature of reality or the influence of politics and more about the choices
made in the process of conducting scientific research. In Act 1 we'll look at the science.
We'll go through a brief history of gravity, do a little primer on dark matter, and introduce a
theory that is attempting to challenge it. In Act 2 we'll get to more of the social side.
We'll learn how the scientific method is actually kind of messy,
get into how this messiness opens up space for subjective interpretations,
and look at what kinds of things can influence those interpretations.
We're going straight philosophy of physics today, and I for one am very excited.
Everyone ever has known that gravity exists. I want to like drop something as a demonstration,
but I don't actually have anything I want to drop.
Gravity. Even animals know what gravity is, at least to the extent that their behavior is
obviously informed by its existence. Like have you ever seen a cat do a really precise
jump over something? You can't tell me that that cat doesn't understand what parabolic
motion is just as well as any intro physics college student. Maybe not in equations or
words, but as an experience for sure. Arguably the only beings to ever not intuitively understand
that gravity exists are astronauts who just got back to earth and haven't yet remembered that
they can't just put things down in midair. Now you know you've got the space station right up there
that- I start with this comically basic understanding of what gravity is because
some people will inevitably try to counter the whole social construct thing with this level
of arguments. About it just being so obviously real and clearly not made up. So I bring up these
silly examples to illustrate the difference between some inarguably self-evident shared
experience and specific scientific descriptions of something, which is the part that I'm arguing
is socially constructed. Me, you, and the cat can all agree that there is definitely some
fundamentally real thing that makes some things fall into other things, but that is different
than a scientific theory and it precedes any attempt to characterize it. The earliest written
descriptions of gravity come from Greece and the Indian subcontinent and don't get much more advanced
than vague notions of things tend to fall down towards the earth instead of up towards the sky.
Neat. Eventually people started using numbers to describe this tendency more precisely and came
to the conclusion that things fall down towards the earth at an acceleration of about 9.8 meters
per second squared. The first mathematical formulation of gravity is often attributed
to Gal Leo in the 17th century, but his work was built on 11th century polymath Ibn Sina's work on
projectile motion, as well as 12th century polymath Abul Barakat al-Bardadi's relations between
acceleration and force. Really bummed that I missed the era of interdisciplinary Middle Eastern
scientists or artist scientists like Da Vinci actually helped this whole gravity progression
along in between painting seminal masterpieces. Da Vinci? Today's physicists can never. So with
this first quantitative description of gravity, we went from being able to predict that if you drop
something it will hit the ground to if you drop something this is how long it will take to hit
the ground. We did it. We made science. However, as mathematically rigorous as this description was,
it had limitations. The acceleration due to gravity of 9.8 ish meters per second squared that we use
in an intro physics class actually varies depending on latitude. Someone in Ecuador for example would
measure a slightly different gravitational acceleration than someone in Sweden and both of
them would measure something completely different than someone on say the surface of Mars. So while
this formulation of gravity was true enough to like hit a rival ship with a cannonball or something,
it was by no means internationally true, let alone universally true. We didn't get that until a guy
named Isaac iterated on the work of Galileo and another guy who thought therefore he was and came
up with what we now refer to as Newton's law of universal gravitation. Universal because this
description wasn't specific to gravity on the surface of the earth. Newton's formulation described
the gravitational force between any two bodies with mass, you and the earth, the earth and the sun,
Jupiter and the Galilean moons, whatever. Any two objects with mass will experience a
gravitational attraction between them that increases with either objects mass and decreases
with the distance separating them. Boom, we figured it out, but for real this time. We've cracked the
code to predict not only the motion of objects here on earth, but the orbits of the celestial bodies
and theoretically anything else in the universe with mass. We're definitely right this time.
But again, while more broadly useful than the previous Galilean formulation,
Newton's law of universal gravitation wasn't quite as universal as he thought. For example,
in the 1800s astronomers had measured the orbit of the planet Mercury so precisely that they found
it to be inconsistent with what Newton's law of universal gravitation would predict. So they figured
that there has to be another planet in closer to the sun. Spoiler alert, there was no such planet.
It wasn't until Albert Einstein developed his theories of relativity at the start of the 20th
century that Mercury's weird orbit could be explained. The TLDR of relativity is that the
rates at which time passes can be altered by extremely high speeds or strong gravity. Time is
relative, so everything else is too. Relativity is trippy and weird and too complicated to explain
here, but the important thing that you need to know for our purposes is that we were able to make
even more precise predictions about gravity with it. And many experiments have supported
Einstein's theories of relativity. From Eddington's observations of gravitational
lensing during a solar eclipse in 1919 to measurements of stellar orbits around the
supermassive black hole SAJ star in the middle of our galaxy made just a few years ago. So we're
definitely right this time. As powerful as this set of theories is, even it has shortcomings.
Most famously, the relativistic construction of gravity is incompatible with quantum mechanics,
which is arguably the other most successful set of theories to come out of the last century of
physics. Both of these paradigms make extremely robust predictions in their own regimes. Relativity
describing interactions between the most massive objects like stars and black holes and quantum
mechanics describing interactions between the smallest things like particles and light waves.
But they break down if you try to consider them together because they each make different assumptions
about the underlying nature of reality. In quantum mechanics, causality is statistical,
almost random seeming. The rate of time passage is static, and the universe has some baseline
resolution, as if it's made out of really tiny pixels. For relativity to work, however, causality
is necessarily deterministic. One cause can yield only one effect. Time is relative, like we said
before, and the universe is continuous. There isn't some minimum size or mass that things can be.
This is a great opportunity to point out the problem with thinking of scientific knowledge as
either right or wrong. A naive, if not kind of understandable, reaction to these conflicting
theories might be to say, well, if they contradict, one of them must be wrong. But the reality is that
they both work. They both have predictive power. But each one has a particular context in which
its predictive power is reliable. In fact, it doesn't really make sense to call earlier theories of
gravity wrong either. Newtonian gravity works for certain contexts. Galilean gravity works for
certain contexts. Hell, even the ancient Greek models that were barely more sophisticated than a
cat's understanding of gravity works in certain contexts. I mean, the cat got over the thing,
didn't it? Sometimes the cat knowledge is enough. Each model accounts for the knowledge that was
available at the time and was iterated on as our new discoveries and ideas illuminated our ignorance.
And it's easy to look at this history of gravity and feel like we're coming closer and closer to
the truth. But in reality, it only seems like that in hindsight. When you learn a lineage of
increasingly successful theories in a physics class or science documentary, you generally don't learn
about the false darts and failed ideas that were necessary to get us to where we are today.
So to complicate matters a bit, we're going to shift gears into a modern problem in astrophysics
that continues to illuminate our ignorance about gravity, dark matter.
So I'm going to go ahead and hazard a guess that most of you have heard of dark matter before and
are at least vaguely aware of it as something that probably exists. As another astrophysical lady
YouTuber who I get compared to a whole lot has explained in a recent video of hers,
dark matter is not a theory, it is an observation. For our purposes today, I'm only going to explain
one of these observations as a mental foothold for my broader argument, but I will refer to some of
these other observations a little in passing. So if you want a more solid baseline explanation of the
full set of observations, go check out her video, if for no other reason than to hear the dark matter
dark matter. Do we need it? What is it? Where is it? How much iconic? So what is this observation
that we call dark matter? The graph I'm going to use to explain this is called a rotation curve,
and it shows how the speed objects in orbit around something changes as they get farther
away from that thing. So if we were to make a rotation curve of the solar system, for example,
this axis would be each planet's distance from the sun and each point's height would tell us how
fast the planet is orbiting. And we have a trend. The further the planet is, the slower it orbits,
because the force due to gravity, which is what's driving the orbit, gets weaker with distance.
But it's slightly more complicated than that. The mass that gravitationally drives the orbital
speed isn't just the thing in the center, it's everything inside the orbit. But because the sun
is so much more massive than even all the planets put together, the difference in mass inside Mercury's
orbit and the mass inside Pluto's orbit isn't that important. So the variation we see in this
rotation curve is mostly just because of the changing distance. If we were to make the same
graph for a galaxy rather than a solar system, we would expect the curve to look a little bit
different. Because the mass isn't as concentrated in the center, the further you get, the more
stuff you're orbiting, so instead of the graph dropping off quickly, it holds up for a while.
But once you get to the edge of the galaxy where there's not that much more stuff being added,
the graph should begin to drop. Or at least that's what we would have expected. Turns out,
when we measure the speeds of the furthest out orbiting stars and gas in galaxies,
they're going much faster than we'd expect, as if there was a lot more stuff inside those
far out orbits than we can see. And that difference between the rotation curve we'd predict based on
the mass of the matter we can see in the galaxy, and the actual rotation curve we get when we measure
how fast things are moving, is what we call dark matter. The term dark matter is simply a label
for a particular way in which our understanding of the universe is wrong. It is exactly this
wrong, and that wrongness is what dark matter is. It's not a theory, it's a set of observations,
and this is one of them. Now everything I've said so far is just kind of categorically true.
This is the prediction that our currently accepted models of gravity expect, and this
is the measurement we see when we try to test those models. Neither of these things is really up for
debate. I mean, I could probably make it up for debate, but I won't. But even though what I'm
about to say next could be found in any intro astronomy textbook, I want to mark this point
as the end of me sharing facts about dark matter, and the beginning of me sharing theories about
dark matter. There's a difference, and it will make more sense as we go. Would it be a mixing
metaphor as if I said we're now crossing the event horizon? Whatever, I'm a physicist,
not a poet. So the prevailing explanation for why these two curves look different is because
there's some invisible stuff in galaxies. And if this were to be the case, there are two things
we could confidently say about it. First, that it doesn't interact electromagnetically. It doesn't
emit light, or absorb light, or reflect light, and is therefore completely undetectable in images
that rely on light coming from an object. Or according to some theories, it doesn't interact
electromagnetically much. Hence, dark. And second, it does interact gravitationally. Because it's
causing these gravitational effects on orbits, it must have mass, which means it must be some kind
of matter. Thus, dark matter. Stuff with mass that we cannot see. Hard to see stuff. And that's a fine
idea. But there's kind of a big hole in it, and that's that we don't have any real idea of what
it actually is. There are a ton of different models for what dark matter is, but none of them explain
the observations completely. Some theories model dark matter as a kind of particle, like axions,
or gravatinos, or what somebody very cleverly named, weakly interacting massive particles.
Feels like projection. Presumably playing off that pun, somebody proposed a theory for dark matter
in which it was made of large, dark objects like black holes or brown dwarfs. Instead of a fluid
of particles naming them massive, compact, halo objects. So at one point, the competing theories
for dark matter were wimps and machos. This is an astronomer's idea of a good joke, by the way.
This is astronomy culture. And it's not like a nickname or something. The title of the paper
I published once has the word macho in it twice because of the name of the events I'm analyzing.
I was looking for black holes and the data I used to identify them came from the macho project,
because black holes could maybe be a kind of macho. So the maybe black holes from my thesis
are named things like macho 96 bulge 5. I always had more hope in that one. I was never convinced
by macho 98 bulge 6. At 100,000 subscribers, I'll do a video about my old astrophysics research.
So if you want to hear more about this overdone tangent, smash that subscribe button. I hate myself
when I do this sometimes. Sorry, the pun thing really got me going. So some people think dark
matter is an invisible particle. Some people think it's big dark things. Some people think it's a
fifth dimension that somehow makes everything make sense. There are theories of cold dark matter
and hot dark matter and even warm dark matter. My personal favorite theory is that of primordial
black holes, which are like teeny tiny little black holes that formed right after the Big Bang,
because I think it's cute. The Uwu theory of dark matter, if you will. This must be what Contra
points felt like when she said Squidwardian. Are we really saying that's word out loud? To an
audience of millions? Okay. But here's the problem. None of these theories of dark matter on their
own can explain all our observations. Like I said earlier, there are other kinds of observations
besides the rotation curves of galaxies that point to some undetectable mass of an unknown
nature. And different models of what dark matter actually is are better able to explain the different
observations. This vulcanization of theories is not dissimilar from the story of luminiferous ether,
which 19th century physicists used to explain how light traveled through empty space. Just like
with dark matter, some effectively invisible material was predicted in order to explain
unexpected experimental results. And the models fractured further and further until everybody
had an ether theory to match their favorite observation. And just like with ether, some
scholars have called this multiplicity of models a crisis for the dark matter community, contrasting
the minimal evidence of any one model with the massive amounts of effort that have gone to
experimentally testing them. Dark matter is one of those particles that for decades physicists
have been saying they're going to find it in the next 10 years. And haven't. We just need to build
a particle collider the size of Earth's orbit. Then we'll find it. Given everything I've learned
about dark matter, I'm inclined to agree with astrophysicists more to hide Milgram's take on the
search. If one does not presuppose anything about what dark matter is, about what its interactions
with baryons and with itself are, besides gravity, and about how it got to where it is,
then it is hard to rule out. My God, the shade. He's kind of right, though. It is pretty hard to
rule out a theory when you have no evidence. And you might be thinking, but what about those
rotation curves? We learned a whole graph for it. Isn't that evidence of something? Well, it could be.
Or we could just be wrong about gravity again.
Remember earlier when I said that Mercury had a weird orbit and that in order to explain it,
astronomers predicted there might be another planet closer into the sun? So even though this was
wrong, there was good context for it. French mathematician and astronomer,
Urban Leverrier, Urban Leverrier, Urbane Leverrier, whatever his name was, the guy who identified
Mercury's weird orbit had actually predicted the existence of Neptune just a few years earlier
based on weirdness in Uranus's orbit. He used Newtonian gravity to analyze the orbit of Uranus
and found it to be slightly off from what the observers were measuring, so he deduced that
there must be another planet there that nobody had seen yet, causing these gravitational perturbations.
And there was. He sent his calculations to an observer who identified Neptune literally that
same evening. Truly a testament of Newtonian mechanics' predictive power. So when he found
similar gravitational anomalies in Mercury's orbit, he theorized that there may be, once again,
an unidentified planet to blame. And since he was so successful last time he did that,
the community went all in. The search began, sub-theories proliferated, and they even gave
the putative planet a name, Vulcan. There's a weirdly high rate of almost having things called
Vulcan in astronomy. Some of it precedes Star Trek. But as we know today, there is no planet
Vulcan. And it wasn't until a century later that Einstein's theories of relativity came
along to explain why. Newtonian gravity just wasn't adequate to predict an orbit as close
into the Sun's gravitational influence as Mercury. I share this example of planet predictions
because it illustrates two diverging responses to failed experiments. You make a prediction,
you take a measurement, your prediction doesn't match your measurements. What do you do? Well,
when it came to Uranus, the answer was to imagine what other stuff might be affecting the data and
then look for that stuff. And sometimes that works. But when it came to Mercury, it wasn't that there
was unaccounted for stuff. It was that the theory the predictions were based on was inadequate.
Do you see where I'm going with this? On the whole, the astronomy community in the last century-ish
has determined that in order to resolve the difference between what we see and what we
predict in galaxies, there must be some stuff out there that we're not seeing. Neptune must exist,
so to speak. But what if dark matter isn't like Neptune? What if it's like Mercury? What if the
assumptions we use to make this were just wrong? Well, that guy Milgram, who's brutal dressing
down of the search for dark matter, I just quoted, kind of developed a whole theory for this. It's
called Modified Newtonian Dynamics, or MOND, and it's an alternate explanation for the dark matter
observations that makes adjustments to our understanding of gravity instead of inventing
invisible ether stuff. Milgram published his first paper on MOND in 1983, 50 years after the term
dark matter was coined by Fritz Zwicky. And while, as I'll get to in a minute, it's not exactly a
popular theory, it is legitimate insofar as there are hundreds of peer-reviewed papers on it. It's
fringe, but it's decidedly not in crackpot territory. Now, I'm not going to get into the
mathematics here, mostly because I refuse to ever show an equation on this channel on principle,
but in the same way that Einstein's relativity usurped Newtonian mechanics because it was more
broadly applicable in the situations of extremely high speed or gravity, MOND proposes additions
that also account for very low accelerations, which becomes more relevant when you're considering
things on the size scale of galaxies, for example. If you want all the math, you can go read the
papers yourself. My references are in the description. I feel like when my old college
professors would like introduce an idea and be like, and you can go home and do the derivation
for fun if you want. And it's like, what nerds actually did that? I did that. The important
thing is that by making tweaks to our current understanding of gravity, we would be able to
make predictions for the rotation curves of galaxies that match our observations better.
But like previous changes to gravity, MOND doesn't negate what came before it so much as add to it.
MOND makes gravity predictable in a wider range of situations, and there's actually
decently compelling evidence for MOND. Unlike most models of dark matter, people have actually used
it to make successful predictions in advance of seeing data instead of adapting to data after
the fact, which you would think would be an important quality to consider when evaluating
competing theories, but as we'll get to later, not the most important. And to be clear, I'm not
going to sit here and pretend that MOND is definitely the more correct hypothesis. I think the strongest
argument against it is that it can't account for everything. In particular, it's not very good at
explaining the cosmological scale dark matter observations that I didn't get into because
this video needs some bounds. But when it comes to galaxy scale observations like our rotation curves,
papers published as recently as last year argue that MOND actually works better than any one model
of dark matter. I should also mention that there are more theories of modified gravity than just
MOND, and some of them do a better job with the cosmology stuff. Kind of similar to how there
are many models of dark matter that each do better or worse at explaining different pieces of evidence.
I'll just say MOND for the rest of the video, but know that I'm using it as a shorthand to
refer to the multiplicity of models that solve dark matter by updating gravity rather than
inventing space ether. But as interesting as this theory is, the field doesn't really like it. As in,
and forgive me for generalizing, but most astronomers do not take MOND seriously as an
option for explaining dark matter. Anecdotally, I can say that in my 10 years studying astrophysics,
I had only ever heard MOND referred to once in earnest, and any other time I had heard anybody
mention it, it's been as a joke. Like, look at those kooky MOND researchers who think they're
gonna solve gravity. So silly. Who's even funding them? MOND is like astronomy's embarrassing cousin
that gets lumped in with ET research and is like in the space of technically legitimate but
effectively crackpotty? Actually, that's not true. People respect SETI. I'm gonna go out on a limb
and say most astronomers take them more seriously than they do the MOND people. But beyond my own
personal experience, you just have to look at an astronomy textbook to see the institutional
erasure of MOND as a viable solution for dark matter. Here's what my first astro textbook
says about dark matter. To explain these nearly uniform orbital speeds in the outer parts of the
galaxy, astronomers conclude that a large amount of matter must lie outside the sun's orbit.
This unseen material, which is by far the predominant constituent of our galaxy,
is called dark matter. Not astronomers hypothesize. Not astronomers are evaluating. Astronomers
conclude there is unseen material and is called dark matter. I looked through all of my old textbooks
that I had lying around and all of them had sections on, you know, dark matter that described
machos and wimps and axions and all that stuff, but literally no mention of the possibility of
other formulations of gravity. Curious. Finally, we can compare the distribution of papers published
on each topic. Doing a quick search on NASA ADS, which is the place to search for astrophysics
articles, we get nearly 80,000 hits for papers with the keywords dark matter and only 1,600
with the keyword MOND. That's a difference of nearly two orders of magnitude. That's huge.
I bring all this up. MOND's complete absence from textbooks, the relative lack of research
conducted on it and the way it's literally treated as a joke by people I know. To support the claim
that as a community, the field of astrophysics has made a choice. And I'm not saying that the
Council of Astronomers who demoted Pluto got together again to suppress MOND. I'm saying that
we hit this phenomenological fork in the road, the dark matter observations, and we had the options
of inventing something or adjusting our models. And despite what I see as a good amount of compelling
but non-conclusive evidence supporting the validity of either option, the field has very clearly
made a decision. And this is really interesting to me because it is such a good example of the
problem in thinking that science is some linear march towards objective truth where we get closer
and closer to the end by using our manly emotionless rationality. That attitude towards science lacks
the complexity of making choices. Like a great philosopher once said, everybody got choices.
Even scientists got choices. Is that a particle we didn't see? Take another shot of modified
gravity? That was a pretty deep cut, but I couldn't not. And I cannot stress this enough.
Those choices are not a failure of the scientific method. In fact, they're necessary for the pursuit
of science to go anywhere at all. Wow, what a cliffhanger. I don't know about you, but I'm excited
to see where this is going. But before we get to that, I got to do my least favorite part of the
video. The part where I give you the uncomfortable choice of paying for the content you're watching
or not. See, I have this kind of idealistic belief that if I make something good and put it out into
the world, then enough people will volunteer to pay me for it that I can keep it free for everybody
who can't and not have to succumb to the various sponsor requests in my inbox. Because wouldn't
it be cool if I could get paid for my work without trying to sell my viewers something they probably
don't want or need? I think so. But I do understand it's a choice. Some reasons one might choose not
to support me on Patreon are because they can't afford $3 a month, because they don't think the
videos I make are worth that, or because they're three raccoons in a trenchcoat and don't understand
the idea of compensation. I know my sincerity reads a sarcasm sometimes, but I really do sympathize
with all those reasons. Especially the raccoon one, you would have no idea what's going on.
But some reasons one might choose to subscribe to my Patreon are to watch exclusive videos,
where I answer questions patrons ask me or interview other creators, get access to the
ad-free versions of my video essays, and help me pay my bills while still making this YouTube stuff.
Both choices are valid, and while they're certainly one that I'd prefer, I do understand
that there can be good reasons either way. So to those already supporting me on Patreon,
thank you. You're amazing. To those who already know they won't, that's fine. I'm still glad
you're here. And to those considering it, you are the population who will determine how long I
can keep doing this. No pressure. Just trying to help you make informed decisions. Okay, that's enough
discussion of like personal finance choices. Let's get back to the fun stuff. Science choices.
So I know a lot of people think that science is just the straightforward application of the
scientific method, and that's very cute. The fact that this is only kind of sometimes what the process
of scientific research looks like is a huge topic that I will probably make a whole video about
whenever I get around to reading against method. But today, I want to draw our attention to that
ineffable initiation of inquiry, the hypothesis. The formulation of a hypothesis has been called
the most mysterious step of the scientific method, because it's kind of hard to explain
exactly where a hypothesis comes from, how a hypothesis is constructed, if you will. The
choice of a hypothesis is so crucial to the whole scientific process, because what you choose to
study determines what you're gonna find out. This is especially important when you have multiple
or conflicting hypotheses. How do you decide which one to point the scientific method at?
One might naively think, well, just systematically test all the hypotheses in whichever is the most
successful determines where your theory goes. So objective. But the inherent futility of this
strategy is exactly what drove philosopher Robert Piercig, who was a university biochemistry student
at the age of only 15, to abandon science entirely after only a few years of research. While doing
laboratory work, he became obsessed with the idea of hypotheses in and of themselves, and in particular,
their tendency to multiply. As you test one hypothesis, he realized, many more hypotheses will
come to mind. And then when you go to test the first of those, you would get hit by yet another
flood of hypotheses. The more science you do, the more untested hypotheses you have. At first,
he thought this was amusing and came up with like a jokie law saying that the number of rational
hypotheses that can explain any given phenomenon is infinite. But over time, his amusement transformed
into a deep nihilism about scientific reasoning and its potential to lead humans to true knowledge
of nature. If the purpose of the scientific method is to select from among a multitude of
hypotheses, and if the number of hypotheses grows faster than experimental method can handle,
then it is clear that all hypotheses can never be tested. If all hypotheses cannot be tested,
then the results of any experiment are inconclusive, and the entire scientific method falls short of
its goal of establishing proven knowledge. Establishing proven knowledge. How much you
want to bet Piercig was one of those science students who picked the subject because of how
much he likes that there's only one single definite answer to each question. I say that
like I wasn't also that student at one point. I thought I was so clever just choosing to learn
absolute truths about the universe. For Piercig, this realization of infinite hypotheses along
with the lack of rational tools to choose between them was catastrophic for his ability to do science.
And I guess because he couldn't reconcile these complications with what I'm assuming was his starting
point of dogmatic scientific rationalism and objective truth-seeking, he dropped out of university
just a few years later. But others have realized these complicating aspects of science without
having existential crises. For example, in The Island of Knowledge, The Limits of Science and
the Search for Meaning, Brazilian astrophysicist Marcelo Gleiser uses a metaphor of an island
to describe how increasing knowledge actually takes us further from a final truth.
As The Island of Knowledge grows, so do the shores of our ignorance, the boundary between
the known and unknown. Learning more about the world doesn't lead to a point closer to a final
destination, whose existence is nothing but a hopeful assumption anyways, but to more questions
and mysteries. According to Gleiser, Piercig's problem of infinite hypotheses wasn't a flaw
of the scientific method so much as a fundamental feature of human's knowledge acquisition. By
seeking more and more information, we're not converging on truth, but fractaling out into
complexity. The more you know, the more you know you don't know.
So if trying to answer questions leads to more questions, and if we only have finite time and
resources to attempt answering some questions, then we still need to figure out how do we choose
which hypotheses to pursue. Well, we've talked about Einstein's sum in this video and he seems
to have landed on some pretty good theories, so what did he think about how we should find our
way to the best truths? The supreme task is to arrive at those universal elementary laws,
from which the cosmos can be built up by pure deduction. There is no logical path to these
laws. Only intuition, resting on sympathetic understanding of experience, can reach them.
Intuition? Sympathetic understanding? What do you think all the Einstein fanboys would think if
they knew their physics god believed that feelings are how we solve the universe? Einstein's not
the only one who says this, by the way. In his writings on how theories are modified over time,
the French physicist and philosopher Pierre Duem suggests that scientists have to follow their
good sense. And this was directly in response to the philosophical question of how to decide
if a challenged theory should change in its foundational premises or the surrounding assumptions.
In other words, the exact kind of fork in the road we see with dark matter and
bond. Do we go back and revise or do we press on and add more? At the present moment,
I don't think we have enough evidence in either direction to know for sure, but as I've already
argued, a decision has been made. And while I agree with Einstein and Duem's ideas of some kind of
intellectual intuition that guides us through the inherently open-ended parts of the scientific
method, and unlike Piercig, I believe that it's fine for this to be how science works and not
evidence of its failure, I think there's an important difference between an individual scientist
going off vibes and a collection of scientists going off vibes in a patterned way. Or there would
be if there was actually such a thing as an individual scientist. You see, despite their aura of pure
objectivity, scientists also live in a society.
So now that we have some context, I want to come back to this question of what does it mean for
science to be socially constructed. Like I said at the top of this video, today I'm interested
in the mid-strength constructivist regime that claims the substance of scientific theories can
be influenced by social factors. And I have a really good example of this that is not at all
related to astrophysics. Science historian Everett Mendelssohn has done some really fascinating work
analyzing the socio-political forces that led to a reductionist approach to biology in 1840s Germany,
a time and place characterized by significant political unrest, emerging revolutionary movements,
and an anti-autocratic energy among the youths. Mendelssohn argued that this particular social
milieu, the same one that produced a young Karl Marx in fact, resulted in a young,
alienated intellectual group that sought to create counter concepts. Whether through science or
politics, they wanted to challenge the old order and their explanations for the world. Reductionism,
the idea that you can best understand things by breaking them down to their fundamental pieces,
was at the time considered controversial and revolutionary and therefore was in line with
the counter-cultural moment. And that's cool, I guess. The interesting part is that at the exact
same time, biologists in France were having their own scientific revolution, except their shift was
towards a holistic, organismic paradigm of biology, which is the antithetical approach to reductionism,
their opposites. Or at least they were opposite at the time. Apparently modern biology has made
some advances towards synthesizing the two approaches, which is cool. Good for them.
Shout out to the biologists who read the script for me. Of the stark difference between French
and German biological paradigms, Mendelssohn says, The very existence of such a marked difference
almost demands a parallel investigation of the mix of cognitive, institutional, and social factors
west of the Rhine. You'll have to read his papers for a more detailed explanation of what
those factors were, but the important thing here is that differences in the social, political,
or institutional contexts led to differences in the approach to formulating scientific theories.
The dark matter, Mend's split, is to an extent an analogous situation. Two antithetical paradigms
for solving a science problem. But the dichotomy is less visible because of what I think is the
monopolizing tendency of American research. Interestingly, more of the top-sided Mend research
comes from outside of the US as opposed to the top-sided dark matter research, so maybe the split
here isn't as clear as Germany versus France, and it's more like the United States research
industrial complex versus a small population of random foreign scientists. I'm not sure about
that detail, but the point is, different contexts leads to different science. And I'm going to get
to my theory on the context that produced the dark matter choice, but first, I want to touch on why
this kind of analysis matters at all. Because the social constructedness of science doesn't just
dictate how science happens, it also determines how it will interact with the rest of society.
For example, via policy, education, or public communication. There are so many situations
where the subjective decision-making necessary to do science has been socially influenced in
negative ways. The choice of how much effort to invest in researching a cure for AIDS in the 80s.
Or the existence of completely legitimate scientific research that exists solely to sell
particular food products. Or the kinds of algorithms and software that venture capital
is investing in right now. Or the decision to launch the space shuttle challenger when they did.
That one's actually really interesting. There's a whole argument that the particular ways in
which people were visualizing data in order to communicate to project leadership is why
what happened happened. And, you know, data visualization is definitely a subjective choice.
I should do a video on that. Comment below if you want a video on data visualization.
None of these are just outcomes of the straight logical path towards linear progress.
They're choices that are influenced by and subsequently influence politics. And like,
please don't reduce this to me saying that science is just a political tool.
Science can be used to many ends, and a lot of them are good, but, dare I say, some of them,
sometimes are bad. Why would you say something so controversial yet so brave?
And I'm not saying the way to avoid doing socially bad science is to remove the subjectivity.
Frankly, I don't think that's possible. I think the more productive takeaway is the
need for transparency and self-awareness in those choices so they can be as well-informed as possible.
In a 1996 paper titled, Is Science Socially Constructed? And Can It Still Inform Public
Policy? Scholar of Science and Technology Studies Sheila Jasenoff answers both questions with a
resounding and well-justified yes, emphasizing the importance of being aware of this multiplicity
of paths scientists can take. As one probes more deeply into the causes of policy-relevant
controversies, one finds that science's inability to answer questions is rarely the most pressing
problem. People are often convinced that they have the right scientific answer. Constructivist
analysis, which seeks even handedly to explain variations in beliefs about the world,
discovers in many such instances that disagreements about the right way to answer the quote-unquote
same question reflected deeper disagreements about what the disagreement really is.
So in order to get the maximum benefit of using science to inform any kind of public policy,
we have to be able to do the meta-analysis of which questions should we be asking to science.
And that is outside the purview of the scientific method. It's a skill set,
nuclear physicist Alvin Weinberg called trans-science. Understanding science
as social constructiveness is also really important in education. In the US, physics education,
especially at the earlier levels, frames learning science as collecting facts and tools that will
lead one to uncovering objective truths. What isn't often taught is the cognitive flexibility
required to make the judgment calls necessary to doing science. Remember Piercig? If he'd had a more
epistemologically mature understanding of what the point of science even is, he probably wouldn't
have had a crisis of faith that made him leave the field when he realized you can't be completely
rational about all of it all of the time. If your goal doing science is to find objective truth through
purely rational pathways, you're gonna get stuck the fuck up when you realize you can't find the
one true path. Or I guess you can convince yourself that you found it and then everybody around you
has to deal with your god complex. A complaint I hear all the time from research mentors and
advisors is that their students don't know how to take initiative over their work. Like they're
basically just obedient little robots who can do any analysis you instruct them to but really
struggle to come up with their own ideas. I think that struggle comes at least partially from
students' lack of belief in their own subjective reasoning skills and intuitive curiosity
because we never teach them how to make imperfect decisions. I don't think we even
tell them making imperfect decisions is okay, let alone necessary. For a more detailed discussion
on the gap between physics students learned perfectionism and the decidedly non-perfectionist
thinking necessary to do science, check out this article called Leaving the One True Path,
Teaching Physics Without Single Correct Answers, where MyLen DePenta talks about their experience
helping students unlearn rigid single solution thinking. Students often accepted the idea that
historical models were imperfect but assumed that the goal of science was to find the single
correct model. But there are no quote-unquote completely right answers. The finite number
of acceptable solutions all have their downsides so the skill of using them isn't in memorizing
or even deriving but in discerning which situations a model is well suited to. This helps students
reject objectivity without rejecting accountability. And it's not just future scientists who have to
have this knowledge flexibility. A lot of arguments against things like climate change or vaccine
efficacy stem from, well, the science changed so the science must be wrong. Maybe if we did a better
job of teaching people what science actually is and how we make it, they wouldn't be recreating
Pearson's very rational breakdown every time they're confronted with updated information.
Scientific literacy is a thing and it's more than just memorizing some fun facts or knowing
how to manipulate equations. And on that note, the social constructiveness of science plays a huge
part in determining what the public believes. An example of this I really like is the recent
scientific validation of millennia old practices in eastern medicine and spirituality like yoga
or acupuncture. Today there is peer-reviewed research proving the efficacy of these practices
to the point that they're sometimes prescribed by doctors or covered by insurance.
But while pointing scientific tools at these ancient methods didn't all of a sudden make
them work better, it did make it so that large swaths of the population who would have dismissed
them before as mystic bullshit would now take them seriously. They believe it because science said
it was true. Science made it true for them, even though it had already been true for a lot of people
for a long time. Similarly, at least to the extent that you probably have heard of dark matter and
you probably haven't heard of Monde, your scientific knowledge of gravity has been socially constructed.
Because while the physicists in my comment section are currently typing,
well duh, scientists know that we're dealing with imperfect models and gravity is obviously
incomplete. Who doesn't know that? The public doesn't always know that and they can only work
with what we give them. So via what I feel safe to assess is the common belief that dark matter
exists and gravity is just facts. Scientific knowledge is socially constructed. The way
scientists do the science has space for variation while still being science. But the reasons for
that variation are not because of the science, they're because of the science's context.
If you buy that whole German-French biology analysis, things like political climate and
social milieu can influence the direction scientists pursue the infinite hypotheses
available to them. And like I keep saying, the field of astrophysics has largely made a choice
when it comes to dark matter. The logical conclusion I'm coming to is that there must
be some contextual reason for us choosing dark matter, which begs the question...
Okay, so this is the highly speculative and squishy part of the video where I share
the broader trends that, at least in my mind, seem aligned with the hard lean towards explaining
the dark matter observations with space ether instead of more complicated gravity. I have
one pitch for a purely socio-political factor because that's what this video is about. But I
would be remiss if I didn't mention the institutional factors that are at play as well.
TLDR, academic publishing in the United States, is literally just a business that motivates researchers
to heavily invest in whatever is already being heavily invested in.
This isn't something specific to Mond and dark matter, by the way. This is just saying that
if there's some small difference in people's interest in the two theories, the financial
incentives of publishing would exacerbate and solidify that difference such that there is an
obvious choice of which one you should study if you want a job. The Matthew Effect, a principle
that says that a small advantage early on will snowball into a large advantage later on,
has been measured in all aspects of publishing from journal impact to institutional ranking
and even individual careers. And papers on novel research are actually biased against in journals
even though they're more likely to become a top 1% most cited paper in the long term.
Basically, financial incentives deter people from rocking the boat even though boat rocking is
fundamentally necessary to progress science. But that's enough publishing and bibliometrics talk.
If you want to hear more about it, go watch this other video that I made.
My point here is that if there's enough of a reason to push scientists towards one direction
even a little bit, then institutional incentives would solidify and exacerbate that choice.
But this still begs the question, why the initial push towards dark matter?
What were the post-big bang in homogeneities that led to the large-scale structure of the universe?
Is a metaphor useful if you need an upper division cosmology course to understand it?
I don't know, this joke's almost as obscure as the E41.
What am I doing? Okay, here's my pitch.
I think the collective subjective choice of choosing invisible stuff as an explanation
for dark matter is consistent with physics' cultural value of simplicity.
And if you don't think physics has a culture, congratulations, you're thinking like a physicist.
Because believing that physicists have no culture is a well-documented part of physics' culture.
But yeah, the physics community, at least in post-enlightenment western science,
highly values solutions that are beautiful or elegant, like some kind of horny Occam's razor
that prioritizes solutions so simple they require feminizing for some reason.
Occam's razor, by the way, also called the principle of parsimony sometimes,
is the idea that the solution that makes the fewest assumptions is usually the best solution.
But as much as Occam's razor can be a helpful rule of thumb that prevents
nerds like Piercig from having a complete mental breakdown,
there is no rule that the universe has to be straightforward.
A messy solution can in fact be more useful than a clean one, an elegant one.
A really great example of simplicity as a driving value for physics is the search for a theory of
everything. Hypothetically, a theory of knowledge would explain all aspects of the universe fully
in one neat set of equations. Or ideally, one equation. Historically, we have had success
with some kinds of unified theories. For example, Maxwell unified our theories of electricity and
magnetism into electromagnetism. But a unified theory of everything that combines the electromagnetic
force with the strong nuclear force and the weak nuclear force and even gravity?
That's our holy grail. And I'll grant we've come kind of close.
There are fairly solid models for a grand unified theory that explain all the forces except for
gravity. A whole bunch of famous theories exist to make gravity play nice with the other forces.
This is what string theory is trying to do, this is what m-theory is trying to do,
this is what loop quantum gravity is trying to do, but no one's quite gotten it to work.
Honestly, gravity's just really hard to pin down in general. Like we can predict what it does
in some context, but we have absolutely no idea why. So the search for theories of everything
is illustrative of modern physics' tendency towards simplification. And I think astronomy's
attempt to explain the dark matter observations with space ether instead of further revisions to
gravity is consistent with a broader desire to reduce everything to a few simple rules.
Because we like for things to be simple. No more than that, we expect them to be.
So we often study them as if they are. And I'm not trying to say this tendency is purely monkey
brain's vibes based. The principle of parsimony is useful in a lot of contexts, and there are
perfectly valid statistical and philosophical arguments for not rejecting it outright. And it
is objectively a cool thing when you can explain multiple different problems with a single solution.
And it's awesome that that is sometimes the solution that works best. But I don't think
it's unreasonable to say that the assumption of simplicity can affect what scientists choose to
study and how they choose to study it. Not necessarily in bad ways, but in ways that limit
the knowledge we generate. In a second here, I'm going to wax philosophical on why physicists want
everything to be simple. But first, I want to pose this video's discussion prompt for the comment
section. If you're new here, I've been ending my videos with a question for the viewer at home
to answer in the comments. And in the end of the next video, I'll share some of the answers I get
from this video, prioritizing commenters who also comment on other people's comments,
because that's how we make this a conversation. Today's question is, what are other examples
of cultural values influencing the creation of knowledge in whatever field, discipline,
or area of expertise you have experience in? What's a subjective principle you've seen
affect how people explain things or even what things people choose to explain? And it doesn't
have to be in academia, knowledge creation happens in lots of contexts and values are always involved.
I know my viewers always come through with super interesting answers, so I'm really excited to
see what we get with this one. So I hope you'll take a moment to share your unique perspective
with me and the rest of the audience and check out other people's perspectives too,
so you don't just have to trust mine. Did you do it? Great, thanks. So why do physicists want
everything to be simple? I think the most compelling reason I've heard for this actually
comes from an argument against grand unified theories, so it's a good thing that you already
know what those are. That astrophysicist Glycer that I mentioned earlier who wrote Island of
Knowledge also wrote a really interesting contribution to a book of essays called This Idea
Must Die, Scientific Theories That Are Blocking Progress, which is a super fun read by the way.
In his essay, he points out some of the shortcomings of existing unification theories,
argues that the idea is nice but ultimately kind of naive,
and proposes what he sees as an explanation for said naivete.
The scientific impulse to unify is crypto-religious. The West has bathed in monotheism for thousands
of years, and even in polytheistic cultures, there's always an Alpha God in charge. There's
something deeply appealing in equating all of nature to a single creative principle. To decipher
the mind of God is to be special, is to answer a higher calling.
Okay, I know there's going to be people who have been with me this whole time whose brains just like
shut off when they heard the word God. If it makes you feel better, Stephen Hawking,
who was a very rational guy whose biopic was literally titled The Theory of Everything,
initially believed in such theories but eventually abandoned it as well. But back to the God stuff.
Despite the common belief that science and religion are opposite things that don't have
anything to do with each other, there is a strong historical record that indicates that
Enlightenment science was influenced by the cultural dominance of the church in Europe,
and a particular puritanism that was the predecessor for modern physics' weird secular
asceticism in the name of a god of rationality. Again, this one point will probably be a whole
hour long video eventually. But for now, let's just say that the intermingling of science and
religious thought, including western science and Christianity, is a well-documented part of
its history. And I'm not trying to overstate the chain of causality here because social evolution
is not so easily reducible. But the Abrahamic holdover of a single point of origin for all
things just makes a lot of sense to me as the reason physicists tend towards a simple solution
even in the face of a messy reality. It really feels like this desire to reduce the universe
to a base set of equations is just repackaged monism with some scientific flavor. We want to
make physics simple because deep down we know that we're all one, man. Damn, is that really
where this video is landing? We made up dark matter because scientists want to believe in God,
I guess so. Told you we'd get there.
What a journey this has been. Unless this video convinced anyone that I'm not a serious
scientist, I should clarify I'm not some diehard Mont supporter who thinks that dark matter
definitely can't exist. I'm more just trying to make a point that sometimes scientists pedestal
certain theories because of subjective values. I don't know what's definitely true, I'm just
trying to see what I can glean from the situation by keeping an open mind. And like, who knows,
maybe they're both right. If the biggest problem with either solution is that neither can explain
all of the dark matter observations, then maybe there's some combo solution in which both things
are contributing to what we see. Real talk, though, it barely matters which of these theories is right
because it's astrophysics. The stakes are literally just ego. The thing that matters is that if we
don't pay attention to how we construct scientific knowledge, we might not realize the effects it
could have on people. And when it comes to actually materially useful fields like medicine or engineering
or computer science or psychology, those impacts can do as much to harm as they can do to help.
And as much as I am deeply a proponent of science for the sake of science, knowledge for the sake
of knowledge, and don't need every question we attempt to answer to immediately have a tangible
use for humanity, I also think that we should maybe kind of actively try not to make knowledge that
is harmful. Maybe. And it's hard to do that if you can't even admit you're making it.
So yeah, our scientific understanding of gravity is socially constructed, and we are almost certainly
wrong about it in the exact same way that people at any point in the past have been wrong about it.
And yet, we've accomplished incredible things with it, like landing people on the moon or sending
a soundtrack of humanity to the furthest reaches of the solar system. Like, Einstein predicted
gravitational waves 100 years ago, and in the last decade, we started measuring them accurately
enough to detect when two black holes smash into each other in another galaxy. That is nothing
short of amazing. I am amazed. Amazed. But as amazing as it is, we did still make that knowledge
up, and we will continue to make knowledge up, and it will continue to be cool and useful and
interesting. Social constructivism doesn't negate science or say that nothing is real or that
everything is relative. It makes our understanding more complete by giving us a lens to analyze
why we do what we do and why we think what we think. To deny the inherently subjective
humanness in the endeavor of doing physics is to deny what pushed us to do it in the first place.
Not ego or money or even utility, but curiosity. That spark that only comes when you realize that
you don't know something and that there might be more to the world than you thought before.
That drive to describe the ineffable that we attempt to satisfy through art and religion and
yeah, even science. When you hear an astronomer wax poetic about the beauty of the cosmos,
that's not rationality, that's mythology. And a thousand years from now, when future humans look
back at whatever remaining record there is about dark matter from today, and they're inevitably
mixing up our science with our pop culture, and they go, look at those humans from way back in
the day that invented this invisible stuff because they didn't understand this super
simple thing about gravity that even kids know today. It'll be fine because gravity is a social
construct and that's okay. Hey everyone, welcome to the end of the video. Thank you so much for
making it here. I had a lot of fun with this video. It might honestly be my favorite one so far
and I appreciate you watching it all the way to the end. In a second, I'm going to share some viewer
comments from my last video, which was about the tech industry and the TV show succession,
but first I gotta pay my bills. I already mentioned my Patreon and you probably know what Patreon is,
but just in case you don't, it's a website where you can sign up to give creators like me
a couple dollars a month in exchange for things like exclusive access to secret content,
having your names immortalized in my videos, and that tiny thing of helping me have an income.
Like I said before, I really, really, really, really appreciate everybody who signed up already.
I really encourage you to think about it if you're able to and if you're not, like, don't
worry about it. Otherwise, you can do the free things to support me, like liking the video,
sharing it with a friend, leaving a comment, subscribing to the channel. I know they all
seem kind of silly and small, but ultimately they make the numbers go up and that is what
determines how much I get paid. So enough of that, let's get into the succession comments.
So for context, this last video was where I used the very popular HBO show succession
to examine how some decisions are made re-regulation of the tech industry. Basically,
the gist is that the tech industry can be quite harmful and regulation is often seen as the way
to prevent that harm and regulation can do some things to prevent harm, but it has limitations
because of the fact that it's a top-down solution and therefore is ultimately controlled by people
with power. And my conclusion was that regulation's fine, but we should try to consider a multiplicity
of solutions for the problems we face with the tech industry. And so I asked people to share
what might be some of those solutions, particularly, like, what might be solutions that people can
engage in, not, like, what should the government do to fix everything. So before I share the kinds
of solutions that people suggested, I want to share one comment that I think is a really good framing
for the whole question of the role of, like, tech and software in, like, liberation projects.
So this is from Kevin Hengehold, who I actually know through the Patreon. I got really excited
learning about data and big tech during lockdown because I saw all the hype around Cambridge
Analytica and thought, fire with fire, right? But to build large-scale left-wing projects to
fight for workers' rights, housing rights, decommodified existence, etc., we need to develop
strong relationships that you can't get by A-B testing email subject lines. All that's to say,
I think it's better to find the people fighting a good cause and use tech to support it rather than
saying how can tech solve x, which I think puts the cart before the horse. I think he completely
hit the nail on the head with that comment. Like, I see a lot of really well-intentioned people with
a lot of very technical expertise try to, like, hold up their technical expertise as the solution
to whatever problem is ailing society, and it's not that their expertise has no place in a solution,
but it is not enough on its own. And I think what Kevin pointed out as, like,
you can't fight fire with fire when you're trying to do something more meaningful than burn
everything down. Becoming the socialist software developer or whatever it was from the last video
requires more than just imitating the enemy. The master's tools will not dismantle the master's house
but for algorithms. Now I've got three lifeboats or three solutions that a lot of people seem to
converge on. The first is open-source software, which is when software is made free and publicly
available along with the code that created it so people can use it and modify it and build upon
it freely. Nick Albritton3796 says, I think it's important to kickstart and develop new open-source
software technologies and to hopefully start building that same concept into hardware technologies,
removing the profit drive and leaving only the incentive of why people develop and use that
tech in the first place. And a lot of people said something very similar and I agree. But I
think something that was really interesting to see was not exactly the criticisms people had of
open-source, but kind of the caveats that should be kept in mind when trying to implement open-source
projects that seem really important. For example, respectable user name says, definitely agree on
the promoting open-source, but also putting in place mechanisms to support people working on
open-source as so often these folks are effectively working for all these big tech companies literally
for free. And there was another interesting critique I saw from Mary Reverie who says,
open-source software is not without fault either. It is the transparent aspect of website text that
allowed for proprietary LLMs like GPT to be created. There is no free lunch, brunch, or dinner.
Everyone has to think critically before putting stuff out. So yeah, open-source can be super
helpful in making more resources accessible to more people, but it does have the shortcoming that
big tech companies can take advantage of it just as easily as you or I. So the second lifeboat that
people converged on was education. And I know I talked about education in the video, but I was
mostly talking about college level education. There were actually a lot of people talking about
like K through 12 level education. So for example, Matias Lopez 6144 says, as a high school teacher
in Argentina, I have numerous students with different interests and political standpoints.
Many of them want to be programmers and are excited about AI and untrusting of international
corporations. One lifeboat is to foster community building in high schools, opening the debate and
showing other ways to live and to understand both society and technology. Treating our students
with respect and engaging with their interests in a matter that fosters their passion, empathy,
and love for their future profession and for the rest of humanity has the potential for helping in
the change. Something I really appreciate about your comment Matias was that you mentioned empathy
and based in the work I've done in like college level education for engineering ethics is that
it's really hard to imagine people who are learning engineering and computer science and all
these things go on being empathetic in their careers and in the things they create when they
weren't necessarily treated very empathetically as they were learning how to do those things.
And I feel like a lot of people might think it's weird to be like, we need to make engineers more
empathetic, but I kind of do think that's very important. And there were quite some other comments
from educators talking about engaging their students like this. John Hendricks 3253 says that
since 2016 they've taught a mini unit on media literacy where students learn strategies to
navigate and dismiss fake news, which is a really cool way to try to combat a specific harm of tech.
And there was even one high school student who talked about trying to engage their classmates
in conversations about tech and ethics and all this stuff. Misery of Micah says,
it seems really small, but being a high school student, soon to be college student,
I feel starting direct conversations with teachers and classmates about the role of technology in
our world would be a first step to decreasing anti-techno capitalist sentiment in this education
institution. I love that. And the last lifeboat I saw again and again was community engagement,
which made me very excited because I made a whole video about why that's so important for
doing any kind of politics. But I also saw someone talk about how community engagement
can kind of fill the personal hole that so many of us have that we try to fill with social media
and stuff like that. Burn Blue Fire K says, I think on the most individual level, what people need
is a sense of fulfillment or entertainment outside of what tech provides. Most people's
everyday use of tech or understanding of it just as a vehicle for content and or convenience.
Addictive but hollow on both the creator and the audience side. Learn to love something
about the place you're in. It helps to naturally form an investment in seeing it thrive. Have that
be in people's focus rather than all the things we see online that are functionally intangible
and feel impossible to do anything about. These interests will naturally lead to connections
Point is, there are so many different ways that so many different people can participate in a
resistance against whatever kind of oppressive force, be it big tech or anything else. And it's
so much fun to see the different ideas people come up with. Thank you so much for everybody who
left a comment. I don't know how to end this. I kind of want to just like end on something
like controversial. Exoplanet research is a sham.
