Philosophy is dead. It couldn't keep up with the sciences, so science left it behind.
We do not need philosophy anymore for the questions that once belonged to philosophy.
Questions of being, of free will, of reality itself can now be answered by science.
Thus proclaimed the physicists Stephen Hawking and Lenin Mladinov in the book The Grand Design.
Their view is an example of what is called scientism, the belief that all things can be understood scientifically,
and that scientific knowledge is the most valuable form of knowledge there is.
In this video I want to respond to scientism and the supposed death of philosophy
by introducing you to Gilles Deleuze and his unorthodox understanding of the purpose of philosophy, contra-science.
Deleuze was the French philosopher who was highly influential in the late 20th century.
His work is known for being subversive and challenging the orthodoxies of his time.
Writing on the history of philosophy, he sought out thinkers he believed to have been marginalised
and attempted to create new ways of thinking and break free of what he called the dogmatic image of thought.
In addition to writing on historical philosophers, he also wrote on things such as art, cinema, psychoanalysis and literature.
And toward the end of his life, he decided to look back at his career
and define exactly what he thought the purpose of philosophy was.
So he wrote the book What is Philosophy, together with his good friend, the psychoanalyst, Felix Guattari.
The two had already written three books together, The Antietopus, A Thousand Plateaus, and a book about Kafka, respectively.
This was the first and only directly philosophical book the pair would write.
In What is Philosophy, they put forth the thesis that philosophy is the art of creating concepts.
This is by no means a new idea for Deleuze.
We find this assertion even in his early work.
But now, Deleuze wants to slow down and really create a theoretical basis for his claim.
As they write in the beginning of their book, the question, What is Philosophy, can perhaps be posed only late in life,
with the arrival of old age and the time for speaking concretely.
It was asked before, it was always being asked, but always too indirectly or obliquely.
The question was too artificial or too abstract.
In developing the aforementioned basis, they start by distancing themselves from popular conceptions of philosophy,
as being about reflection, communication, or contemplation.
Communication, they say, only leads to consensus, which inevitably reinforces the dogmas of our society.
And they outright laugh at the proposition that philosophy is about reflection or contemplation,
saying that mathematicians or artists have never waited on philosophers to reflect on or contemplate their work.
If philosophy is its own discipline, it must be because it has a purpose distinct from other fields.
And that purpose, they write, is to create concepts.
The first principle they present of their understanding of philosophy is that philosophers always create concepts in response to problems.
But what they mean by problem is a little different from what you and I think of when we say problem.
We think of problems in terms of solutions.
For example, if we put forth a mathematical problem like, What is 2 plus 2?
We are doing so because we want to find the correct answer.
4. Delusion-Guatterie's understanding, however, sees the problem as forcing us to think,
without necessarily coming to a singular conclusion.
The solution instead co-exists with other solutions.
As such, the philosopher tries to create concepts as a way of answering the problems he is faced with.
Not to provide universal or final solutions, but to provide new alternative responses to the problem.
But the problems don't remain stagnant. They are forever changing.
Therefore, philosophy must change with them, as delusion-Guatterie themselves write.
If one can still be a Platonist, a Cartesian or a Kantian today,
it is because one is justified in thinking that their concepts can be reactivated in our problems
and inspire those concepts that need to be created.
What is the best way to follow the great philosophers?
Is it to repeat what they said?
What to do as they did?
That is to say, create concepts for problems that necessarily change.
Through presenting philosophy as acting in response to problems,
delusion-Guatterie are creating a conception of philosophy as being in need of constant change,
thereby denouncing all claims to philosophy as being about universal truths.
But what about the eternal problems, you might ask?
Problems like what is justice have been posited throughout history
and will probably continue to be asked to the end of time.
Surely this is an example of a universal problem that requires a universal solution.
Though this might appear to be the case,
we must first ask whether we are dealing with the same problem across time
or if we are dealing with different problems that take the same shape.
For instance, is a question what is justice the same now as it was in the wake of the Holocaust?
I say it isn't, because when it was asked after the Second World War,
it was asked in an attempt to come to terms with one of the greatest tragedies in human history.
But when we ask it today, we are not asking it for the same reasons.
We are asking it out of intellectual curiosity,
or perhaps we are thinking about a specific kind of justice,
for example social justice or racial justice or any number of other motivations.
So although the question what is justice remains the same, it is at once a different question.
And thus, we need to create different concepts in response to those different questions.
Therefore, philosophy must always reinvent and recreate itself.
We might think of philosophy here in contrast to science.
Science, once it is found the right answer, sticks to that answer indefinitely,
unless that answer is proven to be wrong, at which point it seeks a new answer.
Philosophy, however, has to be done over and over and over again.
There is always a new problem that requires a concept, a new dogma that needs to be challenged.
This brings us to the second aspect of Deleuze and Guattari's view on philosophy,
namely that it is a distinct way of handling chaos.
This might be easiest to approach if we start with how Deleuze and Guattari say science handles chaos.
According to them, science provides things with their proper names.
These proper names make up core names on a plane of reference that gives stability to the chaos.
This somewhat obscure phrasing might be understood as being about objective knowledge,
that science provides us with empirical, dispassionate knowledge about the world
and gives stability to the chaos of living, like our dam gives stability to a river.
Consider the experience of love.
It can be an intense, fieve-like experience, and may cause us to act in ways we would never expect,
completely rationally at times.
Science allows us to understand these chaotic elements of living
by giving us insight into how our neurobiology works.
When we are in love, certain chemicals are released into our brains.
These chemicals, which according to a big-think interview with Helen Fisher,
create a similar reaction in the brain as being high on cocaine, thereby accounting for our irrational behavior.
What science can't do is deliver its insight into our subjective experiences of love,
because that lies beyond its scope, and therein lies the utility of philosophy in place of science.
We look to the ancient Greek philosophers who were the forefathers of Western philosophy,
as they had three different conceptions of love.
Eros, Agape, and Filia.
Eros is associated with a kind of sexual desire, a passionate, spirited kind of love.
Agape often means a religious love.
It is a love of God, his love of us, and our love of each other through God.
Filia represents a kind of brotherly love between friends, or a familial love between family members.
These different conceptions of love help us grasp our different experiences of love for different people.
This way, philosophy helps us deal with the chaos of living in a different way from science.
In Deluz and Guattari's words, through the creation of concepts, philosophy gives consistency to chaos while preserving its intensity.
Just like we compared science to dam stabilizing and controlling the water,
we might compare philosophy to a sailboat channeling the winds of chaos without being at their mercy.
Philosophy then seems to gain a certain sociological aspect,
as giving consistency to chaos is of little use if only a handful of academics have access to it.
As such, this perspective seems to demand that philosophy take on an active role in social discourse.
Here, however, we encounter a bit of a problem.
See, if this one thing Deluz is best known for, it is being difficult to read.
His work is often complicated and filled with technical terminology
that is near incomprehensible to anyone who hasn't devoted several years to studying philosophy.
Even then, you're not guaranteed comprehension.
A Deluz scholar called Daniel Smith once commented that even he sometimes struggles to understand what Deluz and Guattari mean,
even after years of studying them.
So what are we to make of what is philosophy?
Is it just another book written by academics?
Four academics, trying to define a technical term which in this case just happens to be philosophy?
I don't think that's the case.
After all, something Deluz has consistently emphasized,
particularly in his cooperation with Guattari, is the value of the creative act.
Therefore, I believe what Deluz and Guattari are really doing
is establishing a theoretical basis for philosophical experimentation.
After all, that is certainly something Deluz himself can be said to practice.
His work on the history of philosophy has at times been called creative misreadings,
because it seems disinterested in the intentions of whatever philosopher he is writing about.
Instead, he focuses on the potential he sees in said philosopher,
and the possibilities for newness he finds in their texts.
To drive this point home, I want to leave you with a final quote from Deluz and Guattari's A Thousand Plateaus,
which is a quote to embrace creativity and explore new possibilities,
and it reads as follows.
This is how it should be done.
Lodge yourself on a stratum.
Experiment with the possibilities it offers.
Find an advantageous place on it.
Find potential movements of de-territorialization.
Possible lines of flight.
Experience them.
Produce flow conjunctions here and there.
Try out continuums of intensities, segment by segment.
Have a small plot of new land at all times.
So the next time you pick up a philosophy book or listen to a lecture,
don't just wonder if the theories you are presented with are correct.
Ask what you might take away from it.
What possibilities for newness is hidden beneath the surface.
How the ideas presented there can be applied in new and creative ways.
That is exactly what making this video has been an attempt at doing.
By taking the context of a very complex book and placing it against a backdrop of scientism,
I have attempted to explore Deleuze's ideas in a new way,
hoping that it might reveal new possibilities for approaching his thought.
Whether I have been successful, I will leave up to you to decide.
If you want to learn more about Deleuze,
I can recommend introductory videos by both Jonas Shaker as well as then and now.
If you want to go more in depth, you can check out the podcast Philosophize This,
which has five episodes on Deleuze.
Or you can check out my personal favorite, The Plastic Pilts Podcast.
We'll find both episodes where they talk about Deleuze
and interviews of Deleuze scholars like Daniel Smith.
If you prefer books, then I recommend Todd Mays,
Gilles Deleuze and Introduction,
or The Cambridge Companion to Deleuze by Henry Thomas Hall and Daniel Smith.
But on my part, that's all I've got for you today.
I hope you enjoyed the video and I'll see you soon.
Take care, bye.
