The southernmost people of the world, the Yagun people of Chiar del Fuego, historically
dwelled on Navarino Island in Chile.
Here an island of canals and fjords in southernmost Patagonia where a rich culture bloomed for
millennia.
But, as in the rest of the Americas, the indigenous people and culture of this place
were decimated by disease and violence leading to depopulation and cultural disintegration
and outmigration and economic decline.
The single best indicator that this culture might be passing away from the world is the
status of the island's indigenous language, Yagun.
As of just a few years ago, a single person, Christina Calderon, became the last speaker
of Yagun when her sister-in-law died in 2005.
Now it's hard to imagine the trauma of a dying language if you speak one of the dominant
languages in the world today like English or Mandarin.
For you, the language through which you understand the world, the language that connects you
to your family and community and the one that captures your own sense of place and identity,
that language is thriving.
Indeed, more and more people are speaking it every day.
For you, the language you see when you turn on a computer or you hear on the radio or
watch on TV, that language is the one congruent with your life, your culture and your daily
lived experience.
It all seems very natural, very inevitable.
But for much of the rest of the world, the language in which their minds speaks to them,
in which they hear the voice of their grandmother, in which they categorize and understand the
world around them, that language may be dying or dead.
And Christina Calderon did not want to see her cultural legacy die, at least not without
a fight.
Publishing a bilingual book of Yagun tales entitled Haikur Mama Shushis, which translates
to I want to tell you a story, Calderon sought to rally the language, reach new speakers
and save nothing less than a unique way of seeing and imagining the world in Yagun.
The book sold out in its first printing, Calderon is teaching Yagun to her granddaughter.
And Calderon is not alone.
By the year 2100, between 50 to 90% of the languages spoken today will likely have no
remaining speakers.
Some languages, like French, if not at risk of disappearing altogether, are still losing
speakers and for the French, the decline of the language is not merely a poignant reminder
of lost political power or global influence.
It's a cultural assault that reaches deep into the emotional and social life of a nation.
The French, like Calderon, have worked to rally the language, creating opportunities
to celebrate and retain French grammar and vocabulary and language traditions throughout
their country and the world.
And this raises a key geographic question.
Is the rise of English, Chinese and Spanish linked to the decline of Yagun and French?
Will we all speak one language someday and what would be lost if we did?
In this lecture, I'll tackle that question by examining the distribution of languages
worldwide, the predominance of certain world languages and the declining trends in global
language diversity and in the process.
And throughout the whole next section of the course, I'll explore the ways that economic
and social change, which we've discussed earlier, impact our human cultures.
First, we should take a look at the contemporary global distribution of languages.
Aggregated in the most global way, the world's languages are typically divided into families.
The language families have linguistic similarities and they're typically assumed to have descended
from common ancestral roots.
We've identified about 10 major language families that we believe all known languages fall
into.
The Indo-European language family is by far the largest language of the language families
and includes about 45% of the languages spoken in the world today.
That includes English and German and the Romance languages, but also Persian and Hindi as well.
It's largely accepted that these diverse but linked languages are the common descendants
of languages spoken by herding peoples who moved throughout Europe and Asia roughly 3,000
years ago, seeding diverse but related tongues as they went.
Indeed, the discovery that the ancient language of Sanskrit is related to the ancient language
of Latin was itself a major breakthrough in the science of linguistics.
The British jurist and linguist William Jones, serving for the British Empire in India in
the late 1700s, came to master Sanskrit along with a dozen other ancient languages and he
made the connection that the European classical languages and Sanskrit were related.
Though perhaps not the first to discover the common ancestor, the Indo-European language,
he did make a huge advance in thinking about the geography and history of languages.
Sanskrit, that great ancient language of South Asia and the language of that region's great
epic Vedic poems, he understood, shares a great deal with the Latin of Avid and Virgil.
As a result, the descendant languages of Latin, which included Spanish and Italian and French,
they're not so far from the descendants of Sanskrit, which includes Hindi, a major language
in India with perhaps more than 200 million native speakers.
Cognites in many languages are notable.
The word for mother in Spanish is madre and in German mutur.
In Hindi, it's ma, a word many English speakers might well use themselves, hey ma, ay mataji,
and I'd add that for my part.
Though I'm not especially adept at languages, I found it reasonably easy to pick up Hindi
during my time in India.
It's certainly not much worse than my French in any case.
This common history of the Indo-European languages also accounts for its coherent geography.
Language families, like Indo-European, they tend to cluster into semi-coherent global
areas.
In the case of Indo-European languages, for example, they stretch across Europe and Central
Asia, dipping across contemporary Iran and down into Pakistan and Northern India.
Another very important language family is the Sino-Tibetan group, which includes about
22% of the world's languages.
It includes many of the Chinese languages, especially including Mandarin, a language
spoken by 845 million speakers worldwide, which makes it the most dominant language on
Earth.
Sino-Tibetan languages span East Asia and extend inward into today what is Northeast
India and Myanmar, Burma.
Niger-Congo languages are another notable family with hundreds of languages, including
Yoruba and Zulu.
Although the Niger-Congo languages only include about 6% of the world's total languages, the
language group does include the critically important language of Swahili, which is a
dominant trade language of Southeast Africa, spoken by many as a first language, but many,
many more as a language of commerce.
Niger-Congo languages, in all their diversity, span much of Sub-Saharan Africa.
The resulting picture of these families is one of large areas of historically linked
languages.
So a map of language families would show fairly coherent regional blocks of the Earth, where
linked languages tend to predominate.
It would show, in a sense, a map of migrations and settlements of related peoples over thousands
and thousands of years.
But such a map would be enormously deceptive insofar as it mixes some major and widespread
languages, like Mandarin, Chinese, or English, in with countless small languages that are
interspersed within the range of these dominant tongues.
A map that simply showed the mother languages of the people of the Earth, where a dot represented
maybe a million or so speakers, would be painted with very, very few colors.
Only nine languages have more than 100 million speakers, and these are the common languages,
or lingua fracas, of the world.
And these are in descending order, Mandarin, which dominates in China and Taiwan, Spanish,
spoken throughout the Americas, English, common in all the former British colonies, including
the United States and Australia, Arabic, spoken across Northern Africa and Southwest Asia,
Hindi, a main language of North India, Bengali, spoken by the people of Bangladesh and surrounding
regions, Portuguese, whose 200 million speakers almost all live in Brazil, Russian, which
is spoken throughout the former republics of the Soviet Union, and Japanese, unique
to the Japanese island chain, and incredibly, a map merely showing just these nine languages
would actually cover most of the world, and it would include an impressive three billion
people.
Of course, as we've learned in this course, all maps tell a story, and our strategic
simplifications, and this map, this map would be no different.
A map of these nine languages would definitely make the point that there are a few singularly
important languages, but it would also demonstrate the reverse bias of our language family map.
This is because it would cause more than half of the people of the earth, people who don't
speak these languages as their first language, to disappear.
From Italian, spoken in Italy, to Pashto, spoken in Afghanistan, hundreds and hundreds
of languages wouldn't be included here.
Igbo is spoken in Nigeria by as many as 20 million people.
Kishua, spoken by the native Andean peoples of Peru and Bolivia, has something on the
order of like 10 million speakers.
By mapping those nine languages, in fact, we'd be failing to map maybe six or seven thousand
languages spoken today around the world, depending on how you count.
A map that attempted to capture all that diversity would be a blizzard of categories, and it
wouldn't be especially useful, but regional maps can give us a sense of many of these
important but less dominant languages and their speaker groups.
For example, we can learn a lot about the settlement and politics of southern India and Sri Lanka
by looking at a map of the languages that were native there before invasions from the
Indo-European people in the north.
These languages are known as the Dravidian languages.
Dravidian languages include Malayalam, Tamil, and others, and while Malayalam is spoken
in a sliver along the southwest coast of the peninsula, Tamil is spoken in a large block
along the eastern coast of the peninsula, as well as parts of northern Sri Lanka.
The first of these two languages, Malayalam, is almost entirely restricted to its own state,
the state of Kerala, which we discussed earlier in the course, owing to its really remarkable
success in decreasing population growth through women's rights and improved social welfare.
This is a politically coherent linguistic community, in a sense, with some natural advantages.
Ethnic Tamil people, on the other hand, though dominant in southeast India, also represent
an important minority in Sri Lanka.
Though the Tamil-speaking people constitute a majority of the northern province and a
big part of the eastern province in Sri Lanka, about 75% of overall Sri Lankan people are
Sinalis and speak Sinala.
The arrival of the Tamil people in northern Sri Lanka can be traced back over 2,000 years,
and looking at the regional linguistic map will give us a clear insight into a conflict
that occurred at the end of the 20th and beginning of the 21st century.
The Tamil people and the Sinalis of Sri Lanka are culturally and linguistically distinct,
but the government of Sri Lanka is predominantly run by the Sinalis in the south as a result.
They became caught up in a deadly and seemingly endless civil war, which was fought between
1983 and 2009.
Fought by the so-called Tamil Tigers, a militant, separatist militia, the war was waged to create
a distinct Tamil state in northern Sri Lanka.
One hundred thousand people died in the fighting before the Tamil insurgency was extinguished.
Now it's important to recognize that language is not the cause of such a conflict, instead
it's the differential power of a minority community that tends to lead to strife, but
it's no coincidence that the geography of these language groups sets the stage for such
a war.
This is a point we'll return to later in the course when we discuss political geography
in greater detail, but for now, whatever the advantages or disadvantages of language geographies
around the world, the take-home message here should be that at a global scale, a mere nine
languages hold an extremely powerful position in the world, and these behemoths are the
languages of the internet and of international trade and of especially the international
media.
At the same time, however, thousands of other languages hold their own local or regional
significance, which only become clearer when we examine the world through a slightly higher
resolution lens, through more detailed maps.
So from all of this, it might be tempting to assume that language diversity is as healthy
as ever.
After all, there's more than 6,000 languages worldwide, and that assumption would be problematic.
As it turns out, we're going through a period of dramatic linguistic extinction, and this
has some important implications.
After that, of the more than 6,000 languages in the world, perhaps 2,000 of them have fewer
than 1,000 speakers.
The Potawatomi language, one of the Algonquin languages in the Native Americans living in
the upper Midwest of the United States and in parts of Canada, that language has no more
than 1,300 speakers.
In my home state of Wisconsin, there are no more than 10 native-born speakers of the language
of Potawatomi and probably fewer.
Though efforts to revive the language are ongoing, young people are less inclined or
less likely to learn it or even be exposed to it every year.
There are even more dramatic cases.
There are Australian Aboriginal languages, with as few as eight living speakers remaining.
There are recorded cases of a single pair of people preserving a dying tongue.
The last single speakers of the language of Wapa and Yuki, which are native Californian
languages, were interviewed in the early 1980s, for example, prior to their deaths.
It's hard to know how many languages die every year, but estimates by linguists suggest
that a language disappears as often as every two weeks.
Now this raises other questions.
First, how many languages should there be?
Well, that's a normative question, but we can think about how this number has indeed
changed over time.
Back when the world had only about 10 million people at the dawn of agriculture, it's likely
there were as many as five or maybe 10,000 languages around the world.
Now, there are over 7 billion people in the world, but the number of languages is actually
decreasing.
This is because back then, people lived in relatively small, coherent, and partly isolated
groups of hunters and gatherers, each of whom likely developed a unique or nearly unique
way of communicating with one another.
It's only with the rise of settled agriculture that things would have changed.
Agricultural communities living in settlements whose population would have expanded dramatically
with increasing food supplies, they likely developed larger, more concentrated language
traditions which may have expanded with trade and the rise of cities.
But even then, there must have been an enormous number of persisting languages all within
their own regional traditions.
Pre-Roman Italy alone had more than a dozen languages.
It was only with the rise of large, extended political empires and kingdoms, most likely,
that the high tide of human languages began to ebb.
So where did all these languages go?
Well, this course is already pointed to many of the major forces that are at work to erode
language diversity.
The accelerated connectivity of global commerce and communication, which has been such an
important part of the changing geography of globalization, that's certainly been a major
contributor.
As these interconnections accelerate, historically isolated locations are often overrun with
new media and commercial demands for the use of dominant global languages, which again
include Spanish and Mandarin and English.
This didn't start in 1492, but that year provides a useful marker.
Fifty years after the Spanish arrived in the New World, many native languages of the Caribbean
had already died.
Demographic growth of speaker communities is another major force.
Mandarin, Chinese, and Hindi are spoken widely because of the recent population boom in the
regions where those languages are dominant.
Urbanization also plays an important role as migrants to urban areas often adopt the
dominant language spoken in that place, and children raised outside of their home regions
are really less likely to learn their family's original language.
But political forces shouldn't be overlooked either.
The rise of powerful empires, as I suggested earlier, and then later nation states, these
tended to promulgate official documents and rules and laws and trade systems, which depended
heavily on standardized communication.
So where hundreds of languages and thousands upon thousands of dialects are spoken throughout
Sub-Saharan Africa, the states of the region, the countries, typically use the official
language of either English or French, which is a product not only of colonialism, but
the necessities of linking to the global economy in the post-colonial era.
In Nigeria alone, where the official state language is English, ten languages have been
recorded to have gone extinct and another 17 are threatened.
And full outright political coercion is an unknown either.
So for decades, it was actually illegal to communicate or teach in the Breton language
in France.
And that language is a Celtic one, unrelated to French, and spoken in northwestern Bretagne
region of France across the channel from England.
And it was actually national policy to eliminate such regional languages in favor of French
for a number of years.
Now unsurprisingly, the number of speakers of this language was in serious decline.
Throughout the 20th century, though, now there is some signs of revival.
In the United States, there was a long, dark era of forced government schooling of Native
American children in boarding schools, run by the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the BIA.
Now here, children were forcibly removed from their cultural context to learn Anglo-language
and culture.
And this went a long way towards eroding the many, many previously thriving Native languages
of North America.
Other examples are countless, like the Tamils of Sri Lanka, the Catalan minorities in Spain,
Kurdish minorities in Turkey, Uyghur minorities in Western China.
These are just a tiny set of examples of cases where linguistic ethnic minority populations
within larger nations have experienced some form of both perceived and very real cultural
coercion.
Language is an extremely important part of this coercion and a spur for asserting autonomous
identity.
In any case, whatever the causes, whether through neglect, coercion, or annihilation,
or assimilation, it should be clear that we're going through a period of cataclysmic decline
in linguistic diversity worldwide.
One might wonder, does this matter?
Does it matter at all?
After all, there's a lot of so-called dead languages out there, including Sanskrit and
Latin and ancient Greek.
Isn't it normal to expect languages to die out?
What's the big deal?
Well, first, we might want to consider the value of these incredible languages in and
of themselves.
They are, in a sense, our collective cultural patrimony.
An endless, inventive, lyric, and beautiful inheritance of our collective past.
Handed down to us by people living in an extraordinary range of places and conditions, the diversity
of languages is a testimonial to the diversity of human thriving.
And this variety is, of course, captured in the language itself.
All languages have unique vocabulary and unique constructions that reflect their own unique
conditions, geographies, and knowledge.
Consider the Ifigao, a culture living in the northern end of the island of Luzon in the
Philippines.
Their language has an enormous array of words that describe different kinds of landscapes
and land uses.
States of forest growth and meadows all reflect the complex pattern of the way these people
historically made a living and made a living on the land by carefully burning and cutting
and managing their surroundings to create an ecological mosaic.
Mabilao is a grassland of cane and trees.
Habal is a hillside of forest gardens.
Ifigao language, in other words, carries the descriptive history of the Ifigao way of life.
There are probably fewer than 30,000 Ifigao speakers remaining today.
The loss of that language would mean the erasure of a kind of knowledge, kind of way of life.
Each lost language, in this sense, lessens us, and lessens us as human beings.
It's like burning the last copy of a book.
And for those communities whose language is dying, the stakes of the change are very high
indeed.
For them, the loss of a language represents the death of a way of being and knowing the
world.
As we'll see, many groups will not give up their language without a fight.
Second, however, the loss of this language means the loss of a kind of knowledge.
Knowledge we may need later as a people, as the world changes and new challenges arise.
From a strictly practical point of view, in other words, some kinds of insights may only
come from some kinds of languages.
As we see in the previous case of the Ifigao, knowledge of how to use land in a specific
climatic condition is built into their language.
Languages both preserve and generate knowledge, and loss makes us more vulnerable to environmental
change.
And many insights may be needed later that we can't anticipate now.
A monoculture of language, in this sense, makes it harder for us to cope and adjust to change.
As the linguist Nicholas Evans puts it in his terrifically readable book, Dying Words,
which is on the decline of languages worldwide, quote, variety is the reservoir of adaptability,
unquote.
The best analogy is to biodiversity.
Now, the reason we're interested in preserving biodiversity, rare plants and animals around
the world, it's twofold.
First, we believe that these rare things are valuable and beautiful in and of themselves.
We no more want to lose a language than we want to lose a rare tropical hornbill.
And second, like biodiversity, the intellectual genetic material contained within a lost language
might be needed later.
You'll probably not be surprised to learn, then, that places that contain the highest
remaining linguistic diversity are also those that contain the highest remaining biodiversity.
According to a study in the Journal of Conservation Biology in Practice, some of the countries
with the highest number of endemic languages, which are Mexico, Australia, India, Indonesia,
they're also among the countries with the highest number of endemic vertebrate species.
Now, in part, this is because the places where languages remain are those where there's
some autonomy or distance from otherwise invasive, centralized state control and global commodity
economics.
Such a condition is also good, as it turns out, for the conservation of species.
So, if we're losing languages all over the world and the forces that are at work in this
process are big ones, including economic globalization and cultural nationalism, is there any reason
to hold out hope?
Can dying languages thrive?
Can dead ones return?
There are actually countless examples where languages have made a rebound, though each
case is a little different.
And the examples of Hebrew, Hopi, and Gaelic are really interesting comparisons.
Among the most obvious examples, then, is the case of Hebrew.
Whether or not you consider Hebrew to have been a dead language in the 19th century,
it was certainly one with fewer speakers than it has today.
For the last 2,000 years, though the language was a really important one for sacred text,
it wasn't spoken as a first language by hardly anyone and rarely used on the street anywhere.
The creation of the state of Israel in the wake of the Second World War tied to an explicit
ideology of cultural survival meant reviving and reanimating Hebrew and very aggressively
throughout the latter half of the 20th century.
Modern Hebrew is spoken today by roughly 6 million Israelis and a great many other people
worldwide.
It would have been really, really hard to predict this kind of turnaround a century or a century
a half ago.
The case of Hopi is really quite different, but it shows another deliberate cultural effort
which can make a huge difference in the fate of small language.
The Hopi language is spoken by members of the Hopi community, a population of around
18,000 Pueblo dwelling native peoples who have made their home in the southwestern part
of North America for thousands of years.
In the early and mid-20th century, as I explained earlier, Hopi children were shipped off to
boarding schools by the U.S. government and separated from their language and way of life.
Their language, a member of the Utah Aztec and language family, was threatened with extinction.
But starting in the late 20th century, something interesting happened.
The community set about a total restoration of the language.
Hopi scholars working at the University of Arizona set down the language in a definitive
dictionary which was a major and first step.
Children were paired with elders to learn how to speak Hopi, and most dramatically,
a radio station began to broadcast entirely in Hopi.
And this last trick is one that has since been tried to good effect in other native
communities in the U.S. and the results are difficult to estimate, but promising.
It's likely that these efforts will go a long way to maintaining the Hopi language from
generation to generation.
A more ambiguous case is that of Gaelic in Scotland.
Until the 16th century, Gaelic was the dominant spoken language over much of Scotland.
The political and economic forces that swept through Scotland, including the Industrial
Revolution and the Ascendants of Great Britain, it meant a total decline of the language.
By the late 20th century, Gaelic had retreated to only the most isolated islands.
But the language has become increasingly important for an emerging sense of Scottish
nationalism and cultural identity.
And with the rise of the European Union, a wealth of new cultural activities emerged
to restore the language in Scotland.
Gaelic media are far more common now than in previous decades, along with related Gaelic
cultural events.
But as geographers Robert Rodgerson and Amanda Gloyer have noted, the number of self-identified
Gaelic speakers has actually only continued to decline.
There were only 58,000 people in Scotland who could speak Gaelic in 1991 and 7,000 fewer
by 2001.
So clearly, a language can be, you know, in this way, both in political and cultural
Ascendants and demographic decline.
It can become, in a sense, more important even as it becomes less common.
In this case also underlines how hard it is to recover languages when they're faced with
the ongoing onslaught of migration and urbanization and globalized economic change.
So to summarize, in this lecture, we've reviewed the global distribution of language families
and languages.
I've tried to show how the geographic clustering of languages into spatially coherent language
families reflects the deep historical migrations and contacts between closely linked cultures.
I've also shown that amidst the vast diversity of languages within these family groups, a
small handful of languages have come to dominate globally today, which include again Mandarin,
Spanish, English, Arabic, Hindi, Bengali, Portuguese, Russian, Japanese.
I've also shown that thousands of other languages hold cultural and political significance
at the regional scale, in fact, a majority of the world speakers speak languages other
than the ones I just listed.
But even so, it's evident that we're in a state of linguistic decline worldwide.
Many of the globe-spanning forces we've already studied in this course, demographic change
and migration and economic growth and change and urbanization, they're all at work eroding
linguistic diversity.
The loss of these languages represents a cultural problem, since it means the loss of cultural
richness, and possibly harms our ability to think and adapt as a species.
But I've also shown that languages can be recovered, and the direct efforts to preserve
these cultural elements sometimes result in success.
So to answer our opening question, no, we probably will not all speak one language someday,
but will certainly speak many, many fewer in the future than we do now, and more is
the pity for the sake of human culture.
But language is just one component of culture.
If language diversity is eroding in the face of global change, is it possible that other
key components of human culture are at risk?
I mean, what about the unique local characteristics of geographic locations which reflect local
culture and convey a sense of place?
Are these also at risk amidst globalization?
Well, that's a question that we're going to turn to next.
