There are more than seven billion human beings on the Earth today, and that is a lot of people.
Trying to get your head around a figure like this is daunting, especially if you consider
that there were only three billion of us as recently as 1960.
That means our numbers have more than doubled in just a few short decades.
And it would certainly be tempting to think that at that incredible rate of growth, our
numbers will grow ever larger.
You might think that we will soon crowd ourselves off the planet like a bursting, petri dish
of microbes eating ourselves out of house and home.
But yet, human population growth will likely end before the middle of this century and
certainly before the end of this century.
Our numbers will level off, probably before doubling again.
How is that even possible?
To answer that question, we're going to have to think geographically, and thinking geographically
again means using comparisons over space from one country or region to another to help see
the larger patterns that influence human experiences and economies and lives.
At the same time, it also means thinking about place, those unique conditions or situations
in every location or town or region that set it apart.
Comparative geography provides us with a few clues as to why human population growth is
slowing.
Consider the densely populated country of Indonesia.
This is a place with enormous numbers of people crowded into huge cities like Jakarta.
The country's 250 million people live off countless narrow fields of rice sculpted into
stacked terraces cut into the steep hillsides of the nation's islands, and much of the landscape
of the island of Java, where Jakarta is located, has been fully transformed into agricultural
land which is densely settled, as recently as 1980.
When the population was around 150 million people, Indonesia had a population growth
as steep as its hills, more than 2.3 percent.
2.3 percent may not sound like a high percentage, but in terms of population, it's a pretty
alarming rate.
The population would have been expected to double by 2012 at that rate.
Yet the growth rate is less than half of that today and it's falling.
The population hasn't doubled, and soon it will probably cease to grow.
Compare this to Afghanistan.
In the exact same period, the growth rate of Afghanistan actually increased from 2.3
percent in 1980 to almost 3 percent today.
That country, which is a far more sparsely settled mountainous land of around 30 million
people, is growing every year.
So what is happening in Indonesia that isn't happening in Afghanistan, and what can these
two cases tell us about our world more generally?
What I want to do in the next half hour is to explore the surprising evidence that points
to the soon approaching end of population growth, and this will show that even though
we might expect population to go on growing forever, leading to a global catastrophe,
it won't.
So why is there reason to worry?
What makes some people think that population growth is a problem?
This kind of thinking isn't new, of course.
The concept of overpopulation is ancient, though its most prominent modern evangelist, the
reverend Dr. Thomas Robert Malthus, lived fairly recently in the decades of the late 18th
and early 19th centuries.
The assertion that made the good pastor Malthus so famous is that, in his own words, quote,
the power of population is indefinitely greater than the power in the earth to produce subsistence
for man, unquote, period.
Now, given people's infinite capacity to procreate and the inherently finite nature
of the earth's resources, Malthus saw that human population was the single clearest,
largest, and greatest influence on the earth, conversely, by his way of thinking, which
we now refer to as Malthusianism.
If you're famous, you get an ism, eventually.
The earth's resources provide the most powerful limit for human population growth and expansion.
So Malthus stressed the mathematical underpinnings of this, pointing out that population growth
is geometrical in his words, which we would today call exponential.
Since the multiple offspring of a single mating pair of animals or people are each themselves
capable of producing multiple offspring, the rate of growth is itself always growing.
For example, assuming six children from every couple, and that was a typical family size
in Malthus' time, you can expect a growth from two people to six in the first generation.
Eighteen in the second generation, fifty-four in the third, and so on.
So if you graph that, you get a steep curve, obviously.
Much steeper than a straight line, and this is a curve moving towards an asymptote.
That is, a steep increase in a few generations.
On the other hand, Malthus argued, the food supply for the growing population is essentially
fixed.
May be amenable to some slight alteration through what he called arithmetic expansion,
what today we would call linear growth in today's language.
Food supplies can grow, he believed, by putting more land under the plow, but not nearly at
the rate that population expands.
So over time, Malthus insisted geometric growth mathematically always outpaces arithmetic
growth with obvious implications.
If you believe Malthus, we have a lot to worry about.
And these claims sit at the center of his key work, which was entitled, An Essay on
the Principle of Population, first published in 1798, and it went through several editions
thereafter for hundreds of years.
The essay suggested that wars and famine in particular, destitution and disease as well,
all these present the horrifying but effective natural limits to growth that keep populations
in check.
Malthus also insisted that policies that promoted the welfare of poor people are counterproductive
because they only encourage unnecessary reproduction and resource waste.
Rather than provide support for poor people, Malthus insisted that the best remedy is moral
restraint.
Now, even in his own time, the ideas of Malthus were considered very controversial and problematic
since his remedies for population growth penalized the poor, and they were quite extreme.
Even so, he convinced a lot of people, and today, many still hold to his ideas, and we
tend to call these people neo-new Malthusians.
It should be pointed out that numerous observers, while admitting that human populations tend
to grow, have shown that they have not grown faster than resources.
These cornucopians, and those are named for the Greek horn of plenty, they've made the
reverse argument that population growth is the root of innovation and civilization.
Economist Esther Boesrup demonstrated that over long periods of time, the amount of food
produced on the same amount of land has increased exponentially, precisely because demands for
food rise when population increases.
Here to this last 50 years, in fact, has been one in which more food has been produced
than consumed, and in which more people have been moved above the level of starvation
than in centuries prior.
Nevertheless, the key question remains, whether or not Malthus's ironclad prediction that
population will grow uncontrolled and can only be curtailed by natural catastrophes,
whether or not that holds true, and if it doesn't, why not?
So let's take a look at some facts.
What's actually happening statistically?
When we examine recent trends, they do indeed reveal that after 200 years of demographic
history since the time of Malthus, a few of his key claims hold up.
For example, it's clear that population has grown exponentially in the last few centuries.
2,000 years ago, at the time of the Roman Empire, the whole world contained only 300
million people.
That's roughly equivalent to the current population just of the US.
That was the whole, you know, that was the world.
Today, it holds more than 7 billion people, more than a 20-fold increase, most of which
occurred in only the last century.
And beyond this, recent trends have made the predictions of Malthus somewhat moot.
Quite simply, the rate of population growth around the world has actually fallen in the
last few decades, and it's fallen fast and it continues to do so.
Some places are in fact experiencing negative growth.
That is, they're shrinking.
Consider the global population growth rate.
That's the growth rate of the whole planetary population of people.
It's a statistic which measures the percentage rate of increase of the total number of people
on Earth every year.
That number peaked at about 2% growth per year in the total population decades ago,
sometime around 1965.
Since then, growth has only declined.
We're now approaching a rate below 1%, which means the world's population is still growing
but at a much slower rate.
So you can imagine a car still moving forward downhill after hitting the brakes, but doing
so at a slowing rate, creeping to a stop.
In places with historically huge and fast-growing populations like India and China, growth is
plummeting.
In some parts of the world, like Germany, Iceland, Portugal, and almost all of Eastern
Europe, populations are actually shrinking.
The world is nearing zero population growth, ZPG, a state where couples produce two or
fewer offspring, which means they replace themselves but no more.
Whatever one might think about the danger of overpopulation, you have to wonder what
would cause a change like that.
What makes population growth decline?
By looking at the variable geography of population change, we get some hints.
And Europe is a good place to start.
In Europe, the population went from being relatively stable before 1800 to having incredibly
high levels of growth at the dawn of the Industrial Revolution.
It's not a coincidence that that's exactly when Pastor Malthus was writing.
He was witnessing a big increase in population.
The dramatic population increase was then followed, though, by leveling off during the
last century, and today we observe a state of population decline in many European countries.
So what happened here?
To answer this question, we're going to break down the trend more carefully.
We're going to need to look at a couple of numbers and examine why rates of birth and
rates of death changed in Europe to uncover clues to what happened.
So to do this, we're going to use two very simple numbers, the birth rate and the death
rate.
Each of these is a statistic that describes the number of births or deaths per thousand
people in a total population in a year.
So to get a sense of what this number means, a high birth rate or high death rate is around
40.
That means a lot of people are either being born if it's 40 is your birth rate, or they're
dying if 40 is your death rate.
That's 40 per thousand.
Places with high birth rates have large family sizes, and women have lots of children.
That shouldn't be very surprising.
In terms of birth rates today, there are very few that are at that high number.
Somalia and Niger are examples of the very few countries with a birth rate that comes
even close to that kind of number.
A high death rate is very unusual in the modern world, though it wouldn't have been uncommon
at all in the ancient world or during the Middle Ages.
Countries with the highest death rates are these days that are experiencing epidemics
like HIV AIDS and other serious health crisis, so countries like South Africa or Lesotho.
Now a very low rate in either of those categories would fall around 12 or 10.
In terms of death rates, most countries in the world today are actually pretty low, and
many countries also have fairly low birth rates.
So the United States today has a birth rate of about 13, and Germany's birth rate is about
8.
Now, in a traditional agricultural society, both the birth rates and the death rates are
high.
People in these societies have a lot of kids, they have large families, but they also experience
disease and hardship and nutritional problems, all of which keeps the death rate high as
well.
So a high rate of both births and deaths, you can see offset each other, so that typically
no more people are born than die, leading to an overall no or very low population growth.
And this was true for human populations from the dawn of agriculture to only a few hundred
years ago.
To illustrate, imagine a rural Scottish farm in the 1780s, so for centuries this cottage
would have housed several generations of family together.
Stretching from grandparents to newborns, they all work on communal land, they'd survive
on basic agriculture, and they'd live cheek to jowl with their livestock.
And there would have been enormous demands for children in a house like this one.
Every new child expands the labor pool for farming after all.
Equally important, in a traditional or rural world, without any external sorts of support
or infrastructure for elderly people, children become the sole source of labor and time for
supporting aging family members and looking after young ones.
They become, in a sense, social security.
Where one third of infants might be expected to die of disease, the need for new children
would have been all the greater, and that was the case at that time.
There was a real and logical need for people.
So this cottage in Scotland and its outbuildings might house a dozen or more people.
Women might be expected to bear as many as eight or ten children.
And perhaps surprisingly, the overall size of the extended family would actually remain
pretty much the same.
This is because, while many people were entering the world to live on this little farm, many
others were exiting.
Consider that at this time, people only lived to be 45, so big families, but no growth from
generation to generation.
In the case of Europe, however, things began to change in the late 18th century.
Children's began to increase, and this growth wasn't caused by an increasing birth rate
or bigger families, which, as I already said, were already pretty big, but instead because
of a decline in the death rate.
The death rate fell mostly because of better medicine, better healthcare, and things like
moving livestock into other buildings, which led to fewer deaths, especially of infants,
women in childbirth, and other vulnerable populations.
So more people survived and lived longer in Europe than ever before.
Their reproductive lives lengthened.
Now, as long as the birth rates are higher than the death rates, more people enter the
world than leave it.
If death rates fall, but birth rates remain unchanged, population can be predicted by
simple math to grow, and to grow at an exponential rate, which is exactly what it did.
Europe grew as a result, and this was the growth that Malthus was observing.
Remarkably, however, in the years following, birth rates also began to fall.
Now, there are a lot of reasons for this decline, and some remain a matter of debate.
Nonetheless, as people became more urban, the demand for family farm labor fell, and
the cost of raising children and educating children increased, families had fewer children
as a result.
Once the birth rates and the death rates came to match again, growth of the population halted.
In many countries, like Russia, where the death rate was higher than the birth rate
all through the early 2000s, and Japan, those are places where the population is actually
shrinking.
So returning to our Scottish cottage, changes after 1820 would have been really dramatic.
At first, the improving health conditions in the household would have stretched the age
of the oldest family members, extending their childbearing years for the families and reducing
infant mortality.
So this old home probably was bursting at the seams, and in the years that followed,
when this great Britain rapidly urbanized and industrialized, and the communal lands
of Scotland were enclosed, family sizes then began to shrink.
These rural homes would have been abandoned or consolidated as small families became factory
workers in Glasgow or further away.
By 2007, the average woman in Scotland had fewer than two children, that's way below
the replacement rate.
The general trend that I'm describing here is referred to as the demographic transition
model, DTM, and the demographic transition model assumes that as societies transition
from agriculture to industrial economies, their populations enter a period of growth, followed
by a cessation of that growth.
It's an abstract generalization based on the European experience alone, so how useful
is this model outside of Europe?
Because it's tempting to use the DTM, and demographic transition model, to predict what
might happen in other parts of the world.
After all, the things that accompany demographic transition in Europe are also ongoing in other
parts of the globe, urbanization, decreasing number of people in farming, changes in jobs,
increasing expenses related to having children, they're all facts of life in China and India,
and much of Africa and Central and South America, although they happen at different times and
under different conditions.
For geographers then, this is like a really cool natural experiment.
It even allows us to test a clear hypothesis.
We could predict that economic development leads to an increase, but then an end to population
growth.
But evidence from around the world, sadly, suggests that population change is way more
complicated than that model might predict.
In some regions or countries, population growth has fallen dramatically, but in the absence
of significant economic growth and change, and the state of Kerala, which is a state
within southern India, it's a textbook example.
When you think of Kerala, think palm trees and beautiful beaches and rubber plantations
and a lot of fishermen.
In the 1950s, this small rural state had the highest population growth rate in India, but
by the 1990s, it was amongst the very lowest, falling from a very high birth rate of 44.
I told you 40 was high.
They were at 44 per thousand in 1951 to 18 per thousand in 1991.
So today, the average couple in Kerala has around two children.
Now, how was this remarkable transition achieved?
Contrary to the model I just described, Kerala remains mostly rural, and it manages with
a lower than average gross domestic product per capita.
It's poor, in other words.
Even poorer than other states within India.
Well, the secret must lie outside these strictly economic factors.
As it turns out, Kerala has a higher than average level of women's education and literacy
and a higher than average availability of rural health care, especially for women.
And that's the ticket.
With good health care, infant mortality rates are lower.
This means that the historic need to have many children as a kind of insurance against
difficult conditions of death and loss, that disappears.
At the same time, where women are more highly educated and participating more fully in
the workforce, the opportunity cost for having them at home goes up.
That means that where women can be major wage earners, the financial trade-off for having
them at home raising children actually increases.
And all of this is true in Kerala, where clinics can be found in even the most rural communities
and where women are present in all fields of work.
So on a recent trip to Kerala, I took a long boat ride up a narrow winding river to a thickly
forested national park, and on that day, the person handling the outboard motor was a woman.
The person who took the fare was a woman, and behind the table managing the operation
were an extended group of mothers and sisters and wives.
And this is a far cry from parts of rural northern India where I've spent time before,
where I've been on a whole day seeing only men.
So clearly, women have economic power here and are making choices with some autonomy.
Surely that impacts fertility.
And there are some things about this outcome that geographers would suggest are kind of
an exception.
The outcome is owed in part to the unique qualities of Kerala as a place, kind of unique
context.
Notably, Kerala is one of the few parts of India where property rights have historically
been held by the women's line in the family.
That's unusual not only around the world, but especially in India, which otherwise has
a pretty patriarchal land tradition.
Kerala in this geographic sense is a unique place.
But viewed through the lens of global comparisons over geographic space, the experience of Kerala
does indeed appear to be part of a global phenomenon.
Women's education and literacy consistently correlate with lower fertility rates everywhere.
So let's go back to Afghanistan and Indonesia again.
Those two countries are compared at the beginning.
In Afghanistan, the average woman has more than six children over her reproductive life,
and many have doubled that number.
In Indonesia, by contrast, women average only a little more than two kids, so why?
These countries have a lot of things in common, after all.
Both are highly agricultural.
Both have almost entirely Muslim populations, and both have been through tough periods of
serious conflict, but in at least one regard, they differ.
In Afghanistan, the literacy rate for adult women is around 12 percent, whereas in Indonesia
it is 89 percent.
Case closed.
The literacy rate is, of course, merely an index of more general status of women in
these two places.
It's just a number, but the implications are pretty clear.
Where women's rights are observed and protected, population growth declines or ends, regardless
of the cultural or economic status of the place.
Now, there are questions about whether correlation here is linked to causality.
You could see it going the other way.
In countries with lower fertility rates, for example, women are freer to pursue education,
so it's dialectical.
Even so, studies continue to show that reduced fertility is related to women's education.
It's also associated with the availability of condoms, the availability of women's reproductive
health care on demand, and the social and political autonomy of women, meaning their
social ability to make independent decisions within households and communities.
But simply, it's clear that the political and economic condition of women in society
is the best and most reliable predictor of demographic change.
Now, just how strong is that trend?
Can it overcome even the strongest political and cultural forces?
According to geographic research, very possibly, yes.
Take the case of Ladakh.
Ladakh is a mountain kingdom in India, near the borders of China and Pakistan.
This place might have been pulled right from the pages of Lost Horizon.
It's like a mountain Shangri-La in the Himalayas, where Muslims and Buddhists have lived side
by side with one another, intermarried with one another, and historically had really large
families.
Starting in recent decades, however, relations between the two religious groups have become
more acrimonious.
Religious leaders on both sides, fearing they're being outreproduced by the other, have called
upon women to have larger families.
But research by cultural geographer Sarah Smith, who's at the University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, shows that this effort on their part has totally failed.
When she interviews women in Ladakh, whether they're Buddhist or Muslims, they do indeed
say the same thing.
Women should have more babies, they tell her.
But when Smith counts heads, she finds that family size is shrinking in almost every household.
Women tell her that they do not themselves want to have more children, they actually
only want to have one or two kids, to increase the chances of their children's education
and success in life.
So even in the face of strong cultural, political, and ideological forces, women choose fewer
children these days, at least when given the power to control the timing and spacing
of births.
Now given that population may respond mostly to the status of women, what are the implications
of thinking about the world's population as a policy problem?
To that end, it might be useful to compare the experience of both India and China in
their very different but equally dramatic efforts to control population growth in the
late 20th century.
First, the so-called Indian Emergency, which occurred during the period of Indira Gandhi's
rule in the 1970s.
In 1975, Mrs. Gandhi declared martial law and sought the end of population growth as
one of several policies through dramatic measures, including mass sterilization camps, the rationing
of food and services, contingent on family size, and even forced sterilization of some
villages and slums.
But all of these draconian measures were carried out on groups with the least political power,
including low-caste communities and the urban poor.
Now international neo-malthusians in Europe and America heralded the effort needless to
say they were convinced that this would lead to a good outcome, yet none of these measures
slowed or halted India's population growth, which is only now slowing, decades later as
a result of complex social and economic factors, including women's rights and access to education.
These policies did have an impact, however.
Their unintended consequences were to sow seeds of distrust between communities and
stir dissent between people and the government.
These persist to this day, and they hang over any effort to discuss population in India
now.
China, and its notorious one-child policy, approached the problem differently.
China set strict quotas on births, one child for urban families and two for rural families.
The policy, which started in the 1980s, involves various rewards for families giving birth
to only one child, including work bonuses and priority in housing and so on.
And in China's major cities, this one-child policy has been rigorously enforced, to the
point where it has been almost impossible for a woman to easily plan a second pregnancy.
In terms of reducing population growth, this policy has been relatively more successful.
The average total fertility rate in China in 2005 was one and a half children per woman,
whereas in 1980 it was almost three, so that's a big drop.
But the program also had side effects and perverse ones, including a lopsided population
of boy children over girl children.
This resulted from a cultural preference for boy children and sex-selective abortion.
This has caused a generation of what's so-called missing women.
The Chinese labor force is also declining compared to the dependent aging population.
The number of people above the age of 65 for every person of working age is going to
double in China over the next two decades.
And this approach comes with a significant social price.
In other words, especially considering the population growth has fallen in most other
countries without this kind of intervention.
I mean, to put it simply, it probably would have happened anyway.
So in this lecture, I've introduced some key concepts and principles in population geography
and in the process, I've invited us to think about a world after population growth.
We've seen evidence to demonstrate three things.
One, global trends suggest that human population growth does indeed hold some implications
for sustainability on the planet.
Of course, especially since recent growth has been exponential, just as predicted two
centuries ago by Thomas Malthus.
But geographic evidence also suggests that Malthusian thinking has very severe limits
for predicting and understanding demographic change since population is an effect of other
processes, especially economic development and the rights and autonomy of women.
Global trends also suggest that demographic shifts tend to happen often despite and not
because of invasive policy efforts by concerned governments.
In the cases of Kerala and Ladakh, strong women's choices prevail over economic hardship
and even heavy-handed political, religious and cultural pressure.
More generally, the question of population, I think, shows the power of thinking geographically.
That is, by thinking about how and why local particular and micro conditions differ from
place to place, we actually gain insight into global macro conditions and spatial patterns
more generally.
You can indeed see the universe in every grain of sand.
So the surprise of an end-to-population growth doesn't seem so surprising.
In fact, it really appears almost inevitable if it's viewed through a geographic lens.
