When you think about future geographies or future places, you're often faced with some
pretty stark choices.
Consider any major science fiction movie you've ever seen.
Typically, you're confronted with either a utopia or a dystopia.
Utopia is a term coined by Thomas Moore to describe a perfect imaginary place, the world
lending the title to his 1516 book of the same name.
Dystopia is its antonym, a place that's gone terribly, terribly wrong.
Now almost all the processes that human and cultural geographers study, the ones I've
introduced throughout this course, lend themselves to images of utopia or dystopia.
Think about it.
Agriculture and population invite stories either about deprivation or plenty, urbanization
makes us think either about desirable cosmopolitan places or modern lives, or on the other hand
crowded nightmarish cityscapes.
Cultural globalization either means the freedom and opportunity to experience whole new and
different traditions, or instead to live in a culturally impoverished, miserable world
with one language and one way of life.
Imagine disease geographies, either as the end of cancer or a global pandemic, your choice,
and so on.
With the short time I have remaining, I want to make a move past these crude caricatures
to kind of reflect on what future geographies are more likely to look like.
Of course, it's hard to predict the future.
After all, the course up to now should have demonstrated how unpredictable the world can
be.
Consider HIV AIDS, a crisis we discussed earlier in the course.
No one could have predicted that great successes that have occurred in just a few recent years
in terms of medication, while seroprevalence rates remain really high throughout southern
Africa for example.
The availability of antiretroviral medications mean many people can survive and even thrive
with the disease as never before.
And this would have been hard to predict, especially in the darkest days of the disease
in the late 20th and early 21st centuries.
So to think about the future and future geographies, we're not merely going to speculate.
Instead, we're going to visit five places around the world, which each in their own
way right now project some part of the possible futures for humanity on this planet.
Some of the things we'll see might be extremely encouraging, and other things we see may make
us a little less optimistic.
But either way, the diversity of places and things and experiences that I'll show you
in the next half hour, I hope, will convince you that the forces of change at work on our
world will in no way hammer flat the beautiful complexity of cultural and human geography.
The future will be as diverse and strange as the worlds of the past, though not without
some terrific challenges.
I'll conclude this course in other words by suggesting that despite the increasingly
dense connections we see around us, and to some degree actually because of them, globalization
only means the proliferation of new geographies.
And that's good news for the field of geography, and I hope it means good news for you since
you've managed to get all the way through the course.
So let's begin with the environment.
The things we've learned in this course certainly might make us think about how the world is
becoming more ecologically homogeneous, less diverse, and flatter in a sense.
We know that the trend is in the direction of massive change.
The rich environmental diversity of the world around us has been, and will continue to be
heavily influenced by people, and some geographers have called our era the Anthropocene as a result.
A time and place where every ecological, atmospheric, and physical system is intertwined with humanity.
Trends towards deforestation and invasive species and climate change, those all might
make us think that we're headed towards a humanized, environmental stew.
Now certainly, that's what you'd expect if you visited Poyang Lake.
Poyang Lake is a giant freshwater body located in China's Jiangxi province.
And it's one of the most heavily used and managed water bodies in the world.
We find fishing here, and domestic duck farming, as well as crab farming and sand dredging.
And with complex sets of dams and water management systems installed all around the lake's inlets
and heavy demands for agriculture, water is moved in and out of this system constantly.
This impact, coupled with the very extreme severe wet and dry seasons, mean that the
water levels at Poyang Lake rise and fall from season to season by 5 to 8 meters.
That's an incredible 15 to 24 feet.
In the summer, Poyang Lake is China's largest, covering an incredible 4,000 square kilometers.
Let that sink in.
That is a lot of lake.
In the winter, the lake shrinks to a water-starved size of less than 1,000 square kilometers.
And this chaotic pulsing of water surely disrupts natural systems in a violent way.
Approaching the water by a path, though, amongst the nearby rice fields, you'd be amazed at
the diversity of life you'll find.
Water birds abound all over the lake, many of which are endangered.
If your timing's good, you're likely to see the giant Siberian crane.
With its pure white plumage and bright red face and head, these birds stand more than
5 feet tall.
98% of the world's Siberian cranes depend on Poyang Lake for their survival each winter.
Sitting quietly by the lake, we would also probably see flocks of spoonbills and huge
flights of whistling swans, oriental white storks along with other critters like water
deer.
These species take advantage of the season to season variability, and their migrations
are linked to this rhythm of change.
This is a heavily used and engineered landscape, there's no doubt about it.
But it's also a wonder of Anthropocene diversity.
Seeing all this wildlife thriving, you might then conclude that, well, people in China
are doing no harm to Poyang Lake, but this too would be a mistaken impression.
While people have adapted to and enhanced the hydrologic system here, the current hydrology
is not considered desirable at least by central planners in Beijing, instead they'd like
to see a lake that's more predictable and less variable from year to year.
By creating a single massive dam on the lake, they're hoping to bring the chaotic variability
to an end.
It's totally unclear what impacts that might have, but a good guess is that it would have
effects on both local human livelihoods here as well as biodiversity.
Birds are good, that a massive dam would wipe out or deeply hinder both.
So what can we say about the future of nature from our brief visit to Poyang Lake?
Well, certainly a visit to the lake can't force us to conclude that people are bad for
nature, whatever that might mean.
Having people using the lake heavily doesn't appear to be incommensurate with having rare
birds and critters.
On the other hand, it's not clear just what kinds of human activity this system might
benefit from and what kinds might be detrimental to diversity.
What we can say is the future of environmental geography and biodiversity will not be the
result of an absence of people, not at Poyang or really anywhere else.
It's instead going to be about precisely what people choose to do on the land, and that's
a very useful lesson for future geographies.
Many natural areas in the future are definitely going to look like Poyang Lake.
In terms of agriculture and population, we've seen in this course that our demands on the
food system are enormous, with a process of ongoing intensification leading to the massive
movement of inputs and outputs all around the agricultural landscape.
Given the trend both towards consolidation of the agricultural system and the often terrible
ecological costs of agriculture, it is not unreasonable to predict that the future of
food is one of a uniform agro-industrial system of filthy monoculture.
Of course, we've also seen the inventive capacity of farmers.
A look at some high-production food systems sheds some light on possible, maybe more optimistic
futures and future landscapes for food.
Imagine Lafarge, Wisconsin, approached from an aerial view the place has an idyllic pastoral
look, at least from a distance.
Set in the southwest part of the state, this is an area of rolling terrain, farmed in crops
following the neatly sculpted rows along the contours of the land which hugged the hillsides.
One of the major industries in this region, unsurprisingly, is dairy farmers, since Wisconsin
produces $26 billion of dairy products every year.
Red dairy barns plucked right from the pages of picture books dot the ground all across
this cultural landscape.
Zooming inwards then, we begin to descend on a single farm, the Wild Rose Dairy.
The Wild Rose is no small operation, and it houses almost a thousand milking cows who
live in sheds along the hilltop.
The dairy system is highly intensive, with automated systems for round-the-clock milking
and a huge focus on moving the endless supply of manure off the farm site and away from
the barn, to be sure.
As we get closer, we realize this dairy smells not very much like a Wild Rose, but something
else is also noticeable here.
Usually in most dairy operations, large or small, the animal waste is lagooned in a giant
pond and then later applied directly to the farm soil, which leads to high levels of phosphorus
pouring into local waters, which in turn leads to the total destruction of streams and local
habitats.
It's a dirty business.
But here, the waste is being directed into a giant metal cylinder, more than 20 feet
high.
What is going on in there?
Because it turns out the manure is being digested by billions and billions and billions
of tiny microbes who devour the organic material, metabolize it, and produce biogas, and that
gas is burned to power a generator.
When the electricity is sold back to the electrical grid, the digester has a remarkable capacity
of 775 kilowatts.
The material that comes out of the back end of the digester, moreover, is a concentrated
fertilizer that's applied to land with a far lower ecological impact.
Incredible.
Beneath the surface of this turn-crank industrial food operation lies a remarkable and creative
set of innovations that are cleaning the water and internalizing the external costs
of farming.
Here, an industrial farm is working to produce the signature of an organic or small-scale
one.
Now, how typical is this operation?
Dozens of dairies in the state of Wisconsin have biodigesters, and more and more are built
every year.
The geography of the future is pretty much here already, then, in a strange comparison
on the other hand.
On the road in Lafarge sits the giant headquarters of Organic Valley, which is a cooperative
that's the largest source of organic milk in the country.
Now, that operation is a producer-owned co-op, which assembles small, organic dairy farmers,
ones who are totally unlike wild roads, and combines their products under one brand name
and markets them all together, getting the advantages of a giant corporation, in a sense,
while maintaining a light touch on the land.
Here, in an interesting twist, small-scale farms are working to produce the signature
of large-scale ones, and remarkably, these two radically different experiments in food
production, wild rose and organic valley, sit nearly side-by-side one another on the land.
What is the geographical lesson of our visit to Lafarge?
Well, I think it's that ongoing experiments in food production around the world are pretty
likely to leave us with a bunch of different solutions to our food problems, as well as
to our ecological ones.
We're likely to see highly intensive industrial systems, like those of the wild rose, beginning
to tune their production systems to capture waste and become more cleaner and more efficient.
On the other hand, it's equally likely that local and craft production farms, like those
that feed the organic valley co-op, those will continue to consolidate their operations
in search of brand recognition and economies of scale and modern technologies for processing
and transporting their products.
So the future of agricultural geography is likely one of experimental improvisation and diversity.
In much the same way, we might have predicted the flattening of natural and agricultural
diversity, globalization also might cause us to be concerned about the future of our
cultures and our economies.
We've seen, notably, how economic acceleration has caused the expansion of a restless global
economy to move production and consumption systems around the world, often leveling whatever
came before them.
We've also seen how local and indigenous cultures can either be swept aside or actually captured
by commodity economics.
This might make us worry and for really, really good reasons.
Nothing could invite this kind of worry more, it seems to me, than a shopping mall.
Shopping malls are the classic examples of global non-culture around the world, big and
enclosed areas, specifically designed to make us consume commodities, usually in antiseptic
and climate control conditions, where behaviors are policed by private security firms.
What a total drag.
Let's visit a mall and think a little bit more about it.
The Abasto Shopping de Buenos Aires Mall was opened in central Buenos Aires, Argentina
in 1998.
Approaching the Abasto building, we may feel there's something unusual going on here.
The mall, which is Argentina's largest, was created inside the Abasto building, which
is a distinctive giant structure built in the 1890s, which housed the city's bustling
local agricultural market.
The building has a remarkable combination of dramatic arches and stained glass windows
and rounded architectural touches.
It's a good-looking structure.
Upon entering, however, you're likely to be confronted by escalators and storefronts
and extremely familiar global brands.
The mall experience, as you're carried slowly through the parade of shops, has of course
been engineered by people who've pretty carefully studied the way the movement of people's
eyes and bodies can be directed to maximize their opportunities to buy stuff.
This is a globalized science perfected in great malls around the world, including Minnesota's
epic Mall of America, which is worth a visit at least once.
Anyway, there's nothing in the Abasto experience it would seem that would tell us you're in
Buenos Aires, or even Argentina necessarily.
In the globalization of the city's commercial enterprises, it might seem geography has indeed
been hammered flat.
But following on months of interviews with Argentinians using the mall, geographer Jacob
Miller at the University of Arizona concludes that things are not all as they seem.
Over here, he observes people, colonizing steps and spaces for informal loitering and skating
and socializing.
And over there, he sees surreptitious drinkers sharing a beer or smokers lighting up cigarettes
in marijuana.
His interviews with shoppers reveal that they come to the mall for anything except shopping.
And they use it as an extension of, or even a way to recover, public spaces that have
been lost to people as the city has become larger and more crowded over the years.
He describes jugglers, bubble-blowing dinosaurs, balloon-selling clowns, cars stuck in traffic,
blasting loud music to the enjoyment of teenagers dancing.
None of these are sanctioned by the mall's owners, but neither can they be fully controlled.
On the other hand, many of the people who Miller interviewed were openly critical or
hostile of the mall dismissing it as a consumer trap.
Ironically, when he asked them whether they ever shopped there, on reflection, they all
report that they do.
So clearly, people's relationships with these economic cultural geographies are complicated
and they're contradictory.
Does our trip to the Abasto forecast anything about the homogenization of global consumer
culture?
I think it does.
This kind of space is one slowly being unpacked and planted all around the world.
It definitely creates a kind of sameness to which people often respond negatively.
But they adapt their behaviors all the same.
All of this should also recall much of what we've learned about the remarkable human capacity
for placemaking, that strange ability to imbue locations with meaning and to appropriate
spaces from their designers to suit people's own purposes.
Future cultural geographies will always be the product of this tug-of-war between a
cultural economic process to discipline people into certain behaviors and uses of space and
the inevitable and ongoing tendency for people to recreate the world as they go.
If this is the future world of middle-class consumers, what can we imagine for the geographies
of the world's larger populations of newly urbanizing masses, while for starters?
The time we spent in this course reviewing population and urban geography gave us a picture
of the world, where rapid, largely unplanned growth is likely to catapult us into a world
of informal settlements and slums.
What might that world look like, with its 10 or 11 billion people, three-quarters of
whom will live in urban areas?
Clearly, one picture might be a pretty bleak one, filled with chaos, street crime, poor
infrastructure, and challenges for health and civil society.
But that would be mere speculation, it might be better to take a look at what such parts
of the world look like right now, without jumping to any conclusions.
Take Fortaleza.
Fortaleza is a city of more than 2 million people, which lies on the northeast coast
of Brazil.
The city has a booming economy, driven in part by a tourism industry supported by a
great climate and terrific beaches.
It's also a destination for the rural poor.
And so, unsurprisingly, host to a number of slums, or favelas, as they're called in
Brazil.
Of these, the community of Pirambu is typical.
Pirambu is a shanty town of hundreds of homes and 200,000 residents, stretching along the
line of the beachfront, populated by older, as well as recent migrants.
All of them coming from the agricultural interior or from fishing communities along the nearby
coast.
Pirambu's homes are cobbled together through a mix of formal building materials and found
materials.
And like most favelas, the place has very limited infrastructure and very few connections
to water or other municipal amenities.
So, what's it like here?
What's it like to live here?
We might predict what we hear about a lot, anyway, in Brazilian favelas.
We might predict drug crime and violence and poor conditions and social unrest.
Research into these communities by Jeff Garminy, a geographer at King's College in London,
tells us a more complicated story, however.
First, he points out that crime is remarkably absent in Pirambu.
It's difficult to know exactly why, but it seems that the northern region of Brazil,
unlike the areas of concentrated wealth like Rio, seem to draw a little action or interest
for the drug market.
But more than this, Garminy describes the dense networks of community activity in Pirambu,
where ad hoc community groups and churches organize people's access to things like health
clinics and legal aid and political decision makers.
Communities work together to get the streets swept and to keep the place as clean as humanly
possible under the circumstances.
So, while official government agents do sometimes enter the favela for limited kinds of activities,
including things like sending in caravans to spray for mosquitoes to prevent dengue fever,
for the most part, it's a do-it-yourself, DIY society, though not one marked by a lot
of overt violence.
If there is a tension in Pirambu, it appears to be coming from the increasing diversity
of religious traditions within the favela, the Catholic Church, along the exclusive spiritual
destination for the favela's population, has now been joined by a number of non-Catholic
evangelical churches.
And none of this has in any way led to strife, but it has carved up the community further
into areas dominated by believers in one or the other faith.
The picture that emerges from Pirambu then is definitely one of an urban slum future,
where historically poorer agricultural communities move in large numbers to populate more dense,
improvised urban settlements.
And let's not sugarcoat this, it certainly means places facing challenges of poverty
and underdevelopment.
People in Pirambu increasingly demand better water connections, better and more reliable
electricity, and improved sanitation, and justifiably so.
But what we don't see, necessarily, in Pirambu, are all the dysfunctions, typically ascribed
to slums, especially Brazilian favelas, which are notorious, like narco-trafficking and
strife.
No dystopia here.
To the degree that Pirambu is typical, and there are indeed thousands of settlements
just like it in Brazil alone, our urban human future is one of improvisation, though not
necessarily unmitigated chaos and misery.
With that in mind, what might we imagine about political geography?
Our review of political geography in this course brought us face to face, after all,
with some of the most violent and ugly facets of the nation's state.
We look specifically at the way ethno-nationalism linked with ideas about state territory to
lead to partition and genocide and ethnic cleansing.
Given the unmitig levels of sectarian strife we see in world conflicts around us, in Africa,
in the Middle East, and elsewhere, it's possible to imagine a dystopian political future of
divided polities, ongoing violence, and dread.
A trip to the city of Mostar might undermine some of these assumptions about future political
geographies, even if it by no means opens a window on some kind of utopia.
Mostar is a city of little more than 100,000 people in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and it was
the site of a great deal of vicious fighting during the war in Bosnia after the breakup
of Yugoslavia in the 1990s, especially between Croat and Muslim forces.
The city sits astride the Nurettava River, and as a result, its most conspicuous bit
of architecture, famous, really, is the Stadi Most, meaning Old Bridge, that spans the river.
The bridge is an often-sided symbol of the history of a conflict in the region, and this
is because it was itself constructed by the Ottomans hundreds of years prior and serves
to link two different sides of the river, though it actually doesn't connect areas of
separate ethnic groups.
The bridge itself was destroyed by Croats during the fighting in 1993, and then ceremonially
rebuilt by the international community in 2004 as a kind of symbol that ethnic strife
was now over, and unity now prevailed throughout the area.
Though almost all the Serbians have fled the city, Muslims and Croats do both now occupy
the place.
And as geographers Guy Robinson and Alma Pobrik of Kingston University and the University
of Sarajevo explain, based on the results of their research amongst communities in that
city, the bridge as a symbol of unity is unquestionably deceptive.
Before 1992, the city was actually the place with the highest incidence of religious intermarriage,
but now Croats and Muslims live apart, albeit interlaced in the urban fabric.
In the process, the two communities have built almost parallel worlds, layered right on top
of each other.
As Robinson and Pobrik explain, the city has two football teams.
There are two hospitals, two universities.
Indeed, the town has two bus services.
For Croats, the bridge itself, linked to Ottoman history, symbolizes Muslim domination.
So despite the best efforts of the international community, the dream of a new unified national
identity free from sectarian feeling has largely failed.
The UN Mostar move amongst one another as if they're in two different ethnic worlds.
And yet, things may not be as bad as all that.
A survey was conducted in 2005 by the political geographer John O'Loughlin at the University
of Colorado to try to get at how people in the city felt about one another.
In particular, he was searching for any indicators that these groups interacted at all.
The survey determined that for 41% of respondents in the city, all or most of their friends
were from their own ethnic nationality.
Now this means, of course, that a majority of people in Mostar have friends from beyond
their own ethnic community.
People further reported that they wanted more interactions with people from outside their
community.
Despite some of the worst violence in recent European history and an ethnically divided
urban landscape, the boundaries of narrow ethnic chauvinism, it seems, are punctured
frequently.
So what do we make of all this?
We have to conclude, from the case of Mostar, that the fabric of inter-communal bonds is
fragile.
It's fragile enough to be pretty fully shattered by inter-ethnic conflict.
We'd be foolish to imagine, in other words, that places like Iraq, which is a place where
conflict between Sunni and Shia Muslims have led to the purging of whole neighborhoods and
towns of historic minorities, we'd be foolish to imagine that such places are suddenly going
to settle back in anything like ethnic pluralism even long after that conflict is over.
We can also conclude that people have a remarkable and strange capacity to live amongst one another
without really living with one another.
The subtle and overt separations of Croats and Muslims in Mostar shows the incredible
ability of people to live as if they were in two different cities.
To the degree that these separations might be anything but equal, this has the makings
of an unpleasant future.
Having said this, it would seem that no ethnic walls are impregnable and that even in places
like Mostar, the possibility of diverse ethnic communities coming to terms with one another
within a single political geography are not hopeless by any means.
Time will tell, but Mostar provides us with a picture of the political geographical future
that's neither a happy multi-ethnic paradise nor one marred by inhuman ongoing horror.
These stories are anecdotal, they're anecdotal ones and they're selected from a whole world
of ongoing change, but I think they do give us a glimpse into the Earth's future, which
is one where geographic differences are likely to persist even as they change.
I think these cases also reinforce some of the larger points in the course because what
I wanted to show in this course first is that the world is filled with geographic differences,
economic differences, cultural differences, environmental differences and political differences.
Those differences aren't pre-given, they're the product of human actions and those differences
also form into patterns, patterns we may even be able to read on a map.
Reading these patterns provides a glimpse at how human, economic, social, political,
environmental and cultural systems work, how we work.
I hope what I've shown then is that reading geographical patterns is something geographers
do.
My second goal in the course was to show that these patterns are always in a state of change.
Human beings inherit the geographies they find around them and these may impact their
life chances, their cultural norms, their political opportunities and their resources
that they have at their disposal.
But human beings and their economies, cultures and societies are constantly reshaping these
patterns and relationships.
People are always remaking the world and changing the geographies they inhabit and explaining
those geographical changes, I hope I've shown, is also something that geographers do.
My third goal in this course was to show that our current era is one of aggressive acceleration
of many of the changes that geographers study.
But as we've seen, this acceleration doesn't change the fundamental fact of geographic
difference.
In that way, globalization most certainly does not spell the end of the study of geography.
In a sense, it really sets the stage for a whole new generation of people to learn about
the world, a world that never ever seems to sit still.
This means that the demand for geography and geographers is stronger than ever and unlikely
to go away anytime soon.
Which brings me to my final and perhaps most obvious goal in this course, which is to make
you as interested in the work of geographers as I am.
My colleagues around the world, they do a lot of things.
They measure crop yields, they survey disaster survivors, they interview urban planners and
they create mathematical models about shipping, and yes, they even draw maps, but what they
all have in common is a remarkable ability to communicate really unexpected things about
the world and the people who live in the world, to tell earth stories.
In this sense, they're really all still geographers.
Through the practice of geography, writing the world, they help us to understand how
our world works, and that's where I hope the journey in this course has taken you.
Thank you very much for joining me.
You have my permission to go and explore the world.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.
