Imagine, for a moment, a landscape of green, brown and black.
Block upon block of crude makeshift housing with neighborhood-sized mounds of garbage and streams of sewage.
Follow these streams as they feed into riverways, slick with luminous rainbows of spilled oil.
Imagine open-air slaughterhouses where cattle and goats are roasted over the flames of burning tires.
Smoke billows and blackens the sky.
Shadows and light crawl across this landscape day and night, created by spontaneous, almost random blazes of fire bursting from a labyrinth of pipelines and monstrous machinery.
All of this is mysteriously maintained by the people that dwell there, carrying rusty tools, sweating, and covered in thick black resin as they move from place to place.
This isn't a description from a modern adaptation of Dante's Inferno. This description comes instead from the Niger Delta in the country of Nigeria.
Geographer Michael Watts from the University of California and National Geographic photographer Ed Kashi captured images like these of the Niger Delta and published them in their book, Curse of the Black Gold.
The pictures are startling and disturbing, but they're also fascinating.
They're images of severe poverty amidst a vast production system for oil that actually produces enormous wealth.
After all, in Nigeria, oil provides only a little less than half the gross domestic product, a more than $50 billion annual export boom for the country.
That's an awful lot of money.
Why then, it's reasonable to ask, is that country's gross domestic product per capita is shocking $2,800?
That's a figure that is less than half that of oil poor Egypt, and it's 15 times smaller than that of the United States.
In this lecture, we'll discuss the wealth and poverty of nations.
First, we'll review the distribution of economic activity and development around the world, emphasizing that different metrics, different numbers, tells very different things.
And then we'll build on what we learned in the last lecture on the colonial legacy of dependency and on the geographic concept of uneven development.
And we'll explore the many forces that conspire to keep poor places poor, including natural resources, governance and institutions, and national debt among others.
And we'll see how the persistence of poverty in some parts of the world, even in the face of coordinated development efforts, shows that many forces combine to keep poor countries poor.
But first, we need to think of the actual geography of wealth and poverty. Where are the rich places? Where are the poor places?
Well, answers to these questions come from the field of national income accounting, and this is an area that is rife with pitfalls.
This is especially true when we start to make maps.
As you'll recall from one of our earliest lectures, maps are the product of decisions made by the mapmaker, and maps of income are no exception.
That's because there are a bunch of different statistics to express wealth and poverty, and none of them are the same, and they can all be aggregated at different scales.
In other words, two different maps of poverty around the world can look very, very different.
Let's start with gross domestic product, known commonly as GDP.
GDP is a statistic that annually adds together all the economically productive activities within a national boundary,
including the production and sale of goods, the sale of services, and rents, and so on.
It's usually a darn big number, even in very poor places.
A really big GDP is like the one for the United States, which was more than $15 trillion in 2012.
So several nations play up here in the big leagues like China, Japan, and the nations of the European Union, all with GDPs that are larger than $5 trillion.
Some countries fare very poorly on this index, especially countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, but even India has a GDP of $1.8 trillion, and that's by no means an especially wealthy nation.
So with this in mind, we can recognize one of the problems with GDP as a statistic.
It simply tends to favor big countries.
When there are a lot of people, there's a lot of economic activity, it's simply a multiplier.
Now, if we map the world in terms of GDP per capita, things begin to shake out a little differently.
This measure, which simply calculates the GDP and divides it by the population, makes a very different kind of map.
Some economic behemoths like China begin to fall into a kind of middle class at around $9,000 per year,
and very small but vibrant economies begin to jump out, on the other hand.
Iceland's GDP is one-tenth that of the United States, but on a per capita basis, they're only 20% lower.
In a GDP per capita map of the world, the U.S., Australia, and Europe still stick out,
but several other countries appear in a prominent second-tier place, including Brazil, Mexico, and Turkey.
These are all places with very high rates of growth in GDP as well, which is a point we'll return to in our next lecture.
Another way to map wealth might be to break GDP down to a subnational unit,
showing states or counties or regions or their equivalent instead of whole nations.
Such a map of GDP density shows a very different world, one that highlights especially the wealth of urban areas
and corridors all over the world relative to poor rural areas.
Here, the economic boom regions of northeastern and coastal China would rise to prominence relative to the extremely poor areas
of western, internal China, and Tibet.
One might conclude from a map like this quite rightly, that the biggest variation isn't between rich and poor countries,
but it's between urban and rural places.
Of course, formal economic activity is only one way to map development.
Many things that are important, after all, are not captured by such a statistic.
In many countries, a lot of exchange isn't monetized.
Instead, it takes the form of a barger.
And if we think about a huge area of work, which is household labor, things like cooking and child-rearing,
which are very important to the economy, these are left entirely out of income accounting.
This means that most of what women do in many parts of the world is fully unaccounted for entirely.
At the same time, some cash transactions are never recorded and they're difficult to estimate since they're illegal.
The global opium trade is an obvious example.
The northern opium trade route, all by itself, which runs out of Afghanistan, across Tajikistan,
Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan, to Russia, is estimated to exceed $13 billion in annual value.
That's as measured by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
Now, the contribution of this activity to these countries' overall economies is probably not trivial.
It's probably important, but it wouldn't appear at all in maps of GDP or GDP per capita.
Quality of life is also really poorly captured by GDP-type statistics.
While in general, very, very low GDP per capita is unquestionably associated with tough living due to poor sanitation, disease, bad education, and so on.
People in many countries may experience a pretty good quality of life even though the overall size and vibrancy of the economy is low,
and there are a few statistics that seek to measure this.
One of the most important is the Human Development Index, or HDI, which combines life expectancy, education, and income together to get a fuller picture about development in a country.
HDI, as it's usually called, maps fairly closely to overall wealth per capita.
The poorest nations throughout Sub-Saharan Africa, for example, also have some of the world's lowest HDI values, so they map together.
But some interesting things do appear using this method.
Some countries of equal overall poverty have wildly different HDI figures.
Only in part to expenditures on public services like hospitals and schools.
Cuba, for example, has a per capita GDP not so different than many Central American or Caribbean nations, including El Salvador and Belize,
but its HDI, its Human Development Index, is far higher.
And this is a result of state investments in things like health clinics.
Equatorial Guinea, on the other hand, has a booming GDP per capita, and that owes to its huge export economy from mining.
Its Human Development Index is rock bottom, on the other hand, comparable to countries like Swaziland, who have per capita GDPs nearly a quarter the size of Equatorial Guinea.
This is the first hint that development can be a pretty tricky thing to achieve, even where economic activity is strong.
So, there are quite a few different ways to map the geography of wealth and poverty, and we need to be careful when we talk about them at a global scale.
Nonetheless, there are places of persistent poverty, including especially Sub-Saharan Africa, which tend to perform poorly no matter how you map them.
So, why do they remain so poor? Is it a lack of natural resources? Is it bad governance? Or is it something else? And that's what we'll turn to now.
It'd be natural to assume that poverty and wealth would have a great deal to do with the availability of natural resources within a country, totally intuitive.
And there's plenty of evidence to demonstrate that this is true.
We need only think of the oil-wealthy nations of Southwest Asia, including Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and others, to reach the hypothesis that national resources are tantamount to national wealth.
In Norway, for example, oil and natural gas receipts support a state investment fund, which is called a sovereign wealth fund.
These directly and indirectly support its relatively prosperous citizens.
A similar fund is actually used in the state of Alaska, I might add.
But as we've learned at the start of this lecture, when we looked at the Niger Delta, some of the most resource-rich parts of the world are also among the poorest places on Earth.
In fact, there are numerous examples that link the availability of major resources to poverty.
And we saw this in the last lecture as well.
Many Sub-Saharan African nations have valuable, exportable resources, especially mineral resources.
And yet these countries, they're consistently ranked amongst the world's poorest countries by any of the measures that we've outlined previously, GDP, GDP per capita, and the Human Development Index.
And this has led a lot of geographers and economists to wonder whether having such resources might actually be bad for a national economy.
And this is often referred to as a resource curse.
The idea here is that the presence of valuable but non-renewable resources like diamonds or oil depress economic outcomes over time.
And this is often attributed to the fact that investments in resource extraction, mining or whatever, sometimes come at the expense of investments into industrial development.
The effect is sometimes referred to as the Dutch disease, so named for a decline in manufacturing in the Netherlands that followed the discovery of natural gas in the 1950s.
Primary economic activity, in other words, shoulders out secondary activity, leaving a country in a state of dependency, not so different than the colonial period.
Recall that petroleum and petroleum products in Nigeria account for 95% of its export earnings.
Other parts of the explanation point to the tendency of resource revenues to concentrate in very, very small numbers of hands, especially through corruption.
Returning to the example of Nigeria, roughly 85% of oil revenues go to only 1% of the nation's population.
Worse yet, according to the World Bank, since 1960, of the $400 billion total earned from oil, something on the order of $100 billion simply went missing.
Now, Nigeria is clearly an extreme case, but many others exist worldwide.
A country like Angola, rich in diamonds, also performs very poorly in terms of development.
This is in part a question of depending on a single or small number of exports, especially those that have very volatile prices.
The pejorative term Banana Republic, invoking national economies depending entirely on bananas, was coined to describe this phenomenon, but it actually refers to all natural resources.
In their now classic study of this issue, economists Jeffrey Sachs and Andrew Warner showed that economies with the highest ratio of natural resource exports to overall GDP,
so in other words, they depend heavily on natural resources.
These areas experience the lowest economic growth, and these kinds of export economies they basically demonstrate aren't especially valuable.
It should also be noted that in countries that are very poor in natural resources, they can actually do very well economically, depending on how other sectors of the economy develop.
The tiny nation of Singapore is one of the wealthiest on earth, owing to largely its position in global oceanic trade in the last century,
switching into a center then for global finance in the 21st century.
No resources to speak of, but enormous wealth.
One of the first things we might think about, the geography of wealth, is that it tracks the geography of resources, but this clearly isn't always true.
It may indeed be the reverse.
So what else might account for the presence and persistence of poverty in some places?
Well, one of the next key factors we might consider, and it's one hinted at when we were talking about natural resources, is the quality of the institutions in a country,
especially their transparency and lack of corruption.
Like transparency, what I mean is the openness of a political system,
and the degree to which citizens living somewhere have a pretty clear idea about how transactions occur, where money goes, and the rules that govern those things.
Where transparency is low, in other words, corruption tends to be high, since the activities of officials and powerful people occur in secrecy.
And rules that control the flow of resources are broken or nonexistent or obscure.
And you can immediately think of how this might be bad for economic development.
If a service is being provided by a private contractor, for example, and the job is given to somebody who paid a bribe,
instead of somebody who made the lowest bid or who showed the most efficiency or effectiveness, you're likely to wind up with really poor services.
Or if timber is cut illegally because someone is paid under the table, you're likely to lose valuable timber resources that might have benefited the public.
And so on.
And with that in mind, a map of corruption worldwide might be predicted to correlate with a map of poverty.
Corruption is pretty hard to map, but it's not impossible.
For example, it's possible to survey a population and determine what percentage of people has paid a bribe in the last year or witnessed a corrupt activity.
The organization Transparency International has done just that each year.
They assemble surveys of people from around the world and combine them to provide an index of places that seem to be more rife with bribery and less transparent overall.
And the results are interesting.
Many central Asian states perform very poorly, along with military governments like that of Myanmar, as well as war-torn Iraq.
Within regions, there's some important variation as well.
In South America, for example, the public sectors of Chile and Uruguay are perceived as less corrupt, more transparent than other countries in the region.
In Africa, Botswana performs far better than many of its neighbors.
Does this amount to anything in terms of development?
It might.
Correlating the Corruption Perceptions Index, which was created by Transparency International, with Human Development Index, run a graph, there does appear to be some kind of relationship.
While countries with the best HDI ratings had a wide range of perceived levels of corruption, making things a bit unclear, the countries with the lowest HDI ratings very consistently perform badly in terms of corruption.
Haiti, Sudan, and North Korea are among the countries at the bottom of both lists, for example.
Now, this raises some interesting questions.
Are places poor because they're corrupt, or are they corrupt because they're poor?
More importantly, what is it that made both countries corrupt and poor?
Is there a larger set of economic forces at work here?
Given that resource dependency and corruption are at least weak indicators of development,
the next natural geographic question is, what are the economic and geographical relationships that tend to reinforce or coincide with these conditions?
The two most important of these, from a global point of view, are debt and trade, considered debt.
International debt is a product of experiments and development actually performed on poor nations during the period just after colonialism and the Second World War.
At that time, when many countries in the world were just emerging as new nations, it was strongly believed that creating large-scale infrastructure,
along with an influx of European and American-style institutions in education and governance and banking, would encourage development.
This perspective is known as modernization theory, made famous by the economist Walt Whitman-Rostow, his 1960 book.
The stages of economic growth stress that capital investment, on a large scale, into fundamental and basic economic infrastructure,
would provide a springboard for poor nations to become wealthy.
And this idea became widespread, and poor nations began to accumulate significant levels of debt in order to make the investments recommended by institutions
like the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund to make this happen.
The idea here is that the West, the U.S. and the United Kingdom in particular, came to be wealthy through certain types of investments,
and by developing certain types of institutions, so other countries should simply be able to follow in their footsteps.
Now, the success of this approach relies on an enormous assumption that Western-style culture and governance are what's good for everyone,
and indeed, it's what made the U.S. and the U.K. wealthy in the first place.
And this bad assumption is what geographer Richard Peake draws attention to in his landmark study of the geography of development.
These assumptions, he suggests, have serious problems.
We've already examined some reasons to question this approach in previous lectures.
As we've learned, the so-called miracle of the rise of the West as an economic center of power has little to do with the modern culture,
as it did with the influx of a lot of capital during the long colonial period.
Nevertheless, this modernization blueprint went global.
Countries around the world borrowed at a terrific rate to build infrastructure that was supposed to result in development.
And as a result, debt in the underdeveloped world tripled between 1976 and 1982,
amounting to hundreds of billions of dollars of debt.
At that time, a lot of money was circulating in the global economy,
owing to the early oil boom in the 1970s, which made it pretty easy to get credit, even for the poorest countries.
A map of international debt at that time would highlight some of the poorest nations in the world, especially in Africa and Latin America.
And then, just as suddenly as it began, it came to a crashing halt.
Money dried up in the international markets in the 1980s,
and the poorest places in the world were suddenly unable to make their interest payments.
Their economies were basically put into receivership,
and the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank came to control them very closely.
So, as Dick Pete points out, three-quarters of the countries in Latin America and two-thirds of those in Africa
were under the supervision of the IMF and the World Bank by the mid-1980s.
Now, consider the implications of this condition for development,
where countries are forced to make significant debt payments equal to a large proportion, actually, of their annual earnings.
There's really little capital left over to invest in economic growth or industrial development or even basic human needs.
According to geographer Diana Liverman and her colleagues, by the 1990s,
debt for many sub-Saharan African countries had topped 50% of their GDPs.
The debt was half what they were making, and debt service payments every year were higher than all of their earnings from exports.
International debt, in other words, had become a shackle on development for poor nations instead of a liberating tool.
So, what about some evidence?
The greed of which debt has been a major component of worldwide underdevelopment
is best demonstrated when we see what happens when it's erased or forgiven,
because that's exactly what happened, and the effect is extraordinary.
In 2005, a decision was made by leading world powers, including the U.S.,
to simply write off the debt of the 18 poorest countries in the world, 14 of which were in Africa.
And this had a $50 billion price tag, but it also had a powerful impact.
As Liverman notes, there had been a notable improvement in human development across sub-Saharan Africa in the last decade,
including major improvements in life expectancy, literacy, and economic integration.
So, though Africa remains underdeveloped, its progress since the time of debt relief is notable.
So, it's clear that the geography of natural resource dependency, the geography of corruption,
are often tied to the geography of debt, and this makes debt relief a very powerful tool for global development.
Having said this, underdevelopment persists, and precisely in the parts of the world
where it has prevailed since the middle of the 20th century, consider again the case of Nigeria.
Despite having had $12 billion worth of its debt bought out in 2006, the crushing poverty there continues largely unabated.
What then, beyond natural resources and corruption and debt, accounts for this problem?
For geographers, the answer may lie in structural relationships that were sent into motion a century prior.
As we discussed in the last lecture, the colonial system that ended in the 1900s left in place the same trade relations that had prevailed before.
This tended to mean countries in peripheral trade relationships tended to export little, have few trade partners,
and depend on a slim wedge of resources.
For example, international trade from Africa in 1950, this is the period just prior to and during decolonization,
it had few notable characteristics.
Total trade from Africa represented just a few percent of the global total of trade altogether.
Not a lot for such a populous place.
Not a lot being exported.
And two, it was dominated by the export of primary extractive materials, especially minerals,
which as we've discussed tended to have low and declining value relative to finished goods.
And three, its trade was almost entirely conducted with Europe.
France tended to trade with its previous colonial countries in West Africa, for example,
as the United Kingdom did with the former colonies of Great Britain.
And by the 1990s, after decades of development, the remarkable fact is almost nothing has changed in that regard.
The percentage of the overall global share of trade coming out of Africa had actually declined.
And there was little or no sign that Africa had enlarged its trade partnerships more globally
or diversified its suite of exports in any way.
Billions of dollars of debt and decades of effort at transforming the economy, but very little had changed.
For many geographers, the conclusion must be that underpinning all the other components of underdevelopment,
including corruption and debt, is something else.
Specifically, it hints at the hard wiring of the global economy through a persistent geography of trade
where value accumulates in a few urban centers and even those only developing countries
that had a previous advantage during the colonial and early industrial eras.
Now, according to this, we might ask, what could break the lock on this flow of trade?
What kinds of economic change might be necessary to rewire the global economy?
And these are questions we'll come to shortly, but their significance depends on us recognizing
how stubborn underdevelopment can be in the first place.
And it's that recognition that I've tried to create here for you.
In this lecture, I've shown that poverty persists worldwide despite two centuries of meteoric, worldwide economic growth.
I've also shown that the way we measure and map economies and poverty can vary depending on our metrics.
So we need to be really careful about how we think about and describe, especially map, economic development.
Even so, I've shown that certain geographic regions have been more consistently underdeveloped than others.
I've demonstrated that though it's an attractive prediction, resource richness and strong natural endowments
may not correlate with economic development for a country and indeed may result in the reverse.
I've also tried to show how corruption and a lack of transparency are key contributors to economic stagnation.
And finally, I've emphasized again that the geographic distribution of economic growth is prefigured by relationships of trade.
That's the big word, which can be very resistant to change.
These persistent relationships are what the geographer Neil Smith described as uneven development.
This term is one he gave to the modern global economy to suggest that unevenness was actually necessary to a specific economic configuration.
For Smith, the booming economies in one place were inevitably tied to stagnation in other places.
Modern economic relationships had a specific and really unfair geography, in other words.
This is kind of depressing, actually.
But this idea does seem to help explain the persistence of uneven economic growth after the 19th and 20th centuries.
And it also demonstrates again the central theme of this course.
Once a set of economic relationships have created an economic geography, that geography has a strong influence over future relationships.
We create the geography of the world around us, but it influences us profoundly in turn.
Smith's formulation also raises a further question.
What if those economic relationships were to actually change?
Would their geographies change?
If trade shifted, where would wealth go to then?
Where would new growth occur?
And where would new stagnation occur?
These are questions that are way far from being academic ones, as it turns out the kind of economic change that would shift the terms of trade is going on right now.
Since the late 20th century and now quite evidently in the 21st century, it's clear that the modern world economy centered on Europe and North America
and built on these core periphery relationships has itself gone through dramatic upheaval.
The emerging world economy centered in Asia and built on whole new geographic relationships of trade and transport
is one in which we find ourselves transitioning through revolutionary economic change right now.
Consider sub-Saharan Africa again.
In the year 2000, not that long ago, the proportion of African total exports to China was less than 2% and amounted to less than $5 billion.
That's African exports to China.
But by 2008, this Chinese market was closer to 20% of Africa's trade and it had a value exceeding $50 billion.
Holy cow, this represents nothing less than a revolution.
What international development, massive borrowing, and countless economists couldn't accomplish in over a century?
Chinese growth may have accomplished in less than a decade.
But what does that mean for Africa and for China and for the United States?
Thinking about this most recent change through the lens of economic geography gives us insight into the space economy in which we live now.
And it's to this new global economy we turn in the next lecture.
