When Hernan Cortes and his fellow conquistadors entered the grand market in Tenochtitlan
in 1519, they were entering the capital of the Aztec Empire and one of the largest cities
in the world.
This was a commercial hub that would have dwarfed any of the cities of Spain, indeed
most of the capitals of Europe.
This city was built in the center of a huge complex man-made lake system and was studded
with pyramids and great palaces.
Tenochtitlan and its surrounding towns had a population of maybe a million people.
Trade goods in the market square would have come from places as widespread as the Ohio
River Valley of North America and the Andes of distance South America.
This was a major hemispheric hub of economic activity.
Like its counterparts in China and South Asia, which I described in the last lecture, this
market represented part of a vibrant global economy, one with many nodes distributed around
the world, all vying for economic supremacy.
But within a few short decades, a swift and profound transformation would occur.
Millions upon millions of native peoples would die in the Americas, in part falling
to the sword, but mostly carried away by devastating disease.
And at the same time, new settlers from Europe would hasten the intentional and non-intentional
flow of untold numbers of plants and animals back and forth across the Atlantic, creating
a totally new global ecological order.
This would all be sped along by the expansion of plantation economies in the new colonies
of the Americas and elsewhere.
And on top of all this, gold and especially silver from the Americas, both stolen directly
from native peoples or mined in deposits across the Americas, flowed into European coffers,
tipping the balance of trade in favor of newly emerging European colonial powers.
If Nochtitlán itself would be destroyed by 1530, its lakes drained and its pyramids
raised to make way for the new Spanish capital, what we today know as Mexico City.
And with incredible speed, a remarkable new global system of economic and ecological connections
would upend the old one.
With the depopulation of native peoples, the expansion of plantation economies, the flow
of gold and silver into Europe, and the growth of a transatlantic trade in goods and enslaved
peoples.
In a few years, the old world system would be thrown into disarray.
The resulting new order, which centered on Europe and later North America, began to rise.
In short, total economic and ecological upheaval created a new system that would last for almost
400 years.
The events of 1492 and the years after really, they deserved their own course.
But in the next 30 minutes, I'll highlight some of the key elements of this period to
make just one single point.
Much of what we know as the current distribution of modern economic activities is rooted in
the often tragic events of 1492.
That's when new connections rewrote global economic geography, creating an international
division of labor that would dominate the world until well into the 20th century.
I'll begin by describing the Colombian exchange.
This is a term geographers and historians use to describe the complex movement of people
and species and things back and forth between the Americas and the old world during the
16th and 17th centuries.
And I'll then describe the profound influence this exchange had in boosting the activity
and centrality of Europe in the world economic system, setting the stage for colonialism
and the industrial revolution.
Finally, I'll describe the economic geography of the unevenly developed world that was formed
in those years, which lasted until the late 20th century.
But first, the Colombian exchange.
And when we last left the global economic system in the 14th and 15th centuries, we
found a world system of intensive global trade with economic nodes spread between East Asia,
South Asia, Southwest Asia, and Africa, and yes, also Europe.
These were linked by long range transport and bills of credit, financial partnerships,
and improving cartography, better maps.
Regional exchange systems had become linked into a set of connections that allowed silk
to flow into the ports of Venice and Genoa in Europe and made it possible for Indian
textiles and jewelry to appear in the imperial courts of China.
That's globalization in 1350, 1400.
The Americas, though they were really economically vibrant on their own, they were isolated from
all this activity.
This would all change with Columbus and all those who came after.
Now, as we know from the earlier lecture, Spanish and Portuguese sailors and soldiers
were by no means the first people to arrive in the new world of the Americas.
The Vikings had colonized Newfoundland centuries prior, Chinese sailing vessels may have landed
on the shores of the Americas in the 1400s.
The native peoples were themselves migrants from across the Bering Land Bridge tens of
thousands of years earlier than that.
So people from Asia and Europe had already been to the Americas before 1492, no question.
But this time, this time it was going to be different.
This time the arrival of European vessels and the sustained commerce between the Americas
and Africa and Europe and Asia would become a genetic economic revolution that would change
the world never to turn back.
Starting back and forth between Western Europe and Africa to the Americas, a new sustained
connection would now rewrite the global economy.
A quick footnote is necessary here.
Why did Europeans, especially the Portuguese and the Spanish, make such an early and successful
goal of it in the Americas?
Why them?
Why not Indians or Chinese sailors instead?
The answer, in short, is wind.
The direction of winds in the tropics around the world is always the same.
But trade winds, as they're called, go from east to west.
Once Portuguese and Spanish sailors had sturdy enough vessels and good enough maps and a
foothold on the Canary Islands, which are already far out in the Atlantic, they'd have
had the wind at their backs.
They'd be crossing the shortest ocean route between the Old World and the New World, that
short span of ocean between West Africa and the Caribbean.
There's no coincidence that Columbus's first landfall in his first voyage was in what we
now call the Bahamas.
These lie due west of the Canaries.
Now it was a huge undertaking, but it was the easiest of all possible crossings, at
least judging from the laws of nature.
In these same latitudes on the opposite side of the continent, by comparison, Chinese vessels
would have been sailing directly into the wind and would have been crossing a distance
twice as far.
These sailors may well have landed in North America before 1492, cycling around a more
northern route, but this wasn't the easiest and most sustainable route.
That lay instead on the other side, the eastern shore of the Americas.
Now to be sure, the Portuguese and Spanish navigators of this period were unsurpassed
in knowledge and expertise.
They were quite extraordinary.
I am quite sure I would not have measured up against the men who signed on to sail into
an unknown horizon.
Nevertheless, they benefited a lot from their geography and they did indeed arrive.
Actually Christopher Columbus's diaries are available to read and at the urging of one
of my colleagues, I've actually read them as a shout out here to Dr. Kendra McSweeney
at Ohio State University who made me sit down and read these things.
The journals are actually, they make remarkable reading.
They're intuitive, they're accessible and they're a little disturbing.
They remind us kind of how uncertain this whole thing must have seemed at the time,
how strange these new surroundings must have been for European sailors.
It's just a little sad that we don't have the handwritten journals of local Caribbean
islanders to describe what they saw as Columbus landed, in any case.
It's not the first landfall of Europeans in the New World that is the most important thing
about our story.
Instead, it was what happens afterwards.
What happened was threefold.
First, an ecological transformation would thoroughly transform both the old and new
world through the exchange of plants, animals and diseases.
And second, Europeans would suddenly find themselves with access to enormous quantities
of silver, enough to help break the stranglehold of Asian trade.
And finally, and most importantly, Europeans would use their new wealth and the new environments
that they had under their control to create a new kind of economy, based on plantations
and uneven trade.
On the first point, European people didn't come to the Americas alone.
They came with countless ecological allies, those are domesticated animals and food crops
and countless other wild critters and plants and microbes.
As historian Alfred Crosby describes in his incredibly exciting book, Ecological Imperialism,
which I have to say was a book that fundamentally changed the way I look at everything, these
new species actually worked together.
They were kind of a team, for example.
Foreign pasture grasses came across from Europe in vessels, often hitchhiking in cargo holds,
and these grasses aggressively displaced native varieties in America, but they had help.
European cattle ruminated on these grasses, which had co-evolved with them back in Africa
and Europe, and the cattle spread the seeds further.
Both dandelions and Kentucky bluegrass are actually natives of Europe, and where European
cows and goats went, dandelions and bluegrass would follow, and vice versa.
Crosby describes these collections of animals and plants as portmanteau biota, and the metaphor
he's using here suggests that the Europeans opened up their suitcases, their portmanteau,
in a sense, when arriving in a new world, and then out-jumped all of the ecology of
the old world, cattle, grasses, pigs, weeds, horses, and these species very quickly overran
many of the native environments of the Americas, making a new kind of hybrid ecology, stretching
from the highlands of the Andes to the forests of New England, which are filled with non-native
species to this day.
The Anthropocene, this era we explored earlier in the course when human beings have become
the prime actors in a global environment that has its roots right here.
And of all the biota that jumped out of the European portmanteaus, the most serious one
was illness.
Africans, Asians, and Europeans had some immunity to the countless diseases of the old world,
owing to their ongoing contact, their mutual infection over thousands of years.
Natives of the new world, on the other hand, had none.
In fact, many of the most common diseases in Europe, including the common cold, are probably
derived from European, Asian, and African domesticated animals.
Native Americans had few domesticated animals at all, and no experience of old world illnesses.
They were immediately stricken.
Smallpox.
Smallpox is one of the most infamous and terrible of the diseases to sweep through native populations,
but there are a lot of others, including new respiratory and dysentery diseases of all
kinds.
Now, a handful of diseases did go in the other direction, from the Americas to Europe.
These probably included syphilis, but mostly this exchange was terrifically uneven, unidirectional,
and was visited terribly on Native American people.
Trying to figure out how many Native peoples were killed by diseases really difficult, but
those who died of disease undoubtedly far outnumbered those killed through direct violence.
There were between 50 and 100 million Native peoples in the new world in 1491, far fewer
than 20 million of them would remain by the 17th century.
80 to 90 percent mortality.
It is almost impossible to imagine a tragedy on this scale.
Imagine living through it.
But it was nevertheless a clear byproduct of the new geographical connections made by
transatlantic commerce and colonialism.
It's important to point out that not all exchanges moved only from east to west.
In fact, many domesticated foods and products of Native American peoples made the reverse
transit from the Americas to the old world.
The things that came in the other direction, they numbered too many to fully list here,
but they include some of the most important history-changing plants in human legacy.
Consider the list.
Potatoes, maize, vanilla, rubber, cacao, and tobacco.
Wow.
These products would become crucial to the global economy in just a few years, but were
all unknown to Europeans or Asians prior to 1492.
So try to imagine Italian food without tomatoes.
What would Indian cooking be without the hot chili pepper?
I find that personally unthinkable, and yet both of these were brought back as part of
the colonization of the New World.
And plants weren't the only thing that colonizers brought home.
They brought home precious metals, especially gold and silver, lots of silver.
Now, as you recall from the last lecture, Europe wasn't especially well-endowed geologically
with silver deposits.
The lack of this species made it hard for Europeans to break into Asian markets.
But American mines and the wealth of Native kingdoms turned this around really quickly.
According to the great global economic historian, Andre Gunner Frank, 17,000 tons of silver
moved from the Americas to Europe in the 16th century.
27,000 tons flowed in the 17th century, and during the 18th century, just in time to
feed an industrial boom, 54,000 tons of silver found its way from the New World to the Old
World.
And Europeans didn't sit on all that money and hoard it either.
They spent it like crazy and invested in a big way.
European traders bought and shipped all kinds of Chinese and Indian goods, textiles, and
silk.
Europe moved from the sidelines of the global trade system to its center.
But more than this, more than the newfound wealth, well-integrated global markets allowed
a newly born European industrial system coming into its own at the end of the 1700s to get
access to other markets around the world in a way that hadn't before.
Investments in infrastructure, shipping, and trade were fed by new wealth from the New World.
And European industry and commerce expanded as a result.
Spanish power in the New World gave way to Dutch and French colonial ambitions in Africa
and Asia, and was followed by those of the English.
But the overall trend was the same, growing wealth and reinvestment in industry and commerce.
The great trading companies of the 17th century boomed with these new investments in trade.
The British East India Company, backed by burgeoning merchant capital, was chartered
in 1600 to trade in cotton, silk, tea, and opium.
It actually came to directly rule over most of India until the 1850s.
These investments were especially aggressive in the development of new kinds of production
systems, specifically colonial plantations throughout the world.
A model of a colonial economy is complex, of course, but at bottom it's based on this
core concept.
Go or mine, basic primary goods like timber or cotton or tobacco, in colonial contexts
using extensive labor, including slaves, then import those materials to the home country,
process them in local industries, and re-export them, especially to the colonies.
The ecological opportunities provided by the New World, along with new colonies in Africa
and Asia, was perfect for this model.
Many of the important commodities needed large areas, warm or wet production conditions,
and lots of cheap labor.
Colonies provided most of this.
Take sugar.
Sugar cane was actually domesticated in Southeast Asia thousands of years ago, thousands of
years prior to the Columbian exchange.
Arab traders brought this rare commodity to North Africa, where it was grown to the degree
possible and traded in European markets.
Here it was until 1500 anyway, a necessarily rare commodity meant only four elites.
But the colonization of the Caribbean changed all of that.
Here was a warm, wet, tropical environment, far more like sugar's native Southeast Asia
than North Africa.
So with land under extensive plantation, massive amounts of sugar could be returned to Europe,
processed and resold on global markets.
The only problem was labor.
The Kareeb and Arawak tribes of that region had all been wiped out by disease during the
Columbian exchange, leaving few workers in what is a back-breaking industry.
And the answer, as we all know, came in the form of human bondage.
By the time the slave trade was done in the 19th century, an estimated 12 million Africans
would have been forcibly and violently removed from their homelands to labor in the New World.
South Africa, which had been a thriving food-exporting region with a large and increasingly well-organized
population, would be decimated for centuries.
Sugar was only one of the commodities involved in this economy, but it was an important one.
In the 18th and 19th century, especially in England, where workers began to work in factories
in large numbers, cheap sugar became more widely available and fed energy into the industrial
system, closing the circle, in a sense, for the new system of global trade.
And as with sugar, so forth, tobacco, timber, cotton, cacao, and countless other commodities
all around the world, a new economic geography was forming, a whole new space economy formed
during colonialism, which depended on labor-intensive activities and the production of raw materials
in the external appendages to be fed to the internal and increasingly industrialized core
of the economy.
So to summarize what I've said so far, we find on the eve of 1492 a widely distributed,
multi-sided global economy with Europe in an important but not dominant position.
With the conquest of the New World in the 1500s, new resources, wealth, and opportunities
accelerated economic activity across Europe.
Colonial economies began to arise, first centered in Spain and Portugal, but later in France,
the Netherlands, and England.
The model for this global economy was to capture the ecological and economic resources of other
parts of the world and develop the raw materials in those peripheral regions, import them to
the home country, process them in value-added industries, and then re-export them for profit.
And in many cases, maintaining this division of labor required deliberate tinkering and
often complete political control.
The emerging textile industry in England, for example, faced pretty serious competition
from sophisticated indigenous textile industries in India.
India had been a major textile exporter for centuries after all, long before British colonialism.
Indian textiles, including calicoes and muslins, were very popular in England.
And in order to make new English textile industry more competitive, British colonial officers
deliberately transformed the Indian economy.
So how did they do that?
Well, India had also long been a major producer of cotton.
So they expanded Indian cotton production, but at the same time, they controlled and reduced
textile exports from India to liberally reducing the competition for the textile mills in Manchester
and Lancashire.
The result was a new kind of division of labor, which would give England significant advantages
and India significant disadvantages.
But how does this work?
Geographers call this mercantile pattern of economic relationships a core and periphery
system.
And this is how it works.
First, you have to recall in the language of economic structure that we introduced in
the last lecture that the core specializes in secondary production, that is, manufacturing
and exporting goods, while the periphery specializes in primary production, which involves developing
and harnessing raw materials.
In this example, Britain has become the core producer and India has become the peripheral
producer.
So how does this give England an advantage?
Well, the core is the site where the greatest value is added through industrial and technological
development, where wealth is generated and goods are produced in abundance.
Generally, the core experiences a growth in economic prosperity and the ancillary benefits
that come with improved health and education and well-being come along with that.
The underlying activity of the core is rooted in access to raw materials and industrial inputs,
whether those materials are timber for the construction of ships.
In the 19th century, rubber and metal for automobiles in the 20th century, or rare earth
metals for computers and electronics in the 21st century.
In a core periphery model of the global economy, those inputs are produced outside the core
in places where labor power is stressed, where less industrial development has occurred and
where the economy is focused on primary production.
Those places tend to have a relatively depressed set of indicators for prosperity and education
and so on.
Now, the global economy has never functioned exactly like this abstraction, of course,
but at its height, the world colonial system had most of these elements.
It's important to point out that with the end of colonialism, many of these relationships
actually persisted.
The world only decolonized, actually, relatively recently after all.
The last African colonial possessions, for example, gained independence around 1980.
Djibouti gained independence in 1977 and Zimbabwe in 1980, and most of the formerly colonized
world remains heavily in primary extractive industries, mining, fishing, agriculture and
commodity production for decades after the global empires of the British and the French
and others disintegrated at the end of World War II.
Some of these production habits were really actually hardwired into the geography and infrastructure
of underdeveloped countries.
Many of the rail line connections in Africa, for example, were designed to connect inland
production areas to coastal export towns rather than to connect these internal places to one
another.
That's a classically colonial infrastructure.
It's enormously beneficial for exporting raw goods, but it's not a great one for creating
an integrated, independent, political formation.
It would take some time to undo what's already been written effectively in iron.
At the same time, for most of the 20th century, the main trading partners of underdeveloped
nations were industrial urban powers like France and Great Britain and the United States.
Colonial countries in Africa and Asia rarely traded with one another, but instead almost
exclusively traded with the core.
As a result, many formerly colonial countries in Africa and Asia and Latin America had major
export profiles during the middle and late 20th century that pretty much matched exactly
what they'd been exporting under colonialism.
Many countries remained effectively one product exporters for nearly a century.
In the year 2000, Cuba still depended on sugar for 35% of its export earnings.
Cacao, the primary ingredient in chocolate, represents 24% of Ghana's export income.
39% of Burkina Faso's exports are cotton lint.
Burundi depends on coffee.
Stick with me here for more than 75% of its export earnings.
These are not what you would call diversified portfolios, and China and India, once global
economic leaders, became laggards throughout the 20th century.
While European nations in the United States and Canada urbanized radically during the
early 20th century, these regions remained persistently rural, although that changed
recently very, very dramatically.
So to review, what we've learned in this lecture is that the global economic system
of the 15th century was thrown into upheaval when the old world economy was connected to
the new world of the Americas.
Specifically, the arrival of Europeans in the new world precipitated three key changes
to the position of Europe in global trade.
First, new world settlement and the tragic and violent elimination of native peoples
and the rise of the brutal slave trade that came with it brought about a great global
economic change.
This opened new commodity markets.
It allowed new locations for European economic activity and expanded the productive resources
available to European powers.
Second, this colonization also heralded a flood of silver into European markets, which
helped underwrite expanded colonization and industrial investment and buying power for
European traders and investors.
And finally, it heralded the rise of a global scale core and periphery model of economic
development, one that would persist for a long time after the demise of formal colonialism.
The modern world economy was born in this sense in 1492.
And as geographer Jim Blout puts it most plainly in his book 1492, Europe took the lead in the
modern era, and I'm quoting now, quote, because of that continent's location near America
and because the immense wealth obtained through colonialism in America and elsewhere, not
because Europeans were brighter or bolder or more progressive or more rational.
In short, geography really matters.
More generally, what I've tried to stress in this lecture are the benefits of a geographic
perspective on global economic change.
For the modern world economy, along with the one that came before it, at least since the
12th century, economic geography has been determined by relationships, relationships
over space.
And it's definitely true that some areas or places are endowed with different resources
and climate and economic activities.
They can't export sugar from Greenland, of course, at least I wouldn't recommend it.
Nevertheless, local endowments and conditions are often not as important as external connections
and linkages.
The emergence of the first world economy in the 13th and 14th centuries produced great
wealth in different parts of the world by integrating them through trade.
The great capitals of Asia, Africa, and India emerged in this period, along with some in
Europe, owing to their connections to an increasingly global economy.
As we've learned here, though, when the global economy shifted, its geography shifted, too.
New places and capitals began to overtake older ones as the center of economic action
moved around.
And in this sense, the global economy is a system, but it's not a static one.
It's always changing, moving restlessly around, creatively building some places and some sectors
and industries while mercilessly destroying others.
On the other hand, a strong systems of exchange and trade are assembled into a geographic
pattern.
They're often quite persistent.
Indeed, a glance at a world map shows that of those countries that were historically
colonized during and after the Colombian exchange I've described here, a significant
proportion of them remain poorly developed today.
So I think it's fair to ask, why is this so?
What makes some countries rich and others poor?
What is the pattern of economic development worldwide?
And we turn our attention there in our next lecture.
