The desert locust, whose Latin name is Shisto Kereca Gregoria, is a political puzzle.
That's because it's both too small and a sense too big to be tackled by national governments.
Let me explain.
The locust lives its life in remote desert areas in Africa, and they quietly munch away on desert vegetation.
In this form, called its solitary phase, the locust is isolated.
If you map their distribution, you find these largely sedentary populations scattered around the Sahara Desert
in Sudan and Mali and Niger.
But they'd be hard to spot because they're widely distributed and they live alone or in really small groups.
But when it rains, something weird happens.
When precipitation increases, so does vegetation.
And as locust populations increase their density at the same time, they change their behavior and they change their shape.
And they enter what is called a gregarious phase.
Now in this phase, they aggregate in massive bands as immature hoppers or in swarms as flying adults,
and then they migrate.
And boy do they migrate.
A map of locust swarms ranges over hundreds of thousands of square kilometers across dozens of countries,
expanding north and south out of the desert zone.
These swarms blacken the sky and descend on agriculturally productive areas.
A map of gregarious outbreaks is totally different from a map of the solitary phase.
It would include tropical central Africa and stretch all the way to north Africa and beyond,
with some swarms carried by winds into the Mediterranean.
These critters, precisely the same ones from the biblical plagues of Moses,
are a scourge of the African landscape,
and are predictably emerging to destroy a whole harvest across whole countries
and falling from the heavens at a terrible cost to local people.
So what does any of this have to do with political geography?
Well, everything.
As the political geographer Claude Pelican at the University of Arizona has pointed out,
the thing about desert locusts is that unlike agricultural problems like poor soil productivity or irrigation,
governments have a devil of a time tackling them.
Desert locust represents as big a problem now as it did 20 years ago,
despite improvement in pesticides, mapping and monitoring outbreaks.
Why is that?
And the answer Pelican suggests is that the locust is mismatched to the capacity of the modern geography of the state.
Now, as you'll recall, ever since the piece of Westphalia,
the unit of coherent governance on the world stage is the state.
That's a coherent, distinct and discreet territory that's governed entirely from within.
Well, that's a huge problem for controlling locusts.
Both the solidarius and the gregarious phases of the locusts take place at locations and scales
that are fundamentally at odds with state territory and capacity.
So on the one hand, solidarius populations are too small to be dealt with.
They're sparsely diffused and appear and disappear from time to time.
They're too variable to be managed by state governments, national governments.
Hidden in tiny patches of green growth in far-flung locations in the remotest desert regions of Africa,
solidarius populations are effectively invisible to large and clunky national governments.
And for countries who may get invaded by locusts like Morocco and Libya,
but whose borders do not enclose areas where solidarius locusts live,
there's nothing they can do to control the breeding sites of locusts.
Those out in countries like Mali or Mauritania, far to the south where they breed,
put simply, Morocco can't make Mali manage the problem before it gets too large.
On the other hand, once an outbreak occurs, the swarms immediately move into international dimensions,
sweeping quickly from country to country.
One nation might do something to control the outbreak, only to have it move somewhere else.
Coordinating actions across dozens of countries over literally millions of miles
is a managerial challenge of monumental proportions,
put simply, the decision-making and organizational ability to stop swarms once they start
is much larger than individual African states can manage.
Beyond the grasp of any individual country,
Paloakon concludes that the locust creates problems for global governance
and invites the interventions of international coordinating agencies.
So, unsurprisingly, the food and agricultural organization of the United Nations,
that's called the FAO, has attempted to assemble an international regime of cooperation
that will allow these countries to get their ducks in a row.
Suffice it to say, Paloakon also shows that this effort has not necessarily been uniformly successful,
only to how darn hard it is to herd these kinds of cats.
And the desert locusts ain't unusual.
Wherever we look in the world, we see problems that look a whole lot like this one.
As we've described in this course, many environmental problems exhibit this exact same characteristic,
whether it's climate change or the movement of areas of deforestation from place to place.
Those kinds of ecological challenges seem to put pressure on what individual states can actually do alone.
The country of Vietnam, as you'll recall from a much earlier lecture,
can ban cutting of trees on its hill slopes, but that may only move deforestation over to their neighbor, Laos,
where the Vietnamese government can't exert any meaningful control.
The United States may affect a small reduction in its greenhouse gas emissions
by, say, switching from coal to natural gas,
but if China, where the U.S. has little or no influence, increases its energy production from coal,
the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere only rises.
This seems to invite some kind of treaty or broader system of management.
Of course, it's not just environmental problems that pose this kind of challenge.
Economic and social ones behave the same way, too.
Consider the problem of trade.
Now, one country may seek to liberalize trade
or reduce subsidies in a certain industry or an area of production.
But if all their trade partners don't follow suit,
they put themselves at a significant disadvantage.
Similarly, currency was entrusted to sovereign states to govern,
with each country creating its own currency.
But if one country changes its fiscal policy or currency,
there's no way for its trade partners to influence them,
though they may very much depend on the outcome.
All of this also seems to invite a larger scale of governance over trade.
So what to deforestation, global warming, regional economic development
and currency policy and desert locus all seem to have in common?
It's just this.
Many problems of great national importance are actually international in nature,
leading to the innovation of new larger organizations.
Even so, as I'll demonstrate in the next half hour,
the structure of modern states makes tackling these problems,
even internationally, pretty much a hit and miss affair.
In this sense, individual nations have problems
that individual nations can't solve by themselves.
So international cooperation of some kind is needed to overcome these problems.
International treaties are obviously the most obvious way to deal with these.
And there are a lot of examples of international treaties.
All military treaties are, in a sense, for example, supranational, more than national,
with some being more so than others.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization, or NATO, clearly falls into this category,
since it organizes a set of military obligations for all member states, all signatories,
and even organizes a chain of military command separate from parallel to that of individual nations.
As a result, it's a politically complicated animal.
But many other treaties are enforced around the world.
The Geneva Conventions are an especially visible example.
These treaties bind all of their signatories to certain restrictions on their behavior
with regard to conflicts, including things like the treatment of prisoners,
restrictions on the use of things like poison gas,
and the management of civilian populations during an occupation.
Conventions and laws like these together represent the planks
that make up a rough architecture of international law.
This is the area of enormous complexity.
All of these are rooted in the tacit notion of universal jurisdiction,
where the United Nations and its Security Council are conceded the right to monitor and enforce them.
Despite the sense that many of these treaties might not have any teeth, difficult to enforce,
the importance of treaties like this is totally unmistakable.
Consider the Chemical Weapons Convention,
a treaty that holds its signatories to the termination of their chemical weapons capacity.
In 2013, at the height of a terrible conflict in Syria
in which chemical weapons were shown to have been used,
under threat of force, the government of Syria actually acknowledged their existence.
That government even agreed to the monitoring and destruction of the weapons.
Now, there are always complications in the enforcement and compliance,
and full compliance anyway,
full compliance may ultimately be impossible in cases like these.
But here's an example where a notoriously intractable state
surrendered its sovereignty, if only in a limited way, to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
A lecture on international law will have to be saved for another time,
but it should be clear that there are some forms of agreement
that may be more or less binding for different nations,
leading to transnational forms of governance even in a world of Westphalian states.
An exemplary case for both the strengths and weaknesses of such an approach
to international problems is the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
or the UNFCCC.
As we reviewed earlier in this course,
during the time since the Industrial Revolution and at an accelerating rate,
people are loading the atmosphere with a range of greenhouse gases,
which tend to trap energy in the Earth's system, which leads to global change.
There is general agreement worldwide that many of the products of climate change
are highly undesirable for everyone.
Rising sea levels will wipe out whole island communities in the South Pacific,
but it's also a grave problem for wealthy coastal cities in China and the U.S. and Europe.
Many businesses and industries are confronted with new costs associated with higher temperatures
and changes in precipitation all over the world.
And that makes climate change a global problem,
obviously not just a problem of one country.
But climate change is one of those problems, like chemical weapons,
where it makes sense for one country to make a sacrifice only if everybody else does.
Consider the possible costs of switching a national energy portfolio
to renewable energy like wind or solar,
and away from very easily available but greenhouse gas emitting resources like coal.
It would be economically unwise for an individual country's point of view
to make the sacrifices necessary without an assurance that other major emitters will do likewise.
Enter the UNFCCC.
Signed in 1992 in Rio, the UNFCCC was signed and ratified by 195 countries,
including the United States.
And it simply states that the evidence shows there is a climate change problem
that's going to hurt a lot of people in countries,
and that the international community will work towards some kind of a solution.
The first effort to establish such a solution came in a follow-up treaty signed in 1997
by fewer 37 countries and the European community.
This treaty, typically called the Kyoto Protocol,
obligated those who signed on to reduce their own national greenhouse gas emissions by 2012
to a level that is 5% lower than their 1990 levels, so to dial back greenhouse gases.
Later, at a meeting in Doha in 2012,
the signatories agreed to get their emissions to 18% below their 1990 levels by 2020.
The treaty has a lot of other interesting elements like
it allows wealthy countries to support green development in poorer countries
as a way of meeting treaty obligations.
It's very creative.
And the treaty might be called a kind of limited success
insofar as it actually got enough signatories and ratifications to come into force,
which is no small feat all by itself.
But for many observers, the treaty is a failure.
First, this is because some of the most important countries in the world
never signed or ratified the treaty.
And this includes the United States,
a country that emits around one-fifth of the world's carbon.
Some previous signatories have actually pulled out in the time since
Russia, Canada, and Japan have all renounced the treaty
or agreed to no further reductions after 2012.
A mark of failure.
Second, though some countries, including Germany and Denmark,
hit their obligated emissions reductions by 2012,
most of the countries in the world didn't.
Greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise, global changes ongoing,
and the current treaty has too few major emitters to be considered currently viable.
Now, there are a lot of reasons for the failure of the treaty and the geopolitics of it,
though they are wicked interesting.
You'll not be surprised to hear me say,
probably deserve their own course.
But from a political geography point of view,
one has to conclude the more narrow demands of sovereign states
under the current international state system seem to have trumped international needs.
Having said this, there remains a lot of international activity around climate.
Municipal mayors across the U.S. and elsewhere around the world
are setting their own greenhouse gas targets and limits.
That's really quite remarkable.
The Mayor's Climate Protection Agreement in the U.S.
is an example of a non-binding treaty that's pushed cities
to have an impact on international climate conditions.
And regional organizations are working on ways to achieve overall reductions as well.
South Pacific nations typically treat each other with distrust,
if I can be generous.
Pacific Islands Forum has begun to pursue coordinated climate action.
And within the U.S., several regional climate organizations have formed
from clusters of states, including the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative,
combining nine Northeastern and Mid-Atlantic states.
In this case, international approaches to the international problem we're talking about
are actually ongoing if we look at the international activities apart from sovereign states.
One might argue, in fact, that the only place where there has been a lack of action
and will is at the level of national governments.
A treaty-based approach to this problem may one day succeed,
but for now it demonstrates some of the limits to internationalism through treaties.
For some kinds of needed integration, moreover, even treaties aren't enough.
This is especially true if a problem brings together multiple countries
and really requires some kind of higher-order organizing body or decision-making authority.
The most obvious example is the governance of international trade.
That's an area where individual countries have historically had total self-control, total autonomy.
It might be necessary to set unified policies around these things,
which would require that members send delegates to represent them in some kind of international agreement
or create a new framework for laws and regulations that exist apart from national ones for trade
with oversight and enforcement and so on.
And for that, a supranational organization would need to be formed.
Now, in theory, a supranational organization is an institution or a body or a set of rules
that a collection of states agrees to follow and to harmonize their own rules and processes to match.
And in the process, by implication, any state that enters into such an organization
is surrendering their right to govern some facet, no matter how small of what goes on inside their own borders.
You can see what a big deal this is.
If we meditate on this for a minute, we can see this.
This represents a major institutional challenge to a Westphalian state system of organization.
Nowhere is this clear than the European Union.
The EU is one of the grandest tests of supranationalism,
and it has shown both historic victories and catastrophic failures.
It makes a really interesting case to imagine the possible fate of the nation state in the future.
The EU is actually a relatively recent development, but it does have deep roots,
and those sink into the charred soil of World War II.
In 1945, Europe was in ruins.
The result of the world's most horrific global conflict.
Observers and geographical theorists alike looked at the map of the conflict,
and they saw a need for enhanced economic integration.
Neighbors that traded with one another vigorously and depended on one another for growth,
in theory would be less likely to go back to war.
The place at the start, they imagined, was between France and Germany,
among the oldest and most vigorous antagonists in the region.
And the industries to start with would be coal and steel,
the lifeblood of the war machine, and a set of commodities
that had been heavily controlled and manipulated by individual countries in the run-up to the war.
The European coal and steel community was a first step, therefore.
This institution, formed through the Treaty of Paris in 1951,
basically created a common market for these materials, coal and iron,
which couldn't be manipulated by cartels and over which national governments
surrendered most regulatory control.
In a sense, the EU was born right there.
In the period following, more and more treaties were signed,
expanding the European common market and creating more and more higher-order governance institutions.
This was culminated in the creation of the Maastricht Treaty in 1992
and the formal creation of the European Union,
a body that had the ability, actually, to govern certain facets of the regional economy
and in which member states surrendered some control of policy, especially economic policy.
To make this work, a whole set of deliberative bodies had to be set up
along with the financial and legal institutions.
The EU has a parliament, a council, courts of justice, a system of election, and laws.
Its delegates meet in Brussels, Belgium, a map of the EU,
and of the extension of new countries in the time since 1992,
reveals just how popular this energy has become for countries who have, at least until recently,
actually competed to join its ranks.
The organization started with its core Western European countries, including France and Germany,
the United Kingdom, Belgium, Italy, Spain, Portugal, and the Netherlands, among several others.
Sweden, Austria, and Finland joined in the few years thereafter,
and by 2004, the Union included a range of former Eastern Bloc countries as well,
including Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic.
Turkey still seeks membership.
For Europe, this clustering has a bunch of advantages.
Focus on a common agricultural policy has allowed the region's farming
to actually survive and thrive despite really increasingly competitive global market.
This involves some significant subsidies, but the burden is spread across member states.
Also, the freeing of labor migration across European boundaries, which is a core ideal of the EU,
has allowed some areas of economic activity to really boom with a constant inflow of workers.
Cross-border railway systems operating at high speed all enjoy some EU support as well.
That should be pointed out that some parts of Europe benefit far, far more from this arrangement than others.
Horror and more peripheral regions tend to send labor to wealthier countries
under this arrangement and experience far less economic growth.
So countries like Portugal and Greece, the longtime members of the EU,
never experienced the economic boom that core European nations did.
Even so, some parts of the EU experiment have got to be called a pretty huge success.
I mean, consider that this region was one of devastation and war a half century ago.
It's almost unimaginable that EU countries would ever want to or be able to wage war on one another ever again.
The greatest experiment in EU's supranationalism, however, came with the creation of the Eurozone,
an area within the EU where nations actually surrendered their currency altogether to adopt the Euro.
The geography of the EU, it should be pointed out, is not the same as that of the Eurozone.
Eurozone countries include many original EU members like France and Italy, but not all of them.
The United Kingdom never joined. Some newer members like Slovakia and Finland are part of the currency zone,
but some like Poland are not.
And most importantly, some of the economic giants of Europe are in the Eurozone, like Germany.
But so are some of the most lagging economies, including Portugal, Greece and Spain.
And here, here is where the trouble begins.
The Eurozone crisis began in 2009, and it has many, many drivers, including problems in banking and international economic competitiveness.
But one of the central problems was a set of debt crises, especially in Greece, which dragged Europe into a collective problem.
It's a lengthy and involved story, but the key elements are that a strong Greek economy had racked up a considerable amount of debt
in the late 1990s and the early 2000s.
And when a global economic downturn occurred in 2008 and after, the Greek economy went into paralysis,
and the country was unable to pay its debts.
Several other slower and slowing economies, including Portugal, also then became a risk.
Now, had Greece been its own traditional national economy with its own separate federal bank, its own currency?
Well, there are some things it might have done to address its problems, like revaluing its currency
or changing the rate at which it printed money.
But as members of the Eurozone, things weren't so simple.
Greece couldn't control its own monetary policy.
Only the European Central Bank can.
On the other hand, the EU's European Central Bank can make fiscal policy decisions,
and it did so to attempt to stabilize the situation, but it can't control Greece.
The EU could not directly control the Greek economy.
Greece's domestic spending policies, domestic policies, their budgets were all out of EU control.
In the language of political geography, the site of sovereign state decision-making
had become disconnected from the site of economic impact.
There was a geographic mismatch between currency and governance.
In an effort to solve the problem and reconnect fiscal policy with domestic budgetary policy,
financial assistance and bailouts for the Greek debt crisis were predicated on Greece's willingness
to undertake several drastic austerity measures.
This had a huge impact on the Eurozone economy as a whole.
Connected together by a single currency, the weaker economies that had entered the crisis
were becoming a drag on wealthier countries, at least from the point of view of places like Germany.
Of course, seen from the perspective of Greece and Portugal,
who had contributed to the European economic boom of the past decade but benefited far less,
the demands for austerity were seen as unfair and imperious and stingy.
These events sort of frayed the collective and mutual goodwill of EU member countries.
Consumer confidence lagged and a range of subjective and political indicators did as well.
It was clear that the EU was not one big happy family.
And perhaps most interesting, it's possible that several of these measures
actually represent violations of the treaties upon which the EU is founded.
Those notably discouraged bailouts and the buying of bonds,
two strategies that the European Central Bank attempted.
In any case, after years of relatively smooth sailing,
the EU, which is arguably the world's premier supranational organization,
had run into some pretty big obstacles.
Now, it's not clear what comes next in the case for the EU.
For many observers, the Eurozone crisis shows the folly of the unified currency
and any efforts at economic integration.
Skeptics of the Euro, especially in the United Kingdom, had a really quite a good round of like,
on the other hand, it's possible to interpret the crisis to show that incomplete integration
is doomed to failure and that only greater international integration of things like budgets
and domestic policy and so on can lead to success.
Either way, the EU is now only one among many, many new supranational interstate organizations.
There are many examples.
The African Union and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
these are both prominent and active international coalitions as well.
Notably, the African Union has actually involved itself militarily in peacekeeping
around the African continent in places like Darfur and Somalia.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations includes a massive free trade zone
and negotiates on behalf of its member economies with major foreign powers, which include China.
And these are just two among many more.
So no matter what happens in the European Union, in other words,
supranational organizations are clearly part of the future.
What I've tried to do in this last half hour is point out ways in which the global political geography
of nation states is constantly confronted with problems too big for individual countries
or even pairs of countries to solve.
And the solution to this has been an ongoing experiment with new forms of governance,
including things like complex international treaty frameworks like the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change,
as well as high-risk, high-reward transformations of governance like the EU.
Of course, it doesn't stop there.
There are many more powerful organizations that are distinct from any state actor or their treaties
who have little or no tether to a single nation.
The most obvious of these are international corporations whose headquarters might be in one location
whose reach and decision capacity may stretch all over the world.
British Petroleum and Coca-Cola, they have power, capital, and influence far greater than many or even most countries.
The same goes for international humanitarian or environmental organizations,
ranging from Greenpeace to Amnesty International.
These international non-governmental organizations, they play a major role in influencing behaviors of states
and, like corporations, they also have a transnational reach.
But it isn't simply big companies or players who become international.
Even localities are in on the act.
In the past, for example, we would think of international visits and cooperation to be the purview of heads of states and ambassadors.
But more and more, we're seeing very different levels in types of organization developing.
Consider that governors of individual states within the U.S. frequently go on trade delegations to other countries, like China,
or think about the countless mayors around the world who are busy visiting one another's cities,
learning new techniques to manage urban problems and exchanging data and technologies and even swapping personnel.
While these levels of government are not empowered by the U.S. Constitution to create or sign any kind of binding treaties,
they can move their fiscal and organizational apparatus to accelerate trade.
This isn't a supranational organization, exactly.
It's really something else entirely, and it's at least different than or more than national.
Together with supranational organizations like the EU and the international legal regime, like the UNFCCC,
these kinds of new experiments in international activity suggest a subtle erosion in modern assumptions about discrete states and absolute sovereignty.
Whatever one might think about these experiments, they're an interesting trend, and it really looks like they're here to stay.
Now, this trend, you should know by now in the course, is one which political geographers don't find entirely surprising.
As we've learned in many of our past lectures, many ecological, economic, social and cultural movements and exchanges across the surface of the Earth
have been experienced in this period of great acceleration.
It's made them able to elude or evade the hard boundaries of countries or nations time and again.
In a certain sense, of course, this internationalization is part of the larger set of forces that we've been describing
that are sweeping across the globe, including migration, urbanization, land cover change, cultural change.
These connect even the farthest corners of the globe together.
With all these forces at work, is it possible to imagine a world after geography where space and people, space and place, in a sense, don't matter?
What might the geographies of the future look like?
It's a fascinating question, and in our next and final lecture, we're going to bring together what we've learned so far in the course to see what kind of answers we might come up with.
