Imagine a giant container, the kind of huge metal box that you commonly see on a flat
bed train car or loaded in countless hundreds on the giant ocean going ships.
These big metal rectangular cans are 20 or 40 feet in length, made for more than 8,000
pounds of steel and can hold several tons of goods, and they're always on the move.
If we followed one of these big colorful boxes from its origin in a place like Shanghai,
China, where it's loaded with commodities, say baby high chairs, to its destination in
the city of St. Louis, we would travel on a complex global journey.
Our container would pass through several transfer points before arriving at the massive
port of Singapore, which is a geographic hub that sits at the center of a spider's web
of shipping spokes across the Pacific.
From there, it would make its way onward, its onward journey to the major commercial
shipping port of Los Angeles, where it would be reloaded aboard a mile-long transcontinental
train, and ultimately unloaded in Missouri.
The contents of the box would be passed along to commercial outlets having never been touched
by a person or seen a light of day traveling more than 7,200 miles as the crow flies.
It's incredible, really.
And the complex voyages of these monstrous containers are one of the key components of
a system of transportation that's revolutionized the economic geography of the world.
It's called commercial, intermodal freight transport, and along with information technology
that can transfer hundreds of millions of dollars at the speed of light with a pressable
button on a keypad, this technology has done nothing less than turn traditional laws of
geography upside down and allowed the revolutionary growth of a whole new center of economic power.
And in this lecture, I'll review how transportation and information technology have fundamentally
changed the flow of goods and money around the world.
I'll briefly introduce some key geographic concepts, including location theory and the
concept of the spatial fix and the idea of the annihilation of space by time.
And in the process, I'll demonstrate that the energy, transportation, and information
revolutions of the late 20th century have allowed capital to migrate far more widely
and far more quickly than it had previously, and that these changes have shifted the global
economy eastward again back to Asia.
But first, we need to consider how geographers think about economic activities.
Traditionally approaches to understanding where economic activities take place have
been rooted in mathematical predictive models.
Here transportation figures big.
One of the most important figures in the history of this kind of thinking was a German economist
and geographer, Alfred Weber.
He, along with other thinkers of his time, was interested in where factories and other
economic activities tended to locate and why.
They resolved the question by predicting that economic activity would take place in a location
where the overall costs of transportation were minimized somewhere between the source
of raw materials and the location of the consumers or buyers.
And that location could literally be triangulated in theory by looking at shipping costs.
Let's consider a few classic examples.
The great steel industry in the United States during the 19th century is a great case.
That industry, with its very heavy inputs, was long at the mercy of transportation.
Strategic location was everything.
The rise of the city of Pittsburgh, exactly where it is, was no accident.
This great steel city was the home of U.S. steel for a century.
Its football team is still named the Steelers, long after steel production has mostly moved
away.
And its location can be predicted by the geographic constraints of steel mills in the 19th and
20th centuries.
The big mills of that day would have to be located where they'd have access to coal on
the one hand and iron on the other.
Those are the two main inputs to make steel.
And Pittsburgh is located, by no coincidence, in the Golden Triangle, the confluence of
the Allegheny and Manongahalo rivers, where the Ohio River begins.
And this spot is the perfect place to unload the ingredients for steel, coal coming from
the Appalachians and iron imported from the Minnesota Iron Range and elsewhere.
Alfred Weber would have hit it right on the nose.
Of course, different kinds of production have different kinds of transportation problems.
Think about bottling factories.
Rather than being centralized in a single location like steel, the facilities that bottle
soda, or what we used to call pop when I was a kid growing up in Colorado, tend to be distributed
much more widely, with one or more bottlers located near each place in each city where
soda is retailed and consumed.
Now why would that be?
Why does soda pop behave so differently than steel?
Well, the main reason is that the heaviest component of soda pop is water, which is ubiquitous.
It can be found nearly everywhere.
So rather than bottling soda in a single location and paying the huge expense of hauling it cross
country, it's much easier to bring the lightweight formulas and sugar right near the location
of consumers and retailers and constitute the finished product in a facility very nearby.
So whether we're talking about steel or soda pop, an important component of economic geography
has always been the costs associated with transportation.
Of course, other things have to be combined in economic activities besides raw materials,
especially including labor and machinery and so on.
So transportation isn't the only thing that matters, but it matters a lot.
And the field of location theory in geography has had a pretty good track record of helping
to optimize the location of businesses using transportation costs as an important factor.
These kinds of approaches and the laws of geography that they give rise to are extremely
reliable in traditional industrial economics.
If we combine these insights with the historic patterns of uneven economic growth that we
identified in the previous lectures, we get a pretty good idea of what the map of the
world economy between 1870 and 1970 looked like.
That map centers economic activity in areas where a lot of capital accumulated during and
after the colonial era from Europe and North America.
Here manufacturing was focused in urban centers along coasts and rivers with raw materials
flowing in from the hinterland or from less developed parts of the world.
Regional maps of GDP, as we've already seen, still hew fairly closely to this pattern.
But a map of economic growth that is the rate of increase in GDP or GDP per capita, that's
a whole other story, where a map of GDP, the size of economies, would still show Europe
and America as strong overall, a map of GDP growth highlights a totally different part
of the world.
On a map like this, China would jump off the page, as would India.
Though the growth of those economies tends to go up and down, and though global recession
can slow the overall rate of growth everywhere in the world, the difference between these
emerging markets and the older economies is staggering.
In a good year, the rate of growth of the economy of the United States might be around
3% in a good year.
Between 1947 and 2013, the United States GDP growth rate actually averaged about 3.2%.
India in 2010 had a GDP growth rate of 10%.
In that year, China, which is the second largest economy in the world, experienced 10.4% growth.
That is a staggering surge in economic activity.
These two countries wouldn't be alone on that map either, Indonesia, Chile, and Kazakhstan
would all show growth rates higher than 5%, along with a list of historically smaller
and more marginal economies.
Mexico's erratic GDP growth rate tends to bounce around, but it hit highs well over
3% throughout all of the 2000s.
Before we try to explain what might be happening here, it might be useful to try to picture
what this growth actually consists of.
Typically, these high rates of growth are associated with a few linked things.
One, an increase in economic activity typically led by manufacturing, and two, significant
foreign investment into facilities and infrastructure for production and transportation.
So for the case of Mexico, this growth might be pictured as taking the form of maquiladoras.
A maquiladora is a factory or a set of factories set up in special free trade zones in Mexico,
typically on or near the border with the United States.
And these mushroomed into existence, especially in the period after the North American Free
Trade Agreement, or NAFTA, took effect in 1994.
Characterized by hastily assembled housing, poor sewage facilities, and poor water and
air quality, these areas are boom towns, where workers flock in droves for steady wages.
Employing millions of workers in Mexico, maquiladoras, are often owned and operated by foreign investors
to make products that are then exported and consumed in the United States, including automobile
manufacturing companies in particular.
Now, similar manufacturing boom towns have exploded across China, too.
The city of Zhongshan on the southeast coast of China, not far from Macau, is really typical.
This historically sleepy coastal river port now has a population of more than 3 million
people, and they're located in 18 different manufacturing towns, each of which specializes
in its own production and export system, with a separate spatial cluster for food production
and another for clothing manufacturing and another for furniture and another for appliances
and so on.
Many of the industrial facilities are state-owned enterprises, but a bulk of the capital is
direct foreign investment.
Money flows into this city from around the world and takes the concrete form of factories
and offices.
In other words, after a long period where the map of the global economy was focused on
the North Atlantic, there's been a sudden, rapid and turbulent shift of investment and
growth to Asia and elsewhere, moving away from the historical centers of economic power
in North America and Europe.
The booming growth elsewhere is driven by a movement of capital to these frontier economies
which typically take the form of investment in manufacturing.
Now, a caveat should be added here.
We should emphasize that a high rate of economic growth doesn't necessarily mean an increase
in personal income or well-being for people in a country.
Nigeria's growth rate is really high, more than 5% for many years, yet its social and
political conditions are pretty grim, as we learned in the last lecture.
And GDP doesn't always match other important indicators like the Human Development Index.
Nevertheless, it's clear that the location of economic activity and growing employment
has moved away from its historic center.
So why is this happening?
Well, one of the key elements central to our story is one we've already discussed, transportation.
Commercial, intermodal freight transport is a modern miracle in this sense.
By tying shipping together in a hub and spoke pattern and tracking those containers of goods
through complex computerized systems, the world is connected seamlessly together by
the flow of massive containers in a way that's never been seen before.
That connectivity makes it far easier to connect the factories of China with buyers
of consumer goods in London or New York.
And this revolution is underpinned, it should be added by cheap available energy.
None of this happens without lots of petroleum moving ships across vast spaces of the world's
oceans.
Depending on size and speed, a container ship might consume 225 tons of fuel per day.
A massive and ongoing increase in energy production worldwide is pretty key to making
all this happen.
And to this, we need to add telecommunications.
The globalization of finance is essential to this boom where money can move quickly
from one investment on one side of the world to another, and this is made possible by fiber
optics and satellites and cellular communication.
So what do these things mean when they're all combined?
In a sense, they mean the end of geography, at least of distance between production and
consumption as a factor in location.
For our purposes, what makes these technologies important, besides how interesting and impressive
they are on their own, is that they have basically upended economic geography, at least as mapped
in Alfred Weber's era.
Of course, while all these technologies have exploded in recent decades, we're really talking
about a process that's been getting a running start for quite some time.
And since the rise of the railroad in the 19th century, the distance between places where
things are produced and the places where they're consumed has grown ever smaller.
Political economist Carl Marx observed this as early as 1857, noting that speed, the rate
at which goods and raw materials can move, was accelerating dramatically and changing
relative distances.
And the result was a collapse in traditional geographic relationships.
In the pages of his fascinating, messy, sprawling book, The Gondrissa, he called this nothing
less than the annihilation of space by time.
And in this sense, we can think of distance as a kind of friction for economic relationships.
As transportation and communication technologies begin to remove that friction, distance shrinks
in an economic sense and space contracts for exchange.
Your money can be in an investment account in New York in one instant and tied up in
a concrete firm traded on an Asian market a second later.
Consumers and products can actually be sent overnight to the other side of the earth,
and bulk goods produced in massive manufacturing centers can cross more than 7,000 miles in
a container all at a tiny cost.
So this tells us how space can collapse and give rise to new centers of economic growth
around the world.
But it doesn't really tell us why.
The answer to that, we have to consider the other costs of production, the ones that affect
economic activity.
Because transportation costs are minimized and the globe shrinks, so investment can access
the furthest corners of the planet, all the other factors of production now take center
stage.
Specifically, besides transportation and communication, there's the cost of inputs themselves.
Inputs include raw materials, of course, as well as infrastructure, both public and private.
But of all the inputs that go into production, labor is among the most important.
Now the cost of labor can be very different from one country to the next.
For example, a worker in Mexico might earn $6,000 a year for what a worker in the United
States may be paid $30,000 or more.
That differential represents an enormous competitive advantage for a firm that can quickly relocate,
free its capital from a manufacturing site in the U.S. and move south of the border.
And of course, in the 1980s and 1990s, that is exactly what happened as free trade zones
boomed with activity in Mexico.
Of course, the competitive gains made by any single firm by making such a dramatic move
are quickly lost if other firms follow suit.
So within a few years, after one company in a sector has moved to an area of lower labor
costs, all the others typically rush after to do the same.
No longer an advantage, the firms then need to look for new horizons.
And once these activities are generalized, the race is off and on to find yet another
location, even friendlier to decreased costs of production.
With the friction of distance removed and the ability to quickly move capital around,
it's possible to pick up and leave not long after investment has arrived.
And it's precisely for this reason that in the early 2000s, investment in Mexico moved
to places in Asia.
What this has meant at a global scale is that capital has been unleashed and in fact prodded
by fierce competition to uproot from its historical locations of economic growth and sink down
in new locations.
Asia has unquestionably been the main benefactor of this switch and China in particular.
But within Asia, there is fierce wage competition.
Another GDP per capita is around $9,300 in China, while in Vietnam it's less than 4,000.
And in Burma or Myanmar, which is now a destination for Chinese entrepreneurs, it's only $1,400.
These differences lure investors to continue to move from place to place at a furious rate.
No sooner has a factory been built than it might be abandoned or phased out in favor
of another plant somewhere else.
In other words, the annihilation of space that has allowed and accelerated the restless
movement of investments are driven by competition.
This process is one famously referred to by one of the most famous and influential geographers
alive today, David Harvey, and he calls it the spatial fix.
In Harvey's conception of economic geography, the economy is always running into barriers
for growth.
An economic system might be unable to realize value because the wage rate is too high or
because there's insufficient numbers of consumers.
By moving some of the factors production around geographically, a log jam in production can
be broken, at least temporarily.
When regional growth stagnates in one location or one sector, he suggests, the frontiers
of the regional economy can be rolled back by exports of money or manufacturing capacity
or the import of new workers.
The differences in wages between Burma and China become a temporary geographic opportunity,
for example, to maintain economic growth.
Stagnating business and economic systems can be propped up, in other words, by moving stuff
around.
But is this a good thing?
Well, from the point of view of residents, a place is experiencing disinvestment.
It certainly is not a good thing.
Where capital flees a region for new horizons, scorched landscape can sometimes be left behind.
The most dramatic examples of this are places like Detroit in the United States or Manchester
in England, post-industrial cities working to find new economic models after being left
behind in the wake of globalization.
Block after block of abandoned homes in Detroit, empty lots and burnout buildings, are the
actual physical embodiment of moving capital.
Certainly, re-attracting industry, especially manufacturing, back to places where it's been
lost, becomes a major political undertaking as a result.
Places like the United States have made serious efforts at finding and expanding industrial
sectors where they still maintain a competitive edge, like precision machinery and agricultural
farm equipment.
This can have a modest effect on these transitions.
It's clear evidence, in any case, of a process of disinvestment being at least perceived
as a problem or even a crisis.
For those on the receiving end of investment, things may look a little better.
These wage increases exceeded 10% for many years, and that's an amazing change, through
which large populations have been lifted out of poverty.
The dazzling and shining crystal towers of urban centers along the Chinese eastern seaboard,
which have sprung up from the ground in just a few short years, are also the physical embodiment
of moving capital.
The actual geographies and living conditions in places experiencing this kind of growth
aren't always pretty.
Early growth is associated with sprawling and chaotic urbanization, as we'll discuss
in an upcoming lecture.
It also tends to accelerate the demand for people to move around, to move in pursuit
of jobs and new investment, and this tends to increase migration.
Another challenge we'll address soon.
And the restless quality of this global economy means that after some real wage growth, there's
no guarantee that investors won't just move on to a new destination where wages are lower,
moving behind populations that may have just had a taste of economic change.
Harvey is quite specific on this question.
Geographic changes in the structure of the economy, he says, importing low-wage workers
or offshoring facilities, can solve temporary crises and open up new opportunities for a
moment, but they can't solve deeper, more fundamental problems in the modern economy.
Nonetheless, being on the receiving end of investment can be utterly transformational
for a region.
These GDP growth in excess of 10% represents an economic miracle that is almost unprecedented
in world history.
China has gone from the backwater of the global economy to its absolute center, again, in
a way that's transformed an entire society within a decade, and this also reinforces
the more fundamental principle of the course.
The geography of differential wages heavily influences how and where economic investment
occurs.
So geography impacts the economy, but once investment occurs, wages may rise, causing
the actual economic geography of the world to again change.
So economy impacts geography, and this recursive dialectical relationship is one we've seen
time and again.
And beyond this, the growing investments in Asia have caused China to become not only
a destination for investment, but also a source of investment activity, rather than
simply being a place where foreign direct investment goes.
In other words, China has become its own engine of economic expansion with huge implications
for other parts of the world.
As we mentioned in the last lecture, nowhere is this clear in the case of Africa.
For many years, trade between Africa and China has totaled more than $100 billion.
It's hard to tell exactly, but perhaps 14 percent of China's international investment
was in Africa.
That's way more than their investment in the United States.
Investment in Africa takes a bunch of different forms, but the first and most important investments
have been in raw materials and land.
They've invested in the exploration of new energy sources, important metals, and timber.
But as the Chinese investment has invested large amounts of money in industries that
extract resources, they've also drawn some skepticism from outside observers.
In particular, many geographers and other scholars of the region have been predicting
a huge buyout of African land by foreign investors to acquire farms to feed Chinese or other
populations.
The evidence for this kind of land grab are mixed, and this is because it's hard to trace
land acquisitions in Africa very well, and many investors may buy land and other resources
through local African partners, making it really difficult to get an estimate of the
scale of this effort.
A recent study in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, however, has tried to
put some numbers on the phenomenon.
The amount of agricultural land worldwide acquired in these land grabs falls between
32 and 82 million hectares.
That's the equivalent of more than 300,000 square miles, so it's not insignificant sum.
Acquired African land accounts for 47%, almost half of those transactions, and China accounts
for a large proportion of those acquisitions.
So clearly, the level of investment activity by Chinese investors in Africa includes some
land acquisitions with very serious implications for Africa's ability to feed itself.
Even if a land grab were not going on in Africa, we might think about this investment as a
kind of spatial fix, as we've discussed before.
Chinese investment, looking for cheaper resources and labor to maintain growth at home, which
has indeed been rapidly declining in recent years, makes Africa a geographical solution,
in a sense, to Chinese economic problems.
On the other hand, this kind of investment is also a major spur to growth in African
countries.
After many decades of languishing and underinvestment by Europe and America, many African countries
are seeing record level capital investments from China.
Growth rates in countries with economic ties to China are also rising.
Ghana's GDP growth reached 15% in 2011.
That is a remarkable result and a major economic transformation.
But what might this mean for China?
This process is occurring just as wage rates in China are actually beginning to stagnate.
If the resource and labor force are geographically outsourced to Africa and elsewhere, what's
going to maintain the momentum in improving the Chinese quality of life?
The Chinese have answered this question by proposing that the next great leap for the
country is nothing less than to turn their previously industrial and agricultural population
into a nation of consumers, consumers who can buy the goods that are produced at decreased
costs through the outsourcing of some factors of production to other parts of the world
like Africa.
Now, this strategy will require the movement of hundreds and millions of people into cities.
That's an undertaking the country has begun recently, and we'll discuss in a later
lecture.
You'll also notice that this kind of urbanization strategy is a sort of spatial fix to China's
economic challenges.
In any case, this outcome shows that China can't promote a spatial fix abroad that doesn't
also have impacts on its home populations and markets.
Like investments into China, Chinese investments abroad become a double-edged sword.
The case of China in Africa is only one of the dramatic and counter-intuitive changes
in the new global economy that's ongoing now.
After a few centuries of concentrated wealth and economic growth in the West, we've seen
a total transition to the East.
As the economic theorist Andre Gunner-Frank insisted in his book Reorient many, many years
ago, none of this should at all be that surprising.
As we've learned earlier, economic growth in China and across East Asia was indeed
very high for long periods of history.
We might think instead of the past two centuries as a kind of aberration in global economic
geography, where a large imbalance temporarily held sway in favor of North America and Europe.
Either way, we're witnessing a period of increased global trade and exchange, one with world-changing
implications.
As I've tried to demonstrate in this lecture, this is because one of the determinant historical
forces that has shaped economic geography is the friction of distance.
As this is eased through new technologies and is increasing competition between firms
and regions, forces faster and faster movement of capital, totally new places are experiencing
growth and change.
This is in part a result of a spatial fix, an effort to spur or stabilize economic growth
by moving investment around.
This is a very exciting time from a geographer's point of view because regional change is so
swift and so surprising.
But is it possible to imagine how and whether this might end?
What happens when investment runs out of new resources and labor frontiers and will transportation
remain as simple and cheap as it is today?
What would happen if fuel costs were to rise dramatically?
Would this create new frictions in the system of global trade?
It's absolutely impossible to tell.
But in the meantime, this new economic geography holds implications for culture and society.
For example, most of this economic growth is occurring in cities.
This means that the world's population is urbanizing as never before.
And as investment and economic growth have moved around, people have also followed, restlessly
pursuing opportunities or fleeing from crises.
People are on the move, making human migration a fact of life around the world.
And so this global phenomenon becomes the topic of our next lecture.
