Who doesn't love wild horses?
They got a great song penned for them by the Rolling Stones.
Their long mains flap in slow motion during beer commercials, and their freedom is inseparable
in a sense, from the things we associate with the wild American frontier.
Untamed but kind of social, fleet but kind of docile, the wild horse has an almost magical
cultural potency in the United States.
In New Mexico, these animals are also part of a symbolic history bound up in the West's
very dark past.
Many celebrity figures, including actor-director Robert Redford, have struggled to help protect
these animals, whose existence is tied up in our minds.
With the fate of American Indians, both have been persecuted in one way of telling the story,
and these horses therefore demand our protection to make up for the violent history of Anglo-Settlement
of the West.
Saving wild horses for many white activists is an act of contrition for past wrongs.
On the other hand, there's not much to like about feral equids.
These creatures are alien, exotic species that have come to breed successfully on public
lands throughout the United States West that are really hard on the vegetation.
They graze voraciously on native prairies and grasslands.
These animals are in fact a terrible nuisance, indeed a threat, according to Fernanda Santos
of the New York Times.
Each feral equid in New Mexico consumes five gallons of water and 18 pounds of forage every
day.
The challenge of feral equids is so great that in many native tribes in New Mexico and
Oklahoma and elsewhere, they've begun plans for the construction of slaughter facilities
to ease the pressure on the land.
There are perhaps 75,000 feral equids in the United States, and in a landscape governed
by water scarcity and poverty, the impact of these animals is multiplied thousands of
times.
That may be a matter of life and death for native people who've already suffered indignities
at the hands of white people for centuries.
Slaughtering feral equids for many native activists is both a practical affair and an act of contrition
for past wrongs.
Of course, both these animals, wild horses and feral equids, are the same.
The animals, under their Latin name, equus ferus cabalus, are creatures brought to these
shores by Spanish conquistadors as part of the Colombian exchange, which we detailed
earlier in the course.
These horses became critically important to many plains Indian tribes, no mistake, but
as countless herds became loose on the land, they became a difficulty for already poor
local populations.
Now in an almost reverse conflict, in the Ozark National Scenic Riverways, a handful
of these feral equids, no more than maybe 35, sparked an equally fierce debate.
National park managers there were working to remove them en masse, since they have,
as was mentioned before, a ravaging impact on indigenous ecosystems by trampling and
overgrazing.
In that case, which was documented by Sandy Raccoon, who's a professor of rural sociology
at the University of Missouri, shows us how this attitude, where horses are understood
as exotic species invaders, is actually dramatically resisted by local people.
Many local residents understand these wild horses to be symbolic of their own settlement
of the land, a part of their own agrarian heritage, a sort of sacred thing as a result.
So are wild horses symbols of native sovereignty or symbols of oppression?
Are they invasive, exotic species, or are they part of the local fabric, the fabric
of local life?
Now since the horses are exactly the same, obviously, it's only their meaning that's
different.
This meaning varies from place to place and population to population.
Whatever meaning the horses come to acquire to a complex back and forth process, which
is played out in things like newspapers and online blogs and public hearings and the courts,
that meaning, that'll be the one that determines the outcome of this really complicated political
struggle.
And in a reverse way, the politics of struggle over horses isn't just about laws then and
slaughterhouse regulations or whatever else, it's about who gets to control what horses
mean.
So this story of wild horses is an iconic one, of course it's a pretty dramatic one,
but as I'm going to argue in this lecture, it's just one example of a ubiquitous geographic
reality and it demonstrates a far more universal principle of cultural geography because of
culture is a system of meaning and if meaning varies geographically and if the meaning of
things influences how we think and feel about contentious issues, then some elements of
culture are inseparable from politics and by the same token, some politics are not
about nation states or countries or laws, but instead they're about the way the meaning
of things in people's daily lives is influenced by things like nationality and identity and
geographic power.
So what tools do geographers bring to bear on problems like wild horses?
How might we think about culture and power?
For many cultural geographers, the place to begin is to admit that in a sense, culture
and history and geography and power are really difficult to differentiate, they're difficult
to pull apart.
We owe this way of thinking about things to many great philosophers including Friedrich
Nietzsche and his later disciples like the great French thinker Michel Foucault and these
philosophers, they were all interested in the history of how things become understood
as true.
What these approaches to knowledge and culture all have in common is this, they insist that
how we understand the world and all the basic assumptions we make about it, these are often
the product of received wisdom, things we were raised with or we read in the newspapers
and we came to accept without ever having the opportunity to question them.
Now history, of course, becomes really important.
By studying the history of concepts and phenomena, we learn that strangely, many things exist
now actually didn't exist before, at least as ideas or concepts at other times in history.
They had to be invented at some point.
When we look into the past of an idea and find that it was essentially created by someone
at one time, it makes us question more generally whether that thing is universal or always true.
So consider again our wild horses.
For both Plains Indians and Conquistadors, horses that got loose represented a resource
loss and probably not too much more.
Horse theft was an important part of warfare after all and the value of these animals was
linked to their physical and labor power.
A lost horse was unquestionably a lost resource.
Now this isn't to say that horses didn't have potent meaning for native people they
sure did or to the Spanish who may have had their own attachments to these critical animals
that they brought with them from Spain.
The thing is simply that the wild horse as such wasn't a concept of great significance
or symbolic importance, wild horse.
So if we flash forward a few centuries when wild horses become powerful, symbolically important
things that kind of come into being only after having been in the landscape for a while,
in other words, do these things begin to take on a revered significance for people?
Only at a certain point it's likely only in the 20th century that some people come to
think about them inseparably from the landscape linked to the buttes and bluffs of John Ford
movies and as a kind of natural element of the world.
In other words, wild horses may have existed as a natural fact but the idea of wild horses
that has a history it's got a moment of invention.
The turn of phrase itself that's often used to describe this condition is social construction.
That is a cultural historian or geographer might describe wild horses as a social construction.
Now here they don't mean that horses don't exist or even that they aren't wild, only
that the meaning of these animals is constructed at some point in history out of whole cloth.
And what I've said about history, that same thing goes for geography.
Many things that people in one place except as unproblematic and true may be very questionable
for people living elsewhere.
The study of cultural geography is in this sense a way to force us to take a more relativistic
perspective on things that are often accepted as true and it also leads us to think about
the geography of cultural conflicts.
So in the case of wild horses the entire conflict over these animals occurs in a quickly changing
western context.
The last 20 years has seen a dramatic change in settlement throughout the region owing
to urbanization and shifts of economic growth to the south and the west in the United States.
So during this period new settlers to the west were more likely to be urban and wealthier
and with less experience in rural contexts.
People like this might by a large ranch home in New Mexico with land and cattle but they'd
be far less likely to actually work that land themselves than the people who owned it before.
Or even more likely they would probably settle in cities.
This geographic shift sets the stage for cultural conflict.
New settlers bring with them a very different set of cultural assumptions about wild western
landscapes.
These ideas were formed in different geographic and cultural conditions.
And these settlers are far, far less likely to think about wild horses as a nuisance
and you know why should they?
They rarely depend on the grazing resources that these horses tend to impact.
At least they're less likely to depend on them than native people in the region.
And this raises the further political question then.
When celebrities from off the reservation bringing with them their own ideas about horses attempt
to stop the activities of tribal people, whether that's the construction of slaughter
facilities or whatever, they're picking a fight about what people can and cannot do
on sovereign native soil.
In this way culture and power are kind of stuck together in a way that makes things
complicated.
And this is because by establishing the cultural meaning of something, by winning the argument
over the meaning of things, you're making only one of many possible ways of seeing things,
the normal one, the norm.
And that gives you a lot of power.
As a result some kinds of cultural geographic research are about figuring out who is pushing
certain kinds of norms and how they're going about it.
As the prominent cultural geographer John Paul Jones III put it, the question becomes
quote, who has the power to designate a norm as the limit to the sensible, appropriate
and legal?
End quote.
So studying conflicts over culture and over social constructions means studying conflicts
over language.
And this is because when we study cultural conflicts we aren't studying actual problems
exactly, the actual problem of wild horses, but instead the way these problems are understood
or framed or named and the norms or rules we typically use to address them.
So when two ways of thinking about or dealing with a situation collide the result is a cultural
conflict and this way of thinking, studying culture gives us a window onto deeper conflicts
that may hide beneath the surface.
Consider the veil.
Muslim women, as is well known, often practice veiling, which involves the partial covering
of the head with a scarf.
Called the hijab in Arabic, a term that translates roughly to a curtain, the veil is worn in keeping
with passages from the Quran that emphasize modesty and privacy.
Referred to colloquially as the veil in places like Turkey, the veil we're describing in
this lecture, the hijab, is really a head scarf for covering.
That's distinct from other traditions of covering like burqa, which is a one-piece cover that
thoroughly hides a woman.
Cultural priorities of modesty in Islam go for men as well as women, of course.
For all the people of this faith, there's a general sense that keeping yourself covered
at least in part, is in keeping with proper behavior before one another and before God.
But the same rules do not typically apply for women and men, and veiling is a specific
cultural tradition for women throughout much of North Africa and Southwest Asia.
It has both a physical as well as metaphysical importance within the faith, and as you can
imagine, it's an important symbolic component of how people conduct themselves.
Of course, modest dress is by no means a unique quality of Islamic cultural geography.
We see a dedication to modest dress as parts of many religious traditions, nor is a special
garment especially unique to Muslim beliefs, since special garments can be found in many
other religions as widespread as Hinduism, Judaism, Mormonism, Christianity in general.
But the Muslim women's veil has historically and fairly recently had a powerful symbolic
content, which makes it a really interesting source of insight into cultural geography.
And this is because since the time of earliest Western contact with Southwest Asian cultures,
all through the colonial period, there's just been a fascination and frustration
with women's veils. They came to take on more cultural and political content than
throughout the 19th and 20th centuries. And specifically, there came to be a sense amongst
modern political elites, especially colonial authorities who were exclusively men, it should
be pointed out, that the veil was a sign of women's oppression and an example of the alleged
backwardness of Eastern cultures. This kind of colonial chauvinism, which is sometimes called
Orientalism by people who study regional geography and history, this has led to a general
association between the veil and conservatism and non-modern behavior. And this association,
as we're going to see, may have a really long hangover period as it turns out.
In the nation of Turkey, this would make for a really interesting set of cultural challenges
during the 20th century. As you likely know, the Turkish Ottoman Empire, which ruled Turkey and
surrounding territories, sided with the Germans during World War I, leading to their ultimate
defeat and the dismemberment of the empire in the wake of the war. And the Turkey that emerged
from the war was chastened and the leaders of this new secular republic, founded in 1923,
came to the opinion that only a really dramatic break with cultural traditions would lead to
desired modernization, progress. Needless to say, the earliest major national leaders in modern Turkey
waged a prominent campaign against the veil. The first great leader of post-war Turkey,
Kamal Ataturk, waged a campaign for the unveiling of women in public. Customary head scarves were
discouraged almost everywhere and they were even banned in some public locations and for some jobs.
And we can already then, very early in our story about veiling, see some of the cultural
geographic elements of this simple practice. First, we see how a simple norm, the practice of wearing
a scarf, becomes a location for a vast set of political projects starting with colonialism
and then entering the era of modern nation building. So, just as John Paul Jones has asked,
who has the power to designate a norm? How does that power work through rules or practices?
So in this case, the power of the veil moved from families and individuals to larger national
priorities. The who here are national political figures now, as to how we see rules that specifically
govern public space, a specific geographic location that up until then had been really a very little
concern to rulers. Now whether or not women were relieved to shed the veil from the 1930s onwards
is really a question we can't adjudicate here, probably. Some thought it was a great relief,
while others may have felt that it was sort of an aggressive imposition on their personal and
religious freedom. But either way, we see a relatively simple cultural practice becoming
deeply politicized by ruling men through an effort to make certain ways of doing things into
a normal part of culture. And by the time I got to Turkey in 1986, in the cities where I traveled,
even in the eastern part of the country, head scarves were actually not especially common. The
women there struck me at times as wearing things that most any European woman would wear. But amidst
all of this codification of norms that discouraged failing, there has been a really remarkable
shift in what women are doing. Since the 1990s, there's been a move, a whole resurgence,
towards wearing veils in public by women. In fact, an enormous veiling fashion industry has
exploded onto the scene in Turkey. The cultural and political geographer Anna Sikor at the University
of Kentucky, along with her colleague Banu Gokariksel, a professor of geography at University of
North Carolina Chapel Hill, these two have spent the past several years just interviewing women
one-on-one and in focus groups and asking them about their veiling preferences. And what they've
learned is terrifically interesting. First, there's no question that veiling is back with a vengeance.
And this is partly the result of efforts by women themselves to assert the right to wear scarves.
Specifically, there have been numerous political movements to allow scarves on university campuses
and other public places where they've been long band or at least discouraged. And this movement
has been especially strong amongst recent migrants from more rural areas into the city. So in this
way, the veil represents a new form of politics about who gets to control women's dress. Women
find themselves contesting the hijab not only with government authorities, but also then
with one another. And as more veils appear on the street, the geography of the city changes for women.
How so? Some women tell Sikour and Gokariksel that they put on who will remove veils depending
on what part of the city they're in. And this is because veiled women are not expected to be in
places like universities or movie theaters and especially not bars, whereas unveiled women
might not raise an eyebrow in those very same places. For a younger woman, taking the veil means
experiencing, in other words, a kind of changing political geography of the city. Other women push
back against this sensibility in their interviews saying they would work to make it okay or normal
to wear the veil everywhere. For them, the veil is an invitation to rewrite the political
geography of the city. It's a political symbol of a larger struggle. That's one. Second,
even women seeking to advance their right to wear the veil find themselves in a really complicated
place between personal faith and regional politics and global economics. And this is because veils,
as I suggested before, have become part of a major fashion industry. There are top price
name brands of veils competing in an intense market for women's business. Head scarves are found
in the front windows of the most exclusive shops along the most expensive shopping streets in
every major city and even smaller towns throughout Turkey. Women seek out expensive designer scarves
and they often consult one another on where to find key desirable items and important name brands.
Now, all this commercialization doesn't go unnoticed by the women that gocorixel and
secor spoke with. Many of them noted there was a contradiction, right? A contradiction between
the modesty that's demanded by them by their faith and the somewhat immodest nature of really
expensive, high fashion designer labels. Veils have shifted from being something that shows
piety to being something that shows piety and is an object of consumer desire. And this falls
in line with some of the things we've already learned in the last lecture about the tensions
between geographic culture and the economics of commodities. Now, there are countless other
debates that revolve around this question. For example, if women take the veil as a political
protest against an oppressive state rule, are they compromising their own rights as women?
Does a highly commercialized veiling industry represent a vehicle for traditional Islam or
a challenge to those traditions? So all these questions are beyond the consideration and the
time we have here, but they share an important common theme. Very personal cultural practices
are often the tip of the iceberg of deep political geographic questions.
Secor and Gokorixl's geographic research, therefore, tells us a lot. It tells us a lot
about veils, needless to say, but it also hammers home the insights about culture and politics.
Cultural practice and artifacts like headscarves are given meaning by people as part of an
ongoing political struggle. Some behaviors that had no meaning in the past or maybe a different
meaning come to take on new meaning, new social constructions as part of disputes about political
geography. In this case, the political geography of Turkish cities and women in those cities.
I consider how all this compares to the way the hijab is treated in France.
There, public wearing of the headscarf has become a divisive political and cultural struggle.
This all arguably began in 1989 when some young women were requested to remove their headscarves
in school and they refused and they were suspended. Since then, the question of whether
women may take the veil in France has moved back and forth in policy circles resulting in a law
in 2004 that effectively disallows the use of the veil in school. Now, to be clear, the law also
bans any, quote, ostentatious religious symbols, which might include an over-large Christian cross,
perhaps, but the targeted law was unquestionably the hijab. Like Turkey, the French law emerges from
what its defenders would call a push for democratic modernism. The display of religious
symbols in public places, especially state-sponsored public schools, might be viewed as a violation
of French enlightenment principles that separate spiritual and religious acts on the one hand
and those priorities from government functions. In light of this, the ban on the veil is defended
as part of a kind of secular democratic move. Others in France have defended the law under
the argument that it protects women. The veil for these proponents is an article that hides
and discriminates against and oppresses women. Holding to this argument, many opponents of
the veil suggest that women do not take it voluntarily, but instead are forced to do so by
male Muslim culture in the places they reside. Needless to say, this is an argument that itself
kind of harkens back to French policies of the colonial era when colonial officers sought to
extend the virtues of French democracy and modernity to the protection of women in the
colonies across Africa and Southwest Asia. As the geographer Claire Hancock from the
Université de Paris suggests, however, this may have a whole lot less to do with religion
or even women or even modernism than it does with the problem of migrants and ethnic minorities
in France. Applying the questions of cultural geography we reviewed earlier and asking who
has the right to set a norm and how does it become normal, Hancock looks at the problem from the
point of view of geography. In the process, what she's done is taken a careful look in her research
at the notes of the commission in France that debated this control of the veil.
And by looking at these debates in detail, she's looking to identify and understand the underlying
motivations that advocates have, those who advocate a ban on veils in schools. And in particular,
she identifies a feeling by some members of this key government commission that the veil
is a problem emanating out of particular places, locations known as banlieues, citées, or quartiers.
These coutiers are localities within French urban areas, quarters, that describe places
where migrants from outside of France have settled. These areas are very often poor,
as migrant areas are in cities around the world, and their residents are clustered in language and
culture. These places are specifically called out by commission members during the debate
as the source of the problem. This specific geography is seen as the site at which veil
wearing and its anti-modern sentiments are located. Hancock concludes therefore that the argument
over the veil is itself merely a veil over a deeper argument concerning the integration
of ethnic minorities into modern France. This is a debate she suggests about universalism,
but that's the principle in France that differences in the national body should
not be recognized and that they should instead be overcome. For those who advocate this principle,
the presence of pockets of acute geographic difference presents a kind of a conundrum.
These coutiers, these quarters, are of course the product of all the forces we've already
reviewed in this course, economic globalization, urbanization, migration, and so on. Yet these
larger forces are never the question under debate. Instead, all the debate focuses on is
the veil, and so the cultural geography of the veil stands in for political geography,
economic geography, the politics of migration all go unsaid in a struggle over the veil.
If we compare the cultural geographies of the veil in Turkey and France, we learn a lot about
cultural geography. We see similarities and we see differences. In both cases, the veil does stand
in for something else. Arguments about veils are a proxy conflict over secular versus religious
governance, for example, in Turkey, just as they are proxy for conflicts over migration and acculturation
in France. In each case, veils are socially constructed in a conflict over meaning.
And this underlines the key lesson of this lecture, that culture is sometimes politics
by other means. I'd invite you to consider this question yourself. I mean, are there
cultural practices or norms that you know from your own experience that are linked to larger
politics? And how are these influenced by spatial variation, settlement history, or related to
geographic influences? Off the top of my head, a huge number of other examples jump to mind,
including things like intensive lawn care, or Spanish spoken in the grade school classroom,
or urban gardening, or ethnic parades and ethnic festivals. In all these kind of banal examples,
vast environmental, political, and economic issues are bound up. In the tiny micro cultural
practices we see around us every day. And this conclusion also reinforces the more general
lesson of this course. In this case, the urban political geography of cities in Turkey and France
has a profound influence on the women that live there, as we can already see. Norms of urban space
make it harder or easier to wear the veil in some locations. Geography, in other words,
influences people and their experience. At the same time, of course, women's political actions
to retake the veil and give it new meaning in Turkey have a reverse impact. They actually
change urban geography. People are influenced by the geographic context, even as they again
make and remake the geography around them. But the fights over the hijab in these two
countries are actually also very different, owing to the unique political geographies
of both nations. For Turkey, the debate over veils takes place in a majority Muslim country,
working through questions of tradition, women's emergence in the economy,
and the tensions between economy, governance, and personal expression.
In France, on the other hand, the debate is situated in a place with a visible Muslim minority
operating within a post-colonial government context. So we learn a lot about each place
by studying the conflicts that play out differently there. Now, curiously, the debates are both
taking place in the hearts of two collapsed empires, French and Ottoman. And I think,
actually, this is perhaps the most salient fact of the case, and it's probably no coincidence at all.
This is because the actual political geography of each of these nations echoes in every part of
these struggles, including the relationship of each nation to its neighbors, as well as its old
empires, as well as to the problem of minority populations within a majority territory.
And these questions, unsurprisingly, do extend beyond cultural geography, and they rarely lie at
the heart of one of human geography's other most vibrant sub-disciplines, which is political geography.
And so that area of research will turn during the last part of this course.
