Most people associate India with starvation.
They imagine a country of one billion people unable to feed themselves.
But the truth is far, far from that image, India has become the world's largest exporter of rice.
It's probably the world's largest exporter of buffalo meat, and it's one of the largest exporters of wheat.
Now, it is true that the nutritional statistics for India are deeply problematic.
Food is poorly distributed and difficult to access, which leads to grinding poverty and hunger in both rural and urban areas.
But this isn't because India doesn't produce enough food.
Surprisingly, in fact, it does. But this wasn't always so.
The Bengal famine of 1770 probably killed 10 million people, maybe a third of the people who were living in that region.
And this certainly wasn't the only famine of the colonial era.
Devastating starvation was recurrent throughout the 19th century, all the way up until the early 1940s,
just prior to the departure of the British from South Asia.
So what happened? How did one of the most famine and starvation-prone regions of the world emerge as a major agricultural powerhouse and food exporter?
How did it come to be among the most sophisticated agricultural nations in the world?
Well, this question touches on far more important and widespread issues than just the Indian subcontinent.
As noted in a previous lecture, population will cease to grow sometime in this century,
but by that time, 10 billion of us will live on the surface of the earth.
Can we feed all of those people?
In order to examine agriculture, at least in a meaningful way, we're going to have to use the tools and measurements of farming systems.
Geographers use an approach called comparative farming systems to break farming down into a few key components
and describe and better understand how agriculture works.
And this approach allows us to compare different ways of getting food out of the land.
For our purposes here today, there's really three key descriptive factors.
I'm going to go through them each in turn.
Intensity, technology, and market orientation.
Intensity describes the quantity of food, usually measured in some kind of weight,
that comes off a given quantity of land, usually measured in some area.
So a very low intensity system of agriculture, like dry rice cultivation in Northern Thailand,
that might produce as little as 1,000 kilograms of food per hectare per year.
That's a measure of intensity.
Irrigated rice cultivation in Northern California, by contrast, is high intensity,
and it might produce as many as 10 times that quantity.
So note that intensity is not a measure of how food is grown by machines or hand labor,
or why food is grown, either to feed the farmer or to sell it on the market.
It's simply a measure of how much stuff is coming off the land.
And it also allows us to measure changes in production,
so that when the amount of food produced per hectare increases over time, when that number goes up,
we refer to that as intensification of agriculture from intensity.
Technology, the second of our indicators, refers to the amount of energy that goes into the farming system,
typically measured in joules of energy.
So low technology systems, like forest gardening in the Amazon,
they may use as little or more than the occasional work of a few farmers with a simple few hand tools.
Higher technology systems may mobilize enormous energy systems, power hungry tractors,
automated and powered irrigation, significant inputs of pesticides and fertilizers.
And the main input into the manufacture of those pesticides and fertilizers, it should be noted, is petroleum.
So these are the direct products of energy.
Hot house farming in southern France, that cultivates crops of really high value, like winter tomatoes.
The French really have to have high quality winter tomatoes, unlike in the United States, or they go crazy.
So it's an example of an incredibly demanding system that can produce that kind of food year-round.
These greenhouse farms demand external heating systems and carefully pumped water in this really complicated hydroponic system,
where the tomatoes are grown without soil and inputs from artificial fertilizers along with machines
and big labor systems to pick the right fruit.
And these are pretty high-tech outfits, in other words.
The third measure of a farming system is market orientation.
Market orientation simply refers to how much of the product that's produced in that farming system,
how much of that is intended for the market, how much of it will be sold, and how much it will be consumed by the growers themselves.
That's a proportion, a percentage.
In Nepal, farmers grow cereal grains on these really steep hillsides cut into terraces, famous landscape.
And a majority of that harvest is actually intended for the tables of farmers.
Now contrast that with wheat production in Canada, where 100% of the product is destined for the market.
So these three measures apply to any and all food production in the world, and they vary enormously.
It should be pointed out that they don't vary amongst themselves in any simple way.
That is, high-intensity systems aren't always necessarily market-oriented, and subsistence systems aren't exclusively low-tech.
So take, for example, traditional wet rice cultivation systems in China.
Now for this kind of system, what you want to imagine is a really complicated landscape.
It's got rice ponds, which are separated by these vegetated berms and linked through a complex array of locks and gates to control water flow.
And these systems often integrate fish production with rice production and maybe cultivation of mulberry bushes, which produce silkworms and silk.
So the inputs into these systems include large numbers of rural laborers, sophisticated seasonal work pattern, and most of this rice is simply by the families who work the land.
So this is a highly intensive and technologically complex farming system, but it's remained heavily oriented towards subsistence production, local eating.
Conversely, some of the most low-intentioned systems in the world are often really market-oriented, ranching.
In the United States or Canada, for example, has always been a really extensive affair, with a number of animals herded over huge stretches of both public and private land.
And as a measure, the food per area ratio here is really, really low, so it's a low-intensity outfit.
Even so, amongst all the food produced through ranching, all of it is headed for the market.
So now we have a vocabulary to rigorously describe farming.
And we're going to use that language to explore how change occurs in agriculture, how more food comes off the same amount of land over time.
So for most of human history, the intensity of agricultural production was really low.
Consider that villagers, whether those are in Europe or the Amazon or wherever, would typically farm the same plot of land for a few seasons,
and then as the soil became exhausted, they'd rotate to an adjacent plot for several years, only returning to the original land after its fertility had recovered.
This system is called fallowing, meaning that resting and rotation of land is very extensive.
Since most of the land is necessarily always out of production and resting, fallowing is inefficient in terms of productivity per unit land
and requires large amounts of land for production.
But this system of farming was successful enough to lead to increases in population.
Over time, these population increases put new pressure on the fallow system.
Farmers needed to harvest more food from the same amount of land, and so the cycle for fallowing grew shorter and shorter.
Shorter fallowing resulted in lower productivity, which placed the whole food system in jeopardy and inevitably led to new kinds of farming.
Agricultural economist Esther Boestrup, who we mentioned earlier, first observed this phenomenon decades ago.
As she recounts in her really, really influential book, The Conditions of Agricultural Growth, this is a nice short book for those of you who get impatient.
Innovations can offset the kinds of losses that I'm describing.
Farmers can learn to supplement the nutrient inputs, the stuff that goes into their systems,
either by putting manure on it or later on through inputs from external sources.
And then new kinds of irrigation can be used to allow farming over longer and multiple seasons
by carrying water either from off-farm locations or dams or from aquifers deep underground.
The result is all the same.
New levels of inputs result in higher levels of productivity.
And the productivity of laborers was also enhanced enormously by the invention of new kinds of tools and implements.
The result is, ironically, that increases in population have historically resulted in great gains in the quantity of available food
rather than a decline in food supplies, which is what Pastor Malthus, as you recall, would have predicted.
So the United States is indicative of this trend.
Between 1900 and 2010, the U.S. population grew from 76 million people to 308 million while more than tripling its food output.
Over the same period, the percentage of the population actually involved in farming fell from 38% of the total population.
That means 38% of people were involved in agriculture at that time.
By 2010, it's less than half of a percent.
And the global data on food supports this even further.
Between 1961 and 2007, the world's production of cereal grains increased from less than a billion metric tons annually to almost 2.5 billion,
so way more than double, significantly outpacing population growth.
And this, in part, answers our overarching question.
Can we feed a growing population?
Well, it appears the answer is yes, at least so far.
But the more complex lesson is that solutions to these kinds of problems of intensifying production typically require linking our local farming system to other locations geographically.
I think about it.
Externally sourced nutrients, fertilizers, rerouted water, imported technology, all these things need to come from somewhere else.
And this changes farming forever.
Moving farms away from being isolated but largely independent affairs to becoming systems with connections around the globe.
It changes farming systems from what we might call traditional, internally sourced systems to farming systems that are externally sourced and externally oriented.
Some of these connections are problematic, and many of them might be unsustainable.
And that raises further questions about the prospect of feeding the globe.
But let's explore this transition further.
Let's imagine what a traditional farm looks like, at least in the abstract.
We can consider an example from India again, from the state of Rajasthan.
Rajasthan is a place in northwest India where I perform research for many years and where you can still find some and many traditional farms.
Rajasthan is really rural.
It's one of the most arid regions in the country, lots of sand dunes.
A traditional farm here might grow a mix of hard grains like millet, along with some legumes like lentils.
If you've ever gone out for an Indian meal and you've eaten dal, you're eating lentils.
And this mix of foods provides a solid protein diet with small animal nutrient supplements like milk and yogurt from goats, things like that.
Now the farmer would traditionally grow this mix of grains during a single season.
They'd plant in July and they'd harvest in October.
And that's synchronized with the rainfall of the monsoon, which sweeps across South Asia during that period.
These grains and legumes were so sturdy a crop that they required really only a few rainfall events.
Just a few rains so that even in bad monsoon, you might get a fair harvest.
It's a nice conservative, reliable way to farm.
Inputs into a farm like this might include a small quantity of irrigated water drawn from a well on the property,
along with nutrient inputs, fertilizer, but really coming in the form of dung from cattle or small animals like goats or sheep.
Where did the seeds come from in a traditional system like this?
Seeds for planting were those held over from the previous planting season.
They weren't purchased. They were just retained out of the harvest.
And they were selected with what could have to be called scientific care by the farmer,
because they were selected for their good qualities.
It's like tolerating drought, how productive they are, whether they're resistant to pests, all those kinds of things.
A system like this has really elegant cycles. It's really a thing of beauty.
Nature provides the sun and the water. The farm produces food for the labor and the livestock,
which are in turn folded back into the soil. It's a nice loop.
And the resulting farm system is one that we could call largely internally focused.
It depends on locally available inputs. It reproduces its own seeds.
It produces food for consumption locally, but rarely results in really big bumper crops
that might allow the marketing of big food surpluses to towns or cities or neighboring settlements.
What little surplus there might have been historically was collected as a tax by local landlords.
So the system was reliable, but only modest in production.
So that's kind of an abstraction, but I have seen that kind of agricultural system in action.
Now the pressures on these systems began acting throughout the colonial era and then into the present.
Very many forces came out of those global interactions that played out in a specific way,
all over India, but also all over the world in the last century and a half.
And here's what they are. First, population increased in both urban and rural areas.
And these things happened for the reasons described in the previous lecture
and included the modernization of health care and improved living conditions
and increased longevity of populations.
But this trend was tied to an even more important one, the globalization of the economy
and the integration of even the most far-flung places and farms
into cash economies, banking, debt systems, and new markets.
With all these systems and institutions came new taxes and demands for cash on the farm.
So a Rajasthani producer would have been increasingly put in the position to increase production
and sell more and more of the farm's products to generate cash.
Now this allows, in fact it encourages, a really big change in the way farms work.
Specifically, new and increasing technological inputs are available
in the form of artificial nutrients, pesticides, along with irrigation water from farm sources,
all the things I described before, and supplies of what are now paid labor from other areas.
Now these inputs are often expensive and they require the generation of capital,
both through loans and then again the sale of the products coming off the farm itself.
So new crops can become necessary only to market demands or better congruence with mechanized production,
along with new institutional partners like middlemen who buy your crop,
university extension agents, and seed sellers.
In India, this whole reworking that I'm describing, changing the farm escape,
was accelerated by something called the Green Revolution.
This was a massive system of innovations and investments that was made into agriculture
during the 1960s and 1970s.
It was centered at key universities and at key international agencies,
and these created and disseminated new varieties of food crops,
new seeds that would, in theory, produce bumper yields when paired with important industrial inputs,
especially fertilizers.
Pioneered by scientists, including the Nobel Prize-winning Norman Borlaug,
the Green Revolution had its own scientific geography.
So for example, international agencies worked to link specific universities in the United States
like Ohio State University, Cornell University, the University of Wisconsin, many others,
to several specific target countries around the world, including Egypt, Mexico, India, among others.
These partnerships were built to create and maintain experimentation and support.
Target countries were inundated with new seeds from experimental farms that crossbred crops
to perform at high levels of intensity.
The results were part of this explosion in cereal grain production, which I described above in India.
Food importing countries turned into food exporting countries through an intensification process
linked to increasing technological investments.
More food was coming off the same amount of land.
That's the big point.
It was doing so by increasing the flow of inputs into the system.
That's kilojoules of energy taking the form of tractors and petrol and paid labor
and pesticides and fertilizers.
The resulting farm system is one we would call externally focused.
It depends on externally sourced inputs and seeds secured off-farm,
and therefore it demands cultivation and maintenance of off-farm markets for the sale of surpluses
where these bumper harvests can generate capital for reinvestment into the necessary inputs.
So in the language of farming systems, increasing market orientation, getting more stuff on the market,
is the necessary condition to maintain the technological shift that drives intensification
in something like the Green Revolution.
In the language of geography, this farm system has become spatially distributed.
It means it's tied to far away sites of production, like tractor factories in Iowa,
experimental farms in the Philippines, commodity markets in Hong Kong or the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
Those far away places are now linked to our little farm in Rajasthan,
and the shift by its nature is a one-way trip.
Shifting to high productivity seed sources tends to be a permanent change,
in part because those kinds of seeds are bred to be really productive in the year they're planted,
but not to maintain that vigor in future generations.
This means farmers have to go out and buy seeds instead of saving them.
They'll experience a lower yield from one year to the next unless they can continue to purchase seeds from seed breeders.
A greater significance is a massive shift in the source of nutrients that must go into the soil.
Think about it historically. Historically, where does fertilizer come from on a farm?
Those inputs would have come out of the back end of a sheep,
or through a covering crop of some kind that provides nutrients,
or maybe just by resting the land for long periods,
but the intensity of green revolution production is ravenous.
Demanding lots more out of the soil, more nitrogen in particular comes out
than can reasonably be expected to find its way back in, at least through traditional means.
So for this reason, one of the most important technological breakthroughs in human history is required,
and this is the so-called Haber-Bosch process.
It's named for German chemists and engineers Fritz Haber and Karl Bosch.
What is this procedure? What it does is it takes nitrogen that's actually circulating around, in the air, around us,
and through a reaction of nitrogen gas and hydrogen gas creates ammonia.
It's the key input for fertilizer.
That seems pretty banal, but this is really remarkable and in fact almost miraculous achievement.
First, it really first made possible at the start of the 20th century,
it now provides an external source for soil nutrients that had historically always been sourced, right?
Internally. A startling.
One third of the world's food, or maybe more, depends entirely on fertilizers produced this way.
In fact, I'd put Haber-Bosch up there with the wheel, or like powered flight,
among one of the most important, though problematic, inventions in the history of our species,
but I'm digressing about Haber-Bosch. I could talk about Haber-Bosch all day.
The point here is that this allows a massive increase in crop yields, more stuff to come off the land.
So most of the food we eat would simply have been impossible without it.
Once a farm comes to defend, depend on, purchase nutrients, there's just little or no chance that you can turn back.
Lost nutrients have to be replaced, often at a higher and faster rate all the time,
with an increasing need for more inputs all the time.
Similarly, and even more problematically, chemical pesticides can raise production greatly,
but over time, their effectiveness tends to fall off.
And if that effectiveness decreases, then you need to use more pesticides, insecticides, or herbicides,
simply to achieve the same effect.
This is because pest species, bugs, undergo evolutionary selection when faced with deadly toxins.
Those individual insects, which are best able to survive the new pesticide innovations that are put on,
those insects are the ones that go on to live and therefore reproduce,
leading in just a few generations to immunity in a whole species of pests.
And that kind of immunity means farmers have to use what?
More and more of the same active ingredient of pesticide year after year to get the same effect
or buy whole new kinds of pesticide inputs.
So for both nutrients and pesticides, this is a chemical treadmill that's been observed all around the world
in the period since the Green Revolution.
This treadmill means that once you step on, ever-accelerating input demands have to be met just to stay in the same place.
Consider, moreover, that many of these inputs are created from, as I mentioned, petroleum.
And their prices tend to rise as energy resources become scarcer worldwide.
These high costs have led to high levels of farmer debt, which has actually led to significant higher,
or higher than average, suicide rates among many populations of farmers.
So this radically capitalized food system has a lot of advantages, but obviously has high costs.
In the case of arid India, back to Rajasthan, as well as many other places in the world,
the new crops selected for production are often less drought tolerant than their native counterparts.
Wheat, for example, requires significantly more water than millet,
and the displacement of one for the other in Rajasthan has required the proliferation of tube wells.
These are deep bore wells across the desert.
These inputs of water, especially groundwater, are coming from a limited and declining source under the ground.
So all these trends tend to raise questions about the sustainability of our current agricultural system.
As a result, scientists and farmers are looking towards new kinds of technological revolutions
to help sustain an advanced intensification of agriculture worldwide.
The challenges they see are numerous, and many of them are actually an inadvertent result of the Green Revolution itself.
Notably, the success of global agriculture has challenged water supplies, as I mentioned, around the world.
Can we create crops that actually use less water?
And using high levels of pesticides has resulted in high levels of farmer poisoning.
Can we reduce that?
In fact, the World Health Organization estimates an excess of 250,000 people die every year
from pesticide poisoning.
And as I mentioned earlier, this has made even more problematic
because pesticides are becoming less and less effective due to pest resistance.
So can new breeds of crops be pest resistant so that those kinds of inputs are no longer necessary or maybe less necessary?
Those are two tough questions.
And the answer for some observers, many, lies in the innovation of genetically modified varieties of food crops.
Genetically modified organisms, you know this term GMOs, are forms of traditional organisms in which direct genetic tinkering introduces a new gene sequence to the plant.
And that'll cause it to express new traits.
There are two innovations in this area that are highly touted and increasingly common in crops around the world.
And these are, quote, roundup ready crops and, quote, BT crops.
You've probably heard of both.
Roundup ready crops have modified genetic codes that cause the crop to be resistant to the herbicide glyphosate.
Now, glyphosate is a chemical that used to kill a wide range of weeds and grasses around the world.
It's very common in the U.S.
And it was released commercially with the trade name Roundup many, many years ago.
So that's why these crops are called Roundup Ready.
Genetically modifying the crops so that they're resistant to glyphosate allows the herbicide to be used liberally with no risk to the crop itself.
Only to the problematic weeds which are growing in the fields that might hurt the crop's productivity.
This allows what? Intensification of production because weeds can be much more easily controlled with an inexpensive broad-spectrum product like that.
So you can see where the idea is genetic modification creates a more intensive outcome.
A second kind of crop is BT crops.
BT crops possess genetic code that causes the plant to produce the so-called BT protein.
The BT protein, which is produced by a gene borrowed from the bacillus thuringensis microorganism, wards off certain insect pest species like corn borers, for example.
And it doesn't need any pesticides.
Without the use of pesticides, none of the pesticides, in a sense, in the plant, in the corn crop itself.
And this allows intensification by offsetting the needs for inputs altogether.
Now, as you can immediately imagine, each of these has very different implications.
While round-up ready crops, for example, tend to result in the increased use of pesticides, or at least of glyphosate, BT crops have the reverse effect.
But either way, they're seen by many as key components in a new food production revolution to sustain the growth of food supplies without expanding the very limited supply we have of land.
And these innovations suggest that the follow-up to the Green Revolution, according to the proponents, may be a gene revolution, a revolution in genetics.
GMOs are hugely controversial, of course.
Some regions, like the European Union, have banned their use, whereas some countries, like the United States, plant them with very few restrictions.
In those parts of the world where the Green Revolution was so important, GMO genes are increasingly found in the crops.
BT cotton has become increasingly accepted by farmers in India, although BT eggplant, that's a food crop, has been widely rejected by the Indian public, so it's a really complicated cultural and political landscape.
Concern has also been raised that BT corn varieties introduced into Mexico might greatly endanger the existence of native corn varieties.
That is, varieties of corn that have been adapted over the millennia to the specific ecological conditions of Mexico.
Supporters of the gene revolution insist that this innovation is basically a necessary next step for advancing intensification and food production and sustainability.
Other observers are less confident that genetic modification will provide the solution to the world's food problems, and instead they suggest that we need to examine food distribution and consumption.
Consider food waste.
As Jonathan Foley, who is the director of the Institute on the Environment at the University of Minnesota, a great writer, has recently pointed out,
a total of no less than one third, and perhaps as much as one half of the world's food is never even consumed, goes totally to waste.
Instead, it's wasted somewhere along the chain between the field and our mouths.
But how did we lose so much food?
In poor places, it's lost to pests or bad infrastructure.
In wealthier countries, food goes stale in supermarkets and restaurants and in our own refrigerators.
You know you're guilty.
So that outstanding figure, that's a big figure, half the food, suggests that if we were to eliminate all food waste just in the abstract,
we could almost double the world's food supply without changing anything, inputs or production, one bit, if feed twice as many people.
Foley also draws attention to the amount of productive agricultural capacity that isn't used to produce food at all.
The corn yield in the United States, for example, is incredibly intensive and productive, but it's a terrible food system overall.
Corn produces a startling 150 to 160 bushels per acre.
That's a high number.
There's a huge amount of potential food.
But much of that crop, about 40% of it, is used for the production of biofuels.
Ethanol that goes into automobile gas tanks.
So that amount offsets about 10% of the petroleum that would otherwise be burning in the cars.
That's a really poor trade-off, in Foley's opinion.
Another 36% of the U.S. corn winds up feeding cattle and pigs and chickens.
These animals produce a far lower number of calories than the raw grain itself, suggesting gross inefficiencies in the way we're managing our food.
Returning to the calculations of geographer Vaclav Smil, whose work we reviewed earlier in the course,
we can think about the scale of agricultural production that's required to produce all of that meat.
Adding all the inputs necessary to support the 1.6 billion large agricultural animals that were raised for consumption in 2000,
that's all the animals that were raised, along with 14 billion chickens and other fowl, we'd need, I know there's a lot of numbers,
but just get a sense here of what it takes to feed all these animals, 1.3 gigatons of feed.
Now, a gigaton is a billion tons, and that would demand, even under liberal estimates, a third of all total available cultivated land.
That should cause your jaw to drop, a third.
So by choosing to produce all that food grain for the production of meat, we've poured a lot of resources into producing less and less food.
But in a meat-hungry world like ours, high input inefficiency seems to be the rule.
Critics of the food system necessarily think that less meat might be a good answer to our problems.
And by way of disclosure, I'm a meat-eater.
Other critics of the food system see different kinds of social innovation that might lead to better food systems.
Many people have turned to self-provisioning with urban farms and gardens appearing all around the world in places like Nairobi and Detroit,
where the soils are often toxic.
People have become incredibly adept at producing new soils for themselves through intensive composting of waste materials
and the productive harnessing of worms, these big red worms, to make whole new soils for farming in post-industrial landscapes.
The organization Growing Power, the name of the organization, is centered in Milwaukee, Wisconsin,
and it's pioneered a community-focused and market-based farming system in one of the lowest income urban areas in the U.S.
Growing Power has created a complicated, complex, integrated agricultural system in the middle of abandoned properties
and foreclosed homes and shuttered industrial sites, including a really complex experimental aquaculture system
that merges crop production, composting of new soils, and the raising of tilapia fish for local markets all in a big integrated system.
So for groups like this, the secret to feeding the population of the future doesn't lie in GMOs.
It lies in the careful integration of food technology systems through local community development, and they suggest it's an alternative.
So, in this lecture, we've seen how more food can indeed come off of less land, but this requires solving a geographical puzzle.
It's a puzzle of moving people and inputs and outputs and commodities to and from other places in the world.
We've seen the complex interaction between the intensity of agriculture and the technological systems that underpin the food supply and production,
as well as how farming relates to complex markets.
And we've also seen how the intensification of agriculture, getting more stuff off the land, has happened historically and how it happened during the Green Revolution.
We learned that it consistently outpaced the growth of human populations.
But I've also suggested that the geographical solutions that make this transition possible come with a serious cost in terms of sustainability.
The debates continue to rage about how these geographic contradictions are going to get solved,
whether through GMO technologies or addressing food waste or innovating local food systems,
whichever the three of these solutions or some combination of these, whatever it is, will come to dominate our food system in the future.
And it's an unanswered question and it's got enormous implications for an increasingly globalized and integrated world.
