On October 7th, 2001, the United States and its allies invaded Afghanistan in an effort
to rout its Taliban leaders as well as the forces of al-Qaeda that had taken shelter
there in the run-up to the attacks of September 11th of that same year.
But this certainly isn't the first war to take place in Afghanistan.
The rule of the Taliban in Afghanistan is itself the downstream effect of U.S. support
for Mujahideen fighters in the 1980s, after all, who were fighting a Soviet invasion that
came in 1979 and the British.
The British fought no fewer than three wars in Afghanistan in the 19th and early 20th
centuries.
There's a history of tragic violence that's put Afghanistan and especially Afghanistan
time and again in the middle of terrible conflict, and all of this conflict raises an interesting
question, why were there so many wars in Afghanistan?
An initial answer might suggest that there's something about Afghanistan's history that
makes it a place where conflict has occurred, and that'd be a really good answer.
For the next half hour, I'm going to weigh the merits of a different kind of answer,
one that has a long history of its own.
That other answer is that Afghanistan has a specific geography that puts it in a cartographic
position that left it regrettably in the path of violent outside actors who've created
its terrible situation and its history of tragedy.
This answer is one that draws on geopolitics, an approach to politics that explicitly addresses
the global configuration of powers within a set of contentious relationships.
Using some key examples and reviewing the history of this idea, we'll see that thinking
geopolitically does reveal some interesting features in the geography of international
conflict, but we'll see too that thinking geopolitically is an approach founded on some
troubling assumptions, and so geopolitical thinking can be extremely misleading, and
it has often dangerous implications.
In doing so, I will also be entering the last part of our course, the portion dedicated
to thinking about the field of political geography.
For want of a better definition, political geography includes those parts of geography
that are dedicated to studying power and territory, sovereignty, states, and governance.
Of course, if you've been paying attention at all, you'll notice we've covered a lot
of that stuff already in the course, whether we were thinking about how women's power
may impact their family choices, or how different state strategies like liberalization or international
relationships like dependency have led to economic underdevelopment or environmental
change.
Still, there are some topics we've not begun to broach, and each will be covered here in
turn.
First, we'll ask whether political cartography can be used to explain political outcomes
in the world, as in Afghanistan, and next, we'll examine the problem of partition and
ask whether borders might be drawn to better account for historical, ethnic, and cultural
differences, or whether this is folly, a really bad idea.
Finally, we'll ask the question whether there are problems that are simply too large for
states to solve, and if there's any hope, of interstate action and cooperation.
All of these are signature questions of political geography, but first, geopolitics.
There are many definitions of geopolitics, and most of them are pretty muddled.
For our purposes, geopolitics simply includes any approach to explaining political outcomes
in the world, or devising political strategy by looking at or making a map.
Simple enough.
It's an old tradition.
The term was probably first coined by the Swedish political scientist Rudolf Kjellin,
but as a major force in intellectual history, its greatest real progenitor was a fellow
by the name of Sir Halford McKinder.
You can remember that name.
McKinder was a geographer who lived from 1861 all the way to 1947, and he engaged in a lot
of the key geographic debates of his day, including some that we've already discussed, like environmental
determinism.
Well, he's famous for a lot of stuff, but chief among these was his effort to develop
a theory of global geographic power.
He searched for a theory that could both explain the hegemonic power of Great Britain during
his time, right, the late 19th and early 20th century, but also helped to maintain that
power.
And to do that, McKinder chose to look at maps, and in doing so, he made one of the strongest
and most radical assertions of what would come to be known as geopolitics.
He suggested that a glance at the global map would reveal a simple pattern.
The world, in his view, was divided into three zones of power.
The first of these zones, he called the Outer Crescent, which included the bands of seas
and oceans stretching from the North Atlantic down to the Cape of Good Hope, eastward across
the Indian Ocean, into Maritime Asia, and onto the Pacific.
And that zone was one where British force had always been triumphant, at least recently,
owing to the power of its navy.
A second, less important band fell inside that first one, and this so-called Marginal Crescent
crossed Western Europe, stretching across South Asia and into mainland China.
And that zone was at the margin of this crescent and represented most of the parts of the world
where Britain exerted colonial power, again, largely owing to the power its navy had, which
dominated the Outer Crescent.
But in the center of these two crescents, like a big bullseye, lay McKinder's third zone
of power, this McKinder called the Pivot Area, or more grandly, because he was a big picture
thinker, the geographical pivot of history.
That zone marked the vastness of interior Asia starting east of Europe and engulfing
all of Siberia and Inner Asia, and including much of the Himalayas and Western China.
Now that area, McKinder insisted, was impenetrable to British sea power, quite obviously.
If it was controlled, it was stitched up and stitched together with railroad networks and
integrated into a big unified economy, he argued it could withstand invasion and be
used to strike out for world domination, like a big game of risk, right?
In McKinder's time, I should point out, this was the domain of Imperial Russia, and then,
of course, later, the Soviet Union.
And that's a matter we'll see is of no significance at all to Afghanistan.
McKinder's map, and its accompanying grand argument, was called his Heartland thesis,
it suggested that by controlling this Heartland, you could ultimately command the world.
Now, the degree to which this theory holds any water, and it's got a lot of problems,
is really of less interest to us than the kind of cartographic imagination that it required
to come up with, the vision to read the power of nations off the vast configuration of a
global map and to set a strategy to control the world, sounds.
So what McKinder would inaugurate with this oversimple map was a grand strategic way for
especially powerful countries to look at the world map for clues to projecting and maintaining
power.
Modern geographical or geopolitical ideas developed from this basic set of concepts.
These held that geographic configurations could be read for strategic theory.
Now there's many of these theories, and they span the length of the 19th and 20th centuries,
and they take a lot of different forms.
But each of them has had implications for state strategies, and they've had real impacts.
For example, there are a range of geopolitical theories that attest to the power of buffer
states.
Buffer states are autonomous, independent nations that sit at the boundaries of major
powers and are controlled and supported to provide a non-militarized border between that
power and what might be hostile nearby neighbors.
Any strategic plan involving buffer states typically stresses the management of adjacent
countries for defensive purposes.
Now this kind of thinking, it actually predates McKinder of course, but it has its roots in
the colonial contestation of Asia that would lead to McKinder's thinking.
In particular, beginning in the early 1800s, it was clear that British ambitions in India
were becoming paramount to the British Empire and its whole economy.
At that time, British access to the subcontinent and all of its key trade goods and its huge
markets, all of that was by sea.
Now at the same moment, the Russian Empire was in a state of expansion, consolidating
its control of Central Asia and Siberia and extending its influences southward.
Looking from India, imperial geostrategic thinkers could only imagine that a direct
Russian border with India would threaten the, quote, Jewel in the Crown, as India would
come to be known.
The decision was made to advance a vast intelligence network into the border regions of India,
especially Tibet and Afghanistan.
If you want a good glimpse of what this looks like, Richard Kipling's book, Kim, you can
read it in an afternoon and it's a rip roaring good tale, but it tells you something about
how people were thinking at the time.
In this, they called the Great Game, although it was followed by actually an actual full
offensive to secure Afghanistan as a buffer state to possible Russian aggression.
So the Great Game was really anything but playful.
The next three Anglo-Afghan wars are notable for their brutality as well as their total
futility.
The First War between 1839 and 1842 began with a British victory, but ultimately a really
terrible uprising and then defeat.
The Second War went from 1878 to 1880 and it went better for the British and left Afghanistan
as a kind of puppet state for the empire in the late 19th century.
The third and final Afghan war was a short and bloody one in 1919 and it was fought to
a standstill but resulted in ongoing tribal uprisings against the Raj in its border areas.
And I'd point out that these border areas today are parts of Pakistan that are still
populated by autonomous tribes about which we're going to hear a little more later on.
And these uprisings of course would dog the British for years really until they leave
India.
The point to take home here is that the British achieved very little in these conflicts even
when they were victorious.
In a sense then, British efforts in Afghanistan were driven by a tacitly, McKinder-like view
of the world.
The pivot point of history lay in Central Asia, the British power lay in the peripheral sea
lanes of the outer crescent, strategy dictated that British power contend for those pressure
points between the two and maintain a heavy hand on the edges of what McKinder would later
call the world island.
In short, Britain followed McKinder right into a quagmire.
In this sense, Afghanistan's tragic location may not have had much actual geopolitical
importance but it had theoretical geopolitical importance and it held a kind of significance
in the way great powers of the day imagined the world.
The results were pretty disastrous both for the failed British expeditions but also and
especially for Afghans who suffered greatly in these three wars.
So geopolitical thinking may have set more of a trap for the British Empire than it did
a road to supremacy.
Despite the lessons of Central Asia, the allure of geopolitical thinking survived into the
20th century although it took on some new forms.
This kind of buffer thinking unquestionably held sway in Moscow during the time of the
Soviet Union.
It certainly accounts for the creation of the Warsaw Pact, a coercively arranged military
treaty to offset NATO in the West that enrolled all of the Eastern European countries that
bordered the Soviet Union, especially including Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary,
Poland.
The strength and configuration of the alliance was predicated on the major land invasion
routes into Russia across which armies had marched successfully in both the 19th and
the 20th century.
Whatever the real threat of NATO to the Soviet Union, the Kremlin's arrangement of its treaty
organization was definitely one made while hunkering over a map.
Maintaining this buffer system became politically and economically untenable however.
It's somewhat unclear of course whether this geopolitical thinking actually ultimately
took a toll on the Soviet Union but it's very likely.
It's kind of interesting to think that geopolitical thinking may itself have had a role in the
undoing of Soviet power even as at one point it was deemed essential for Soviet survival.
On the other side of the Cold War, another key modern geopolitical theory with real world
consequences was rolling out as well and that's the so-called domino theory.
The name for this geopolitical theory was coined by President Dwight Eisenhower in a
press conference in 1954 and there he said, I'm quoting, you have a roll of dominoes set
up, you knock over the first one and what will happen to the last one is a certainty
that it will go over very quickly, end quote.
Since that press conference was focused on trade, natural resources and security in Asia,
this clearly shows large scale geopolitical thinking with potentially huge strategic
implications.
In particular, Eisenhower was concerned about the expansion of communist power in Asia with
countries adjacent to China coming into risk of serial collapse to communism like dominoes
including Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia together called Indochina at the time followed by Burma
and Thailand and later Indonesia and as France's colonial power in Southeast Asia was dwindling
in 1954, this theory pretended some pretty serious issues for the United States.
Now the degree to which domino theory, stated or unstated, drove the United States' entrance
into the Vietnam War and the later escalation of the war is debatable and probably beyond
the point of discussion.
But this theory clearly spelled out an imperative to kind of draw the line at Vietnam and that's
a decision that the Johnson and Nixon administrations would ultimately regret as the war dragged
on at terrible cost in the next decade.
So what's clear from both of these cases is that 20th century Cold War geopolitics born
of MacKinder's way of thinking was a seductive way of thinking about the globe.
It operated on a global scale and an invited strategy for especially global powerful players.
But what's also clear is that it's difficult to separate the actual geopolitical importance
of these places, Afghanistan or Vietnam, which were all wrapped up in these grand theories
from the concept that they're geopolitically important places.
And what I mean here is that simply that many geographers have argued that geopolitical
theory is an important insight not into the globe, but into the way 20th century colonial
and Cold War leaders thought about the globe, which led to a number of major decisions,
some of which led to trouble and sometimes disaster.
Now having said this, and before we think about alternatives to geopolitics, it might
be useful to think about many situations where geopolitics of some kind or another are both
evident and of some real practical utility.
As a kind of geographic method, geopolitics invites us to look at the map and to look at
the map from the point of view of different actors and walk around in their shoes a bit.
Now here, I'll briefly use the cases of Ukraine and North Korea, both of which are key geostrategic
sites and which tell us how the map matters in thinking about the state of our political
world and how the same map, most importantly, looks different to different actors.
To begin with, the nation of Ukraine, it's a former Soviet republic positioned north
of the Black Sea and west of Russia.
The country has a long history of standing somewhat divided in terms of its allegiances
and interests to the West, where Europe and NATO lie, and the East.
And these tensions resulted in mass riots in 2013 and early 2014 and remain an unresolved
geopolitical dilemma.
Some of its geopolitical importance in this regard lies in its demographics.
Ukraine, like a lot of other countries bordering Russia, as well as those that used to be part
of the Soviet Union, has a large minority of ethnic Russians, around 17% of the current
population is Russian.
Those Russians unsurprisingly live disproportionately in the eastern part of the country.
This creates a political tug of war, at least in theory and national elections, with a powerful
and vocal minority looking eastward and many other parts of the country politically looking
west.
And this has some impact on the position of Ukraine, more largely in regional and world
politics.
But it'd be over simple to say that the nature of internal conflict in Ukraine is some kind
of east-west ethnolinguistic culture war.
As the anti-government revolt in Ukraine during 2014 showed, people's resistance to the state
had a lot more to do with people's perceptions of government corruption, mismanagement, and
economic stagnation, not ethnicity.
Still, Ukraine's position between its EU and Russian neighbors puts it in a tight spot,
as Russia's occupation of Crimea in March 2014 clearly demonstrated.
But what really makes Ukraine so geopolitically lively is something different, as different
from ethnicity or invasion routes, which are the typical fodder for geopolitical thinking.
Nope.
Instead, in this case, it's pipes.
As it turns out, Russia's major exports are oil and natural gas, which is a booming international
business for them, and a major source of its foreign export earnings.
65% of Russia's exports come in the form of oil and natural gas.
And a lot of this goes to the European Union.
In fact, almost 25% of the EU's natural gas comes from Russia.
But these exports depend on being able to actually get the resource out of the country.
To do that, Russia moves 80% of its gas through pipelines in Ukraine.
A map of Ukraine's gas lines would show it being part of a jumble of lines around Europe,
but would also reveal a very clear pattern.
Most enter the country in its far east border with Russia, and exit through borders with
Hungary, Slovakia, and Poland.
And regrettably, Ukraine and Russia have been in a series of nasty disputes over winter
gas prices and back debt.
And these disputes led Russia to actually shut down the gas to Ukraine in 2006 and 2009.
Regrettably for Russia, this also then means the shutdown of supplies and exports to the
rest of Europe.
That cost Russia quite a bit in terms of export earnings.
So this unique geographical position makes Ukraine a political target for Russia, but
also gives it a kind of strange bargaining power in disputes over resources and debt.
Russia's recognition of Ukraine's geopolitical power has led Russia to make a massive investment
in a new oil route.
It probably wouldn't surprise you.
This is the huge South Stream pipeline, as it's called, which will actually run underneath
the Black Sea, doing an end run around Ukraine and delivering oil and gas directly to the
Mediterranean.
So looking at Ukraine from Western Europe, one might see a kind of satellite state of
Russia recalling maps from the era of the Warsaw Pact.
And from the Western European eyes, Ukraine's position has a kind of familiar quality maybe
of a potential buffer whose allegiances might be lured away from an eastern center of gravity.
But the view from Russia, right, would look really different.
Looking at Ukraine from Moscow, one sees a kind of geostrategic bottleneck, a political
and economic choke point on Russia's emergence as a global energy power.
This is an example where careful study of a map will yield some insights into the way
geography and political economy and powerful states all become entangled.
Another map worth looking at in this regard is one of the two Koreas and their surroundings.
This large peninsula is divided in two, the result of an officially unfinished war.
That conflict touched off in 1950 after a series of border skirmishes led to a full-on
war that eventually dragged both the United States and China into conflict.
And the war ended in a stalemate with the Korean Armistice Agreement in 1953, leaving
North Korea in the sphere of its northern neighbor China and South Korea politically
and economically connected to the United States.
The demilitarized zone, or DMZ, between the two countries is the most heavily fortified
and guarded border in the world.
No official peace was ever declared, war is a possibility, however remote at any time.
Now the geopolitics of this configuration is troublesome for everybody involved.
Viewed from South Korea, the North is a repeated aggressor whose unpredictable behavior constantly
puts South Koreans on the defensive.
Consider that South Korea's bustling cosmopolitan capital, Seoul, is just 35 miles from the DMZ.
That's right, 35 miles.
Viewed from Japan, most distances are calculated based on the flight capacity of the No-Dong
missile.
That's North Korea's main proven armament.
That rocket can travel about 1,000 kilometers or about 620 miles.
That puts Tokyo just about in reach.
North Korea's other unconfirmed and untested missiles, including the Type 1 and 2 if they're
operational, could easily hit targets across Japan.
Given the North Korean habit of saber rattling, and given that international authorities have
confirmed that North Korea has tested a nuclear device, the map matters quite a bit to the
Japanese.
Viewed from China, things are even more complicated.
North Korea has been a long time ally or client for China since the Chinese crossed over into
North Korea during the war in support of the North, or more accurately in fear of an
American invasion into China in 1950.
This history makes North Korea something of a buffer against perceived military aggression
by the West.
Consider that the Japanese invaded China in World War II with noted atrocities and a
long occupation still on the minds of many senior Chinese officials.
Keeping North Korea where it is, where it has been, is the geostrategic plan of China
at least up to the present.
For all these reasons, it's been extremely difficult to settle matters on the Korean peninsula.
With American interests thrown in with Japan and South Korea, and Chinese geography depending
on North Korea's position, everybody's waiting for everyone else to blink.
Things aren't helped much by the capricious and totally erratic behavior of North Korea's
leadership, but geography certainly matters here too.
What should be clear from our review so far is that geopolitics is a grand theory, is
highly problematic, but as a description of the inevitable cartographic configurations
of power on the world stage, it's a useful tool, at least a useful tool for examining
specific thorny global problems from Russian oil exports to the prospects of Korean unification,
which brings us back to Afghanistan.
Is it important and for whom?
This is a question that deserves its own course, but the short answer is yes, although to different
people for different reasons.
For the United States most obviously, the importance of Afghanistan is one of it being
a previously failed state that harbored terrorism, albeit in part owing to blowback from previous
American interventions, but there are many failed states in the world and Afghanistan
stands out.
The country has further importance owing to its location across major resource and pipeline
routes, as well as its position within Central Asia more generally.
So there's that.
Viewed from Pakistan, however, Afghanistan is far more complicated and worrisome, and
this is in part because Pakistan's frontier districts lie along the long arc of the Afghan
border.
These districts include some of the least well controlled and highly autonomous tribal
regions of that country, of Pakistan.
Among these are the federally administered tribal areas, that's a mountainous sliver
of territory inhabited by ethnic Pashtuns, that's a key community who are also in the
majority across the border in Afghanistan, and who make up a significant portion of the
Taliban, Afghanistan's former ruling group.
As a result, the war in Afghanistan has long since spilled into these districts, where
Taliban fighters are thought to be taking refuge, perhaps along with key leaders of
terrorist networks, at least according to American authorities.
That's led to the use of unmanned aerial vehicle strikes into those territories in Pakistan,
which is a matter of enormous controversy in Pakistan and one that Pakistani leadership
sees as an attack on its sovereignty.
This totally frays the already poor relationship between ostensible allies, the U.S. and Pakistan.
That alliance is rooted in Cold War-era politics, where the United States tilt towards Pakistan
and was intended to offset India's warmer relations with the Soviet Union.
In recent years, that alliance has been built around the war on terrorism and the importance
of Pakistan for America's position in Afghanistan, so that's pretty complicated and it's pretty
much about geography, but things are even more complicated than that.
Another gander at that map reveals the easternmost part of Afghanistan and the northernmost parts
of Pakistan rest adjacent to the region of Kashmir.
Now, as we mentioned briefly in the first lecture in this course, Kashmir is the disputed
region between Pakistan and India.
At the time of Indian independence, when the two modern nations of Pakistan and India were
being created, the Hindu Raja of Kashmir elected to join India.
Pakistan intervened ostensibly to protect the Muslim majority in that region.
The result is that the region was occupied by both powers and split down the middle.
The line of control that runs through the center of the region leaves Indian military
forces occupying the southern part of Kashmir and Pakistan occupying the north.
It's been a site of violent struggles between these two rival nations for decades.
For Pakistan, Muslim majority Kashmir is being denied its right to independence and sovereignty
by Indian aggression.
And it might be added that puts Indian troops extremely close to the Pakistani capital of
Islamabad.
Meanwhile, New Delhi describes Pakistan-controlled Kashmir as a route through which militants
can enter India, a kind of terrorist highway out of unstable Central Asia and into South
Asia.
Now, India's interest in Afghanistan is unquestionable, therefore, since it seeks to limit Pakistani
influence over Afghanistan and to maintain a stable state there that what?
Doesn't produce further terrorism.
Given that the terrorists that attacked Mumbai and blew up the Taj Hotel there in 2008 were
trained in Pakistan, this urgency is all the more politically potent for Indian leaders.
Of course, any Indian meddling in Afghanistan is viewed conversely as a form of aggression
by Pakistan.
A look at the map, then, tells us that many interested parties are at work in the region,
which makes resolution a really difficult thing to imagine.
By any accounting, the war in Afghanistan has taken a terrible toll on everybody involved.
American casualties for Operation Enduring Freedom have numbered in the thousands.
The casualties of Afghans, including civilians, are very difficult to calculate, but they're
clearly they number in the thousands, at least from direct action, bombing, and collateral
damage.
And that number is far higher, perhaps in the tens of thousands or more, if we include
the deprivations and indirect impacts of conflict on the country.
Civilian deaths to drone strikes in Pakistan are equally hard to count, but they're numerous
and a really high profile.
The terrible tragedy of the war in this region is in part one of an ongoing history, of course,
that might arguably be traced back to the colonial politics that began in the first Anglo-Afghan
War and which never really went away, but equally important.
The situation is one that has resulted from the tangled and often violent political ambitions
of a number of states.
It's impossible to drop a stone in Afghanistan and not send ripples through Pakistan, and
so through to Kashmir to India.
The lack of resolution of one problem is tied to the lack of resolution of another precisely
because of geography.
So in this lecture, we reviewed the concept of geopolitics.
We've determined that at its grandest scale, geopolitical thinking reflects a worldview
of certain kinds of global leaders, especially during the colonial and Cold War eras.
I've also suggested that these kinds of high-level geopolitical theories and strategies paid
off quite a bit less than their armchair advocates ever suggested.
The utility of geopolitics, I further suggested, may lie in its ability to invite us to look
at the world and the world's map from a number of different positions and then to reflect
on the competing interests of the clash over control of territory.
When it's used more modestly, it can help us explain or at least think about the murky
enterprise of statecraft at the global level and the exercise of power by dominant or
hegemonic nations.
Much the same can be said about the notion of territory, I might add.
It's an equally messy topic, but it's one that might help us to examine the political
outcomes that occur when people attempt to carve out new states and new nations for themselves,
and so it's territory that's the topic of our next lecture.
