In 1947, the country of India was carved in two.
Actually it was carved in three, but it would take decades to learn this.
That's because the independence of India was predicated on the idea that religion presented
the root problem, and so there needed to be one nation for Muslims and a separate nation
for the Hindu majority.
The horrors that followed up this decision, which was actually opposed by the country's
chief leader of independence, Mahatma Gandhi, these are now pretty well known.
Partition led to the mass migration of millions of Muslims who lived in what would become
India, out to the east and the west, along with the migration of millions of Hindus out
of what would become Pakistan, back into the heart of the subcontinent.
This initiated a period of violence from which the two countries had really never fully recovered.
Partition killed at least a half a million people and sent 15 million refugees into motion.
It can easily be viewed as one of the most horrific tragedies of the 20th century.
And for our purposes today, what is especially interesting about the assumption of partition
is that it would solve the problem of ethnic and national identity by drawing new lines
on a map.
By moving Muslims into a Muslim country and Hindus into a Hindu country, it was assumed
people would experience better governance and better stewardship of their rights and
a better quality of life.
For many, this assumption proved actually a fatal flaw.
Most notably, many of the people who lived in the province of East Pakistan felt sorely
cheated by partition.
East Pakistan, which we now call Bangladesh, was carved out of the colonial Indian state
of Bengal in the eastern part of the country, a region whose central city Calcutta had long
contained both Hindus and Muslims, and which would become a part of India.
Partition in the east was especially violent and horrific, tearing communities apart and
effectively dividing an ethno-linguistic Bengali nation in two.
But trouble didn't end there because the people of East Pakistan were actually physically
separated from the ruling power in West Pakistan.
While West Pakistan included the large region of the Punjab and the Indus River Valley,
East Pakistan lay almost a thousand kilometers to the east, with India sitting very awkwardly
right between the two.
Western Pakistan, moreover, treated East Pakistanese as a minority, as a Bengali ethnic second
citizenry beneath the concern of dominant Punjabi and Sindhi ethnic groups of West Pakistan.
Mapping a new nation based on religion only created new fault lines based on language
and culture.
The result of this was another terrible war of independence.
This one fought out in 1971, and leading to the displacement, again, of tens of millions
of people and countless deaths.
Bangladesh emerged out of a cartographic necessity that was actually created by a previous cartography
of partition.
An undivided community was violently mapped into pieces in 1947, in other words, only to
be reassembled into new forms, again in a violent event, more than two decades later.
Now, a reasonable person might ask, is this any way to order the world, and what I want
to explore in the next 30 minutes are the questions that lie at the heart of these kinds
of violent political geographies.
Describing the history of the nation state itself, and using the cases of Kosovo, South
Sudan, and East Timor to show how new political geographies emerge, I'll explain some core
concepts in political geography, including regionalism and irredentism.
And I'll demonstrate the following in a nutshell.
There is a tendency to conflate national identity with state territory that sometimes leads
to the partition of countries as a strategy to lessen conflict, but the creation of state
territories of identity often actually leads to and creates more conflict.
But to begin with, we need to think about the state itself.
It's probably hard for many people to imagine that states, countries that we understand
today, those abstract cartographic objects that we call France, or Namibia, or Kazakhstan,
they actually have a pretty shallow history.
For most of human history, complex patchworks of communities, like clans or principalities,
gave sovereign power to leaders over complex, incoate, familial, tribal, and ethnic territories.
Different groups might share a territory, or have traditional or even seasonal rights
to land or space.
Before the state, the relationships between land and people were governed by a wide variety
of structures like clan rights or feudal holdings.
The arrival of the political state represented a major break, in other words, a kind of new
order with some really important downstream implications, many of which are problematic.
Most political geographers assigned the moment of the state's arrival on the world scene
to the peace of Westphalia in 1648.
That event was really the culmination of several peace treaties that brought to a close a particularly
ugly chapter of religious wars in Europe.
But it's a big effect.
The one that had perhaps the most profound reach into our time was that it established
in law the idea that a discrete territory was assigned the status of a sovereign state.
A state would be a unit in whose business other states couldn't mess around, interfere.
A state's territory enclosed its citizens, who were subject to the rules of that state
and not another one.
Citizens in this sense belonged to states.
States would bargain or negotiate on their own behalf with other states.
States would have consistent rules, and they would have institutions within themselves,
but different states might be expected to govern their own affairs differently.
As I mentioned before, this marks a major break with previous forms of political geography,
and the implications are ones we're really only still trying to deal with today.
Of course, the next 300 years would carve out a lot of exceptions, complicated exceptions
to those notions, as economic empires captured and came to control colonial holdings that
might have been less than clearly sovereign.
Here is just one small tragic example that between 1884 and 1908, centuries after Westphalia,
the Congo Free State was effectively a private holding of Belgium's King Leo Paul II.
And the brutalities, the arbitrary violence, and mass murder associated with that regime
were notorious.
The Congo Free State was neither free, nor was it really even a state, so apparently
the peace of Westphalia didn't apply to Africans.
In any case, and with these exceptions aside, this new Westphalian arrangement of things
set certain key expectations which are important to the question of territory.
In theory, a state encloses a relatively homogeneous bunch of people who share a common language,
culture, and history, a common nation.
Now the linkage of nation and state in people's minds, that's a critical one, since it means
unifying culture and politics, and doing so within a clear set of cartographic boundaries.
But as we all know, the lines on the map rarely encircle a coherent human experience.
Differences in religion and language, history amongst people within a state territory are
pretty much inevitable.
Equally problematically, people with a common language or culture or history might be divided
by a line on the map and live in two different states where they might be a minority or
a majority.
These tensions, the tensions that this produces drive a great deal of modern geopolitical history.
Consider that where a major cultural or ethnic minority of some kind lives in a relatively
coherent piece of territory within a state, their collective identity may come into tension
with the larger majority and the state, and this effect is called regionalism, and often
announces itself through movements for independence or autonomy.
There are countless examples of these cases, but Europe has quite a few.
These prominently include both the Galician and Catalan minorities in Spain, the Britons
in Northwestern France, Sicilians within Italy, and of course Germans in Denmark, and the
Danish in Germany, and that's just scratching the surface.
But for the most part, these kinds of regionalisms work themselves out through political process,
as where the Scots have achieved autonomy within Great Britain, relative autonomy.
Sometimes things become messier, as in the case of the Basques in Spain.
Basque separatism reached a fever pitch in the 20th century.
Basque nationalists formed a revolutionary separatist group, the ETA, that engaged in
targeted brutal political violence, and eventually the Basque region did obtain a limited level
of autonomy and self-determination within the larger Spanish state, but even so, there are
Basque communities that are still arguing for full independence.
The creation of a state of their own.
In some cases, states with a majority national community may look across the border to their
neighbors, where their fellow nationals are in the minority, and make claims on the status
or interests of those citizens, and also on the territory where they live.
Such a situation is commonly referred to as irredentism, and it's not an uncommon excuse
for violence or coercion or even invasion.
Consider the demands made by the German state in the 1930s.
Claiming concern for the German speakers in the Sudetenland in Czechoslovakia, this is
a very famous case, this led to the region's annexation in 1938, and the beginning of the
spiraling conflict that became the Second World War.
Regionalism and irredentism make a potent political cocktail, as you can see, with just
these few examples, but they become even more disruptive and dangerous in complex ethno-linguistic
landscapes, especially when fueled by pretty narrow political interests.
To help understand this, let's consider the case of the breakup of Yugoslavia in the 1990s,
with special attention to the region of Kosovo.
The history of the Balkan region is critically important to a full understanding, and it's
a rousing good tale, including Venetian traders marching armies of the Ottoman sultans, crusader
knights and tides of settlers moving in and out of zones scorched by war and fed by periodic
peace.
For one of time, it's suffice it to say that the region has become one where a mix of groups
have lived together alongside one another, including Albanians and Bosnian Muslims, Croats,
Montenegrens, Macedonian Serbs, Slovenes, and a handful of Bulgarians and Hungarians.
A glance at a map of these ethnic communities in the Balkans today reveals, unsurprisingly,
a jigsaw puzzle.
And this is because the region has been one of enormous political and military action
for more than a thousand years, with rulers, resettlements, wars and conversions washing
back and forth across a mountainous region with countless local conditions and leaders.
What would stand out to you looking at this map is that though there are some areas with
strong, coherent, and singular ethnic territories, for the most part, the region is filled with
pockets, a patchwork of different communities scattered across the area.
Indeed, our term for the breakup and creation of jumbled new states from larger states
is typically referred to as Balkanization, a term that was born in this region, the
Balkans, during the emergence of the region from imperial rule in the early 19th century
and then again the early 20th century.
Indeed, at the turn of the 20th century, these many ethno-nationalist communities were spread
over a loose set of political territories which were assembled out of pre-existing states
as well as those carved out of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
These were herded together into a single state at the end of World War I, and the region
was wrenched apart again in World War II and then sat under a single socialist state of
Yugoslavia until around the time of the fall of the Soviet Union, when cartographic upheavals
began to occur all over the world and not just here.
And tensions had been simmering, of course, for a long time, and the following years saw
the country fall into pieces in fits and starts with new boundaries for officially recognized
major states, Croatia and Slovenia, followed by the Republic of Macedonia, followed by
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and then Serbia.
And in each of these countries, inevitably, significant ethnic minorities necessarily remained,
Serbians in Croatia, Croatians in Bosnia and so on.
In terms of theory, what we see in this effort is an attempt to square a complex, pixelated
map of ethnic national identities with the blocky boundaries of a set of Westphalian
states.
More immediately, the result was a bloodbath.
That cleansing became the euphemism of the era of governments, exterminated and expelled
people in order to cause the ethnic landscape, the national landscape, to more closely resemble
the jumbled borders on the map, the landscape of the state, starvation camps, war and mass
graves had come back to Europe 50 years after they'd been banished by the last great war.
A quick review of the situation in Kosovo, which was an especially tragic part of this
conflict, is revealing about how these things play themselves out.
Kosovo is a region in the Balkans, bordered by Albania on its west side, Montenegro in
its northwest and Macedonia in its south, while it historically has had a very important
relationship to Serbia by the 20th century and majority of the residents of Kosovo were
ethnic Albanians.
And many or most practiced Islam.
Indeed, while most of the former Yugoslavian countries and regions speak languages from
the Slavic family, Kosovars speak a language rooted in the Threso-Illerian family group,
like their neighbors in Albania.
In the socialist state of Yugoslavia, in fact, the region enjoyed some political autonomy
within Yugoslavia, though the area is somewhat resource poor and historically not very economically
strong.
And in the late 1980s, as Serbian nationalism was heating up within Yugoslavia, Kosovo was
stripped of its autonomy.
Serbian nationalists at the time, including Slobodan Milosevic, became increasingly concerned
about Kosovo's autonomy.
Anticipating the emergence of a new Serbian nation and a new Serbian state, they sought
to retain all regions with historical ties to what they called a greater Serbia.
For Serbian nationalists, Kosovo had enormous political symbolism.
It was there that the site of great battles between the Serbs and the Turks took place
in the Middle Ages, and there's lots of cultural and religious sites that the Serbs identify
as important.
To be sure, Albanians had their own historical nationalist movements as well.
Under the Ottoman Empire, back in the 1800s, Albanians in Kosovo and elsewhere pressured
the state for autonomy and ethnic unification.
It wouldn't take too much imagination to overlay the imagined map of a unified Albanian
nation on top of that imagined by Serbs to see that the flashpoint falls in that area
of overlap in Kosovo.
And so, in the early 1990s, as the stirrings of change were felt all across the region,
things started to get very ugly.
As I explained previously, starting in 1991, Croatia, Slovenia, and Bosnia-Hurtsa-Govina
all had declared independence, which resulted in a complex set of conflicts and a full-scale
regional war.
Only Kosovars saw this as the moment, their chance to disconnect from what they felt was
becoming an oppressive Serb-dominated Yugoslavia.
In the early 1990s, the self-convened Kosovo Parliament declared Kosovo to be a totally
independent new country, calling itself the Republic of Kosovo.
Now, at this time, no one outside of Albania recognized Kosovo as a legitimate state, but
the Serbians responded very quickly.
Open, violent conflicts spread across Kosovo over the next several years, and while many
of the people of Kosovo called for political and nonviolent solutions to the problem, Serbian
military units engaged in a brutal war with Albanian guerrilla fighters, the Kosovo Liberation
Army, KLA, a war that lasted most of that decade.
What happened during this terrible conflict is pretty unclear, and conflicting stories
are still being sorted out amongst survivors and in the international criminal courts.
But mass killings of civilians undoubtedly occurred, along with countless displacements
and the employment of scorched earth tactics across the land.
Serbians and the minority were killed, along with countless majority Albanians.
Both Serbians and KLA commanders actually have been indicted as war criminals.
Now, keep in mind, Kosovo is only about 11,000 square kilometers in size, about 4,000 square
miles.
That is smaller than the state of Connecticut.
Every square inch of the land was impacted, and no one, no one living in Kosovo was unaffected
by this kind of violence.
The area is basically still recovering from this conflict, really from a state of trauma.
In 1999, the international community intervened through a massive bombing campaign to drive
the Serbian army back out of Kosovo.
This bombing occurred almost five years after the Dayton Accords were signed in the U.S.,
which was supposed to bring an ostensible end to the conflict in Yugoslavia.
On top of the war itself, the bombings displaced much of the population of Kosovo even further.
UN forces finally moved in to occupy and pacify the region in the early 2000s, and in 2008,
Kosovo declared independence again.
This time, many countries recognize Kosovo as independent, though currently in 2014,
some have not, including the EU.
Though peaceful, the matter is not wholly settled.
So what does Kosovo teach us besides the terrific brutality of people?
It tells us a lot about the complexities of nationhood and statehood, and the way the
two really map really differently, and the dangers of assuming that formalizing a state
boundary might solve problems born of nationalism.
The irredentism of Serbia is unquestionably an extension of a Westphalian logic, projected
through a racial and nationalist imagination.
The idea that an Albanian Kosovo would solve ethnic issues free from the troubles of coping
with a Serbian minority is equally problematic.
So it's possible to ask ourselves, what good, if any, independence of minority populations
might achieve?
Is it a solution to ethnic conflict in any regions, anywhere?
I mean, with this kind of record, it's pretty tempting to throw the whole idea of states
out the window.
It certainly raises questions about whether redrawing maps can settle ethno-national problems.
To answer these questions, let's take a look at two other cases.
South Sudan and East Timor, both of which have achieved independence within the new millennium
and are among the newest nations on Earth.
They both have violent and troubled histories, but both show some points of promise or at
least remote hope.
Start with Sudan.
Sudan is a territory located south of Egypt whose borders enclose most of the source waters
of the Nile River and whose enormous north-south extent, at least until recently, straddles
the depths of the Sahara down across the East African Sahelian region and almost into tropical
Africa.
Politically and culturally, the region is also stretched across a really complex gradient.
With very different cultures and religious histories spanning from the north to the south.
As only one indicator, the main language of northern Sudan is Arabic, for example, while
the southern Sudanese speak languages from the eastern Sudanic group along with dozens
of other local tribal languages.
Islam dominates in the north, whereas Christianity and many traditional religions are more common
in the south.
Now, needless to say, this difference between northern and southern Sudan isn't broken
into convenient, simple or coherent blocks or polygons.
If we imagined these patterns or looked at them on a map, we could trace a sort of shift
from dominant North African cultures into very different central African ones.
Either way, they were all thrown together in 1947.
It was an auspicious year.
Sudan was a country that emerged, like all of Africa, from brutal colonialism in the
20th century.
Sudan was under Ottoman and Egyptian rule for decades before the British then colonized
the region fully in the late 1800s.
The British administered the northern and southern halves of the country somewhat differently,
somewhat autonomously, leading to an increased and enhanced separation of the two.
Northern Sudan experienced greater relative investment and infrastructure under the British,
while the south was neglected or mined for resources.
But the retreat of British colonizers after the Second World War resulted in the Juba
Conference, which created a single unified country with its capital in Khartoum, where
you guessed it, in the north.
The result was an unfortunate one, at least if you lived in southern Sudan.
Suffering from neglect and widespread misrule and discrimination, southern Sudanese began
a campaign of separation and resistance almost immediately after the Juba Conference.
War in Sudan went on for decades in the 1960s and 70s, and then again in the 1980s and 1990s.
These wars were horrific and violent.
Conflict in Darfur is perhaps the best known of these.
This region is in the western part of Sudan.
It was the site of conflict between the Sudanese militia, Sudanese military rather, and militia
groups against local non-Arab ethnic populations.
Perhaps a half million people were killed in Darfur in the early 2000s.
I mean, that's a figure that's very, very difficult to wrap your head around.
In 2011, the people of southern Sudan held a referendum and declared independence.
On its day of independence, people thronged the streets, waving flags of the new nation,
new state, and celebrating a newfound self-determination.
Of course, as we've seen, every new line on the map creates a new problem for every
problem that it solves.
There are countless current border skirmishes in south Sudan, with conflicts among numerous
minority populations who suddenly find themselves on one side of a national border or another
or worse, who've been split in two by partition.
Violence between tribal groups is ongoing within southern Sudan itself, south Sudan.
Given that there's also enormous oil wealth precisely in this border region between Sudan
and south Sudan, we can predict trouble for some time to come.
Nonetheless, here's a case where new lines on the map may, may, have opened political
possibilities for minority communities that weren't possible before.
East Timor is a similarly ambiguous but promising case.
Timor is an island in southeast Asia, which sits near the end of a chain of islands extending
eastward from Indonesia's main islands like Java in the west.
The island is about 31,000 square kilometers, about 12,000 square miles, it's about the
size of, say, Maryland, and is only about 420 miles from Darwin, Australia.
That's far closer than it is to Jakarta, which is Indonesia's capital, which is many thousands
of kilometers further away.
The island was split in two originally under colonialism, with the Portuguese occupying
the east and the Dutch occupying the west.
The Portuguese underdeveloped and neglected their part of the island pretty badly all
the way up until 1975, and in that year, they basically unceremoniously up and left, allowing
the government and military of Indonesia to immediately occupy the region.
Popular resistance to Indonesian rule was really widespread and unsparingly crushed
by the Indonesian military.
The violence of this occupation was largely overlooked by the world community, in part
because Indonesia and the United States both shared an aversion to the possibility that
the East Timor might emerge as an independent communist country smack in the middle of maritime
Southeast Asia at the height of the Cold War, nonetheless.
It didn't take long for an army of national liberation to form, called the Falintil, and
a nasty and protracted war followed.
People in East Timor spoke a different language from their Indonesian neighbors to the west.
They had an entirely distinct political history, and they identified themselves as distinct
in ethno-national terms.
Indonesia, conversely, saw East Timor as a natural geographic extension of the sphere
of its state territory, which includes the vast chain of islands stretching east of
Java.
Here again, the questions of nation and state rear their head, and to troubling effect.
It didn't help that East Timor sits on an oil-rich area of really valuable offshore resources.
This seems to come up a lot.
The people of East Timor held a referendum in 1999 on the question of independence from
Indonesia.
Independence was met by more violence.
Crow Indonesian and Indonesian Army forces created havoc in the streets in an effort
to stop the election, and in the wake of the vote, which showed overwhelming support for
independence, mass murders occurred across the region.
The UN finally stepped in and pacified the situation, officially emerging as an independent
nation in 2002.
The Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste has come onto the world scene amidst a great deal
of controversy.
Shortly upon arriving, it found itself in complex negotiations over oil rights in coastal
waters, adjacent to those of Australia, and gang violence and poverty are widespread,
so becoming a country didn't solve most, or perhaps maybe even any, of the problems that
the people in the area inherited from colonial misrule.
But it did provide them with something, provided them some measure of self-determination, which
they appear to prefer, even amidst great poverty.
East Timor has a long way to go before it can meet the needs of its people, and whether
it will do so more effectively than the government of Indonesia might be a fair question, but
it's one that at this point is pretty much moot.
For political geographers, the case of East Timor, like South Sudan, underlines how national
geographies and state boundaries are really hard to reconcile.
But both cases also show that the call for self-determination is a really strong one,
which sometimes sorts itself out in ways that actually bring new countries into the world.
These outcomes again also underline the more general lesson of the whole course.
The political geographies that the people in East Timor and South Sudan inherited from
colonialism, those were disadvantageous to be sure.
These configurations had consistently led to poverty and underdevelopment, but these
people also acted to literally rewrite world maps, creating new geographies in which their
descendants would come to live.
Now it would be romantic and a mistake to assume that the new geographies that came
out of these movements were inherently better than the older ones, but the people who live
in these places think so and it would be equally wrong to speak for them or second guess them.
People are forged in the geographies in which they find themselves, but they also always
remake the world, which brings us back to East Pakistan.
For the architects of partition, they were all well-educated British officers and Indian
independence fighters and Muslim political leaders, the idea that each ethno-national
community needed its own state was one based on a long Westphalian heritage.
In theory, discrete identities led to discrete states.
When they were faced with real geography, on the other hand, they were confronted with
many complex identities and multiple ethno-linguistic and cultural differences, differences that
mapped very poorly into discrete territories.
To settle on religion seemed natural at the time, but it only created new problems for
people in what would only ultimately be called Bangladesh.
Would the people of Bangladesh have been better off without partition in the first place?
Gandhi certainly thought so, but this is an impossible question to answer, at least in
any simple way.
Could a better solution be found than always trying to match territory to identity?
Maybe.
Imagine.
Imagine people have multiple political citizenship, or imagine allowing them to govern in linked
or parallel places, or perhaps we might craft more local autonomous areas over zones in
which people could exercise a civic identity outside of a national one.
All of these can be imagined, but we can't say they're a common way for modern people
to deal with problems.
Instead, what we can say as scholars of political geography is that owing to the unchallenged
assumptions of state sovereignty and territory, we can say that modern people tend to think
that discrete state cartographies can solve the problems of geographically complex linguistic
differences.
The assumption, that assumption, has been periodically proven foolish, and in fact even
dangerous.
But in a world made up of sovereign states, it shouldn't be surprising to see a lot of
people demanding places of their own in the future.
This opens up a new line of questions.
We assume that the political geography of the world is one of sovereign states, each charged
with mining its own business within the discrete territories allotted to them on maps.
What happens when we face problems that defy those borders?
What happens?
When a jigsaw puzzle of nations and states faces problems that flow between states, things
like trade, or carbon dioxide, or refugees, or drugs, or crime, that's the question that
we'll tackle next.
