Harry Rabinowitz's family arrived in America in 1898, settling in New Britain, Connecticut.
They left Russia because of their economic hopes and aspirations as well as the crushing
conditions at home.
And after working in a few hotels and pursuing a short and truly ill-fated professional boxing
career, Harry managed a chain of cafeterias up and down Broadway in New York City.
He worked hard and successfully sent his son and daughter to college.
Harry lived to be 101, and his son and daughter, along with all their numerous descendants,
all graduated from college and all gained a significant quality of life improvement over
that of his own family.
These next generations experienced a rise in wealth and a number of opportunities that
would have been impossible if Harry had stayed in Europe.
And one of Harry's grandsons is here talking to you today.
I am the product of migration, as are probably many of you.
Now, in Harry's time, a lot of people were on the move.
Around 15 million immigrants came to the United States in the first 15 years of the 20th century.
The restless movement of people worldwide has only increased since then.
It's increased because of an overall increase in global population, of course, but also
because of revolutions in transportation and telecommunications.
In fact, according to surveys conducted by the United Nations, in 2013, more than 232
million people were living outside of their country of origin.
Those people were their own country.
It would be the fourth largest country in the world.
So what kind of impact does all this mobility have on the world?
On the one hand, we might consider this a global tragedy.
We often associate migration with negative circumstances, because sometimes it's the
product of war and violence, which is often evidence of poor governance and poverty in
the places that many people are leaving.
Many migrants are also viewed as competitors for jobs in the places where they're migrating.
Introducing new cultures can sometimes lead to misunderstanding and conflict.
But on the other hand, wherever migrants go, they contribute significantly to economic
growth and human development.
The money they earn abroad is often sent home to help move poor countries into better economic
conditions.
Migrants have helped build many of the modern nations of the world that we recognize today.
The great nations of North and South America certainly come to mind, including the United
States of course, but countries like Chile as well.
We can find many, many examples elsewhere in the world.
However you view migration, for better or for worse, it's a major global phenomenon and
it's a big part of who we are as a species.
So what can migration tell us about the world and about ourselves?
Tracking where people come from and where they're going is an important part of geography.
And when we look at these migration patterns, we discover fascinating insights into the
world's economic and political climate.
And in this lecture, we'll explore why people never seem to be able to stay put.
Before we take a look at what the global geography of migration looks like, let's take a minute
to learn how migration rates are measured.
A common index of migration is called the net migration rate.
The net migration rate is a figure that represents the number of people moving in and out of
a country per thousand people of its overall population.
This figure will be positive in a country where the population is increasing from in
migration and negative in a country where the population is decreasing from out migration.
Consider the United States, famously known as a nation of migrants, it had a net migration
rate of plus 3.64 in 2013.
This means that for every thousand people living in the U.S. in 2013, the country added
almost four more people to the population just through migration.
Now the U.S. is by no means even close to the largest migration destination.
Qatar has an astonishing net migration rate of plus 33.
Singapore is plus 15 and Spain is plus 6.
What makes these places such a big draw?
Qatar thrives on migrant labor and has a wash and oil money.
Singapore's booming economy also makes it a magnet across East Asia and Spain's higher
number comes from completely different factors.
There, the immigration laws and barriers are actually notoriously stiff and the economy
is by no means rapidly expanding, so for Spain, the flow of migrants is coming from areas
of intense conflict and economic trouble, places across the Mediterranean, North Africa
and Southwest Asia as well.
Now many countries also have high negative scores in this index, meaning their sources
of migrants.
Consider Mexico, a country known in the U.S. as a country that contributes many immigrants
to our population.
In 2013, Mexico's migration rate was negative 2.99.
This means that roughly three people per thousand left the country.
This number is by no means the highest for migration.
Dozens of nations have had far higher levels.
In the same year, 2013, Syria's rate was a startling negative 18 and Haiti's was negative
6.9.
While some economic hardship in Mexico has led to a modest level of out-migration, the
combination of poverty and disease in Haiti led to far higher levels, compounded by the
terrible earthquake of 2010, Syria, on the other hand, has been one of the more stable
modern economies of Southwest Asia.
Out-migration in this case was the result of their terrible civil war.
So now that we know how it's measured, what does the global geography of migration look
like?
Well, a map would show some fairly strong regional trends.
Countries that have a high positive net migration rate, where more people enter than leave,
include many parts of Europe, the U.S. and Canada, as well as Australia, and a few wealthy
Persian Gulf countries.
Countries that have a high negative net migration rate, where more people leave than enter,
include many parts of Sub-Saharan Africa, Central South America, and South Asia.
Now, some of this reflects the geography of the global economy.
Many countries are attractive because of relative economic prosperity, while others are characterized
by poverty.
Some of these patterns reflect politics and strife, on the other hand, with countries
standing out only to war or civil strife.
In recent years, Iraq, for example, is a major source of migrants.
The upshot of this statistical international comparison is to emphasize that while there
are those forces that drive people to migrate away from places, there are also forces that
draw people in.
These diverse factors together account for the net migration patterns we see worldwide.
So why do people move?
Though it's a little oversimplified, the factors that influence migration can be crudely lumped
into two categories, pull factors and push factors.
Pull factors are those that attract people to new places, and they include economic
strength and jobs, rule of law, amenities like healthcare and infrastructure, better
observation of human rights or the rights of minorities, among others.
The levels and qualities of these characteristics differ dramatically from place to place, providing
a number of different possible destinations for migration, depending on the different
needs or conditions of people.
On the other hand, push factors might include economic problems, lack of employment, oppressive
political systems, or even ecological conditions, like drought or flooding.
These two vary dramatically from place to place, as they always have.
The simple fact of the matter is that movement of people has been, across the history of
the species, the rule, rather than the exception, urbanization, a very, very late innovation
in human settlement and livelihoods, has increased our new sedentary lifestyle, as have changing
views of ways of viewing property.
Individual people can now own land, for example.
This is also a relatively recent institutional change.
Even with these key components of sedentary living, with all those pushes and pulls acting
on people all the time, it's not surprising that migration is so common.
The distribution of these changing push and pull factors also helps us to explain the
ever-shifting geographic patterns of human migration.
That is, if the factors directing one stream of migration include economic activity, for
example, the destination of that migration stream may abruptly shift from one country
to another if economic conditions change.
This has been compellingly demonstrated by geographer Brad Yokish of Ohio University.
His work on Ecuadorian migrants began with a familiar pattern, tracking Ecuadorians to
the United States.
Prior to the 1990s, Ecuadorians came to the U.S. in large numbers, and they settled in
and around the area of New York City.
These migrants largely imagined their states to be long-term, but non-permanent.
They planned to send large amounts of their wages, earned washing dishes and so on, back
to their families in the highlands of the Andes, to build new homes and buy new appliances.
This is a very familiar but important story.
Yokish was surprised to learn, however, through careful interviews with migrants in Ecuador
and in the U.S., which is very difficult to obtain, that this pattern of shifting was
shifting very rapidly.
So, in the late 1990s and early 2000s, several things changed.
Another political and economic crisis erupted in Ecuador during this period, and it created
new push factors for migrants from new parts of Ecuador.
These new migrants had no ties to New York City.
At exactly the same time, moreover, border security increased in the U.S. and made migration
there more expensive and even dangerous.
The result was a totally new migration stream in destination.
In Europe, Ecuadorians in the thousands began to settle in Spain, France and the Netherlands
instead of the U.S.
But with very few pre-existing Ecuadorian communities established in Europe, these migrants faced
a whole bunch of challenges, including racism and differing labor conditions.
Even so, they established an entirely new set of international connections in the process
between Ecuador and Spain.
In any event, the Ecuadorian example shows that migration is a fluid process, that the
geography of the drivers of migration, those magnetic poles of push and pull, they're always
changing, creating new patterns all the time.
The most dramatic push drivers for global migration are major crises, including war and
famine.
These cause widespread displacement and often sudden large-scale movements of people.
In 2009, there were more than a dozen countries around the world that were major sources of
refugee populations.
Afghanistan sent 2.9 million people abroad, Iraq 1.8 million, and Somalia 678,000.
Sudan, China, Angola and Burma also scattered hundreds of thousands of people throughout
the world.
But many other countries contributed this large-scale movement of people as well.
What all these countries have in common is violence.
The wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, following closely on the heels of September 11, 2001,
dislocated millions of people, as did the ongoing conflict in Somalia.
Under these conditions, people are often willing to abandon everything, their belongings, their
home, and their extended family to go anywhere that might be safer.
And typically, these populations wind up in refugee camps, and the term camp is probably
somewhat unhelpful, because these sites can sometimes be the size of cities with improvised
infrastructure and markets and local economies.
Make no mistake, however, they're typically crowded and miserable places.
They represent a temporary solution that just simply sometimes becomes permanent.
Consider Dadaab.
This camp, in a rural and isolated part of Kenya, houses a half million refugees, almost
all from Somalia, fleeing the conflict there.
That makes Dadaab Kenya's third largest city.
And with too little infrastructure and poor sewage and bad housing, the camp grows every
day, and more people fleeing from the chaos in Somalia keep coming into the camp.
And in a way, the camp has indeed become a kind of city.
Thousands of its residents are actually the grandchildren of the first refugees who arrived
there.
The place has eight primary schools.
It's got two secondary schools.
There are 50 mosques.
Households are arranged on an ordered grid, and most telling, there are a number of markets,
and shops that sell anything from basic goods, from bicycles to biscuits.
But conditions here are fierce.
Most residents struggle to find water, cooking fuel, rape and theft are common.
We need to be clear, nobody wants to be here, except perhaps the handful of merchants who
make a small profit under these really desperate circumstances.
So what does Dadaab tell us about migration?
First, it shows us the sheer scale of human movement under very difficult circumstances.
People are willing to move in really large numbers when faced with war and famine.
Second, it shows the difficulty of life under these conditions.
And with millions of refugees worldwide, it emphasizes the terrific demands placed on
international organizations, ranging from the beleaguered United Nations to non-governmental
organizations like the medical team from Doctors Without Borders.
It also demonstrates the remarkable tenacity of social and economic systems, however, to
organize and emerge, however fragile, amongst migratory populations.
In other cases, refugees spread out from camps and come to occupy semi-permanent positions,
though these are typically marginal and impoverished as well.
Take the example of refugees from Iraq.
1.5 million Iraqi refugees live in Syria, slightly less than a half a million in Jordan,
and 200,000 more in other Gulf states.
The Organization Care International, studying the Iraqi situation in Jordan, showed that
Iraqis there lived at the outermost margin of the economy, depending on international
aid payments of around $170 per month, a figure well below their subsistence needs.
And though some Iraqis go on to make their way to the United States or other parts of
the world, most remain, hoping to return home to communities ravaged by sectarian strife.
This is a case of prolonged displacement, and it's been a very destabilizing one itself
for many parts of the region.
As I described a moment ago, large-scale displacement has major debilitating effects for the people
and nations involved in them, so this raises an interesting question.
When we predict where large-scale displacements might happen in the future, it would seem
sensible for us to try so that we'd be ready for them when they do arise.
Well, this is the focus of geographers who research environmental migration.
Now, of course, environmental factors have always been one of the biggest drivers of
migration.
The prolonged droughts and dust bowl in the United States in the 1930s permanently shifted
the population westward and northward away from the affected regions, resulting in a
permanent demographic change.
The jodes of Steinbeck's classic novel, Grapes of Wrath, were, in this sense, environmental
migrants.
According to the International Organization for Migration, 20 million people were displaced
in 2008 by droughts and floods.
That's more than four times the number who were displaced by violence, so visible changes
in the global climate system, which we discussed earlier in this course, should really cause
us to sit up and take notice.
But where are the at-risk areas for future climate migrations?
Because predicting climate is tricky business.
Though droughts and floods will be important, they're difficult to pin down.
The most obvious place to start looking for future migrants is people near sea level.
This is because one apparently irreversible recent trend has been the melting of the arctic
ice sheets and the decline in glaciers worldwide, and the flushing of this ice, now in the form
of water, into the world's oceans, has raised sea levels and will continue to do so.
This is made worse by the expanding volume of the world's oceans due to warming itself.
Recent research suggests that we can reasonably expect the sea level to rise between two-and-a-half
and six-and-a-half feet by the end of this century.
It's a conservative estimate.
That would make most of the world's coastal cities harder to inhabit, and some, like Miami
and New Orleans, at risk of total inundation.
Higher sea levels could be many, many feet higher than that, meaning whole coastal populations
would be put at risk.
So for people living on large continents, it's possible to predict some internal migration
away from flood zones and on to higher ground.
This is an enormous challenge, and one that's going to affect countries around the world,
and an even greater challenge faces island nations.
These countries may lose whole land areas, and almost all of the migration that results
from such change is likely to be non-voluntary and international in scope.
Climate refugees from island nations could number in the hundreds of thousands or millions,
and there's still no credible plan for how to deal with this mass movement of people.
Consider the island nation of Nauru.
This country is only 21 square kilometers in size, tiny, and its 10,000 residents all
hug the island's coast since the interior of the island was largely destroyed by phosphorus
mining long ago.
Now if sea levels rise five feet, which is a conservative estimate, it would basically
spell the end of this country and its inhabitants, period.
They'd be permanently scattered to other countries.
Many other such island people living around the world, moreover, make the livelihood of
a large scale migration from these places nearly inevitable.
While environmental factors or climatic migrations are astounding and dramatic, they're not that
different from what we've seen in other types of displacement, but it's clear that international
resources to adapt to wide scale migration are still poorly evolved.
Much of the same can be said of those designed to deal with voluntary or economic migration.
Most of what we've discussed so far in this lecture is forced migration.
It's a loose term that includes most situations where there's little or no choice.
War, famine, poverty, so on, are typically viewed as drivers of forced migration.
Voluntary migration is again a very loose term which refers to situations where someone
moves though they don't really have to.
Now the distinction is really questionable since a deteriorating political or economic
situation can be very, very bad before it forces someone to move.
This raises the question of when something is no longer voluntary.
Nevertheless, geographers recognize that most economic drivers of migration, those that are
centered on increasing opportunities for the migrant, are somewhat voluntary.
They're also among the most common cases of migration.
So how much of global migration falls into this category?
It's difficult to tell for sure, but of the roughly 230 million international migrants
worldwide, the majority will likely fall into this category.
The significant proportion of this migration is made up of legal guest workers.
Legal guest workers are people who arrange temporary positions in another country to
earn money with the intention of ultimately returning to their home country.
Many major economies are actually built heavily on the flow of guest workers like this.
Consider that among the countries with the highest net positive migration rates are wealthy
Persian Gulf states like Qatar and the United Arab Emirates.
These countries depend heavily on a constant inflow of legal economic migrants to work
in oil fields and in the service industry.
These migrants predominantly come from other poorer countries in the region as well as
more distant countries like Pakistan and Indonesia.
Legal economic migration often also brings very high skilled workers into regional economies.
The United States government gives out 85,000 special H1B visas every year.
H1B visas are specifically given to foreign workers with specialized knowledge.
In 2012, these visas were all given out within the first 10 weeks of the year.
There appears to be a shortage, in other words, of legal visas relative to the demand for
foreign workers in this category.
Now, part of this flow of economically driven migrants occurs illegally as well.
In the United States, the number of undocumented workers peaked at around 12 million in 2008.
The numbers dropped off in recent years owing to recession and weak overall economic growth.
Nevertheless, a significant number of workers in the U.S. economy come from a stream of
migrant workers without formal legal documentation.
The impact of this flow of workers on the global economy is pretty hard to measure, but
it's clear that migrants, whether legal or illegal, often occupy some of the most difficult
and poorly paid jobs operating at extremely high levels of productivity and efficiency.
Also, whether legal or illegal, international economic migration is largely dedicated towards
earning remittances.
Remittances are flows of wages earned by migrant workers back to their homes and families,
and they're unquestionably a significant part of the global economy.
A 2009 study by the World Bank estimates that $420 billion of remittances flowed internationally
that year, more than 75% of which went to developing countries.
Numerous conflicts emerge from this reality.
The United States government, like many others around the world, wrestles with humane ways
to acknowledge and accept this group of workers without losing control of the rate of migration
into the country.
This is a politically divisive issue in many nations.
In Australia, for example, tens of thousands of immigrants, a mix of refugees and those
seeking a better life, they arrive in boats from nearby countries, including Indonesia.
Reaching the flow of migrants and returning those who have landed in Australia has become
one of the most divisive debates in recent years in Australia, and it's a major part
of national-scale political campaigns.
These debates are made all the more complex in places like Australia and the United States
because why?
They're countries founded by migrants.
But just when debates of these kinds emerge into public discussion, there are frequently
changes in the flow of migrants.
Remember that in Mexico, a country that many people in the U.S. and Canada and Europe think
of as a source of migrants?
While Mexico still has a negative net migration rate, as we discussed earlier, the foreign-born
population in Mexico almost doubled between 2000 and 2010.
The country is becoming a destination for foreign migrants.
In fact, more Americans, U.S. citizens, have moved to Mexico in the last few years than
Mexicans have moved to the U.S.
Let's pause for a moment to think about that.
This was an incredible turnaround and has a number of causes.
First, economic growth occurred in Mexico at a startling rate, rising wages in China
have made manufacturing in Mexico more attractive to outside investors, and this means people
have moved to Mexico from all over, including other parts of Latin America, but also Asia.
Mexico's streamlined its immigration policies, too, making these in-migrations a little easier.
As we can see, voluntary migration ebbs and flows to kind of topsy-turvy global economy
where capital moves around so quickly, and migration does, too.
So what can we learn from all of this?
First and foremost, we can see the question of migration underlines some fundamental geographic
principles and concepts.
Specifically, geographers see, in the case of voluntary economic migration and the issues
associated with it, the awkward spatial overlapping of three different factors, capital, labor,
and territory.
In the first category, it should be clear by this point in the course that the geographic
distribution of capital investment and the jobs that often go with it are unstable.
Capital moves worldwide, and an accelerating rate.
Money, industrial infrastructure, and resource development can bloom overnight in one place
if investors and speculators sense an opportunity.
It can also be evacuated just as quickly, so economic geography is highly mobile.
And as we've seen here, the migration of labor is also irrepressibly mobile.
People overcome some very significant impediments to seek opportunity for themselves and their
families back home.
Labor-sustained and increasing mobility is made all the easier by the technologies that
have also allowed capital to move, including computers, cell phones, and international
flights and shipping.
The political geography of borders, boundaries, and legal jurisdictions is not so mobile on
the other hand.
For a Pakistani worker in the United Arab Emirates, options and rights are extremely
circumscribed, as they typically are for both legal and illegal workers outside of the bounds
of any nation.
Now if we overlay these three geographies, the always moving capital, the slowly following
labor, and the jigsaw puzzle of national boundaries, we see a terrific jumble, a set of poorly
matching and always moving configurations.
These inevitably result in conflicts, excesses, or shortages.
Some of the same elements apply to forced migration, albeit in a different way.
Somali refugees in Dadaab have moved out of their home country as a result of swirling
and unpredictable geographies of violence visited upon their home.
Displaced to Kenya, they're beyond the reach and responsibility of what limited government
there is, since they're on the other side of an immobile political geographic line.
In other words, the problem of migration is a problem of a spatial mismatch.
So you might look at the problem of migration as being one of people, people who move around
or out of place, and this causes legal or jurisdictional problems.
But geographers might suggest that it's the other way around.
People are in a state of constant motion, out of necessity and out of choice.
It's the legal mechanisms and hard jurisdictional borders of global political geography that
are poorly adapted to that reality.
It's the borders, in other words, that may be overfixed in an increasingly mobile world.
So what have we learned here?
First, this lecture has tried to emphasize the remarkable scale, prevalence, and universality
of human migration across the earth.
We've seen that people's migrations are often efforts to solve existential problems, like
freedom from violence or starvation, or to meet aspirations for themselves or their families
Second, we've learned that the geographic pattern of migration is determined by the
configuration of structural conditions in the places from which migrants come and to
which they're going.
As these conditions change, the rate and direction of migration can change as well.
And we've seen that in cases of forced migration, where people are displaced only to drastic
conditions in their home countries, the legal and humanitarian capacity to cope is limited.
Even while the forces that cause those migrations, especially conflict, are unabated, the limits
of this system for dealing with refugees in particular will be put to the test in the
next century as new waves of environmental migrations arise from climate change, starting
with large-scale movements from island nations at risk of inundation.
And we've also learned that economic migration is a significant part of the global economy,
but that it can cause conflicts that are yet unresolved around the world.
We've also seen that the problem of migration is actually one of several interlocking pieces,
including the mobility of capital and labor, along with the immobility of national jurisdictions
and territory.
The frictions between these three spatial configurations have only become more frequent
as the global economy has become faster and faster and more far-flung.
In other words, since humans first walked out of Africa, migration has been the signature
of the species, but most patterns of migration today reflect the pressures and exigencies
of the global politics and economy.
And maybe nowhere is the energy of all this human movement with all its accompanying problems
more evident than in cities.
As humanity undergoes its greatest period of urbanization in the next few years, and
people migrate from countryside to city all over the world, we've got a chance to observe
one of the greatest cultural and ecological transitions in the history of our species.
And just to this process, urbanization that we turn to next.
