When the People's Republic of China was born in 1949, the proportion of people living in
cities was between 10 and 20 percent.
Today, it's closer to 50 percent.
But the Chinese government plans, as an effort to fuel economic growth, to drive that figure
to more than 70 percent and to do it quickly.
Before 2025, the nation of China intends to move 250 million of its people into cities.
Now let's think about that number for a minute.
To get to 250 million people, we would have to add together the populations of Tokyo,
London, New York, along with all the major American and European cities, plus Sao Paulo,
Brazil, Mexico City, Delhi, and more than a dozen others.
That means the Chinese plan is basically to build the equivalent of the 25 largest cities
that already exist today, again, from scratch and populate them with a quarter of a billion
people in a little more than a decade.
And that's just China.
The urbanization of the global population is ongoing, and it's occurring at a rate
far faster than similar transitions occurred in earlier urbanizing eras, including those
of Europe and the United States.
And this unleashes a flood of questions.
What drives this incredibly rapid urbanization?
What kinds of cultures emerge from these cities?
What cultural and social problems come from urbanization?
What opportunities?
And are these cities sustainable?
Is density a cause of environmental devastation, or maybe, just maybe, is it a solution to
environmental problems?
In this lecture, we'll examine the incredible questions of urbanization, a core part of
the science of human geography, and a problem that is front and center on the global stage.
And we'll review the current state and rate of urbanization worldwide, explore the history
of urbanization, consider the benefits and costs of a global city-dwelling population,
and weigh the evidence for whether this is a positive or negative trend overall.
We'll also see how the rapid and inevitable growth of urban populations worldwide means
the emergence of both entirely new kinds of citizens and new kinds of environments.
Though the risk for over-urbanization and ecological disasters do exist, the economic
and environmental opportunities provided by urbanization are compelling and extremely
hard to resist.
But first, how urban are we?
The definition of what constitutes an urban area can vary from country to country, but
overall, urban areas are understood as large and densely populated.
The United States defines an urban area as an area that has a population density of at
least 1,000 people per square mile.
By this definition, the United States itself is about 80 percent urban.
With that in mind, if we examined a map of urbanization worldwide, we'd see some glaring
differences in the proportion of populations that live in cities.
North American countries would stick out as more than 65 percent urbanized, along with
most European states, as would many large South American economic giants, including Brazil,
Argentina, and Chile.
You'd see Australia, New Zealand.
Several of the Gulf states would also stand out as urbanized.
Countries that are mostly rural, those with an urban population of 40 percent or less,
would span much of Sub-Saharan Africa, and parts of Southeast Asia, China, and India
would fall somewhere in between.
In short, a map of urban populations worldwide would look a whole lot like what?
A map of economic activity and the wealth of nations, and this is no coincidence.
These make perfect hubs for economic activity, simply owing to how dense they are.
It's far easier to move and exchange goods and materials in an urban setting than in
a setting where the population is more spread out.
The density of people and the availability of labor allows for higher order secondary
and tertiary economic activities, which we discussed earlier in the course, from manufacturing
to financial services to information management.
Cities have a far higher value-added economic contribution to the economy than primary extractive
industries and farming, so urban centers are economic hubs, and highly urban populations
represent some of the most historically wealthy parts of the world.
Now, a few caveats should be added here.
The link between growing cities and growing economies doesn't suggest that rural resources
and rural people are unimportant to the thriving of modern economies.
They most certainly are.
It simply means that the services provided in rural areas, like farming, mining, and
so on, can increasingly be provided by fewer people, opening the way for more people to
live in cities.
There are also, in some places, moves towards counter-urbanization, where people have moved
to rural areas or small towns to retire or to telecommute in ways made possible by new
technologies.
This is a small trend against a much larger tide, and even with 75 percent of people living
in cities in the next few decades, billions of people, of course, will continue to live
in rural areas.
So this isn't to say that we don't see vibrant, economically active rural areas in the world.
We absolutely do.
Rather, this is to say instead that the historic trend of overall economic agglomeration has
been in urban areas, and people are moving there in droves.
In fact, urban centers in many countries account for a vast majority of the economic activity
of an entire nation, sometimes throwing more economic weight around than their population
might otherwise suggest.
The capital of Bangladesh, Dakar, accounts for almost half of the country's manufacturing,
even though it holds less than 10 percent of the population.
And in some countries, a major city represents an outsized proportion of the population and
the economic activities.
These primate cities, so named by the geographer Mark Jefferson all the way back in 1939, are
cities that are twice as large and twice as economically active as the next largest city
in a country.
Paris, for example, is almost eight times bigger than the second largest city in France,
Marseille.
Bangkok's 7.5 million people make it 15 and a half times larger than Nantamburi, Thailand's
second largest city.
So needless to say, both Paris and Bangkok are massive centers of economic activity for
each country.
Many countries don't have this primate city effect, of course, but this is all simply
to point to the economic importance of urban areas and to help explain the strong connection
between the size of the economy and the proportion of urban populations worldwide.
If we look at another map of urbanization, on the other hand, one that shows the rate
of increase in urban populations, we see something interesting.
This map would match much more closely with maps that show the poorer countries in the
world as well as those experiencing the greatest current growth in economic activity.
For example, in 2013, the United States experienced only a 1.2% annual rate of increase in its
urban population, a little bit of growth.
But in that same year, the country of Benin in Africa saw urban growth increase at more
than 4%.
India's 2.4% rate of urbanization and China's 2.85% put them somewhere in between, but it's
still fast growth.
Considering that these countries all have very large existing populations and are set
to add quite a few more people in the next few years before population growth slows to
a halt worldwide, this all sets the stage for an explosion in urban dwellers.
For these reasons, we can imagine the coming century as the great urban century.
Future geographers and historians will undoubtedly look back at this moment in history as an
important one, in which the world's human societies underwent one of the greatest transitions
since the advent of agriculture.
This is a pretty big deal.
But what makes this such a big deal?
What does urbanization really mean for cultures and societies worldwide?
To answer this, we have to look back a little at how urban societies differ from rural ones
and at what happens in urban contexts that's unique.
Some of the earliest cities in the world, like Ur and Thebes and Harappa, were striking
innovations when they appeared on the scene nearly 5,500 years ago.
More than just architectural wonders with vast walls and organized streets and water
management, stuff like that, these spaces allowed for totally new social changes, complex
social organization, occupational specialization, and the growth of administration, these were
all allowed and they were encouraged by urban settlements and urban economies.
This density also unquestionably catapulted forward new technological innovations owing
to the exchange of information both within cities and between urban centers connected
by bustling trade.
In fact, it's hard to imagine innovations like modern firearms developing anywhere besides
an urban setting.
Consider, then in order to make modern firearms, we had to integrate Chinese gunpowder, Southwest
Asian metal casting, and early European methods of mass production.
This took a cosmopolitan urban setting for sure.
As described earlier in this course, these social changes were followed millennia later
with the rise of denser networks of market towns, which became the springboard for economic
growth and the rise of new trading classes, whole new social systems formed in the dense
networks of cities that had never been seen before.
These included the rise of medieval guilds, social organizations that consolidated economic
power and exchange in a specific sector or trade.
Urban areas were totally unlike other more traditional forms of exchange, including church
or family networks.
They were the first of many complex institutions all the way up to the modern corporation that
were made possible by the density of specifically urban economic activity mixed with social
exchange.
As urban areas became linked to the rise of global trade in later eras, especially the
later industrial revolution, further social transformations emerged from cities.
A complex social and political machinery is rooted in urban life.
These political innovations, they represent some of the most corrupt institutions, of
course, ranging from the historic urban boss political machines like New York's Tammany
Hall to those bosses emerging in new Chinese cities, but they also represent the explosion
of civic organizations, charitable societies, unions, business organizations, rotary, and
new political ideologies and parties.
Cities are engines that drive new social organization.
And for individuals, cities are often destinations because they allow new kinds of freedom, new
kinds of independence.
Though they're often criticized as places where people experience isolation and detachment
from culture, cities are also places of enormous cultural experimentation, where historically
isolated ideas and traditions tend to mix and new ways of living emerge.
Urban jazz and rock and roll are all the direct products of a massive urbanization
of African Americans.
African Americans migrated from the rural south to the urban north in the 20th century
and brought earlier musical traditions with them, and it was cities that catalyzed this
collision of cultures and provided spaces for expression to develop these signatures
of American culture.
So in general, we can think of urban living as producing economic stratification, but
also providing enormous social and cultural freedom, making city life really, really different
than traditional rural life.
Let's consider what all this means for a future world of mostly city people.
It's hard to know, but we can certainly expect new kinds of social organization.
Consider Dharavi, massive informal settlement in the heart of Mumbai, India.
It can certainly be considered a slum.
Dharavi covers an area of approximately 432 acres and is incredibly densely populated.
With some estimates as high as 1,200 people per acre, and people are really on top of
each other, between 250,000 and a million people live here, and you can see the difference
is those figures.
It's a figure that's hard to pin down because the population ebbs and flows with the seasons
and year to year.
Most residents in this crowded place, many of them are really recent migrants from rural
areas.
They're staggeringly poor.
Facilities and infrastructure are limited here.
Securing basic needs like water is a constant challenge.
This unintended city within a city is so emblematically impoverished, it inspired and was actually
used in the Academy Award-winning movie, Slumdog Millionaire.
But as geographer Jan Nyman has demonstrated in his research on Dharavi, this place is bustling
with new economic and social innovations.
Nyman, whose chair of National Geographic's Global Exploration Fund in Northern Europe
points to the incredible range of economic activities going on throughout the jumble
of tiny houses and factories and shops that are all cobbled together with found materials
and improvised architecture.
These activities include retailing and wholesaling of common goods, as well as tanning and the
manufacture of embroidery and pottery.
People market diverse consumer and producer services and astoundingly have constructed
and maintained schools and houses of worship.
Nyman points out that in 2002, Dharavi's GDP was estimated to be around $360 million.
That's a thriving slum.
More than this, this slum, which is the term Nyman basically rejects, has become full of
new civic organizations.
In fact, residents have shown a terrific capacity to organize.
The spur to this organization has been the threat by the city to condemn the settlement
for new development and move the residents to new places, turning the area into higher
value housing and commercial properties for wealthier people, while the population of
the slum has organized in response.
The project to bulldoze the settlement has actually brought local civic and religious
organizations together to resist forced removal, but has also entangled them in local cutthroat
party politics.
Whatever the outcome of this increasingly tense standoff, the case of Dharavi demonstrates
that urban living, even of the most desperate kind, leads to vibrant economic, cultural
and social innovation.
And what's true for Dharavi is also true for informal settlements in Pakistan, whether
called Kachia body or in Brazil, where they're called favelas.
These places also have new and vibrant economic and political lives.
So what does this mean for our new urban century?
Well, we can predict that the coming global urbanization is going to bring, first, burgeoning
economic activity, to stark inequalities in income, but also increasingly independent
citizens, unpredictable, new cultural innovations, and sophisticated new social organizations.
Based on all this, and thinking back on China's plan to urbanize another quarter of a billion
people, we might make some very modest predictions.
China's intention for this plan is to further accelerate its economic growth by creating
millions and millions of new economic producers and consumers out of rural people who would
otherwise fend for themselves and produce and consume their own goods.
China wants to revolutionize its economy by urbanizing.
What we've seen around the world suggests that this might actually work.
The density of economic activity and the new social stratification that emerged from urbanization
might indeed be a boon for the Chinese economy.
On the other hand, we've seen that urban populations tend to innovate and develop high levels of
independence.
They also create and interact with complex local political machinery.
Both of these things might represent a real challenge for the centralized Chinese state
and the Chinese Communist Party sometime down the line.
Urbanization of China might be a case of be careful what you wish for.
In any case, whether urbanization is a result of state policy like in China, or simply a
product of massive economic change like in India, it's happening very rapidly indeed.
The most obvious result of this growth is the creation of new megacities.
Now, there's no exact definition of a megacity, but the term is usually applied by geographers
to describe really huge cities in excess of 10 million people.
This describes the 30 largest cities in the world, a list that would include many wealthy
cities quite familiar to us like Tokyo, which is the world's largest municipal area by population
and population density, as well as New York City, Paris, and Moscow.
But the list of megacities is mostly filled with much, much poorer, faster growing cities
like Jakarta, Indonesia, Karachi, Pakistan, Guangzhou, China.
Karachi has more than 23 million residents in a country whose annual GDP per capita
is less than $3,000, and its population growth rate is approaching 5% per year.
Yikes!
It's reasonable to ask.
Is Karachi actually overurbanized?
What would it mean for a city to be overurbanized?
Overurbanization is a term that sociologists and geographers use to describe a situation
where the growth of the city outpaces the provision of employment, basic infrastructure,
and resources to keep up with the rate of growth.
The growth of informal settlements, or slums, is certainly a sign that overurbanization
may have occurred.
As we've seen in the case of Dharavi, the flow of people into cities is often well beyond
their capacity to provide housing, or roads, or even water, for new residents.
And those such informal areas are indeed thriving, they also suffer from any problems.
In particular, crowding, filthy water, and lack of sewage infrastructure often make informal
settlements very unhealthy places for people to live.
Bad air quality is another sign that overurbanization might have occurred.
Among the most notorious cities in this regard is China's capital, Beijing.
Beijing is constantly shrouded in clouds of sulfur dioxide.
Besides being a terrible irritant and making it difficult to breathe, sulfur dioxide causes
respiratory diseases and premature death.
Now, there are numerous sources of this pollution, including the rapidly increasing number of
vehicles on Beijing streets, and the side effects of nearby industries like steel and
cement.
And these release a lot of the pollution.
The city's location in a bowl surrounding mountains only makes matters worse, as the
air settles like a blanket over the city, preventing the pollution from dispersing.
The situation has become so acute that many residents actually take air vacations, going
out of the city simply to breathe.
The Chinese government has taken a number of steps to try to alleviate the problem ranging
from the sweeping to the bizarre.
On the sweeping side, the government has begun a campaign to shut down industrial facilities
that don't meet air quality regulations.
On the bizarre side, in a public campaign in 2013, the city of Beijing confiscated and
destroyed more than 500 barbecue grills.
While it is true that open air grills and fires can contribute to air quality problems,
it's unlikely that this represents a major source of the problem relative to automobiles
and industry.
Clearly, however, if this is the fate awaiting future residents of our planet, it's not
a welcome one.
Of course, it's difficult to argue that overurbanization is just a problem of the so-called developing
world, but consider Phoenix, Arizona.
With one and a half million people, four million if you count the whole metro area, Phoenix
is the fifth largest city by population in the United States.
And like many cities around the world, it's grown by around 4% per year over the last
four decades, growth that has only slowed a little bit during recent economic downturns.
Phoenix is certainly a glistening spectacle with modern roads and infrastructure and an
overall expanding economy rooted in real estate and technology and transportation, but the
city has an Achilles heel.
Water.
Phoenix has sustained its population by pumping water from the local groundwater aquifer, that
area under the ground where water resides and sandy pores, but this has led to a decrease
in the water table by hundreds of feet.
In the 1990s, new water supplies came to the city from the Central Arizona Project, which
is a 336-mile-long system of interconnecting canals and pipes and tunnels and pumping plants
that brings water from the very distant Colorado River.
But this water may not be enough to meet growing demands, and if climate change decreases the
amount of water available through this interstate system of water delivery, which it already
shows signs of doing, then there may simply not be enough water to sustain the economy.
This might easily be described as overurbanized in this case, no less than Karachi or Sao Paulo.
On the other hand, the general anti-urban bias of many of those who have environmental concerns
may be misplaced, and this is because as geographers are beginning to learn, cities provide unique
opportunities for doing creative and really efficient things with resources that might
make an urban future a very green future.
For starters, as we discussed in an earlier lecture, urban populations consistently and
universally have lower fertility and birth rates than rural ones, and the reasons for
this are numerous, but the nature of urban culture and household economics of urban
living, these all tend to encourage smaller families because of later marriages and greater
expenses associated with child rearing and so on.
The result is that the movement to cities around the world has significantly hastened
the demographic transition we discussed in an earlier lecture.
Urban populations are ones that grow slower if at all, and this has an overall positive
implication for demands that people might place on resources, at least in a global sense.
But more than this, urban infrastructure is actually very resource friendly.
Consider mass transit.
Residents of major cities like New York City or London are much more likely to not own
cars.
56% of residents of New York City don't have a car.
We consider that every car puts its own weight in greenhouse gases into the atmosphere every
year, that the pollution associated with automobiles can be a major detriment to urban health.
This is a major green asset for cities.
This is only possible through the density of city infrastructure and the proximity of
housing and jobs.
To be fair then, cities without this kind of infrastructure and with a poor match between
home and work don't fare as well environmentally.
Los Angeles has a car ownership rate of more than 80% and a long history of air quality
problems.
Resource delivery can also be made extremely efficient in cities.
Having people in relatively close proximity to one another allows great efficiencies in
the management of waste and sewage and minimizes the energy required to treat and deliver water.
High rise structures lose less energy in either heating or cooling than freestanding rural
or suburban homes.
In terms of carbon dioxide emissions, urban households emit less than suburban or rural
ones by putting people together more closely in cities.
Surrounding lands can also be better managed for wildlife or other ecological services.
Even informal urban settlements have shown themselves to be terrifically efficient,
though they're not connected to formal municipal infrastructure.
Research in the barrios of Tijuana, Mexico by geographer Catherine Meehan at the University
of Oregon has shown that people know how when it comes to managing water is formidable.
In these neighborhoods, there's no formal connection to the water grid.
No water is delivered to individual homes and public supplies are distant and they're
hard to get to.
As a result, most residents of these slums drink bottled water, which they buy in very
large bottles, and they husband very carefully.
But what about washing, gardening, other uses?
For these, after painstakingly tracking the water these barrios use for a long time, Meehan
showed that residents of Tijuana have developed ingenious systems for harvesting rainwater
off their roofs, using it for bathing, laundry, and other uses, and then further recycling
it for watering gardens.
Every drop is used many times without a drop wasted.
Though the residents of Tijuana's barrios would very much like to be connected to the
municipal grid, their incredibly sophisticated system, though born of necessity, shows the
possible efficiencies of urban living.
This isn't to say that current infrastructure, even in wealthy or well-developed places,
is up to the challenge of meeting people's needs efficiently.
Take as only one example the problem of water leakage from pipes.
In the United States, even with its long history of modern utility management, water is lost
all the time, and in huge quantities.
The American Water Works Association studied the question and produced an estimate for
major cities across the country.
New York loses around 15 percent of its water simply through the pipes.
Pittsburgh, 26 percent, and Atlanta, a whopping 31 percent.
If we estimate that New York City alone uses more than a billion gallons of water a day,
the annual loss rate is enough to supply countless cities around the region.
That means there's a lot of low-hanging fruit for an urbanizing world.
That is, there are a lot of things that can be done to simply capture more of our resources
more efficiently so that urban living might be more sustainable.
Clearly, a great deal would have to happen for the cities of the future to lay claim
to being truly sustainable.
Infrastructure would have to be improved and replaced.
Citiescapes would have to be designed to maximize walking and mass transit over other
kinds of conveyance.
New forms of energy production and distribution would have to be devised.
There's a lot to do.
But there's nothing that should make us assume before the fact that an urban future is an
environmentally bad future.
In fact, there's actually reason to think the reverse.
So what have we learned?
First, the world is on a steady and accelerating pace to become largely urban in the next century.
And those cities have been with us for thousands of years.
This represents a major break in the way most people on Earth live.
We've also learned that countries that are the most highly urbanized are also the ones
with the largest economies.
And this is because of the economic opportunities provided by high densities of people and infrastructure.
Moreover, where the rate of people moving into cities is highest, we often see higher
rates of economic growth as well.
We've also briefly considered how urban living changes people's social interactions and their
political organization.
New urban populations innovate new forms of culture and are more socially gregarious and
diverse.
They may also present new challenges for centralized authorities trying to govern them in the
future.
And this underlines the more general principle that drives the whole course.
As people make new cities and come to occupy them, cities transform people into new kinds
of cultural, social, and political actors.
We again make geographies that are constantly remaking us.
And finally, we've waived the possible crisis that urbanization may bring on in terms of
resources, health, and sustainability of urban population.
Overurbanization occurs where dense populations lack sufficient infrastructure.
But we've also learned that cities are potentially the most efficient green places for people
to live.
With some innovation, the future might be both urban and green.
Of course, the movements of so many diverse populations together into great urban melting
pot raises some troubling cultural questions.
What happens when far-flung pockets of diverse languages, customs, and ways of life are merged
through both globalization and urbanization?
Will local traditions of living vanish in the mix?
Might they survive in the face of this terrific uprooting?
One of the first test cases geographers might consider in answering that question is the
case of languages.
Will we all speak the same language someday?
That's the question we'll address in our next lecture.
