Welcome to another MiTeX Building Product Innovation, MiTeX Posistrut.
One of MiTeX's most innovative and most versatile on-site building products is the Posistrut
Roof and Floor Truss System.
MiTeX Posistrut trusses are open webbed, parallel cord trusses that can be used to
construct roofs, floors, even wall bracing panels.
The secret to the popularity and versatility of Posistrut trusses can be found in their
open web design.
Their unique V-shaped steel web with integral teeth, combined with timber top and bottom
cords result in long, strong, lightweight, parallel cord trusses.
Posistrut's combine the strength of steel with the fixing and handling advantages of
timber, plus the ready access they provide for services on-site is an extremely tangible
advantage over solid beams or I-beams.
Plumbing, electrical, even air conditioning ducting can all be installed with ease, making
Posistrut trusses an on-site favourite with builders and trades alike.
Each and every MiTeX Posistrut truss is engineered to meet the specific requirements of your
roof or floor so you can be sure you're getting the right solution for every job.
MiTeX Posistrut floor trusses are the perfect floor joist.
When used with MiTeX's unique, load-sharing, strong back bracing system, Posistrut floor
joists deliver a rigid floor structure that's straight and uniform.
Another inherent advantage of Posistrut floor trusses is they can also be designed and manufactured
for top cord support.
This makes them quick to install and ideal for internal applications where space is at
a premium.
Trust top cord support is a much more practical, more rigid method of fixing than those adopted
with I-beams or timber joists.
Plus, costs are reduced because there's no need for expensive hangers or brackets.
Wide parallel cords mean easier floor fixing and more stable trusses.
It also enables the truss to be placed upright without the need for temporary bracing.
MiTeX Posistrut trusses are manufactured to length so they are ready for immediate installation
on-site, eliminating the need for trimming.
There's none of the material wastage or extra labour on-site you get with timber joists or I-beams.
MiTeX Posistrut trusses are extremely versatile in design and application.
Flexible end shapes and bearing conditions ensure there's a Posistrut solution for almost
any challenge.
They can be designed to support upper load bearing walls, with their wide flanges giving
floor sheathing even greater stiffness.
Posistruts can be supported off top or bottom cords or in between.
Trimable ends can be factored into the design for greater flexibility on-site.
Posistruts can even be cogged into steel beams.
Ribbon plate pocket ends offer yet another option for supporting upper walls.
Concealed beam pockets can also be accommodated with ease.
The advantages don't stop there though.
With MiTeX Posistruts proving ideal for shower recesses and cantilevered balcony step-downs.
These can all be incorporated into a Posistruts design and manufacture.
The result?
Less work for the builder on-site and quicker installation of your flooring solution.
No more time consuming on-site packing for the builder.
It's all done in the prefabrication plant ready to install.
MiTeX Posistrut flooring cassettes.
Many builders and developers, especially those working on large multi-story projects,
are specifying Posistrut flooring cassettes.
MiTeX Posistrut flooring cassettes replicate on-site construction in a factory.
The floor is prefabricated off-site to all the relevant specifications.
Plus it includes allowances or deflections, reactions, plumbing locations, void stacks,
wastes and duct chases, and recessed wet areas all at the design stage.
This ensures there are no interferences when installing on-site.
The cassettes can be topped with just about any flooring surface.
Most opt for particle board but products accommodating wet or dry areas can also be used.
Posistrut flooring cassettes can utilize top-cord support for ease of installation.
This means they can be craned into position on-site and fixed in minutes.
The implications this has on-site are substantial,
with more square metres of flooring laid by less labour in a lot less time.
Storage on-site is minimised too, as the Posistrut flooring cassettes are installed on the same day as delivery.
Plus, once installed and fitted, the cassettes can be walked on,
a great advantage when working at heights.
It also means the next part of the construction process can get underway straight away.
MyTech Posistrut flooring cassettes save time on-site and speed up overall construction time dramatically,
especially on large multi-residential and multi-story constructions.
MyTech Posistrut flooring cassettes, the perfect solution for your next domestic, commercial or light industrial project.
MyTech Posistrut roof trusses.
MyTech Posistruts can be engineered and designed to suit almost any roof application,
with clear spans up to 8 metres,
allowing the architect to introduce some exciting dynamics into their designs and maximise internal dimensions.
With open-planned areas now an integral part of today's domestic and commercial building designs,
Posistruts are the logical choice as a roofing solution.
Low-pitched flat roofs have also increased in popularity as owners seek the appeal of high ceilings,
but are often hampered by building height restrictions.
Height limitations can also be an issue with two-story homes where sloping sites make traditionally truss roofs not viable.
Even cathedral ceilings can be easily accommodated with MyTech Posistruts.
The outer-plane stiffness and wide flanges make Posistruts ideal as purlins and girts in a variety of applications.
Further proof of the versatility of this ingenious prefabricated engineered building solution.
MyTech Posistruts can be used as bracing elements in timber walls,
particularly where large wall openings preclude the use of large bracing panels.
Posibrace panels are prefabricated into the wall frame,
eliminating the sometimes expensive and time-consuming nailing required for the fixing of plywood braced panels.
MyTech Posibrace creates a rigid panel suitable for use in most timber-framed houses,
multi-residential units and commercial projects.
MyTech's Posistruts trusses have been readily adopted on-site because they are so user-friendly.
They're easier to fix, easier to manoeuvre and easier for following trades.
Their open web design makes them much lighter than solid timber beams,
an advantage not lost on those who have to install them.
With OH&S becoming more of an issue,
any product that can reduce stress on workers both in the prefabrication plant and on-site is more than welcome.
Lighter weight design invariably leads to safer handling and faster installation times,
and time definitely relates to money on-site.
Posistruts open web design provides excellent access for plumbing,
electrical, heating and air-conditioning ducting.
It avoids the need for cutting holes through solid timber joists and risking reducing their strength,
possibly even their structural integrity or building expensive bulkheads to accommodate other services.
Plus, the ensuing rectification work can prove expensive.
With MyTech Posistruts, it's not even an issue.
Services are installed simply and quickly, adding to on-site time saving.
MyTech Posistruts aren't just great floor and roof joists,
they also deliver practical advantages and creative solutions
with everything from posistrut flooring cassettes,
step-downs for shower recesses, cantilevered balconies and more.
Freedom of design, right through to time, labour and cost savings on-site,
make Posistruts trusses the perfect solution for your next domestic, commercial or light industrial project.
MyTech Australia, creating the advantage.
