I will talk about some work to appear and work in progress with Shruti, which is our
postdoc at UC Davis and three of my students, me, Giancaro and Humo.
Okay, so here is the outline. So the kind of big goal of this program is to find some
geometric picture for non-planar amplitudes in an equals-four superangles, an equals-eight
supergravity, and in general about how to capture amplitudes which don't have
color ordering are not in large and limit in terms of some geometric constructions.
And it is based on the work in the last 10 years on scattering amplitudes in planar
and equals-four superangles. And I will repeat a lot of it, so half of the talk would be basically
repeating what we already know maybe in some certain direction that I will use them to generalize
and get some insight on the non-planar structures. While I heard that you already had many thoughts
on this topic, but anyway, I will start very gently. And just the main kind of take is that
in this planar and equals-four superangles theory, so for physicists they probably know what I'm
talking about, but anyway, it's certain very nice theory that you are like. We can formulate
the question of calculating scattering amplitudes using cells in the positive Tasmanian,
which are related to play big graphs, which is the same as on shell diagrams, physics,
and there is some nice unification and the whole problem can be nicely formulated in the language
of amplitude, which I'm not talking about today, because for the non-planar part, there is kind
of nothing at the moment I can say about it. So in this talk, we will take a certain attempt
to generalize this story beyond planar limit, beyond planar, play big graphs, and on shell diagrams.
And we will use physics approach to calculate scattering amplitudes called
BCFW recursion relations, and we will consider some one version of it, which is normally not used,
because it expresses planar amplitudes in terms of non-planar objects. So normally we don't like
it, because we would like to preserve planarity, preserve symmetries, manifest, which are related
to planarity, but now we will purposely not do it, and despite we will still talk about
planar amplitudes, we'll use different building blocks, and they will lead to the non-planar
positive geometry. And we will study these building blocks and see what we can learn about them,
and eventually in future these building blocks should be also the building blocks for non-planar
amplitudes, but now we are expressing planar amplitudes in terms of non-planar building blocks.
Why? Because here we have everything under control. We know what we are talking about,
we know what these planar amplitudes are, so we are just purposely using these other building blocks.
Okay, so I have a long motivation to get there. So let's just start, I divide it into physics and
mathematical motivation. So on the physics side, what we are interested in is the problem of
scattering of elementary particles in quantum field theory, and this is described by a mathematical
object called scattering amplitudes, which is a function, depends on coupling, depends on momentum,
depends on some spin information, helicity for us, because we will talk about mass as particles,
and in the standard way of doing it, we are using perturbation theory, which we will also use here,
and this requires that we are expanding along some, in some small parameter G,
and then we organize this scattering amplitude A as a series in G, when at the leading order we have
the simplest dominating part called tree-level amplitude and one loop, two loops, three loops,
and so on, because the power of this G is controlled by the number of loops in corresponding Feynman
diagrams. Feynman diagrams is a standard way how to calculate amplitudes in the perturbation theory.
Now this method of Feynman diagrams is very general, works in any, basically any weekly
couple on field theory, but it often obscures certain things, including symmetries or
simplicities that the final amplitude does have. So people in the past look for different methods
and different ideas how to reconstruct these mathematical objects, these scattering amplitudes,
and one of them kind of the most prominent one is the recursion relations, recursive construction,
and the idea is that rather than writing the amplitude as a sum of Feynman diagrams,
we write it recursively, we calculate lower point amplitude, and then we use this information to
feed it into recursive formula to calculate higher point amplitude, and that turned out to be extremely
effective. Now kind of the most important version of these recursion relations, before going to much
details, is so-called BCFW recursion relations. It's kind of the minimal recursion, and it works
for quite a large of class of quantum field theories. There are some conditions that the theory
must satisfy in order to work, and it does recurse the higher point amplitude in terms of lower
point amplitudes, which are shifted in a certain way, but we can actually continue this recursion.
So now we are talking about these three-level amplitudes. There is some generalization to loops
in this N equals 4 superangles theory, but yeah, we will talk just about three-level amplitudes in this
talk, and we can recurse these three-level amplitudes because recursively you recurse higher
point in terms of lower point, so you can just continue this process until it stops,
and it stops when you hit the smallest amplitudes, which are three points, when
you only scatter three particles. In order to describe these three-point amplitudes,
we use certain kinematical data, kinematical description, so the external particles, as I said,
are described by momenta, spin information. We will be interested in massless particles,
where the mass of the particle is zero, so if the particles are on shell, p square equals m
square is zero, and in four dimensions, instead of the four momenta p, we can use two spinners,
lambda and lambda tilde, and this is called a spin helicity formalism. So in any case,
in the end, it's boiled down to the fact that all information about the physics
is given by two sets of spinners, lambda and lambda tilde, two-dimensional spinners,
and for each particle, we have one spinner. And using these spinners, we can build some
kinematical variance called angle and square bracket, which are just epsilon contractions
of these spinners for two different particles. So these will be the objects that you later see
in some of the formulas. Now, why is it useful? The useful thing is that for these three-point
amplitudes, the simplest ones, these spinners are very convenient to solve for the momenta
conservation. So that's one of the conservation law in physics, that the sum of external momenta is
zero. And we also talk about massless particles, so the squares of the momenta are zero. You want
square p to square p free square is zero. And as it turns out, this set of equations is extremely
restricted, and there are only two solutions. And therefore, we associate two free-point amplitudes,
just based on the kinematical solution, even without talking about any particular theory.
And in one solution, all these lambda spinners are proportional, and the lambda tilde spinners
are not. So they are generic. They do satisfy some condition, but they are not proportional.
And in the other version, all the lambda tilde spinners are proportional. So we have these two,
the momentum conservation and these on-shell conditions only allow us these two solutions.
Okay, this is independent on theory. So when we will graphically represent these amplitudes,
we will use these two different plots, white and black, depending on which solution we are talking
about. Now, if you look at a specific theory, we have some formulas for these free-point amplitudes.
So for the theory we are interested in, n equals 4 superangles, which is certain supersymmetric
extension of QCD, theory of strong interactions, we will have some formulas. And for this
free-point wide amplitude, all the lambdas are proportional. So the result only depends on
lambda tilde. As you can see, these brackets are the contractions of lambda tilde spinners,
while for the black vertex, for the black free-point amplitude, all the lambda tilde
are proportional. So the result is only the angle brackets of lambdas.
Okay, so now back to the recursion. So the recursion allows us to express the amplitudes,
in the higher-point amplitudes, in terms of these free-point amplitudes if we do the recursion
all the way down. And then there is some procedure how to do it, but in the end we are getting
these subjects on the right, which are graphs, which only have these black and white free-point
vertices. And they stand for these free-point amplitudes. So each graph is calculated as
a product of these free-point amplitudes living in each vertex, where all the legs
external and internal are on-shell. This is a very different than on a Feynman diagrams,
where the internal legs are not on-shell, they are off-shell. They don't satisfy the
zero for that moment. But these do, so these are very different diagrams, and we call them
on-shell diagrams, and they are building blocks for amplitudes. For some simple amplitudes,
an amplitude is one on-shell diagram, but for more complicated you get a sum of them.
So you can express in these recursion relations the amplitude as a sum of these on-shell diagrams.
Okay, so that was the physics motivation. Now the mathematical motivation is that the same
diagrams appeared in the past in combinatorics and algebraic geometry as play big graphs.
And I'm sure they are useful for many things, but in particular, they can be used to represent
the permutation of n labels. So it's a graphical way how to represent the permutation,
and they will also correspond, which will be more important for us. They also correspond to the
cells in the positive graphs manner. Okay, so first about the permutation. This is something
we will not then use later, but we would like to use it. So hopefully there is some generalization
of this picture to the graphs we were talking about, the second part of the talk. But here,
what is known is that if you take a planar play big graph, and it must satisfy some condition,
but be reduced, hopefully some of you might know what is it reduced graph, but it's not that important
trust. But these, so some special subset of these play big graphs represent
permutation, or in one one correspondence with permutation module, some identity moves,
which I will mention just in a second. And you draw a graph, and there are certain rules,
how to read off the permutation. So if you start with external life one, then you
you take a path through the graph and you land on some other external life. And that's where
the one goes in the permutation. And then there is some simple rule, there should be like here,
I don't know why the black disappeared. So if you go through the graph on the white vertex,
you turn left, on the black vertex, you turn right, and it's a non trivial
you can get just some, you don't need to get necessarily permutation, but you do. That's what
was proven by Alex Posniko before. Okay, and the graphs are not unique, because you can change the
graph and you still keep the same permutation. And there are certain identity moves, which change
the graph, but the permutation stays the same. You can either merge, expand the pair of vertices
of the same color, as you can see in the picture, or once you see any square in the picture.
In the play-by graph, you can just flip the white and black vertices, and also it doesn't change the
permutation. So there are some examples how you would change the original graph, but you don't
change the permutation. Okay, so the second connection is to the positive grass mania.
So the positive grass mania is some subspace in the real grass mania and GKM,
where all ordered miners, main miners, are positives, so K by K miners are positive.
So we consider a matrix K by N, here in this example, 3 by 6, modulo G of 3, where all ordered
miners, 3 by 3 miners, are positive or non-negative. Yeah, we allow that they are zero when we go to
some lower dimensional cell. Okay, so this is a very interesting space. It has a very interesting
boundary structure. It's topologically a ball. Yeah, there are just many interesting things about it.
We will not use all of them, but yeah, we will do a certain
survey on what we need later. Okay, now the boundaries of this space
is when we send a consecutive miner to zero. So all the ordered miners are positive, like
1, 3, 5 miner is positive, 1, 4, 6 is positive, but the only miners we are allowed to send to zero
to go and boundary of this space are the ones which are consecutive, like 1, 2, 3, 4, 3, 4, 5,
so on. So here for G3, 6, G plus 3, 6, there are 6 of them. Now the top cell of this positive
grass mining is nine-dimensional because we have 3 by 6 matrix, modulo G of 3, so we have 18 entries
minus 9 for the G of 3 fixing, so we get 9 independent entries, so it's nine-dimensional.
We call it the top cell when no condition is imposed on any miners. And now we go to a boundary,
we impose a condition, we set one of the miners to zero, and we get lower-dimensional cells.
So this is a six, eight-dimensional cells, and then we can go to seven-dimensional cells when
it oppose two conditions. And then it becomes more interesting for the general, so it's not
only enough to say which miners you send to zero, there is some additional information that you
have to give. For example, for this G3, 6 positive grass mining, if you set miners one, two, three,
to zero, and two, three, four, to zero, there are two solutions, so you have to further relate to
which one, which solutions you have in mind. Both of them are possible, both of them are different
seven-dimensional cells. Okay, now the connection with play-by-graphs is that the play-by-graphs are
related to the cells in the positive grass mania. Again, it's a modulo disidentity move, so different
graphs which are related by disidentity moves correspond to the same cells.
And for example, this graph is associated with a cell in G plus 25. There is an easy way how to
read off what is the N and what is the K of the grass mania, and N is just the number of external
legs, and K is related to this number of black and white vertices. So in this case, K is two.
And the prescription how to do it is that you have to label the grass, and then you will read off
the entries of the of the metrics, in this case, two by five metrics, using variables of the grass,
and this is called a boundary measurement. And then there are two ways how to associate variables.
One way is to associate the variables associated, one way is to add variables associated faces,
these are called base variables or edges, these are called edge variables, here I am doing it with
the edge variables. You have to also add so-called perfect orientation, you have to add arrows on
all legs. And then on the external legs, you have certain arrows incoming, these are sources,
here the legs one and five are sources, and we will go to sins, which are the external arrows
on external legs outgoing. And we look at the path and we read off, we read off the path as a
product of all the edge variables along the path and the sum over all paths which are possible.
So if you can see from one to three, if you go through the graph, there is only one path and
it only, it only carries the alpha six edge variable. So the entry will be alpha six,
which you can see here in the metrics. And if you're going from one to two, there are two different
paths, so you have to sum over them and get alpha one plus alpha two, alpha six, that's the first,
that's the entry on the first row, the second and so on. So you just fill the metrics.
Now, this is a particular, this is a G25 grass mania and it's a top cell. There is no condition
imposed on the miners. And now, this is just the way how to parameterize the grass mania,
but the important connection to the positivity is that there is a choice of signs of these edge
variables such that all the ordered miners are positive. So indeed, you are getting a cell in
the positive grass mania. You have to fix the signs of these edge variables or face variables in
case we did it with face variables. And then all the miners are positive. So the play the graphs
gives you a positive parameterization of a cell in the positive grass mania.
Okay, now the boundary structure, we set the consecutive minor to zero,
which sets the edge variable to zero. And this is a very nice interpretation in the graph because
it erases that edge, which variable will be set to zero. Okay, so for example, we can send minor
free four to zero in this metrics. And this can be done by setting the alpha four edge variable to
zero, which just means that we removed that edge. And the resulting play the graph is a play the
graph for that co-dimension one cell. So to this five dimensional cell, a G to five. Okay, so
play the graphs provide a very nice stratification of this positive grass mania and by removing
edges, setting the edge variables to zero. Okay, so the play the graphs give coordinates
and provide stratification of the positive grass mania. Now the question is, is there any
useful connection to on-shell diagrams, which are the graphs we introduced in the beginning
in the context of physics, which look the same, they were the same, but
well, just the graphs were the same. So is there any useful connection? Okay, so and there is.
And the question is posted in the following. So for the same graph, in physics, we calculate a
function, which is given a product of three point amplitudes in each vertex of this graph.
And this function is on-shell diagram, the function associated with the on-shell diagram
is a building block for scattering amplitudes on one side. And on the other side in mathematics,
we constructed the C metrics, which is a cell in the positive grass mania parameterized by the edge
variables or face variables of the same graph. And now the question is, can we connect these
two things? In other words, in physics, you would ask the question, can we calculate the on-shell
diagram using this story about the positive grass mania? And the answer is yes. And in fact,
the same function that we got as a product of some three point amplitudes in quantum field theory,
we can get as a logarithmic form. So a certain integral over a deloc form on all edge variables,
just d alpha over alpha for all edge variables. So this is a form. But now we integrate it,
we will not do any integral in the end, but we consider this form and certain delta functions,
which purpose is to solve for these alpha variables in terms of lambda, lambda, delta,
which were these kinematic variables, which describe the external X and the scattering.
And now we think now about these lambda-lambda spinors geometrically. And the lambda has an
object that's two labels. One is just the spinner label, one and two. So you'll think about it as
a two-plane in n dimensions, because we have n of the particles. So we can live in this n-dimensional
particle space. And in that case, it's a two-plane in n dimensions. The lambda tilde is also a two-plane
in n dimensions. And the C matrix is a k-plane in n dimensions, just by definition, it's a grass mania.
And the momentum conservation, which we will write in physics, says that the lambda and lambda
tilde planes are orthogonal. So writing the sum of external momentum being zero in this lambda,
lambda tilde, which means that these lambda and lambda tilde planes are orthogonal.
Now, this is a quadratic condition, because it involves both lambda and lambda tilde together.
We think about it as a condition on entries of lambda, lambda tilde. And the C matrix
linearizes this quadratic condition. So instead of talking about what is the relation between
lambda, lambda tilde, we talk about C matrix. And we say that the C matrix contains lambda
and is orthogonal to lambda tilde. Once we say these two statements, just being written in terms
of two delta functions, this imposes that lambda and lambda tilde are orthogonal. Okay,
so these delta functions are very natural from our point of view. And they reproduce
the momentum conservation. And furthermore, they solve for the three parameters of the C matrix.
And there is exactly two n minus four of these delta functions. So these delta functions can
solve for two n minus four parameters. And these two n minus four will be important number.
So, okay, so having these on show diagrams, let's play big graphs.
They correspond to the cells on the positive Tasmania. If the dimensionality of the cell is
bigger than two n minus four, then the C matrix has some unfixed parameters. Because adding these
delta functions fixed some of them, but not all of them. If the dimensionality of the cell is less
than two n minus four, then we didn't have enough delta functions. Sorry, we had too many delta
functions and not enough three parameters in the C matrix. And we are getting some more conditions.
And now on the lambda, lambda tilde. So now the lambda, lambda tilde are constraints themselves.
We are imposing more conditions on that. This is all possible. These are perfectly fine diagrams
and perfectly reasonable and important. But the ones which will be relevant for us is then the
dimensionality of the cell is exactly two n minus four, which means that all of the parameters of
the C matrix are fixed. All the H variables are fixed in terms of lambda, lambda tilde. And there
are no additional constraints of lambda, lambda tilde. And these are exactly the ones which will
be relevant on cell diagrams for the BCW recurrent relations. Okay. So when we, for one example,
this example, we perform this integral, which as I said, there is no integral to do. We are really
thinking about solving from the delta functions for these parameters. So it's like integrating
dx over x and delta x minus x naught. So all this integrals is exactly of that form. And
using this prescription, we just rederive the kinematical formula we would know from physics.
And in this case, this single function, so-called particular factor for 5.3 level amplitude.
Okay. Any questions so far? So this is, I guess, for most of you just
a review of known things. So now we will go further to look about the cells in the positive
drasmania in a geometric way. You would like to, instead of thinking about the C matrix,
we would have to get some geometric description. And this is something which will generalize to the
cases of our interest later. So the drasmania is a k-plane in n dimensions, but we can read
the matrix in an opposite way. So we now look at the columns of these matrix, and we think about
them as coordinates of a point. And we would like to do it in projective space. So for each column,
we can factor out the overall scale. And the remaining thing are coordinates of a point in pk-1.
Okay. So for us, the k-plane matrix, this drasmanian matrix describes a combination,
some configuration of n points in pk-1. Okay. So thinking about these columns.
Now, for the simplest case of g2m, when it's 2 by n matrix, this will be n points on a line.
It's n points in p1. And the positivity of all the ordered minors, in this case, 2 by 2 minors,
will force these n points to be ordered on this line. So the top cell of g2m, of positive drasmanian
g2m, can be interpreted geometrically as n-ordered points on a line. Now, if we go to a boundary,
we have to send one of the minor to zero, the consecutive minor, like ii plus one.
And setting this minor to zero means that we merge the adjacent points i and i plus one into one
point. Now they are merged. Okay. Now we can go to a second boundary when we send
two of the minors to zero. And as I said before, sometimes there can be more solutions. So if you
send ii plus one to zero, i plus one, i plus two to zero, there are two solutions. In one,
all these three points are merged together, ii plus one, i plus two. But the other solution is that
the i plus one point is completely removed, which in this way of writing, it means sending
this lambda to zero. We just completely erase the point. And yeah, these are two different cells.
Okay. Okay, now the second, this was the first thing. So we will think about this configuration
of points. The second thing is that this can be also nicely encoded in this DOC form. So
in this connection to physics, we first took the play big graph and we associated a DOC form
in all the H variables. And then we dressed it furthermore with these delta functions. We solved
for the variables. We got some expression, some function of lambda lambda theta. So let's just
look at this DOC form before we are doing any dressing. So this is just the DOC form in all
H variables, the alpha over alpha for all alphas. Now, this depends what the alpha variables are,
depends exactly how we label the graph. There are different ways how to label the graph.
And they just corresponds to different gauge fixing of the GL2 of this cell in the positive
truss manner. There is an equivalent way how to write this form, which is a GL2 invariant,
when instead of any alpha variables, we directly put their minors. So this is an equivalent way
how to do it. We take the form over all entries of these two by five metrics, modular GL2. So we
are not fixing the GL2 yet. And then the form has this number. There is a simple numerator,
it's just one. And in the denominator, you can see the product of all consecutive minors. And
these minors are exactly the first boundaries of that graph money and cell. So sending one of the
minors to zero, as we said, is merging points. So we can take this form and take a residue,
and then we get a form for the lower dimensional cell. And this is all very nice geometric
interpretation, because looking at this form, you immediately see what the boundaries are.
Now, one thing which is not manifest here, which was manifest in the gauge fixed way,
how to write the DL form, is that in this way, it's not that obvious that the form is logarithmic.
In other words, if we start to take residues, we always find only simple forms. Now, if we take
this GL2 invariant form and plug the explicit parameterization of C metrics using the boundary
measurement, we would again reconstruct the DL form in terms of edge variables. So they are
completely equivalent. One is gauge fixed, the other one is not. Okay. And so for general G2n form,
for the general G2n top cell, we could just get this simple form with this consecutive minors
being the denominator. And in physics, one solving for these delta functions, these delta
functions in this case, which relate the C metrics to lambda, lambda, tilde are especially simple,
and they just force the C metrics to be a lambda directly. So the C metrics is 2 by n,
2 by n metrics. It's a two plane in n dimensions. The lambda matrix is also a two plane in n
dimensions. These delta functions forces them to be equal. So in this case, if we calculate
this function, kinematical function, it directly just turns from one to the other,
and this is a famous part Taylor function for MHP. Okay. So now we will look more closely at,
so the G2n is not that interesting, it's just too simple, but we will look closely at G3n.
And for G3n, this is a configuration of n points in P2. Now the positivity of the three by three
minors give us convex configuration. So if you just draw it in a plane, all these points one,
one, two, three to the n must be in a convex configuration. And now sending
the consecutive minor to zero forces the three points being on a line. So sending a minor one,
two, three to zero forces the points one, two, three being on a same line. If we count the
number of parameters, the top cell is three and minus nine dimensional because it's three by n
metrics. That's three and entries minus nine for the GL3. But as I said before for us, the
interesting case, the one we will look at more closely, is two and minus four dimensional because
these are the cells in the positive rasmalia we will need for three level amplitude DCFW
recursion that we care about in physics. All the other cells are also important, but they are relevant
only for loop amplitudes. Mostly relevant for loop amplitudes, not the three level amplitudes.
So for the G3n, we have to impose n minus five conditions. And so it's codimension n minus five
cells that are of our interest. So for G3 six, which is the thing on the board, it's one condition.
So indeed, the case is when for six points when we consider when we impose one condition are the
ones that are relevant for us. In particular, if we do this DCFW recursion relations,
and we do it in terms of these on-chill diagrams, we get three on-chill diagrams for
six point nmH3 amplitudes, which is just n equals six, k equals three. And these three
on-chill diagrams correspond to three eight dimensional cells in G3 six. And these are
the corresponding configurations. So I think I just wrote, I just write d mu, they're not that
important for our discussion. Now, and you see some kinematic expression, it has some what we
would call physical poles, and it has something called spurious poles, which will eventually
cancel once we sum all three terms. Okay, now for the channel BCFW cell in G3n, the configurations,
the Grassmannian cells that we get are, could I mention five? Sorry, could I mention n minus five?
And they would correspond to endpoints on three lines. So this is what we will get as the
configurations. So we will have endpoints on three different lines. So this is the general cell,
how we would represent here. And again, once we take the deal for
solve for the parameters of the symmetrics, we would reconstruct an object called R invariant,
which is very important for physics. It has some conformal symmetry and so on. So we like it very
much. And importantly, the only thing we show up in the BCFW are kind of a special subset of these
R invariants. The general R invariant depends on five labels. And this one only depends on
three labels. It depends on like an origin one, i and j. So what is the interpretation? In BCFW,
only a subset of all on-cell diagrams slash play big graphs do appear.
And they do correspond to configurations of endpoints on three lines. The general R invariant,
which means that arbitrary g3n on-cell diagram or play big graphs would correspond to the
configurations of endpoints on five lines, not three lines, but five lines. For BCFW,
we are only getting a subset of them. But yeah, they are similar. This is more special being on
endpoints on three lines, rather than five lines. Okay, so now let me mention quickly some
eukinematical approach, how to bypass this step of solving for the parameters of symmetries.
So this is what I just said. Yeah, this would be the standard way how to get this R invariant
expression or for the higher k, some more general Youngian invariant, writing the deal for solving
first alphas and writing it as a super function. There is also some super component of lambda-lambda
Fiona. Now, there is a quicker way how to do it, which in the first step realizes that
starting from BCFW, the function that we would like to get is almost a product of two
amplitudes, two MHV amplitudes, two G2N geometries. And then there is some shift,
which does something more. But you can actually go back to these configurations of
six points in P2 and label some shifted points P and six hat, which show up in the recursion.
And okay, so make it short. This kinematical formula for this R invariant can be also written
as a product of three MHV amplitudes, which means these part Taylor factors,
which involve these shifted momenta. Now, this is trivial for the cases where the BCFW term
really comes from the factorizations of two MHV amplitudes, but for a more general BCFW term,
where we are getting these configurations of endpoints on three lines.
This is not that obvious, or it's not obvious at all. But yeah, we have a clue that you can
write it like that. So what is the meaning or what is the interpretation? It means that despite
these are configurations in G3N in the Grassmania, you can still think about it in this lambda-lambda
tilde space, which in the original picture is not clear because the lambda-lambda tilde space only
enters once we solve these. Still, we can just think about each of these lines separately as a
small G2N, and on each of these G2N, write a part Taylor factor and then take the product of these
three part Taylor factors. These part Taylor factors will all evolve some shifted momenta Q1 and Q2,
which we have to calculate, and there is a simple format for that. So this is a certain way how to
kind of do a localization in G3N in terms of a collection of G2Ns. I don't know if it has any
mathematical interpretation, but in this kinematical space it just works. We will use it for the
non-planar, so I'm just mentioning it. Can I ask a question? It's not that important for the main
story. Okay, so we finally get to the non-planar on shell diagrams, slash plain big graphs,
and the big question, yes, there is a question. Was this phenomenon somehow related to my question?
Can you hear me? Can you unmute yourself? I am unmuted.
Oh, sorry, can you say it again? Can you hear me now? Yeah, I can hear you.
I was asking if the phenomenon on the previous slide was somehow related to MHV rules.
No, it is not. It's kind of interesting because the MHV rules is a different thing. There are some
references. It's more related to Feynman diagrams, and this is something else. I don't know what it
is exactly. It just means basically that if you look in G3N and you know that the cell
localizes these endpoints on free lines, you can kind of zoom on each of these lines separately.
Yeah, also note that normally in the recursion relations, you would think about the amplitude
as a product of two MHV amplitudes with some shifts. This is a product of three MHV amplitudes.
Yeah, so yeah, I don't know. It doesn't seem to be related to anything what we saw before.
It seems that there is just some way how to parametrize the G3N, which trivializes the C.lambdas,
C.berg.lambdas, C.lambda-thilda condition. Somehow trivializes them such that we can just solve
for kind of the parameters of each of these lines directly in terms of lambda-lambda-thilda.
Yeah, yeah. So how general is this phenomenon? Does it happen?
For GKN as well. Yeah, it is just more complicated to think about GKN because it's
hard dimensional, but for GKN, these BCFW cells would place endpoints on
many lines. Two K minus three lines in a higher projective space, and it does work as well there.
Yeah, so it is something very general that you can basically write
that any Youngian invariant as a product of MHV amplitudes. There is something which I don't
say about the super function. There is a super function in the numerator, so I'm skipping that
step, but kind of the denominator structure is just MHV amplitudes. But note that there are these
extra points. Yeah, there are these points Q1, Q2, and for higher K, there will be more of them.
Yeah, so it's MHV amplitudes including these points, which make the result not holomorphic,
because if it was just MHV amplitudes in terms of external lines, it would be holomorphic,
and that's wrong, because the R invariants also depend on lambda-thilda. But all the
dependence on lambda-thilda is through these points Q1 and Q2. They come from just angle brackets
of Q1 and Q2. I like the reference finish here, Zemel. No, no, it's not reference. These are not
reference. They just are external momentum. Oh, sorry. Okay, they're determined in terms of...
Yeah, directly solved in terms of external momentum. Yeah, so this reproduces the R invariant. If you
do MHV diagrams, you don't get R invariants. You get some references. Yeah, so it is not the same.
I don't know if it is related. It doesn't seem to be, but yeah.
Okay, great.
Yeah, so Matthew, I have a question.
Yes. So is there a way to understand this by taking the image of the character cells into
kind of moment? So like you can map cells in the corresponding k-krumion into
some corresponding gg-krumions where the lambda-thilda can understand what the image...
Yeah, yeah, so Matthew is asking about relation to the moment of the mothry to Hedron, which
lives in the lambda-landa-thilda space. Maybe this is possible. Okay, I made some comment about
the amplitude Hedron in the end, but it will be just that we should do it in the future.
But here, the important thing is this q1, q2. It's like these extra points that you have to
introduce. So these geometrically in grass mania are intersections of these lines, but this is in
grass mania, but these points are some kinematical points in the lambda-landa-thilda space. So
if this is understood what these points really are, then I think, yeah, if you can make any sense
of these new points in the momentum amplitude Hedron language, yeah, then I could explain it or
give some insight. But you have to introduce these new points, yeah, and they naturally live,
they naturally exist in the grass mania, and you would have to somehow do the image in momentum
amplitude Hedron and see what they are, yeah. So, no, definitely, if you, the momentum amplitude
Hedron language is eventually important for something I will not talk about, which is like
the deloc forms. In order to write the deloc form, okay, maybe I will say a few sentences here. So
you can also write a deloc form for these cells, and normally the way how you would write
the deloc form for the R invariant is you just start with the R invariant as deloc forms in all
H variables, but now the H variables becomes functions of lambda-landa-thilda. So the deloc
forms exist by not that nice, they are complicated, you just have to solve for alpha for these H
variables. Now, in this language, we can actually write the R invariant as a deloc form only in
terms of lambdas, but these lambdas include these Qs, yeah, so they are holomorphic deloc forms,
but they also involve these special points. In other words, the only dependence on anti-holographic
data is through these points Q1, Q2, yeah. So there is like a minimal pollution of anti-holographic
in the story. Now, in order to check it against the, if these are the right deloc form, because
if they reproduce the right expressions, one needs to uplift it to the momentum amplitude of
the language, and the moment we don't know how to do it otherwise, and comparing to the deloc forms.
So it's possible that the language will be eventually useful also to understand
why this picture is correct, yeah. Okay, let me, right, okay, good. So now about non-planar,
we will use kind of the same way how to calculate these functions also for the non-planar. So
non-planar on-shell diagrams or play big graphs. So here is the question, is there any analog of
the cells in the positive gas manian for non-planar on-shell diagrams? I don't think the non-planar
on-shell diagrams, play big graphs, haven't been studied that much. There was a little bit, which
I will mention. Now, the thing is that you can take the graph, you can label it using edge variables,
you can do the boundary measurement, and you can construct the C-metrics. That's not a problem,
that works as well. The problem is that there is no positivity. So fixing the signs for alpha doesn't
give you anything for the minors. The minors are not positive. Yeah, it just seems to be some C-metrics
in GKM. However, apart from this positivity, many aspects of the planar play big graphs are
unchanged. For example, if you send edge variable to zero, you remove an edge. So it really looks
like you are doing a stratification of something. There are boundaries of this space, and you can
you can characterize them using removing edges. You get another play big graph,
non-planar, and eventually you get actually a planar one. Once you kind of remove enough
number of edges, it planarizes, and then you get a planar play big graph, and then the story about
positive grass manian kicks in. So eventually it crosses that line and it becomes a positive grass
manian. So now the natural conjecture, or maybe the question is, is there any cell or some subspace
in, is there an interesting subspace of GKM, some G-star KM, which is associated with non-planar
play big graph, arbitrary non-planar play big graph. And you can also equivalently ask this
question, is there any geometry of endpoints in PK-1, which you would associate with non-planar,
with this non-planar graph, which would give you that grass manian picture. So
we can ask this question for G2N, and this is solved, but it's just too simple. So if you have G2N,
we know that it's endpoints in P1, so endpoints on a line. And now the positive grass manian says
that these endpoints are ordered, one-to-end. Okay, but if you consider endpoints on a line,
they are always ordered in some way. So endpoints on a line, you can always decompose it into just
the collection of all possible orderings of these endpoints. So the space can be just
triangulated in terms of small positive grass manians with different orderings. Now if you
look now at the non-planar graphs for G2N, you will eventually learn that, yes, the graph
corresponds to a grass manian geometry, and it is just a union of different G2Ns with different
orderings. Yeah, and there is some nice story that this is already quite old, with these people
that we figured out how to start with the graph and how to give the collection of these small
positive grass manians and how to write a form. It's just a sum of particular factors. Yeah,
so there is a lot of nice stories about it, but the G2N is kind of too simple to see what is,
how it generalizes for higher K. Okay, now for G3N, we have endpoints in P2, and now it's obvious
that just the collection of all different orderings is not enough, yeah, because the positive grass
manian means that these endpoints, when they are ordered, it means that they form a convex
configuration, like the one you're on in the picture, but if you consider the general G3N,
okay, the points are just completely scattered, there is no ordering, nothing like that, no
convexity. Okay, so, but our question is about these on-chill diagrams slash play big graphs,
so is there any geometry we can associate with them? And now we will not look at all
play big graphs, but just the ones which show up in the BCFW recursion relations, okay, and the
methods, how we will determine what the geometry is, is called the non-adjacent BCFW, so this is
this weird version of BCFW, we typically don't use, because we don't like it, but here it's very
useful, because it allows us to open the window to this non-planar geometry. So, for the physics
perspective, the non-adjacent means that in the BCFW, we are not shifting adjacent flags,
but non-adjacent, and this necessarily gives us, once you do it geometrically in terms of
on-chill diagrams, it gives us non-planar on-chill diagrams, okay. Now, the same procedure that we
use to this kinematical trick, fast track, in the planar case, we do here in the non-planar case,
okay, so we started the BCFW term here on the left, there is an on-chill diagram, we immediately draw
once we recurse to three points, notice it's non-planar as you can see it, and now we can
directly associate a non-convex, I would say here, non-convex configuration, I call it non-planar
geometry, because it comes from the non-planar graph, but non-convex configurations of points.
So, anyway, I don't have much time, so this is the configuration that you get, it looks almost
like the one before when you had the six point on three lines, but you see that it's not convex,
yeah, the point six is kind of off, yeah, it's on the other side, so that's what you get,
and yeah, you can calculate the form, and it's a new form, it's not an R invariant, it's not
that much different, but yeah, it's a different, yeah, the form is not the same. Okay, now what
about the geometry? So, in the planar case, the first one, we know that for one particular cell
in G3n, the points 1, 2, 3 were on the line, which means that the minor 1, 2, 3 is zero,
and all other minors were positive. Now, looking at this configuration, it changes, yeah, the 1, 2,
3 is still on Li, so 1, 2, 3, minor is zero, now all minors are positive except few, so minor 4,
5, 6 is actually negative, and minors 2, 5, 6 and 3, 5, 6 don't have a fixed time. Okay, so this is
a definition, this is a invariant way, yeah, the way how I drew these pictures kind of much depends
what I choose as an origin, how I draw it exactly, but the set of these inequalities
is an, I know, invariant way how to define the cell, so this defines some eight-dimensional
cell in G3sets, yeah, not a positive gas mine, it's not positive anymore, the minors,
but some eight-dimensional cell, and now if we want to do the boundary stratification, we would
just do the same thing as we did before, we start to merge points, we just start to put them on a
line and so on, and in the corresponding play big graph, it would need to erase edges and do the
usual stuff that we would do in the planar case, but now it's not planar, it's clear that eventually
we would hit planar, for example, once we move point 6 and this intersection point to the right,
now it becomes a convex configuration, which means that we actually erase the edge which
made the diagram planar. Okay, anyway, we can do it for all these BCFW terms and yeah, sometimes
we get these convex configurations, sometimes we get non-convex, there is some general solution
for these non-agents and BCFWs, what type of configurations you get, but okay, this is the
general configuration, so we have before endpoints on three lines, we still have endpoints on three
lines, but they are not convex, so some of the points are kind of off, are on the other side,
and yeah, if you look at it, you can easily write what are the, which minors are positive,
which minors are negative. Now, there is a question, does this have any combinatorical
description? We know that for the positive gas mania there was a permutation, we can associate
with each of the cells, now maybe there are two permutations here or something like that,
some modification, yeah, so yeah, so these are the guys that we studied and which are relevant
for these BCFW recursions, they are two n minus four dimensional configurations in g3n,
not in the positive gas mania, this g star 3n that we don't know what it is in general,
but we know what are these lower dimensional configurations, yeah, okay,
yeah, so maybe I'll skip that, so this is about the physics,
in the, in the plane, for these planar configurations we have these are invariants,
they are very nice because they have some Youngian symmetry of planar n equals four super Young
mills, they make it manifest, now the question is with these non, non adjacent BCFW, they give
these configurations, there are some new expressions, I would call it non-planar analog of R invariant,
they are very similar to R invariants, but they are not, so they have, the question is do they
have some particular symmetry, because these will be also natural building blocks for non-planar
amplitudes, yeah, here they show up in the expansion of planar BCFW, but eventually if
we do really non-planar amplitudes this will be like coefficients of polylogs in the
for higher loop non-planar amplitudes, now there are some nice, here unlike in the,
in the invariant case there is some important numerator, which is necessary there to cancel
double poles in the denominator, yeah, anyway, I think I will skip this story, but there is one
important thing is that despite these expressions are not R invariants, and they correspond to
these non-planar configurations, we can use some trick called, it's not a trick, it's very no,
KK relations for the, for each of the lines separately, and we can rewrite
the arbitrary, arbitrary distribution of points on a line, as a sum, this is at the level of
forms, so at the level of expressions, as the sum over expressions when we fix two of the points
being adjacent, and we sum over some permutations of remaining points, there is some shuffle product
of the remaining points, okay, so what it means that for this configuration on the left, in the
button left that we have, that was our result of this non-adjacent PCFW, we can actually write it
as a sum of these adjacent configurations, so we can write it as a sum of R invariants with
different orderings, okay, so these non-planar R invariants are still quite special, because there
are sums of planar R invariants with different orderings, but some particular sum, yeah, so
it's not a random sum, it's a very special sum, okay, this will be not true for general
non-planar on-shell diagram, the ones which goes beyond BCFW, this is only DCFW, so the ones which
go beyond DCFW will be not true, so the last thing I would like to mention, so this is something in
progress about non-planar top cells, because in mathematics, so in physics we like these two and
minus four dimensional configurations, but in mathematics the fundamental things are top cells,
yeah, not these lower dimensional cells, so now the question is what are the non-planar top cells,
what are the top cells associated with non-planar play big graphs and is there any geometry for
them, now fortunately these top cells have been classified by these people for G36, so only for
G36, they drew all play big graphs slash on-shell diagrams for the top cells, there is like 27
of them, and they wrote forms, they wrote these GL free invariant forms, so this is the data they
provide, they provide the form, and from the denominator of these forms you can figure out
what are the first boundaries, what I mentioned bound boundaries, so this is the one which
corresponds to a planar top cell, so you can see these consecutive minors in the denominator,
so from that you can figure out what is the configuration which is exactly these
which is exactly these boundaries, and indeed this is just a convex configuration,
okay now you can do it for the ones which correspond to non-planar play big graphs,
and the forms look different and you can try to figure out what is the configuration of points
which has the, what I mentioned one boundaries corresponding to the to the pulse of these
expressions, anyway and we did it for some of them, so you start to get configurations like that,
so these are not convex anymore, but you just get point, yeah you get configurations of points
which are not convex, and you can find the signs of all minors and some of them are negative, yeah,
and yeah we did it for a couple of them, yeah here you can also see there is some configuration
where point five is somehow in the middle of that configuration rather than on the outside,
so again this is some, this is some non-convex configuration, and we did it roughly for the
house of the half of the on-shell diagrams they have, sometimes they are even more tricky because
some of them the boundaries are not just being like three points on the line, but two points,
and some extra point which comes from intersection being on the same line and so on,
so we can get very complicated things, now the question is again what are these, what is it
geometrically, is there any combinatorical prescription, and what is special about these
configurations, because the playby graphs single them out, there is just definite number of non-planar
playby graphs, there is like 27 of them per g36, and no more, it's not infinite, it's just 27,
and these must be some special subspaces in g36, similar to the positron, to the positive
brass mania, okay, so being few minutes over time, let me just say that we identified some
non-planar positive geometries in BCFW recursion relations, there is some story about holomorphic
deloc forms I didn't have time to talk about, and these non-planar are invariants,
from the physics point of view we had these two n-4 dimensional cells we cared about, but
there is a parallel mathematical questions about the top cells, because they are fundamental,
use some data for g36, but of course the question is for let's say g3n, and general what are these
non-planar top cells, what is the combinatorics, what is special about them, can we describe
them in the same way as the positive brass mania, it seems like that, because the positive brass
mania is just one playby graph, and these guys are also playby graphs, and they are very similar
apart from this positivity, and now there is also a question we tried to address, but so far
we don't know much, which is how it's related to the amplitude hydrant, because eventually
in the case of planar n equals 4, these guys are just building blocks, all these playby graphs,
all these on-chill diagrams, they glue together in a bigger object called amplitude hydrant,
which is the geometry for the actual scattering amplitude, not the building blocks, but the whole
thing, and there is a version in the momentum blister space called amplitude hydrant and
momentum amplitude hydrant in the lambda-landa-thilda space, and very minimally these non-context
configurations and these non-adjacent PCFW cells should triangulate amplitude hydrant,
as it turns out they don't triangulate the original amplitude hydrant, because they are non-planar,
non-adjacent, so the momentum blisters don't play nicely with them, but it's likely that they do
triangulate somehow the momentum amplitude hydrant in some new way, the way which the
normal PCFW doesn't, so maybe there is something interesting to learn about. Now the final thing
is that what I'm trying to actively do is to figure out what is this picture for
gravity three-level amplitudes, because the pictures are the same, once we leave the planar
world, we are in the complete non-planar world, and that's where the gravity lives naturally,
because gravity doesn't have any altering. However, the biggest problem here is not about
the geometries, but it's about replacing the DL form with some new type of form,
which would reproduce gravity amplitudes rather than diagnose amplitudes.
There is some progress on that, but this is a hard question. Okay, thank you.
Thank you very much. Let's thank the speaker again. And if you have any questions,
feel free to ask now. If you want to ask any questions. Yes?
Yeah, I don't know. We didn't. Yeah, so the thing that we did here so far was
yes. Okay, so there was a question if these non-planar play-by-cross,
where if you look at them in the context of web diagrams, yeah, and I was just saying that
so far what we tried to do is just to kind of do a catalog of all of that with these
positivity conditions. So, yeah, starting from, so yeah. For us, the diagram itself was not very
useful because we didn't know what to do with the diagram, but once we had the form, we knew what
were all the first boundaries. So, we just tried to draw the configuration where the first boundaries
would correspond to the denominator of that form. Yeah, so and once we draw the configuration,
we can figure out what are all the signs of the miners. So, this is kind of an invariant
way how to describe the symmetries for us. The cell in something, in a grass money,
I'm not positive. You see there is a negative sign here, but I don't know what to do directly with the
what is nice about the diagram as the play-by-graph. Yeah, so like what is the question that I would
like to answer there for the graph? Yeah, here at least I have a question. Well, what is,
how do I characterize the symmetries? Yeah, what are the positivity and negativity?
What are the signs? Yeah, but yeah, I don't know what is the right question about the graph. What
would like to see, like to see for the graph? I would like to calculate the mutation or something
else or what to do directly with the graph, I don't know. Yeah, but yeah, definitely there certainly
can be, there can be good characterizations of the graphs directly in terms of some
combinatorics that I don't know. Are there any questions? We can also continue informally after
since you were overtired. Okay, let's thank the speaker again. Thank you. So, and also see you
next week. We'll have the current needs coming and we'll have a hybrid seminar again and then
we're supposed to pick after. So, it's going to be, it's going to be a hybrid seminar.
And thank you very much and see you next time.
