How many ways can you triangulate a regular polygon?
A triangle has one way, a square has two, a pentagon has five, and a hexagon has fourteen.
How about for a septagon?
You can try this yourself, but has someone already figured this out?
You can check this by looking up the sequence in the OEIS, the online encyclopedia of integer
sequences.
Counting for one, two, five, fourteen produces over three hundred and fifty sequences.
We find that our polygon problem matches the Catalan numbers whose general formula
is given here.
There are many other interpretations of this sequence.
It counts the number of paths in an N by N grid which start in the bottom left corner,
only move right and up, and finish in the upper right corner.
The Catalan numbers also count the number of rooted binary trees with N internal nodes
where each node has zero or two children.
They count the number of ways for an even number of people around the table to shake
hands without crossing.
Lastly for now, the Catalan numbers count the number of ways to order N pairs of open
and closed parentheses.
The OEIS entry for this sequence also gives formulas involving the Catalan numbers, such
as sums, asymptotic growth, integrals, generating functions, and determinants of Hankel matrices
whose entries are Catalan numbers.
There's plenty of other information as well.
This massive collection of integer sequences started over fifty years ago when Neil Sloan,
a young math student, was seeking information about a particular sequence.
Back in 1964, when I was working on my thesis at Cornell and I had a sequence, I had a lot
of sequences I was trying to identify.
So I picked the simplest one to see if there was a nice formula for that.
I was interested in how fast the sequence grew.
So if I'd had a formula for the sequence, I could have just looked at its asymptotic
behavior, and that was the information that I wanted.
So there were various books around, there were combinatorics and other books and tables
which had sequences in them, but I couldn't find a particular sequence I was interested
in there.
So I started writing on file cards, all the sequences that I did find, so that my next
sequence, I would have a little, I would have a place to look to see.
So I started making little catalog sequences, and it grew and it grew.
And grow it did.
In 1973 Sloan published his first catalog containing over two thousand sequences.
The second book with over five thousand sequences appeared in 1995.
The next year the OEIS website was launched with ten thousand sequences.
As of 2015 over two hundred and fifty thousand sequences are in the OEIS.
The site is maintained by a team of twenty nine editors in chief and over one hundred
associate editors.
There are so many fascinating sequences.
Some are well known, like sequence A5, which gives the number of divisors of N. Interesting
but less known is sequence A48987, the number of possible chess games after N moves from
each side.
Or sequence A19473, the number of N cells still lifes in Conway's game of life.
And does Sloan have favorites?
My favorite sequences.
Well you know over the years that's changed a bit.
My all time favorite is Rekamon, Bernardo Santos Rekamon's sequence A5132, which is
just a wonderful sequence.
In fact it is my favorite one to listen to.
In fact we've been listening to Rekamon's sequence during this entire video.
Each sequence has its own music.
Now a question for you.
It concerns the EKG sequence 864413.
From the description can you figure out the next number, give it a shot, or look it up
at oeis.org.
