My name is Adam, and for the last 12 years I was a cook.
When Daria and I moved to Thailand and started this channel, it was just supposed to be about
food.
That's it, that's all I know.
But it turns out that when you follow the stories of food, if you just go where the
road takes you, it might change your entire life.
This is a story that I still can't believe or lucky enough to get to tell.
One I'm honestly terrified I won't be able to do justice.
A story of the forgotten people living in Thailand's northwest jungle, of migrants
and refugees and so-called stateless children, of perseverance and survival, triumph and
tragedy and of course, food.
This is our road trip to a town called Sangkla Buri, an ancient village along the Myanmar
border where we came to find the local food, but left with so much more.
If you've heard of the Three Pagodas Pass, the famous border crossing between Thailand
and Myanmar, that's where we're headed.
There's a lot of stuff on this trip that is going to take a good deal of research and
understanding and we're kind of going into a situation that none of us really know what
to expect.
But right now we only have one priority, which is lunch.
This is Highway 323, soon to be replaced by a new expressway but for now the road to
Kanchana Buri, Thailand's jungle curry capital.
We left Bangkok around 9am in a van on loan from an embassy, invited guests of some mutual
friends and with almost three full days ahead of us, to track down the most interesting
food we can find in one of the most unexplored corners of Thailand.
Now the thing about this country is it's a true melting pot.
There are said to be around 46 different ethnic groups making up the modern kingdom and that
doesn't even include the foreigners like me.
Thai cuisine represents nothing less than history, each dish telling a story, the mixing
and blending of cultures and techniques between Siam and the Chinese, Indian, Lao, Malay,
even Portuguese.
But the farther you get from the urban centers, the more the melting pot hasn't melted.
Trying stuff cooked here is like turning back time, a window into a world that used to be
a lot less complicated.
Alright, so the guests and guides and hosts for our trip to Northwest Thailand are starting
to learn quickly what it's like to travel with OTR, the good and the bad.
The good is we eat really, really well.
The bad is we have to sit here and stare at it for a really long time until we're actually
ready to start eating because we've got to get all of our coverage and then you guys
are going to really hate me in a moment because you're going to have to sit here while I try
everything one by one and say, wow, this is delicious.
Vasana, JP and what are a driver who is really upset at me already because he's just slowly
starting to go, you've got to wait, you've got to wait.
Alright, let me introduce you to the people sitting across from me since they're the
reason we're here two hours into a seven hour road trip far away from anywhere we've
ever been.
This is Jean-Pierre or JP and he's been in Thailand since before I was born.
He's the only one out of six of us who's been anywhere near our destination before.
In fact, he's come to the remote borderlands several times in his former capacity as Thai
director of the Asia Development Bank.
And Vasana originally from Bangkok, once Thailand's trade representative to the United States,
for the last two decades focused on public service ever since finding herself in the hospital
for two months, injured on 9-11 when the towers fell.
This is no normal group, and honestly, it's not a normal road trip.
See where we're going is a place called Sangkla Buri, almost 400 kilometers northwest of Bangkok
and right next to the Burmese border, right in the middle of the most sparsely populated
part of the entire country.
For a guy into food history, it's the Holy Grail, a place where some of the first ethnic
groups to settle Southeast Asia still live, practicing cultures and cooking dishes long
lost to the outside world.
But it's also a place with such hardship that JP and Vasana are heading there because
they're bringing a donation from Bangkok's Rotary Club, school supplies, toys, and money
on its way to a school for stateless children.
And into the undocumented tribes in the mountains are here fleeing violence across the border.
Sangkla Buri is famous for its preserved and ancient way of life, but also for human
trafficking, ethnic violence, and most of all, its wild mystery.
There's only one road in and out.
Many of the local people are unregistered and Thai's not the primary language or even
Burmese.
It's the domain of the Keren.
Native to the nearby mountains or brought here as slaves by the Japanese to build the
so-called Death Railway.
And most of all, it's the home of the Mon, the ancient people who introduced the region
to rice farming, Buddhism, and so much of modern cuisine.
Long absorbed into Thailand, outlawed in Myanmar, the majority in Sangkla Buri.
Somewhere in the middle of the Khao Lam National Park, the signal started fading on our phones.
By the time we reached 100 kilometers north of where we had our lunch, the jungle got
denser.
And for a hundred more, we kept on going, driving through forests and mountains, through
police checkpoints, and finally crossing the River Kwee, looking out over a region that
all of a sudden was very real.
The town was dark when we arrived, nine hours after leaving our home in Bangkok.
The next day we'd separate.
Jasper, Daria, and I on our food trip and JP and Visana off to do their good work on
behalf of Rotary Club.
So at a hotel restaurant near the water, we had our dinner and raised a glass to the journey
before tomorrow, starting the real one.
There's an old story that about a thousand years ago, a monk named Tong Su made a pilgrimage
to what's now Myanmar to study under mon Buddhist teachers.
He'd eventually settle here, building a temple in the remote mountains near the River Kwee.
Now Tong Su was known as a healer, and his reputation drew followers, forming a settlement
of mon, Karen, and the ethnic dye.
Today it's a place known as Sangkla Buri.
This part of town, this side of the water, is the home of the ethnic mon.
And before we get into anything else, let me talk about the food.
As I mentioned earlier, the mon were the first to bring rice farming to Southeast Asia, coming
from what's now China in the Yangtze River basin about 5,000 years ago, following the
rivers to the south, first settling the Irrawadi, then the Chao Praia, then everywhere.
Now there's not much known about ancient mon cuisine, that's why we're here, but
there are a few dishes among today's mainstream Thai food that we know trace back to the mon.
There's Khao Kluk Gapi, shrimp-paste fried rice, served with an assortment of meats and
vegetables and based on a traditional mon dish.
There's Khao Cheh, rice soaked in chilled jasmine water and associated with Songkran,
or the Thai New Year.
And most of all, Khanom Jeen, Thailand's favorite noodles, served from the far south along
the Malay border all the way to the old Lan Na Kingdom in the north.
Khanom Jeen was the signature of the mon people.
In fact, the name, while today meaning Chinese snack, actually derives from a mon word,
Hanom Tien.
And it's not unique to Thailand.
The noodles themselves are a part of the cuisine all across the region and wherever
they show up, it's an indication that sometime, hundreds or thousands of years ago, there
was mon influence and culture, an ancient trade route or a mon settlement or civilization
long since destroyed or assimilated.
In Vietnam, the noodles are called Boon, Num Ban Chok in Cambodia, Idiyapam in South
India in Sri Lanka and in Myanmar, Mohinga.
So we actually, we have not arrived at the market yet, that's down the hill and it ends
soon so we need to rush.
But the very first thing we saw was a Burmese lady selling Mohinga by the side of the road
and with fresh Khanom Jeen noodles.
So that is extremely exciting and we are detouring on the way to the market and hopefully
we still have time to make it there.
But right now, I don't really care.
Mohinga is the national dish of Myanmar, a soup made from fish stock served with fried
garlic, chickpea fritters and here, condiments including what I think is tamarind but I don't
know because I don't speak mon and communication might become an issue.
That's alright, we can talk through food.
I might just sit right here because the other customer just left and we're going to chase
this with some water.
This is the first time I understand why all of our Burmese friends say we have to start
every day with a bowl of Mohinga, not to insult the restaurant version of this dish but it's
clearly not made to be a restaurant dish.
This is so comforting, subtle, I would say a lot less fishy than I expected.
Look at him, look at him, look at the namgom.
Plus, what dish is not made better with crispy fried garlic, this is just, it's very, very
good.
With breakfast done, our destination was the morning market.
Open every day from 5 a.m. until about an hour after sunrise.
The early morning in Sanclaburi has a feeling all its own.
The quiet stillness of the remote mountains punctuated with the sounds of two-stroke engines
and people on their way from place to place, with an energy of somewhere both welcoming
and incomprehensible.
Everyone going out of their way to smile or watch us walk by, a warm start to the day,
and also a reminder in case we ever forget that we are very much outsiders.
In the thousand years or so since the first settlers followed Tongsu and built a home
here in the valley, while the entire world has grown up, the Mon language and culture
has more or less remained the same, although for the people themselves it's been a long
and often tragic journey and one that needs to be understood to gain any kind of context
about where we are.
At the time Sanclaburi was established, the Mon were the rulers of what's now Thailand,
having built a kingdom called the Dvaravati, based in what today is the neighboring province
of Supanburi.
For this part of the world this was the first real empire and it was Mon, establishing trade
with China and India in bringing religion from Theravada missionaries.
The Dvaravati would fall to another Mon kingdom, the Lavo, which would gain even more influence
and territory and the Mon seemed destined to rule Southeast Asia forever.
But that's not what would happen.
In the 11th century the Lavo would be defeated in a series of battles by the Khmer and would
become a sort of vassal empire.
The Khmer would absorb Mon language and traditions and people too, enslaving a huge number of
the Lavo.
Then 400 years later the Khmer would fall to Ayutthaya in the ethnic die and the last
vestiges of the Mon would disappear.
To the west this story would be completely different.
Far removed from Angkor or Ayutthaya, in what's now Myanmar the Mon had been locked in an
ancient and endless war with their rivals, the Bha-Mar, the rulers of the powerful Pagan
Kingdom.
In the 1200s just as Thailand's Mon were being crushed by the Khmer, Myanmar's Mon
gained the upper hand, establishing their own kingdom.
As it relates to our story where things really developed here in Sanclaburi as a Mon town
was win in the 16th century, that kingdom would fall again to the Bha-Mar and thousands
fled the massacres that followed and came to the remote jungle lands here, around Tongsu's
temple.
Anyway, long story short, over the border the clashes continued for another two centuries
between the Mon and the Bha-Mar, with the Mon finally routed in 1757, the Burmese army
chasing them as far as Ayutthaya and then raising that city to the ground.
Now it's worth mentioning that since the ethnic Mon had long been absorbed and welcomed
into Siamese society, many of the nobles in Ayutthaya's court were of Mon descent.
And as both Toxin, who revived the Siamese empire in Tonburi, and Rama I who'd built
the palace in Bangkok both had Mon roots, there was plenty of room for the new refugees
to integrate into the new Thai kingdom.
Again though it was different across the border.
The Mon and Bha-Mar had now been at war for almost a thousand years, with the violence
persisting until the British arrived and enforced an uneasy peace.
They carved out a Mon state, bordering Thailand and ending just across the hills from Sanclaburi.
Then the British colony fell, the war began again, and it is very much still ongoing today.
And we'll pick up that story later but first, we've arrived at Sanclaburi's Mon village
morning market.
This is such a cool atmosphere, it's really hard to explain how unlike, this reminds me
of Yunnan province, it's the only place I've ever been where you know you can go deep into
the countryside, at least the last time I was there and you end up finding these village
markets where everything is different, the languages are different, the people are just
differently.
One thing by the way, if you're listening around me, I don't recognize the languages
that are being spoken.
So, from what we understand, Thai, Burmese are both minority languages here, the majority
language is Mon, Korean is a secondary language, so good morning.
So there's a lot of languages being spoken that I have never heard before.
Yeah, let's go into the market, we have one hour before this since, the dog is literally
playing with him and asking for cabbage as treats, that is so funny.
This just smells so good.
And I just hope somebody comes here to let me eat some of this, Honglei is usually made
with pork belly, this looks like beef, but I'm not sure what that is or what the difference
is, we've got four different types of bowls of stuff here, there's something cooking back
there so somebody's going to come back to this house and let me eat.
Here comes our man, he just went and picked up something.
I'm not sure what happened when we followed the smell of food cooking to a platform just
behind the morning market, but the long story short is that this is not a restaurant, it's
the house of a very confused Mon family who probably didn't expect their own day to start
with Jasper and I barging in trying to order breakfast, Toto we're not in Kansas anymore.
There's a section of Sangkla Burri intended for visitors, a place with at least something
of a tourist infrastructure and we figured this would be a good time for us to maybe
go down there, to shake off our embarrassment and see the other side of town and maybe find
a place to actually sell us something to eat.
The walk from the morning market to the quote tourist center of Sangkla Burri is only about
400 meters, maybe five minutes up one hill and down another, but here, for at least a
few square blocks, the vibe is completely different.
A pretty straightforward cluster of optimistic trinket shops, signs in Thai and even English
and restaurants serving dishes more well known by the general public.
We stopped here for a famous place that sells Joe in Chinese kanji or Joke in Thai, this
one with what looks like ground pork, crispy garlic, a bunch of ginger, a soft and semi
runny egg, and of course, patonggo, which is what in Chinese you would call yotiao, Chinese
donuts if you will, so you should have this with your Joe, but actually that's very good.
I never ordered Joe, I don't know why, because I lived in China for so long I kind of never
saw the point, you know, this is what you eat when you don't have enough rice so you
boil it to make it stretch longer, but maybe that's a little unfair, this is delicious.
I have work to do, I've got two coffees.
The bridge that connects this mon settlement with the other side of Sangkla Burri is the
symbol of the region, the biggest man-made wooden bridge in Thailand and at 850 meters,
one of the longest on earth, an attraction that brings at least some curious onlookers to the
town, usually after visiting the waterfalls in the Khao Lam National Forest. It's a bit ironic,
kind of a metaphor for the region I guess that this bridge only gained attention and the village
first saw visitors in 2013, not because of its grandeur, but because it made the national news
after being destroyed in a flood, then rebuilt by hand the next year. It's an engineering marvel,
each piece of wood cut from the nearby forest and all of it done by hand, no heavy equipment
needed. It's called the Utama Nusorn Bridge, named in honor of a mon Buddhist monk named Luang
Po Utama, and that brings us back to where we left off, when the British left Myanmar in 1948.
We pick up with the Bahmar now in control of the newly independent country,
for the record in case you're wondering, yes the name Burma comes from a word for
Bahmar, and actually so does Myanmar, both variations of the same term. Anyway, with the
mon state now no longer under any kind of protection, an independence movement took hold
and the Burmese sent in the military to shut it down, and by that I mean they pretty much laid waste
to the whole region. One of the mon villages destroyed within a few months of the end of
colonization was a place called Yebu, once home to a population of a few thousand,
about 40 kilometers northwest of the Thai border at the Three Pagodas Pass. In June 1949, Yebu was
burned to the ground and a local monk, Luang Po Utama, gathered around 60 families and led them
through the mountains, avoiding the Burmese patrols and crossing into Thailand where they'd
settle their own corner of Sangkla Buri. Now to that point this region was fraught with its own
ethnic tensions, with occasional flare-ups between the various different groups, but Utama was a bridge
builder pun very much intended, and the land his followers settled was actually in a village that
had previously been majority Karen, a place called Nong Lu, a Karen word meaning roofs made of palm leaves.
The mon areas in Sangkla Buri were scattered throughout the valley, and the main town became
something of a diverse community, with the new cultural center a temple Utama would build in
1953. Now that's all on the other side of the water, where our hotel is and where today there's
something of a small but reasonably developed city. The bridge itself would come decades later,
with construction led by Utama himself starting in 1986, connecting Nong Lu to a village on a
peninsula that until almost that time was neither a village nor a peninsula. Everything we've told
you so far about the history of Sangkla Buri, from Tongsu's pilgrimage to the death railway and even
Utama's new settlement, was based around the river Kwe. It gave life to the region and all
through the centuries as new migrants arrived, they'd settle pieces of land along the river.
But in 1979 construction would begin on a hydroelectric power plant, which would dam the river,
about 80 kilometers to the south. In 1984 the work would be completed and the ancient valley
would begin to fill with water, and within months, a thousand years of history and the homes of countless
people would be below the surface. Now many of the families that lived in the valley were refugees,
undocumented migrants and ethnic minorities, and as they'd lived off the grid, they had no citizenship
and thus received no compensation. But thanks to Utama, along with a grant of land from the Thai
government, Sangkla Buri came together to help build a new village, a home for displaced families
who'd once come because they'd already been displaced by any of a dozen wars and conflicts,
both recent and very, very long ago. And that is the story of where we've spent this morning,
and the people we've encountered in this unique place, keeping alive a culture long lost with
their own history just below the water. Wow. I've never, I've never seen anything like that before.
That's insane.
It's almost surreal in real life. You know what I mean? You can see pictures of it,
but when you're actually right next to something where, you know, it's incredible.
It's
welcome.
We had about an hour left before we'd need to meet up again with JP and Visana to travel
further into the countryside. So we asked our boatman where he'd go for lunch if he wasn't on the
water and he sent us here to a local mon restaurant just past the mohinga stall where we'd started
our day. First of all, tell me what we're eating. What is this? This looks amazing.
The specialty here is a dish called hang le, actually quite well known in Thailand and
something I listed among my top 10 favorite Thai foods in a video we did last year.
It's known in Bangkok as a dish influenced by the Burmese, something that probably came from
Myanmar. But this is the first time I've ever known the real roots of hang le,
a unique specialty not of Myanmar itself but of the Mon people.
Oh my gosh. That smells amazing.
Crispy pork, excuse me, crispy pork skin. Everything is better with pork rub.
Crispy pork skin, everything is better with crispy pork skin. I did not expect that in a stewed vegetable dish.
This is just the best version I've ever had of this.
Thank you so much. Okay. Thank you.
Now, can he tell us what he just said so that we can actually translate that on screen later?
Okay, we just had one of the best meals we have ever had in Thailand,
the best hang le curry I've ever had. We have 25 minutes before we need to be back on the other
side of the lake. After we cross the bridge, that's where our drive is meeting us because we have
plans all afternoon. But I just saw somebody down the road here that's serving on no khao soi.
And so we're going to try and fit that in. This is going to be the fastest food segment we've
ever filmed, but we can't come all the way to the Myanmar border and not have a bowl
of homemade on no khao soi.
We got to run.
In 1949, after Utama's successful journey with the 60 mon families to Sankla Buri,
it wasn't long before more refugees would follow. At first, it was family members and
neighbors of that first group of modern arrivals, but in 1962, the trickle became a constant flow.
That was when Neh Nguyen seized power in Myanmar in a military coup, and in one of his first
moves, his government outlawed the mon language, mon culture, basically erasing the mon people.
When the refugees would come, many would arrive illegally, but through work they'd at least
earn Thai registration and according to the law, their children born here would become Thai citizens.
But that law would be repealed in 1972, in large part because of just how many people
were pouring across the long border from Myanmar. This change didn't just affect the new arrivals,
by the way, but also many of the hill tribes in the border regions who spoke their own languages
and lived separated enough from society that they couldn't actually prove that they'd always been
here. In 2008, the Thai government reversed the law again, but since then, very few applications
for birthright citizenship have actually been accepted. There's a simple truth which is that
the Thai-Burmese border is long. In fact, 2,416 kilometers, about the same as from Paris to Moscow.
It's impossible to police and with so much turmoil on the Myanmar side,
there are a lot of undocumented immigrants. When a child is born to refugee parents on this side
of the line, the newborn is neither Burmese nor Thai. They're stateless, which means they don't
have a passport, but also that they don't receive government medical insurance. They can't buy a
smartphone, can't open a bank account, or get a legal driver's license. As of 2023, according to
Thailand's Health Security Office, there are 520,000 stateless persons residing in the country,
and many of them are here, living a life of survival in places like Sanclaburi.
Let's see what we have at the convenience store.
Can I have just a Coke?
This doesn't even need to be part of the video, I just wanted to,
I don't like to come here and not support and buy something.
It's about 2 in the afternoon and we've been taken by JP and Visana to ride along with the
medical worker from Children of the Forest, the organization supported by the Bangkok Rotary Club,
on her rounds as she checks in on some of the makeshift communities built on the outskirts of
Sanclaburi. This place, the home of about 125 people, is mixed between Maan, Khorin, and Burmese,
all living on a remote property owned by a monastery, which allows migrants to stay and
build their own places to live for a rent of about $5 per year. Delito, the medic, is herself a refugee,
first coming into Thailand from a city in Maan State about three hours away. That was almost
24 years ago. Obviously, a lot of people who come here, it's not easy. I'm sure when you came,
you didn't speak Thai, or did you, when you first arrived? I can't speak Thai, okay? I'm really
scared. I don't have any paper, but it's lucky one of the Thai men is take me with his motorbike,
we passing to the checkpoint, but before it's my job is I'm working also the boyapun on the
on the what is the hospital, like a clinic near the border. So when we take the patient
to the Thailand, we have a border pass, like a letter you can take. So the also the people
is around there, they know as I just come and go, so they're not checked. So I live here. Since
of I came in here at the Sangla Buri about six months later, I have a paper, not Thai
idea. I have a paper after that. Now I have a serial card. There are hundreds of settlements
like this throughout the border region and Delito tries to visit each one once a month.
More often, if there's an urgent need for medical service, like here where there's a newborn
from a one single mother, this scare and then she's a single mother. And then her job is making
broom. But now is the this house is not their house. The owner didn't come because of no broom
flower here at the moment. So she no job. But since of she have a baby about 10 days. So her
mother is people around here contact me, she have a problem, no food, no husband. And then please
come and help. So we come and helping her now is her baby dead. Since this land is owned by the
Buddhist temple, nobody gets turned away, which means not only is this place known as Frogstream
Village, a mixture of languages and cultures, but also of the needs of the people here.
For some, it's a temporary stop, a place to stay until the next job comes along in the orchards
or rubber plantations. But for many, it's the only option. Among the people staying here are also
those who are disabled or look after disabled family. There are single parents, the elderly,
people without any other options. In fact, some of the residents living in makeshift
housing close enough to Myanmar to hear the gunfire have been here for as long as 25 years.
Her daughter is have a polio polio. Yes. Since I was born, he said about one month and then
get sick and then like that. But his wife is a die. When she's a three years old, but now she's a 22.
This house and then we helping. Helping is when the kids sick. One of the boys is get sick and big,
upset and then take to the, take down to the Ratchaburi hospital. And then this house
is we have we also also the pregnant woman around here. So she have my telephone number
who have a problem and then they worry they can't speak Thai or they don't have ID card and then
come and contact her. She have my telephone number. She contact me just before she said one of the
patient who have a problem with the leg is a car. No money to go.
It's not all despair at Frogstream Village. Many of the children are now students at Delito's school,
Children of the Forest, where not only do they learn Thai, but also gain something priceless.
A name, a registration, not citizenship, but legal documentation and access to the Thai school
system. Hope. For the people living here, there is work. They've formed something of a village
business, collecting a special kind of plant, which grows in the nearby mountains. This is
the making room. And this is the business here. This is the people in here that that is the main
the main business is making room. Okay. And they sell this room. There is a room factory here.
And then they're making room here. And then this room they take to the whole Thailand Bangkok or
everywhere. Really? Yes. Yes. That is all is from here.
This is hard work. You see how intense that I mean this is thick. This is packed in really thickly.
I would stab myself right through the hand if I even tried.
I have a feeling in the mon language, he's hilarious. I just don't understand anything about that.
Oh, he said, uh, if, if you come and buy with the dollar, it might be, he said it's a very good,
good for them. If you have like, it's been more than 10 years since I've been back to America.
I don't have any dollars. I would love to.
So we found we've somehow this still is a food video because even here, even
along the Thai Burmese border, in a refugee village, for people who don't have Thai ID,
who don't speak Thai for the most part, Mon Karen and Burmese living here on the land
owned by a Buddhist monastery, we have still found somewhere serving food. And we have our
favorite sticky rice flour and what looks like black sesame doughnut and some squash,
which she's giving us with a dipping sauce. As we were about to leave Frogstream Village,
I noticed something that caught my eye, a restaurant or more accurately, a snack counter,
serving things like fried chicken, sticky rice, pastries and the kind of fritters you'd see in
any proper Burmese market here open for business servicing a refugee camp of 125 people.
Okay, no Ken, no problem. Yeah, yeah. Please, please, please.
I'm sure. Is that what she said? Not done every day? Is not every day people come to film
food video here? They're going to be famous for their food, you can tell it is, is they're
going to be famous for their food when they're on on our OTR.
It was like the best, best franchise we've ever had. That's a good comparison. It was really good.
Thank you very much.
As we left the village to head somewhere else, Delito received a phone call. It was her mother
in Myanmar, letting her know that she was safe as their home village had been bombed by the Burmese
military earlier that same morning. It's a fact of life for her living here in safety while every
day she worries about her family three hours away. Can you go home right now? There's the border.
Can you go back to visit your family and come back in Myanmar to Thailand or not right now?
Right now, now is the way it is. In Thailand you can go, but in Myanmar they're closing the road,
so have a wall in there. They're closing so you can't go. Even now my mom's hometown is fighting.
And here it's safe and then if you if you have like a one-day working, you can buy food right
in Myanmar. It's no job fighting, no food, no job, so people is just, just even with all the trouble
of coming here with no ID, it's still better than maybe some people's safety in Burma.
Safe, safe, safer than Burma because again here is no fighting, right? Even if you don't have money,
but only you have to scale when they come and take, you scale again. So if you like,
living in the jungle, you're walking in the rubber garden, that is your safe life.
That is what the people here around here.
So this is, if this looks improp too, it is improp too, and I was just telling your father
actually is behind us that my favorite thing about filming is when I don't know what's going on
and somebody just says, hey, at this time you need to be here. I'm like, great, that's awesome.
It's less work for me. Okay. I've been told now that we needed to be at Children of the Forest at
3.30, which I don't even have time to process where we are. We'll do that tomorrow morning. Okay.
But we just got here, we changed vehicles, we're in another pickup truck and going right back to the
back. Where are we going? Okay, so we're moving from, you've just been to some of the villages on
the road. Now we're going off road into the jungle, see some rubber plantations quite deep in the
jungle, about 15 kilometers into the jungle. And we're going to visit some of our students that
come to the school, give you an idea of just how far our students are prepared to travel,
just to get an education. And you'll meet some mothers and you'll meet some patients as well
that were helping. So it should be an interesting trip. Amazing. And then I see there's a cooler
being loaded into the back of the, into the back of the truck as well. That's right. Yeah, we've
got a, we thought might as well treat the villages there. We know them quite well and make it exciting
for them. So we're going to, they're doing a little bit of food and that now, enjoying doing that.
And we're going to take some ice, take some coke and some snacks for the kids over there as well.
Anthony Bourdain once said that the greatest meals you could ever have are the ones you don't go
looking for. Instead, life is about putting yourself in a position where they might just
happen. Like jumping into the back of a pickup truck heading as deep as the path goes off road
into the jungle.
There was a time, I remember when I was a little kid, when I could be in the back of a truck
and just get tossed around and it was no problem. And now every single bump I'm like in 10 years,
that has been a murder in my back.
Guys, Jasper, this is going to make a really bad headline if I lose my balance and just crush
and crush the kids. That's going to be really bad for everybody.
I love how the car is driving so much more gently now that all the kids are in the back.
When it was just us, it was like, no, I hope nobody knows that word.
I can't swear around the kids. This is why I could never be a teacher.
Yeah, I don't know if this is translating to video, but we are, this is just a straight drop
off everywhere along the side of the bus. It's just a dead drop the whole way. I'm going to
give this back to Jasper because I clearly have no idea how to operate a camera. But yeah,
we have been driving alongside a straight drop and there keep being times when
they'll yell out to us, hang on tight. This is a slippery part.
Well, the car has stopped and we are surrounded by people and I almost forgot that we were,
we had a direction. I was just going to keep going and then we're just going to end up as deep
as you can get in the jungle and then we're going to turn around and come back and I can't
believe that there's a settlement here, but oh my God. Everyone's even kids are laughing at me.
My back, what back? My back is done.
There are things that you see and experience once in a lifetime,
places that open your eyes to a world so far removed from anything you've ever encountered
that you can't help but leave a different person. This is one of those places. It's a makeshift
settlement so far into the jungle that for six months a year during the rainy season,
it's completely inaccessible. The only way in or out a four hour hike each way to reach the nearest
paved road, a hike that unbelievably many of the 30 children who call this enclave home make every
single day just to get to school, to receive an education and get that life-changing piece of
paper documenting their own existence. Our host is Daniel Hobson, born in the UK, but in Sanclebury
for two decades. The founder of Children of the Forest, the place the kids here find their hope.
Why would somebody build a house here? This isn't just, I want to be deep in the jungle.
Are the parents working for the rubber? Are they independent? Are they working for rubber
companies? Why does this exist? Yeah, you're right. It's the following work, which is typical of all
the stateless families really around this area. Wherever the work is, that's where they'll go.
They don't have their own land, their own home, so they'll follow where the work is. And at the
moment the work is here in this huge rubber plantation, which they'll be tapping tonight
from about 12 o'clock. They'll start tapping and they'll finish maybe seven or eight in the morning,
so they'll sleep during the day. And that's every day, or that's seasonal? In the heavy rain,
you can't tap the rubber, but at the moment it's kind of the best time of year. That's when the
rubber is flowing, the best is right now. So they'll be tapping it for three nights and then they'll
take a break one night. Do you find the kids that you teach, or that your teachers teach, coming
from a place like this, where they have to... I would guess that somebody who would go to the
initiative of walking 12 kilometers, each direction to get to school every day, is going to not be
lax with their work. Is that fair? That's a fair statement. It's great to see the motivation
just to get to school. It takes them probably about two hours to get to school. And then once
they're there, yeah, they're going to take that opportunity to study hard. And we've been working
with this village now for almost 20 years. So we've actually seen children that have studied hard,
gone through the elementary school, gone on to high school, and are actually now studying in the
city to be teachers, community development workers, hotel management, vocational colleges.
And what are we looking at real quick, just so we understand, these are all houses around us,
or is this like a platform, which I guess is just for communal meals? I don't know,
if you can kind of explain to me just what we see, is every building going down this way,
a family's home? Yeah, that's right. Every building here is a home. There's a community spirit here,
even though, strictly speaking, it's not a village, it's not a community. It's just workers that are
on the land, the landowner of the rubber plantation happens to own. But there's a community spirit,
and they're all Karen in this area. So these are all, these are all Karen families? Yeah,
that's right. So it would have started with just what, one or two families when they, and then
they ask their cousins and distant cousins to come, and then they kind of build up a
village because, like you said, following the work, coming here for the work.
The Karen tribe of Thailand's far west are also like the Mon, an ancient people,
with their own history in Southeast Asia dating back at least as far as the third century AD.
But unlike the Mon, there is no unifying Karen culture or identity. The Karen are a Highland
people, scattered throughout the mountains of Myanmar and Thailand, and as far as the Andaman
Islands off the coast of India. And their settlements were built so far apart that in different places
they practice vastly different cultures and traditions. But like the Mon, they're also
marginalized, and also at war with the Burmese government in a fight for ethnic autonomy.
That's the story for the families that live here. Refugees who fled persecution and now get by
working the rubber trees in a harsh and unforgiving landscape, starting again at the very bottom of
society, completely cut off from the conveniences of 21st century urban life simply because of who
they are and where they were born. Like everything else here in the settlement,
food is usually based around what can be farmed or foraged in the nearby mountains,
along with staples like rice purchased with hard-earned income. But today we're in for a treat.
This morning, while we were in the town, Daniel went to his own local market and bought a whole
pig, delivering it here a few hours earlier. And since then, a few of the villagers have been
hard at work, preparing a true feast, a celebration of life and survival, and to welcome us to their
small corner of the jungle with their very best Karen hospitality.
So earlier today, some of the guys who we came here with went to the local market and bought
some fresh pork, which apparently was just as fresh and amazing as it gets. So then they've been
cooking all day to prepare this feast for the village tonight. We have pork curry. This is
this is rice because obviously it's all going to be based around rice. So pork curry, rice,
this is a soup made from the innards of the pork. So we have intestines, we have kidney,
we have liver, and then we have the meat from, I see hoof and I see spine along with gourd and
vegetables. And that is going to be hearty and flavorful and very healthy. We have eggplants
and we have these nuts, and it's going to be served along with the classic Burmese
and got the fish paste. And that's what we have. And I think everybody here is about to,
they're about to lose it. If I don't say, okay, let's open the floodgates and eat
because this just smells and looks amazing. This is really a feast prepared for everybody here tonight.
The pork curry is just dynamite. Yeah.
Who is the cook? Who do I, who do I compliment? Who is the cook?
I just really want to compliment the chef because the soup is mind blowing how good that is.
I just, I just, is this the chef? Thank you. Please, please help me to explain that this is,
everything is really special. This is incredibly good that I would be proud to serve this at,
I would be proud to serve this at my restaurant. She's embarrassed and walking away.
As if we needed one more component for a very, very long and very fascinating day.
We were on the way home to the hotel and there's a night market and we,
the pickup truck stopped and Daniel said, you know what? This is actually
pretty cool night market. You guys should check it out. So our day is not quite done yet. We have
one more stop and it's the last, the last part of one of the most really, really,
unbelievably interesting days we've ever had on the channel. And I need caffeine to keep going.
So let's start with a, with an instant coffee.
Just a few blocks from our comfortable beds after a day that saw us start at sunrise on the
peninsula, explore the Mont Village, take a boat trip around the reservoir, eat a bunch of awesome
stuff and then spend the afternoon and evening deep in the mountains. Well, there's still one more
stop. And by now, who cares? We can't get any more tired. So we might as well just keep going
and do what the locals here in this amazing town do when their hard days are over. Hang out and
enjoy the night market. I am so tired. Oh, I forgot that I'm wearing a hat. That I'm like...
Cowboy, Daria, you, you could not, you could not look like more of a tourist. Camera around your,
camera around your waist and a stupid hat on. It doesn't, at least it doesn't say Ronaldinho.
Look at this. The crispy fried garlic makes everything better. I did not intend for you to
take that spoon from me. I was showing that to you, not giving that to you. Pretty good, yeah?
Daria, you and I have traveled off camera to most corners of Thailand and there's always a market
like that. You're a mess with your camera and your, your hat.
I've turned into an ATM. My pocket is literally like an ATM now. We're,
just, we walk past the, walk past the food stand and all of a sudden there's just
money coming out of my, coming out of my pocket. Okay, thank you.
All right, before we get to the last part of this video, I need to go into one final bit of history.
In this case, our own, or at least why we got in that van 48 hours ago. It starts of all things
with ice hockey. Actually, a video we filmed back in March about a donut shop at Bangkok's
hockey stadium where we interviewed a man named Greg Beattie, who happens to be the president
of the local Rotary Club. Rotary, if you don't know, is a service organization. It was founded in
1905 and since then has grown to almost one and a half million members worldwide with a focus on
promoting peace and public works. Anyway, Greg must have been really low on options since he
invited me to give a keynote at a Rotary meeting. And after rambling through my speech, I was introduced
to a man named Matthew Kelly, a longtime Rotarian and for decades, a famous rock musician,
most associated with the grateful dead. Anyway, fast forward a few months and we're
filming in Pateya and who walks by but Matthew Kelly. He invites us to brunch and tells us
on the channel about an organization that along with his wife has become their personal mission,
Children of the Forest. The first time he visited was in 2004, right after they welcomed their first
students and that would change his entire life. The Kellys packed their guitars and harmonicas
and moved to Thailand and since then have devoted their own resources to the project,
including through Matthew's local Rotary Club. When the Kellys first visited Sankla Buri,
Children of the Forest was just two small bamboo classrooms set up by an Englishman then
in his early twenties named Daniel Hobson. He traveled through the region and saw how many
kids living on the margins had no hope, no future, no documentation or Thai language skills.
So he cleared some land, built a couple of shacks and gathered a few local mon,
Karen and Burmese and sent them into the jungle to spread word of his new school,
where the kids could come and have a chance to learn. The first day they opened his goal,
his secret hope was for 20 students to show up. They received six times that number.
In the two decades that would follow, Children of the Forest has grown into a force for true good.
It's a school, a women's shelter, a medical clinic, a self-sustaining farm and it even has
a football team that keeps winning regional championships. Last month, Greg called me again,
the hockey guy and said that two of his Rotary members would be taking the trip to visit the
organization. Would we like to jump in, spend a couple of days in Sanclebury doing whatever we
do here on OTR and maybe if we want to check out that place that Matthew and Mary Kelly had told
us so much about. And on our last morning before heading back, well that's exactly what we're gonna do.
Everything that happened today is out of my hands. Yesterday was something that me and Daria
will remember forever. Seriously, and this goes back to every part of sort of unraveling where
we are and the people and the challenges and then obviously that's something that connected with you
20 years ago because you've been here for that long. Before we get into that story, where are we?
Tell me about what we're looking at, what is this place? Just give me the basic rundown of where
we are. Okay, well we're in a town called Sanclebury on the time me and my border and this is a
special school, a school that was established almost 20 years ago now and a school which
particularly caters to the needs of the stateless children from as young as four years old. The
children join our school here and from the kindergarten they'll go into our grade one,
grade two of elementary school. The elementary school here is a satellite of the government
school so the children will get full certificates when they graduate here and this is their entry
point into the school education, Thai education system. We're kind of the bridge between the
villages, the plantations and the big Thai government schools. Children of the forest
sits on about 17 acres of land just outside the main town of Sanclebury and here on the property
more than 7,000 stateless children have learned to speak Thai, received an education,
two meals a day and in many cases legal residents and access to continue their studies in Thailand's
public schools. For a stateless child to be in a position of vulnerability where they're
being exploited or being trafficked, the assistance or the response that they get from
society is just not the same and of course there are people of influence and power that
know how vulnerable and how weak these children are and they're able to exploit that so that's why
the first thing we want to make sure is that all the stateless children in this border region are
in education so once they're here at this school that's when the monitoring begins you know that's
when we're able to know the child, we're able to know their plantation, their village, we're able to
know their families and they immediately get this safety net and then they also join the Thai
education system which means that they get a student number, there you go they're visible now,
they're not invisible anymore, they've got some proof that they exist, this is their student number
and their student number is the first step on the way to gaining certain levels of identification
which one day can be realized into Thai citizenship.
Today there are more than 200 students enrolled at Children of the Forest but that's just a
fraction of those receiving their services. There are houses built on the property for women fleeing
abusive relationships or single mothers in need of help raising their children. There's a health
clinic operated by Delito who as we saw yesterday also travels into the villages and looks after
hundreds of others in need. There's support provided to children in other jungle schools if
this location is inaccessible and there's even a sports program for local teenagers
with the Children of the Forest football team competing throughout the region.
Are you a celebrity to them having come from Manchester?
Yeah some of them think that I used to play for Manchester United which
my football skills are not quite up to that but yeah yeah just leave them thinking that.
A few years ago when Daniel's parents retired his mom and dad came over from the UK and built
their own house in Sanclaburi and ever since they've dedicated their golden years to Children
of the Forest as well. Hands on and contributing whatever they can to a place that every year
sees its needs grow but also its successes. Good morning, my name is Faisu so I grew up here so
when I maybe eight years old I went here to the Children of the Forest so I started
house and went to university and when I graduate I come to help in here.
So we had a little get together with the kids last year and we said what would you like to
add this term and some of the older kids said we'd like to have music and play
guitar so we managed to get a donation and bought some acoustic guitars not expensive ones but just
and the music teacher comes in for an hour. He's here yesterday and he's here again this morning.
Did you make it? Did you make it?
Yes. Anya. What's it?
Pea, bean and what is it called? Tomato.
Okay. This is Christmas for me. This is the most exciting thing that could have possibly happened
to me this morning. Even if by now we'd completely lost track of the fact that we were here to make a
food video at least someone never forgot and in between a morning of checking on patience and
overseeing the Children of the Forest women's shelter our friend Delito found time to make
sure we'd fulfill our own mission preparing us a completely unexpected meal of her own family's
traditional mon food.
I guess I don't drink but
Jay is a local painter. This is. This is a cisney.
This is something to say. I want you to try a little you know. I'm so excited about this.
Three star Michelin restaurant. You know you have the classical guitar playing in the background.
We have the music over there. Yes. We have the home cooked meal. It's very elegant, right? Yes.
What did you make for us?
Mon food for me is food you guys. Mon, very old style, very old style, true.
This is a little bit special for all of you come because in our culture,
more and more culture when the people come there so they will come with the food.
So cook food and then eat if you lie and you can try if you if you like the taste you try a lot.
Okay. If you don't like just try a little. Tell me the name of the dish as you would say it in
mon language and then also just kind of a little description. Mon language.
Thank you so much for this. This is just an amazing, amazing meal.
I'm happy.
How do I say how do I know I asked you this yesterday but I'm not very good with languages.
How do I say thank you in one language?
If you want to say like a very soft one is a tango.
After that you just said easy is a tango.
I want to say this in a very not soft way. I want to say this in a very tango.
Until the age of 10 or 11 then I would have come to the school here. What would you like to do?
The life would have been that of a typical stateless child really just no home, no land.
So you're moving constantly just following wherever the work is so you might have a few
months here and the work seems good but then your employer decides not to pay you so you
haven't got enough for food but you hear about work in another town or another village and then
you'll follow the work there and just keep moving around from factory to rubber plantation to
construction site just no no stability.
It's hard in a place like this to put into words what it's actually like to visit
but the main takeaway at least for the three of us and I'm sure as well for JP and Visana
and I suppose for Matthew and Mary Kelly and for Daniel and his family is that coming here
shows how inadequate our knowledge and the usual reporting about refugees and migrants actually
is. I mean the scale of the problem is so big that there's no way to cover this topic without
distilling people down to statistics to reducing everything to numbers like the 520,000 stateless
people living in Thailand's no man's land surviving in limbo with dreams and ambitions the
kinds of things that make us human long given way to the simple struggle of how to survive another day.
520,000, 4.5 million in total who fled from Myanmar, 5 million people stateless and 35 million
refugees if you consider the entire world. It's a massive number but it becomes completely
overwhelming when you consider each one is actually a person. These people, the families who cooked us
dinner at the rubber plantation or who stay on the grounds of the temple that allows them at least
to exist. It's not fair how is it fair that I have the life I have just because I was born in New York
into a family with a house and a car hell we had two cars and someone else has to hike four hours
twice a day just to get recognized as a person just for the chance to earn what I take for granted
every single day food shelter clean water I don't have much I feel like I don't have much and things
haven't always been easy but even with my problems I can still go out to dinner or do a weekend at the
beach or even have a hobby like playing tennis or running what a luxury it is to have a hobby.
When you think in terms of the top line number statistics like 520,000 or 35 million seeing the
work that goes on here can feel like taking a cup of water from the ocean it's too much it's just
way too much but when you stop turning people into statistics and see each one as an individual
then all this starts to make sense and what an honor to have been invited here.
When Daniel found out that a food channel was coming to visit children of the forest he had an
idea since even though the students come from different backgrounds at its core this is a
community we shouldn't leave without at least one last meal of the regional specialty and for the
kids one chance to show us who they are and where they come from so the whole time we've been here
while we've been touring the school and having our own incredible experience groups of students
along with some of the staff who themselves are graduates of the school have been hard at work
preparing us a going away feast something for us to remember what it was like to visit Sanclaburi
and to spend these last three days experiencing something that we will never forget of course
it's conom gene made with banana leaves cut down from their own plantation vegetables from their
own gardens and a technique to make the noodles themselves used here in this jungle since the
mon ran the kingdom and everything that would come after well it hadn't happened yet
do you feel fulfilled is this a life that you ever would have envisioned for yourself and how
how is what's it like being you having having this life and having seen the success that you've
been a part of creating um i don't think i ever really consciously planned to you know be living
here permanently um it's just something happened i just kind of followed what was inspiring me and
what i felt needed to be done and had an incredible team around me to to make it happen and yeah i'm
happy a lot of the visitors that come here and they think that it involves a huge kind of sacrifice
to be here but not really it's uh it's easy to get up in the morning when you're seeing all this
inspiration around you um probably more sacrifice will be being in an office in the city for me
that would be a real level of sacrifice
for more information or to make a donation to children of the forest please visit their website
linked below in the comments and description subscribe to the channel for more from otr
to everyone who supports us on patreon thank you you make videos like this possible see below
for the link to our patreon or social media and we'll see you soon she's going to take you for
a little walk is that okay and don't forget this is yours mm-hmm parkour be done length you don't
you don't you don't want to be in parkour buy them off darryl inside minnesota i hope she won't
take her to berma or something like that but hopefully just for her if you leave the premises
of the school call me
