I've got here a variety of computers running all kinds of different operating systems from
Raspberry Pi, an iPhone, an Intel MacBook, an iPad, a Windows Surface, an M1 Mac, and a cheap
thin client. And all of these are connected to a virtual session on a terminal server. So how am
I able to share one computer amongst all of these users running on all of these different platforms
without using virtualization? Come along and find out.
The concept we're implementing today is called a terminal server. Long ago,
mainframes using time-sharing systems allowed users to share computer resources. Back then,
they used teletype equipment as terminals. Incidentally, this is why Unix and Linux named
their terminals TTY, short for teletype. As technology progressed, MIT wanted to develop
a unified computing environment that encouraged the sharing of ideas, code, and data across all of
MIT. They called this initiative Project Athena, and they developed many of the ideas surrounding
modern thin clients. This project also included the X-Windows system, a protocol to allow graphical
applications to access graphical terminals separated by a network. Fast-forwarding to the
modern era, Microsoft has supported graphical terminal servers since NT4, and continues to
offer a terminal server product to this day. So apparently, it's useful enough to some company.
We are going to build a Linux equivalent to the Microsoft terminal server,
supporting many user sessions at the same time without virtualization. While I won't be expanding
a network login today, you could combine this setup with system-wide network authentications
such as Kerberos, which incidentally was also developed by Project Athena.
Welcome to the server room. This is the hardware we're using today. We got an AMD Ryzen 5 3400G
with 32GB of RAM, and we just got our Exubon 2 installer, keyboard and mouse,
Gigabit Ethernet, PGA. Once we're all done, the only thing we're going to need plugged in
is going to be the Ethernet power. I've chosen to install Exubon 2 desktop version 21.10,
although you can choose any Ubuntu flavor you'd like. I chose Exubon 2 since it's a
lightweight desktop that I feel is very easy to use. Even though this is a server, I'm starting
with a desktop OS, so the entire graphical environment and graphical applications come
installed. Depending on your use case, you might want to change the file system here. If you choose
none, it'll install on EXT4, which is a pretty good install if you're just using it normally.
I'm going to choose ZFS instead. So with ZFS, each user will get their home directory on a
separate dataset, and it'll also create snapshots of the root file system every time it does a
software update, and it'll let you roll back to them through the boot menu. So this is a nice
feature if you're managing users and want to be able to back up their datasets to TrueNAS or
something like that. So now we let this run, and we'll come back when it's all done.
So now because we installed the desktop Ubuntu, we have a graphical user interface instead of a
command line. So it's going to pop up with some graphical things we need to take care of. The
first one is this language support dialog, and we're going to let it go.
The software updater also wants to run, and we're going to tell it to install updates now.
Hey, it wants to restart. We're going to restart later, because we're going to have to restart
pretty soon anyway. So now we're going to open a terminal, and because it's a server, we probably
want to administer this over SSH, so we're going to install open SSH.
And also XRDP, which is the first remote desktop utility we're going to install, and it's actually
installs almost everything through this package. The last thing we need is audio support for XRDP,
and currently there's a bug in the installer for XRDP's audio that doesn't work correctly with ZFS
file systems or NFS home directories. So as a result, I'm not going to put this in the video,
but the instructions are my blog posts, and I'm keeping them up to date as I work with the developer
on solving this. Now at this point, we can reboot the system, and then we're done using the physical
console. We can do everything else remotely. So to understand what's happening here, let's dive
into how a Linux graphical program gets its output onto the screen. So any graphical program has a
canvas. That's the region within the Windows borders. Windows draw things onto their canvas,
such as shapes, or text, or graphics, or whatever the window wants to draw. The output of all of
these windows is sent to the window manager, which composites all of them into a single canvas.
This composite is then sent to the display server. The display server takes the canvas and interfaces
with the appropriate hardware drivers, dealing with multiple monitors, resizing monitors, etc.
The video output for each monitor is finally sent to the video hardware,
which generates a physical signal to send to the monitors. Now we can inject ourselves at different
points in this process to get different types of remote graphical access. To view the contents of a
single window, we can redirect it over SSH using x11 forwarding. In this case, a single program is
running on the remote system, but the display for that one program is sent to the client. With a
terminal server such as XRDP or X2GO, we act as the display server. In this case, we create a full
desktop environment in window manager bound to our remote session, cutting out the display hardware
entirely. Alternatively, we could insert ourselves into the display server and display hardware
pipeline and capture the output being sent to the monitor. This is normally how VNC operates,
taking over the same session that would normally be displayed on the display hardware.
And finally, if we're operating in a virtual machine, then the display hardware is emulated
anyways, so we can capture the output of the virtual graphics card and send that over the
network. I've done other videos on this topic using SPICE for thin clients.
So now that we have the system up and running, we should be able to connect to it through remote
desktop. This is the Microsoft remote desktop client available from Microsoft Store. It's also
available on Android, on iOS, on macOS. Pretty much every platform has a software available,
and it looks pretty similar. So we're going to walk through it on Windows, but it should be the
same whatever platform you're using. So we have to add a PC. We need the IP address of our terminal
server. And we could either tell it to ask every time or we could add a user account here. I'm
going to tell it to ask every time for now. So let's see what that looks like. So now if we double
click on it, it tells us it has a self signed certificate. So because we're not running in a
Windows domain, we don't have a public certificate for the server. It is a little bit concerned,
but we can click through that. So now we get the login to VDI system, and this is done by XRDP.
So we can use our username and password. And we're logged in. I have a terminal open from
when I installed the audio support. So this is our exubuntu desktop and we're logged in via Windows.
We have access to all of our programs, including web browser. Go to my website.
It's very functional. I mean, this is running just fine.
The web video is not a good experience. So don't try web video, but most applications will work pretty
well. So now let's add more users to the system. So we could either from the terminal if we wanted.
So we do sudo add user, make him a name, alpha. And we need our sudo password.
And the full name is what gets displayed on the login prompt sometimes.
You could set it, you could not set it, it doesn't matter to you.
So now we have the username VDI alpha that can log in really. How about adding a user from the GUI?
Can we do that too?
So I got my admin user.
And change my name. So let's add a new user.
Another thing to note. So Linux does not allow you to start with a number.
And XRDP seems to have trouble if you're using an ends with a number.
Numbers seem to be fine in the middle, but don't put a number on the end.
So now we need to set him a password.
And the user can change their own password later.
There we go. So we got some remote users.
Now let's see what it looks like when one of them logs in.
So we could log out of our session here and click log out.
Or we could go up here and just close the session.
So now it happens next time we connect to that server.
So we get the login screening and we'll try VDI Bravo.
And there we go. They have a session too. So unless we do some more restricting,
a lot of these programs here exist for every user, but every user might not be able to use them.
So here if I try to create a new user, it asks me for the password for admin, not for my own user.
And that's because VDI Bravo doesn't have pseudo permission, so they're not allowed to make changes.
So if you try to make changes, it requires the password for the admin account that does have
pseudo privileges. So remote users on the system see all of these programs, but can't necessarily
use them. So we'll restrict that in a little bit later.
So how about if we log in again as the admin?
So right back to our session we were up before. So when a user closes the session by closing
remote desktop, it leaves all their programs open and running. And next time you connect,
it reattaches to them. So you can leave Firefox or terminal or whatever open and come back to it
later, and it won't close anything when you log off. What about copying and pasting things?
So I got an excerpt from Wikipedia. I just copied on my off screen. If I go in here,
I got a new text document.
Paste it in there. So this got copied and pasted across my session.
So the clipboard does work between your remote session. How about copying images? You go over
here on my desktop and copy an image. Can I paste it in here? Oh, must give remote desktop access.
Yeah, sure. Let's do that. So remote desktop asks for permission and then closed.
So I gave it permission and let's see if we can copy the clipboard.
There we go. We copied an image. How about files? Can we access any files on my remote system?
So I'm going to file on my Windows desktop here, and I'm going to copy it into the
remote session. It doesn't let me drag and drop, but I can copy and paste. And there you see my
file got copied to the remote session. So now you're all going to ask, what is web browsing like?
Let's try YouTube. Looks great. I get a display that resizes itself. I get a keyboard and I get
a mouse. What I don't get is the ability to take a flash drive or another USB device, plug it into
the Pi, and have it show up on the virtual machine. And that's what I'm going to expect.
So audio works as well. Sometimes it stutters if the video stutters, but it's functional.
So what about touch screens? Here we have an iPad. You can see that everything works correctly.
One quirk about the iPad is that the mouse does not move to the location of your finger.
So if you click your finger onto the touchscreen, it clicks wherever the mouse currently is.
So mouse movement is relative. As you drag your mouse across the screen,
I'm not necessarily touching where the pointer is. I'm touching somewhere else on the screen and
moving at the same distance, which can feel a little bit disorienting, but you get used to it
pretty quickly. So here we have a Microsoft Surface tablet. And in this case, the touchscreen does
work as expected. Wherever I click my finger is exactly where it clicks the mouse on the screen.
So I can click in the corner to close the window. I can drag. You can see the
click and drag box shows up. So a slight difference in functionality between clients.
Digital security has advanced a lot since the mainframe time sharing days,
and keeping users isolated from each other and from the system as a whole is very important.
Running a terminal server like this securely is perfectly within the capabilities of Linux.
However, with our current configuration, it's like giving everyone their own account on the same
desktop. Each user cannot see other users' documents, but they can all see system files,
and it's not hard for them to share files with each other. Whether that's a problem or a feature
is up to you. More importantly, RDP is a very commonly targeted protocol. While the protocol
with modern security settings is secure for the users and does keep user data safe, you will be
targeted by attacks and bots trying to guess random passwords. You'll probably also show up on an
index of all RDP servers publicly facing on the internet. You should plan on isolating the server
to your internal network and using a secure remote access VPN to connect back home. Also,
without additional configuration, we haven't limited how much system resources each user could
produce. So it's theoretically possible that some rogue user could start crypto mining with all the
extra CPU time. We also haven't limited who can log into the system, so anyone that has an
account on the computer can log in remotely. Most of these issues can be resolved by locking down
things on the server, and I'm going to go into how to configure them now. To configure session
management, we need to go to etsy xxdrp, and then the file is sessman.ini.
So this configures the xdrp session manager, and a lot of the options that we probably want to
add are in this file instead of the xdrp.ini file. The first few options that you might want to
consider changing are in the security section here. So by default, allow root login is true,
and we're going to set that to false. And that means that the user root can never log in.
There's also a line here that says terminal server users equals ts users, and that's the name of a
group. So once xdrp is installed, it does not create this group ts users. And so since the group
does not exist, any user on the system can log in. But if we create the group ts users and add
users to it, then we can restrict who can log in. So let's try that.
So we'll add the admin to the list, and who else do you want to add to the list?
Let's echo and foxtrot. So if you want to add someone later, you can go back to manage groups,
find the ts users group, and click properties, and click the checkbox for group members here.
If you want to do this from the command line, you would use group add.
This case, it already exists, but that would create the group if it didn't already exist.
And to add a user to the group, we use gpassword.
So this should have added our alpha user to group ts users.
You can see now the alpha is checked in this box, so it shows up in both places.
So what happens when an unauthorized user tries to log in?
I rebooted the server and let's see if VDI Charlie is allowed to access it.
So we get an error here that says login failed for display zero.
And so this is what a user will see if they try to log in, but they don't have permissions to
log in in this system. It takes them back to login screen. We get cancel to disconnect the session.
Now that we understand about ts users, there's a few other things we can look at in this file.
So restrict outbound clipboard. This sets if you're allowed to copy things from the server
to the client on the clipboard. If you're trying to prevent data from leaving the server,
this might be a good option to use. Max sessions. This is the maximum number of
sessions it'll allow. This doesn't mean your system is capable of this many sessions,
and your system might stop allocating more sessions long before then if it runs out of memory.
So by default, when you close a remote desktop session, the session will stay open.
So the next time a user logs in with that same account, we'll get connected to the already
existing session with all of the already running programs. If you set this to true,
it will eventually kill all the programs and log the user out. You can set a time
to wait before killing sessions. And you can also set a time to kill to disconnect idle sessions.
If someone's not using the system, but it's still connected, it can kick them off. If you'd
like the user to be able to log in more than once with the same account, you can set a session
allocation policy. The default is to have one session per user. If you try to log into a remote
session with the user account of another user who's already in a remote session, it'll kick out the
first user and transfer that session to the new user. If you'd like to intentionally create more
than one session, you could set this to one of these options here. The most common would be UBI
to filter by IP address or UBC to filter by connection. So by IP address, that means each IP
address connecting to the server can have one session at a time. Multiple connections from the
same IP address will get handed off to the same session, but multiple connections from different
IP addresses will go to different sessions. And by connection means that a new session is created
every single time remote desktop connects. If you're going to use UBI mode or especially UBC mode,
you really need to use kill disconnected sessions. With UBC mode, every time you make a connection
to the server, it'll create a new session. So there's no way for you to kill that session or
reconnect to it other than killing the process on the server. So something's going on with our
system. Someone's trying to use a lot of resources here. And the system has a lot of memory, but
someone is still using quite a bit of it. Let's see what's going on. So if we filter by CPU,
someone is clearly trying to stress the system here. And it looks like it's VDI echo. So we could
nicely ask them not to or we could try to restrict how much CPU time they can use. How about memory?
So our window manager is using a decent amount, which we kind of expect. But VDI echo again here
is using two gigs just for no good reason. So maybe we want to limit them to two gigs per user
or three gigs per user so they can't monopolize the whole system. The better way to visualize this
is by using control groups. There's a tool called system D CG talk, which shows us the usage per
control group instead of per process. So right now it looks like user 105.slice is using 200%
of the CPU and 2.2 gigs of memory. XRDP service is not using a ton at around 2.8%. But if I move
my window around a lot, you'll see that XRDP starts bubbling up to the top. So how do we tell
who user 105 is? Well, we use the command ID. So if we ask ID, it tells us that user is 1001.
But how do we go from a number to a user? Well,
so VDI echo. So VDI echo is the one that's using all of our CPU right now. So in order to bring
some sanity to the system, we're going to limit each user to use 200% of the CPU, which is two
threads and use two gigs of RAM. So the folder Etsy system D system is where we create both files
and folders to limit control groups. System D has a folder structure where we can put configurations
of control groups per user. Normally, this would be something like Etsy system D system user dash
number dot slice dot D. So for example, for user 1000, we might create a file in Etsy system D
system user 1000 that slice dot D and any dot comp files in that folder would be applied to slice
of user 1000. However, there's a little trick we can do if we eliminate the number and just do user
dash dot slice dot D, then this folder applies to all users by default if they don't have their own
configuration. So we're going to create this folder and create a configuration file in it to limit
the default VDI user.
So in this file, we're going to put a little bit of configuration that turns on CPU and memory
accounting and sets a quota for each one. So here's an example configuration I've linked in
the description below my blog post, which goes into some more detail and links to some resources
on system D control groups. So we're going to save this and let's see if this applies.
I rebooted the system so the changes take effect. We can see here that VDI echo is trying to run a
stress test again. But if we go back to CGTOP, we can see that they're being limited to roughly
200% CPU and suddenly under two gigs of RAM, just like we asked for.
Remember that color manager error we got earlier?
We get this error about the color manage device and we'll deal with that later.
It'll pop up from time to time, but here's how we fix that. So we need to create a configuration
file for policy kit. First, we need to see what version of policy kit we're using. In this case,
it's 0.105. In newer versions of policy kit, we need to create a .cont file which contains
JavaScript code for processing the rules. In older versions, we need to use a .pecla file.
This version 0.105 uses the pecla file method. So we need to create a file in the folder etsy
pull kit one local authority 50 local dot D.
And we can name it anything we'd like, but we need to make sure it doesn't conflict with anything else.
So now we have a pecla file. We need to copy and paste the code down for my website into this file.
So here's the configuration. It gives any user access to certain color manager permissions,
and that should get rid of the color manager errors.
So now we have a functional terminal server which can be accessed by clients of all different
operating systems. Ignoring internet video, this is a pretty good user experience for each client,
and uses a lot less resources than creating a virtual machine for each session.
Thanks to Microsoft's wide support for the RDP protocol, we can have access to high quality
clients on pretty much every operating system in existence. Microsoft publishes their client to
the Apple Store, the Android Store for Android TV even, and Samsung even supports RDP access on
their Tizen Smart TVs. So by using this protocol, instead of X forwarding or VNC, we get better
client access. This wide client support makes it a great solution for bring your own device type
solutions, where you're relying on potentially arbitrary user supplied devices that could be
running any operating system. While not specifically an advantage of the thin client architecture,
keeping all of your computing and data centralized in a server keeps important data off of the end
user's devices, which can be a great feature for remote access or for when you're traveling.
Be sure to let me know if you liked this video, and if you have any other topics on terminal
servers you'd like me to cover in the future.
