I think things have got to come up to date in evolutionary biology and recognize that essentially
Darwin would never have been a neo-Darwinian.
Dennis Noble, welcome to How the Light Gets In.
I am very happy to be here and delighted to have this discussion with you.
In one form or another, as you've claimed, the idea of genetic determinism, this idea that
our behaviors controlled can be predicted by the inner workings of our biological makeup,
goes back a very long time. You've pointed out that you can find it in day cards in the 17th
century. You can, that's right. Yes. Why do you think this idea has sort of such a lasting appeal?
I think it has been a big mistake, maybe philosophical for a moment, of dualism.
You see, Descartes was a dualist. He dealt with the problem of the mechanics of an organism
by saying there must be a spiritual entity that interacts with the mechanics. This was Cartesian
dualism. In a sense, the dualism of the replicator being in communication with and conducting
the vehicle is a resurrection of the same kind of problem. We don't need a dualism.
The agency of organisms comes from within us. It doesn't come from some ghostly outside.
I don't even know what that would mean if I try to give it meaning. I think it's fairly easy to
see where it comes from because, obviously, it has to have some degree of non-determinate function.
Otherwise, it would be determinate. What we're talking about is, can there be innovation? Can
there be creativity? That's the key question. Now, the Darwinian, rather than neo-Darwinian answer
to that is, well, there is chance. There is stochasticity, but it's not used. It is just simply
determining how many breakages, how many changes occur naturally in the genome. Then, natural
selection comes along and automatically works out which are successful and which are not.
I accept that. Obviously, if that is the way things happen, that's fine.
Now, I just reverse that by saying that in addition to that process, organisms can actually go and
use the chance. They're doing that all the time. The way our immune systems work shows that. What
happens when a new virus or new bacterium or new anything else arrives is, first, the immune system
are going to use some anthropological way of saying it, but we all know this has to do with
molecular processes. What it does is to try to find out whether it's got a sequence that already
can latch onto that virus or that bacterium, in which case it just multiplies those cells. So,
it's got the feedback there already if it already exists. If it doesn't, it does something quite
fascinating. It goes to the nucleus and says, please stop the error correction and allow the
breaks to occur. Then, we will select out of those the very few that can grab hold of this new virus.
That's how the immune system works. Now, what I'm saying is that's general. It happens in bacteria
when they resist antibiotics. It happens in cancers where they resist radiotherapy and
chemotherapy. What do they do? They also hyper mutate. They use chance to get novelty. I think
that's what organisms are doing all the time. The answer, therefore, I think to the question,
are we creative? First of all, it's obvious we are. How do you get a Beethoven? How do you get
an Einstein if we're not? But the question is, can physiologists explain that? And I think they can.
If you can bring that stochastic process under some kind of control, you then do the selecting,
then you can end up with creativity. To go back to your claim that this sort of gene-centric
or gene-deterministic view is founded on a kind of dualistic picture of the human as divided
between the body and something else. Do you find that animates even contemporary versions of this
idea of the gene-centric deterministic picture? Yes, actually, because I don't want to diminish
the reputation of Richard Dawkins. I've acknowledged that many times. His book is clearly
the best exposition of neo-Darwinism we've got, popular exposition. It naturally sells in millions
of copies. But I don't think the great majority of research biologists are any longer following
that path in the way in which he laid it out. So I'm sorry to say I think the ground has shifted
quite a long way. You see, in the debate we've just had, and he preferred to call it a conversation,
I'm happy with calling it a conversation. But in what we've just done, it seems to me that what
that showed was that I don't think people like Richard yet know that, that things really have
moved on very rapidly. Did we know a few years ago that there could be tiny particles that can
carry RNAs and DNAs to the germline? No, we didn't. That's within the last 20 years.
So there is a shift here. It's in principle of enormous proportions, and whether people are waking
up to that in the public media, I rather doubt. But they really should, because it has big,
big implications. And what do you see as the main fault of this old picture, the gene-centric,
selfish gene, Richard Dawkins, neo-Darwinian picture of ourselves? What's the main
kind of objection that you have to that picture? Well, the main one I've got is actually a health
and wealth, a health and welfare problem. We've spent literally billions now in the world
sequencing genomes. Now, I'm not denying the importance of the genome sequencing. It has
clearly given us the possibility of establishing trees of life and so on as we compare the
genomes of different species. That is brilliant. That's good fundamental science. But I'm a
physiologist. I teach medical students. From the point of view of what was promised 20 odd years
ago in relation to cures for cancer, cures for diabetes, cures for Alzheimer's, cures, you name
it. There was going to be these cures coming from the sky almost as we got to know which
gene caused which. What have we found? The association levels are quite tiny. Now, physiologists
like me seeing that data says, but we know why. I mean, the experiment that I described in the
debate is very obviously illustrating that. We found a major protein that contributes to the
rhythm of the heart, how frequently it beats. We know it contributes about 80% of the current
that generates that rhythmic frequency. Knock it out with a blocker of that protein or knock the
gene out. What do you find a very modest change in frequency? Now, that doesn't mean that it
didn't contribute 80% of the functionality. We know it did. We measured it. What it means is that
another mechanism kicks in and we know what that was. We've been able to show that from
a physiological point of view, the association scores don't really tell us very much. You can
even have association of zero for a gene that is actually functional. Now, that's striking,
but what that means is just reading your genome, you won't know that. You won't even see that.
So, I think the big issue for me is when are we going to wake up to the fact that we've spent 20
years now sequencing as many genomes as we can, the output as promised simply hasn't appeared.
If we appreciate why that happened, why that failure happened, we can then shift to a better
way of doing it. And we know what that was. Before genome sequencing, what we did was to look at the
high-level organization of the system, the living system, locate what was going wrong there, and
then work down to find what you might do at lower levels with a drug or any other kind of treatment,
for that matter, to put it right. And that works much better than trying to go the other way,
because going the other way, oh, the space for possible molecules and possible effects and even
more possible combinations of effects, because those complex diseases are going to require
combinations of treatment, there are too many. You can't do clinical trials on all of those
possibilities. It's just far too expensive. So, I think we just need to take a different approach
to research, medical research, to try to benefit from the human genome sequencing
in a way that's different from what they originally promised. The new medications haven't
fallen out of the sky. We now need to take up the pieces and work out why that was the case.
I think I've already explained that. And then what do we do about it and how do we do a better way
of getting healthcare sorted out? Because it's urgent to do so. We've got aging populations
that are going to swamp our health services. This is really urgent. So, the previous picture in your
mind suffered from this almost reductionist impulse that everything was reduced to the level of the
gene. And once we found what genes were for each disease, we could then treat it. But as you say,
there isn't actually a gene for most things. There isn't a program there, I'm afraid. You see,
I'm a programmer. I know how to write if then, else, and if so, then, that, and so on. You know,
you can do that endlessly. It's what programming does. There is no such program in the genome.
You look there and try and find it. You won't find it. What you've got is a series of switches,
because it is true that each sequence that can be used to make an RNA or protein has a place where
it can be switched on or off. Sure. But that's the switch. It's not the if, then, logic. The logic
is not there. You've said that this approach is sort of neo-Darwinian. And in a way, you were hinting
that it goes against the kind of fundamental tenets of Charles Darwin himself. Absolutely so.
How do you see the difference between those two? What was Charles Darwin's view and how did it
get distorted by neo-Darwinianism? Yes. I think what neo-Darwinism did was to take his initial,
the discovery for which he's initially rightly respected enormously, which is natural selection,
which is the key element in the origin of species and in the joint papers he did with Wallace
at the previous year, 1858. So rightly, Darwin is praised for that. But he was a much more nuanced
thinker about evolution. He went on worrying about this all the way through his life.
First, in the origin of species itself, he already includes use and disuse
as a mechanism of evolution. Even the great modern synthesisist Ernst Mayer in his big book on
biological thought about 30, 40 years ago. At the time of the centenary of the origin of species,
he wrote, you know, in Darwin I can see 12 places where he acknowledges Lamarckian mechanisms.
So it wasn't absent in 1859, but by 1868 he formulated a theory which he then went on for
the next 10 years of his life to try to prove. He was that devoted to it. Now his theory was very
simple. It was that the use and disuse in the body can get communicated to the germline.
How can it do that if there aren't particles that do that? He couldn't see them. So he admitted
at that time, you find that in his 1868 book, he says this is a guess, this is a hypothesis.
We've now found them and they are the tiny particles that cells all over the body are
pouring out all the time. I mean, when Richard told me during the debate, you know, he would need
all of this information to be transmitted. Well, it is transmitted. So I think things have got to
come up to date in evolutionary biology and recognize that essentially Darwin would never
have been a neo-Darwinian. He would not have accepted the Weissman barrier. Otherwise he
wouldn't have developed his theory of gemmules to explain how information could go from the soma
to the germline. He would have never accepted the idea that natural selection was the only
mechanism and he says that specifically. So I think if he'd lived to hear Weissman giving his
famous lecture in 1883 on the isolation of the germline, he died in 1882 so he couldn't. But if
he'd lived to it, I think he would have said, no, you're wrong. What's the alternative picture to
this sort of genetic determinism? You've used the metaphor in the past of thinking of genes not as a
code, as you said, but as a kind of musical score. Yes. And as a score that can be interpreted in
various different ways. Can you tell us a little bit more about the way you think about this?
Yes. Well, I am, as it happens, a musician. I actually give a big concert tomorrow in Oxford in
the Sheldonian theatre. But now I've obviously taken from my musical side of my life this metaphor
for a very good reason. If you look at a score of Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, whatever you want to take
and you look at different orchestras, different soloists interpreting those scores,
what stands out a mile to a musician is the differences. Of course, you can recognize the
same notes there, but the interpretation is so different that one can, one has always to say,
this style of playing Beethoven, there's that style of playing Beethoven. The same thing can be said
about Bach. And I think the answer is that the analogy is that with the same notes, you can play
totally different music. And the same is true for genes. With the same genes, you can play very
different behavior. For example, if I'm selfish, I have my selfish characteristic at a time when I
have the genes that Dennis Noble has. When I am altruistic and very kind to people, I have exactly
the same genes. My genes haven't changed between being selfish one day and being altruistic the next
day. I naturally use the same genes. So genes can't be responsible for my selfishness. I'm responsible
for myself. So what is the agency here? Where do we locate it? Who's doing the interpreting of
the musical score here? The organism is the source of the interpretation. Now, the big question
there is how do you explain that without recreating a duality? How do you get to that without having
to make Descartes' mistake? Descartes' mistake was to suppose there's a kind of other entity,
non-material, soul, spirit, whatever you want to call it, that interacts with the mechanics,
as it were, because he actually thought that other animals, apart from humans, were indeed mechanisms.
So now, interestingly, most evolutionary biologists who are the near Darwinian
persuasion tend to say, well, humans are also. Now, that's difficult because we seem to feel
that we're not. But put that to one side. The big question is how can you get creativity
without having to have something up there that injects it into you? You know that lovely
painting of the fingers pointing, you see, and Adam gets, as it were, activated by the finger of God.
We don't need that. I'm not saying whether people believe that or right or wrong. I'm
leading that to them. But what I do think is you don't need that because the organism has that
ability already. The reason is simply because it can use the chance events that occur in
its molecular mechanisms. There's where the creativity comes from. Then the question is
what emerges from that you want to keep and what do you want to reject? It's very simple.
It sounds like what you're saying is allowing for a kind of freedom to enter into the picture
of how we think of our biology. Genetic determinism makes it sound like we are
cartesian machines and we have a clockwork. But my question is, is there now a room for
determinism to come from another side, namely the environment acting upon us? Yes, but now
let's have a look at that because you see that's stochastic as well. I agree with you. Yes, you
could say that the environment is itself determining what we do. Now I think that's partly true.
Clearly, I've become the kind of person I've become through my history. So in that sense,
it must be the case that the environment is a big influence, just as genes are. You see,
I don't deny that genes are influential. I just simply say they're not causal in the way that we
can be as agents. They're not causing my selfishness. They're not causing other forms of my behavior.
Now, the way I think to think about this is that once you can harness chance, use it,
you have the possibility of creating novelty and that's what we're doing. Isn't that what we call
creativity? You see, before a Beethoven emerges, we couldn't have predicted. I don't think musicians
before a Beethoven would have predicted what he did. He turned the uppercut around and came in with
all the rest of it and turned music upside down. Einstein did the same with physics,
fundamental physics. I think what those people were doing was to find the chance processes within
themselves, seeing it and then saying, oh, I want to go that way. That's going to shock the world
and they go for it. Now, sometimes they're wrong. That's fine too. That's how science, music, poetry,
and so on experiments and finds its way forward. If we didn't have people who were wrong, we wouldn't
be where we are. So we have to encourage that. But the process, I think, is within ourselves
and it's based on the fact that we are not determinant like computers with silicon chips that are rigid.
I sometimes think of it like this. If I met a robot that looked very much like a beautiful girl
and everything went fine together with her and me, but then I discovered there was a big problem.
I couldn't work out why she doesn't seem to know where she's going. What's her purpose?
It's as though she's being programmed by Google to be the best person to satisfy all my wishes.
But if that is all that it does, the robot gets boring after about six months, you see.
And then I ask the question, but how does the robot see it?
Could we imagine how the robot would see it? And I think what the robot would say would be
roughly this. Oh dear, I'm made of silicon chips. My molecules, yes, they vibrate a bit,
but they don't move around. He's made of water. What happens in water? The molecules are moving
around all the time. It's Brownian motion, which we've known about ever since about 1830.
So she's frustrated. I wrote a story like this. That's why I can repeat it here because it fascinates
me because this will come. AI will get to the point where we will be able to create simulations of us.
Well, Aber have just done that in their magnificent performance 40 odd years later. So we will get
to the stage where we can recreate this kind of almost human activity. How would we know there's
a difference? And I think it would be illustrated quite well with the story I'm telling you,
which is that the poor girl in the story would be saying, look, it's terrible. I know I cannot
harness chance in the way he does. You see, what the reason I can produce all kinds of variations
is that my creator built a random number generator inside me so that I don't always do the same
thing. But that isn't the same as him, because he's got a purpose. That's the difference.
Speaking about the future and sort of AI and a post human future, perhaps, what do you make of
things like CRISPR and human enhancement through manipulating of our genetic material?
Are those sort of efforts misguided given your views about the role of genes in shaping our
behavior? How do you? Yes, first of all, CRISPR is very interesting indeed, because I think it
illustrates the point that there is natural ways in which organisms can change their genomes. What
does CRISPR do? It does precisely that. And the bacteria from which they were taken do it all
the time. So that's the first point. It actually illustrates part of what I'm saying. We organisms
are capable of changing our genomes. But when you come to the question, could we use it to,
as it were, deliver the promises of the human genome project, even though they've not yet
produced it, because we can say, OK, if you could correct this gene, would we have the future reassured
and we can then avoid all of these diseases? I very much doubt it, but I think it's very
dangerous, because we do not know the function of all genes. Most genes in any way contribute to
many functions. So when you manipulate this one, because you know it produces this disease,
what else are you doing? And if we don't know that before we use CRISPR, how do we know that
modifying the germline, because that's what it amounts to, isn't going to produce problems in
the future. So that's why I say that I think it's dangerous. We need first to know more about the
functions of genes in general in cooperation with each other, because they tend to work
in cooperation with each other, rather than as isolated elements in the system. In that case,
we need to know that before we interfere with that system. It's like a watchmaker suddenly
saying, well, I'm going to fix this watch by bashing this cog and changing it this way,
without understanding the finesse of what has been created.
What do you think the biggest question in molecular biology is these days that
people aren't paying enough attention to and should be?
I think we have to get back. I'm sorry to say this, because I am a physiologist. We need to get back
to a physiological interpretation. Now, I wrote an article just two years ago together with a
colleague, and I called it, could physiology rescue genomics? I think we can. We can identify
where there is causality, even when it's not shown by the association levels.
Now, I've explained that in the case of the heart. I can do the modeling and I can demonstrate it.
And we did the experiments that are the basis of the model. I think that could be done much,
much more. And the database to do it is already there, because we have hundreds of physiological
models now on a site, which is called the CELML, the technical term, website. So we have many of
the causal models in place to simulate what the biology is showing. We could easily, well,
I say easily, it takes good mathematicians and programmers to do it. But we could work out
why this gene association is so low, and then ask the question, what would be a better way of
intervening in this system, this control system? So I think that physiology could come to the rescue
of evolutionary biology. So a more holistic approach to the organism rather than a reductionist one?
I'm afraid we have to, because reductionism has failed, yes.
Dennis Noble, thank you very much. My pleasure.
