Hello.
Thanks for attending the opening ceremonies of the last two lectures.
We needed to set things up so that we could talk about game theory sensibly.
Now, let the games begin.
Games come in different varieties, and today I'm going to show you how to handle a particular kind of game.
A sequential game, also called a dynamic game.
As the name suggests, sequential games have events unfolding over time.
I do this, and in response you do that, then he does this, so I do that, and so on.
Actually, most of the encounters you think of as interaction with other people are sequential.
So, I do this and I do that, and I do this and I do that, and I do that and so on.
Actually, most of the encounters you think of as interaction with other people are sequential
games.
The only real exception is a game where all the players are making their decisions without
knowing what the other players are doing.
These games are called simultaneous games or static games.
They're the topic of our next lecture.
So chess and monopoly are sequential.
Players take turns.
A player might even get multiple turns in a row.
This can happen in monopoly, not so much in chess.
Bidding at an auction is usually sequential.
I have 10.
I have 10.
Do I hear 20?
20.
Thank you very much, ma'am.
Sequential.
Unless it's a sealed bid auction, then we all write down our bid and submit it in envelopes
and the highest one wins.
That's a simultaneous game.
Get the idea?
Here's a lovely sequential game about free trade and airplanes, adapted from a case study
in Thinking Strategically, an excellent and highly readable book by Avinash Dixit and Barry
Nelbuff.
You know Boeing, the U.S. commercial company that builds commercial aircraft.
For a while, it had the medium-sized, medium-range jet market all to itself, both in the U.S.
and in Europe.
Airbus, a European company, wants to change that.
Trouble is that entry into that market costs a lot of money, a billion dollars.
The EEC, the European Economic Community, would be delighted to see Airbus succeed,
but it can't help financially.
We consider the U.S. and the EEC to be two different markets.
You get a monopoly in either of them, and you make $900 million.
Get a monopoly in both, and it's worth twice that, $1,800 million.
Competition isn't as nice for the companies.
If they compete in either of the markets, the competition reduces the profits to $600
million, and that gets divided by between the two of them, $300 million each.
These profits, of course, ignore the startup costs for Airbus.
While competition is bad for the companies, it isn't necessarily bad for the markets.
When both firms compete in a market, that market gains $700 million of bonus from the
competition.
Lower prices, higher quality, better availability, and so on.
So the U.S. gets whatever Boeing gets, plus the $700 million competition bonus if there's
competition in the U.S.
In a similar way, the EEC gets whatever Airbus gets, ignoring its startup costs, plus a $700
million competition bonus if there's competition in Europe.
This is going to be a sequential game, so let me tell you the order of the moves.
First, the EEC can intervene in Airbus' behalf by passing legislation that says, if Airbus
builds this plane, then it will have a monopoly in the European market.
We'll call this PL for protectionist legislation.
If the EEC does pass PL, then the U.S. can respond with similar legislation, giving Boeing
a monopoly in the American market.
Regardless of whether such legislation is passed, Airbus then decides whether or not
to build their planes.
Boeing has already paid its startup costs, so it's going to compete in any market that's
open to it.
Well, our first task is to impose some mental order on all of that information.
Don't worry about the numbers for a moment.
Just think about the events as they unfold.
We're going to record them in the way that we usually do for a sequential game, with
a game tree.
You can impress people by calling it the extensive form of a game, but it comes to the same thing.
A game tree is called a tree because it looks like one, or one on its side.
It begins with a single root node, which corresponds to the first decision in the game.
Here, that decision belongs to the EEC.
They have two choices, pass the PL, or don't.
If they had more choices, there'd be more branches coming out of the root node.
What happens next?
Well, if the EEC passes the PL, then the U.S. can retaliate with PL of its own.
As I described the problem, the U.S. considers PL only if the EEC passes it first.
Perhaps there isn't the political will for unilateral action in the U.S.
Whatever its cause, notice that saying that a game's moves are sequential doesn't mean
that they alternate players.
In this game, if the EEC doesn't pass PL, the U.S. never gets a move at all.
You'll notice the color coding.
It's not essential, but it makes it easier to keep track of who gets to make a decision
at each point.
Red means the EEC, blue means the U.S., and in a minute, we'll show Airbus in green.
In general, each node of the tree will be controlled by one player, the one that gets
to make the decision for that node.
We'll see later that you can introduce chance events into a tree by adding a player called
nature, and the branch that nature takes will depend on probability.
Okay, what happens next?
Well, no matter what's been decided by the governments, Airbus now decides whether to
build or not.
We could go on and add Boeing's move to this tree.
But it's pretty clear, Boeing's going to make the most money it can, and that means
operating in any market where it's allowed.
This is Boeing's dominant strategy, meaning that it's the best that Boeing can do regardless
of what anybody else does.
So I'm not going to include Boeing's strategy on these trees.
I'll just remember that if it's allowed into a market, it's there.
Well, the tree is looking good, but to finish it, we're going to have to give it leaves.
Those leaves are going to be payoffs.
For each different way that this game can play out, we need to figure out the payoffs
for each of the players.
So let's start with the easy ones.
When Airbus decides not to build, what legislation is or is not passed doesn't really matter.
Airbus doesn't build, so Boeing gets a monopoly in both markets and therefore makes $1,800
million.
That's also what the U.S. gets because there's no competition.
The EEC gets zero just like Airbus.
Let's put these payoffs on the tree.
You'll notice the color coding again in the payoffs, red for EEC, blue for the U.S., and
green for Airbus.
By the way, you can ignore the little labels like three, colon, one.
That just means this is the first situation that player three may find himself in.
Okay, we have three more payoffs to go.
Look at the top path in the tree.
The branches say that both the EEC and U.S. pass the PL and Airbus builds.
What's the payoff to each player?
Let's start with Airbus.
Both markets are closed.
Airbus gets a monopoly in Europe.
Boeing gets a monopoly in the U.S.
A monopoly market is worth $900 million.
But Airbus has to pay $1,000 million, a billion dollars in startup costs, so it ends up with
negative $100 million.
Europe doesn't have to pay that startup cost, so the EEC gets the $900 million.
On the American side, Boeing's $900 million is also what the U.S. gets.
Nobody gets a competition bonus because there's no competition on other continent.
I'll put all this on the tree.
Okay, the next payoffs we need correspond to the path where the EEC passes the legislation,
the U.S. does not, and Airbus goes ahead and builds.
What happens in this case?
Well Boeing isn't too happy.
It operates only in America where it has to share the market with Airbus.
It gets half of $600 million or $300 million.
The U.S. gets that too, but because of the competition in the U.S., it also gets a $700
million bonus for a total of $1,000 million for the U.S.
How about the EEC?
Well, there's no competition in Europe, so Airbus is getting $900 million there and $300
million in the U.S.
That makes $1,200 million.
There's no competition in the EEC, so $1,200 million is what the EEC gets.
Take off the $1,000 million in startup costs, and that leaves $200 million as the profit
for Airbus.
Let's go back and trim the tree with these payoffs.
Okay, stick with me, one more set to go.
The final possibility is that the EEC keeps its market open, and so does the U.S. and
Airbus builds.
Let's do the numbers.
In two open markets, we have competition in both.
In each one of those markets, both Boeing and Airbus will make $300 million for a total
of $600 million for each of the companies.
$600 million is Boeing's payoff, but Airbus has a billion in startup costs, and therefore
will be getting negative $400 million.
The EEC gets the $600 million, yes, but also a $700 million competition bonus for $1,300
million total.
And that's what goes on with the U.S. as well.
We'll put these on the tree to finish it off.
So what happens?
Who does what?
Well, if you're like most people, you're going to want to start our analysis at the
beginning with the EEC, but that's a trap.
What the EEC should do is still rather murky.
It depends on how others will respond to the decision that it makes.
This is a general principle, and it's the key to finding optimal strategies in sequential
games.
Dixit and Nailbuff set it concisely.
To look forward, you must reason backward.
Then at the end of the tree, at the twigs, start with Airbus.
After all, by the time that Airbus makes a decision on this problem, the situation is
all but resolved.
Decide what Airbus is going to do in each case.
Look at the last node on the top branch.
Airbus can build or not.
If it builds, it loses $100 million.
If it doesn't, it breaks even.
Look at the green payoffs.
Clearly, breaking even is better than losing $100 million.
So if both governments close their markets by passing the PL, Airbus won't build.
I'll highlight this edge in orange to indicate the choice that Airbus will make if we reach
this node.
Okay, look at the next node down in green.
If the EEC is the only one to pass the PL, then Airbus makes $200 million by building
and makes nothing by not.
Clearly, making $200 million is better than making nothing, so in this case, Airbus will
build.
Again, we'll show this in orange.
Finally, let's look at the last node for Airbus.
Here we have open markets on both sides of the Atlantic.
Airbus loses $400 million by building and breaks even by not, so Airbus won't build.
An orange bar to indicate this too.
So much for Airbus.
We now know when we reach a green node what's going to happen.
So back up one more step and look at the U.S. decision.
If it passes PL, it knows that Airbus will fold and the U.S. will make $1,800 million.
We're looking at the blue payoffs now.
If it doesn't pass the legislation, it knows that Airbus will build, and again, looking
at the orange bar and the blue payoff, we see that the U.S. makes $1,000 million.
The increased profits from competition aren't as attractive as the double monopoly, so the
U.S. will pass the legislation, like this.
The procedure that we're following is called rollback.
The logic begins at the end of the tree and then, like a wave, rolls back to the beginning.
One more step and the rollback is going to be complete.
The EEC situation is now a lot easier to analyze because when it makes a decision, we know
how everyone else will respond.
Again, just follow the orange bars.
So what happens?
If the EEC passes PL, so will the U.S. and Airbus won't build.
Just follow the orange bars.
Remember that we're looking at the red payoffs for the EEC.
If it doesn't pass the PL, Airbus still doesn't build.
In either case, the EEC is going to make nothing.
If the players are rational, it's really not going to matter what the EEC does in this
problem, so I'll highlight both choices.
And the rollback procedure has now told us the outcome of this game.
The EEC can pass the legislation or not.
If it does, the U.S. responds with legislation of its own, Airbus doesn't build, and the
EEC makes nothing.
If the EEC doesn't pass the legislation, Airbus still doesn't build.
So no matter how things work out, the U.S. gets $1800 million, Boeing does as well, and
the EEC and Airbus get nothing.
Great for the U.S. and Boeing, bad for the EEC and Airbus.
Look forward, reason backward.
And look at how the choices that we did make depended on things that never happened.
Well, this wasn't a very happy ending for Airbus.
By the time the two governments got done with their maneuvers, Airbus was pretty much out
of the cold.
Was that the problem?
Was it that Airbus had to go last?
Sequential games, by their nature, have a definite turn order, and we often hear a lot
about first mover advantage.
A lot of people will tell you that the earlier you get to act, the better off you are.
But is that true?
Well, we can examine this idea with the current game.
Let's let Airbus go second.
Basically, when the EEC makes its policy about PL or not, Airbus can commit the funds to
develop in the plane if it wants before the U.S. has a chance to act.
Does it make a difference?
Well, let's look at the new tree.
Notice how the green moves for Airbus now come before the blue moves for the U.S.
We don't need to recompute the payoffs, thank goodness, because those just depend on what
events occurred, not the order that they happened.
When you roll back this tree, you start with the U.S. Look at the blue payoffs and see
what the U.S. does.
At the top, if the EEC passes the legislation and Airbus builds, the U.S. doesn't pass the
legislation because a thousand, its blue payoff, is better than the alternative, 900.
On the other hand, if the EEC passes PL and Airbus doesn't build, then it really doesn't
matter what the U.S. does, so I highlighted both of the branches for the U.S. and Orange.
Okay, back up.
Look at the green payoffs to see what Airbus does.
At the upper node, if Airbus builds, it gets 200 million.
Just follow the orange bars and look at the green Airbus payoffs.
So if it doesn't build, it gets zero.
So building is better.
At the lower green node, if Airbus builds, it gets minus 400 million, so it doesn't
build and gets zero.
One more step back to the EEC.
Check the payoffs, follow the orange bars.
If the EEC passes legislation, at the end of the tree you'll see that it gets 1200 million
in red.
If it doesn't pass the legislation, it gets zero, so it passes it.
Take a second and look at this.
This is really interesting.
Under the new order, the EEC passes the legislation, Airbus builds, and then the U.S. doesn't pass
legislation.
The result is that Airbus and the EEC do much better than last time, and the U.S. and Boeing
do considerably worse.
So order does make a difference, at least it did in this problem.
Does that mean that earlier is better?
Well, let's run another experiment.
Let's let Airbus be even quicker and let them move first.
In the new tree, when you roll it back, it'll look like this.
The tree's smaller, you can see, because if Airbus doesn't build, then the laws passed
really don't make any difference, so I left them off the tree.
And when I rolled it back, you can see that the result is back to the original one.
Airbus doesn't build.
The U.S. makes 1800 million, so does Boeing, and the EEC and Airbus get nothing.
So going first was bad for Airbus.
Going second was good.
Why doesn't Airbus build?
Because Airbus can read the decision tree.
If it does build, the EEC will not move to protect it.
And that's not because the EEC fears retaliation from the U.S. The EEC can read a decision
tree too.
It knows that if it passes PL, the U.S. won't retaliate.
No.
The EEC won't pass PL because it makes more money with Airbus in a competitive market
than it does in a closed market.
It's death to Airbus, but c'est la guerre.
Airbus, in going first, has to commit itself to a course of action.
And once it's committed, the EEC is looking at for what's best for itself, not Airbus.
The result, ironically, is a solution that's worse for both Airbus and EEC than the one
we found a moment ago when they worked together.
There are a couple of important points that I want to make here.
The first is, forget about the idea of a universal first mover advantage.
Depending on the game, it might be best to go first, or last, or somewhere in the middle.
Airbus, it was good to be in the middle this time.
I'm actually surprised that the idea of a first mover advantage is as popular as it
is.
There are lots of real-life situations where you don't want to go first.
Imagine seeing a used car on a lot that you're interested in.
Would you rather name a price first, or have the salesperson do it?
The advantage of going first is commitment to a course of action.
And the advantage of going second, or later, is flexibility of response.
In different situations, one of these factors may outweigh the other.
The other important lesson is the difference between cooperative and non-cooperative games.
These are standard terms, but they're a little misleading.
In a cooperative game, binding agreements between the players are possible.
In a non-cooperative game, they aren't.
All the games we've looked at today so far have been non-cooperative.
True, the EEC and Airbus worked together in the second game, but that doesn't make it
a cooperative game.
The point is, they didn't have to work together.
In the third game, where the EEC did better by selling out Airbus, you saw that that's
exactly what it did.
So Airbus, to do well, has to wait for the EEC to pass its legislation, but then act
before the U.S. does.
It has to be flexible with respect to the EEC and committed with respect to the U.S.
Our rollback analysis has indicated what a delicate position Airbus is in.
This tree rollback approach can be used in a lot of different games.
For it to work, they have to be finite and deterministic.
Essentially, they have to be guaranteed not to go on forever, and they can't involve random
chance.
They also have to be non-cooperative and sequential, of course.
You can't make binding agreements with people, and you have to have an order of events.
That's it.
Except for one other thing.
It has to be a game of perfect information.
Perfect information basically means that you always know the whole history of the game
before you make a move.
And other players do, too, of course.
In our original game, if somehow the U.S. had decided whether to pass legislation, but
it kept it a secret from Airbus, that would be a game of imperfect information.
So chess is a game of perfect information, since the player knows the entire history
of the game whenever they move.
Poker is a game of imperfect information, since one player doesn't know the cards that
are in another player's hands.
If a used car dealer knows the quality of the car that he's trying to sell you, and
you don't, that's a game of imperfect information.
And to handle the game of imperfect information, we need some fancier tools.
It won't be enough to just find the rollback equilibrium.
Rollback equilibrium.
Equilibrium is a very big idea in economics, physics, and chemistry.
And game theory, too.
The basic idea is that an equilibrium is a steady point.
If you have a system in equilibrium, you don't expect it to spontaneously change to another
state.
A marble put on a level surface is an equilibrium, put it on a slope, and it's not.
Games, as we've said, are interactive.
If you find out that another player is making a particular choice, you might decide that
you want to change your choice in response to it.
Then they might want to change theirs, and we can end up with a model of shifting strategies
moving back and forth.
The idea of an equilibrium in game theory is essentially a set of plans that won't set
off the switching game.
If a game is going to have a steady right way to be played, then that solution should
be an equilibrium.
It'd even be better to come up with the equilibrium idea that includes only those right solutions.
But that's surprisingly hard.
People have tried.
All of the ideas of game theory equilibrium begin with the one that was come up with by
John Forbes Nash, and called the Nash equilibrium in his honor ever since.
You've probably heard of Nash.
A fictionalized account of his life appeared in the movie A Beautiful Mind.
Nash was absolutely brilliant, a first-right mathematician who unfortunately suffered from
paranoid schizophrenia for much of his midlife.
More recently, his outstanding work is garnered in the Nobel Prize in Economics.
We'll talk more about Nash later.
For now, let's focus on his equilibrium.
It's a good idea, but like a lot of good ideas, it's really quite simple.
Have each player select a strategy.
Together, these are called a strategy profile.
Once you know all the strategies, they essentially play themselves out.
Remember, a strategy is a complete instruction book for what you'll do in every situation.
Once the books are together, we don't really need you to be there to see how the game plays
out.
At the end of the game, every player gets a payoff.
My question is, do you have any regrets?
Once you saw how everyone else played, do you wish you'd followed a different strategy?
If the answer is no for you and for everybody else, then we've got a Nash equilibrium.
No player will gain from unilaterally changing his or her strategy in a Nash equilibrium.
Saying this more simply, if everybody else is playing the Nash equilibrium, you might
as well too.
You're not going to gain anything by changing on your own.
In a sense, a Nash equilibrium is self-reinforcing.
Regardless of how the equilibrium has arrived at, once everybody knows that that's what
we're doing, no one's going to gain by being the only one to change.
By the way, rollback equilibria, like the ones we've talked about so far, are always
Nash equilibria too.
Unfortunately, the Nash equilibrium has its own problems.
Let's go back to that second Airbus game one more time, the one where Airbus goes second.
That was the one in which Airbus did very well.
But now I want you to look at a different strategy profile on that tree, this one here.
In this tree, the EEC and US always pass PL, and Airbus doesn't build.
This obviously is not the rollback equilibrium we found earlier, but it is a Nash equilibrium.
Why?
Well, Nash equilibrium means that no one gains by unilaterally changing their choice.
So we'll check this for each player.
Right now, both governments are passing the legislation, Airbus is not building, and the
US is making 1,800 million.
Who would want to change?
The US?
No way.
It's currently making its best possible payoff.
It's very happy with the way things are working out and won't want to change it.
How about Airbus?
No way.
We have closed markets on both sides, and in that situation, Airbus will lose $100 million
by building.
So it doesn't want to change either.
Well how about the EEC?
Does it want to make a unilateral change?
After all, it's currently getting zero, which is its worst possible payoff.
True enough.
But the point is, they can't do any better by changing their policies.
They're making zero because Airbus is not building.
And whether they pass the legislation or not won't change that.
So we have a Nash Equilibrium.
No player is helped by a unilateral change in their own strategies.
That's what a Nash Equilibrium means.
And it's one that the US likes considerably better than the Rollback Equilibrium we found
before, although the EEC and Airbus don't.
If you go poking around, you can find other Nash Equilibria for this game too, like the
one where nobody passes anything and Airbus doesn't build.
So which one's the right one?
The idea of a Nash Equilibrium alone isn't strong enough to narrow down the answer to
one choice.
The right answer will need to be a Nash Equilibrium, otherwise people would change what they did
once they found out what others were doing.
But not all Nash Equilibria are equally good candidates for the right answer.
In fact, this fact has led to refinements of the idea of Nash Equilibrium, especially
for sequential games.
The refinement that's particularly relevant to our discussion here is one that's due
to Selton, the idea of sub game perfection.
It basically says this, you've got a strategy profile, a strategy for each player, and it's
a Nash Equilibrium.
The strategies, strategies tell you what you should do in every possible situation that
you could find yourself in.
So Selton said, if your strategy is really a good one, then I should be able to plunk
the players down anywhere in the game tree and have them start the game at that point
and play it out.
If it's a really good strategy, then what is they're told to do on that sub tree should
be a Nash Equilibrium for it.
If you start at a new point in the game tree and follow it from that point on, you're dealing
with what's called a sub game of the game.
The idea of sub game perfection simply means that if the game is restricted to that part
of the tree, everybody's still playing a Nash Equilibrium.
The rollback equilibrium for any tree is going to be sub game perfect.
That follows from just the way we found the rollback equilibrium.
We were actually looking at each sub game of the game, although we didn't say so at
the time.
But let's look at our alternative solution to see if the other solution we found of that
game is also sub game perfect.
It's certainly a Nash Equilibrium, but it isn't sub game perfect.
Look at the node that's labeled two colon one in the upper right hand corner.
It says that if the EEC passes the legislation and Airbus builds, then the U.S. is going to
pass the legislation too.
But this is silly.
If the EEC did pass the legislation and Airbus did build, that is if we started at the node
that's labeled two colon one, then the U.S. either has a choice of passing the legislation
and making 900 million or not passing it and making 1,000 million, and 1,000 million is
clearly better.
So the U.S. can announce all that it wants, that it will pass PL if the EEC does and Airbus
builds, but it's a hollow threat.
Once the Airbus enters the market and starts to build, the U.S. is going to make the best
of it by not passing legislation.
The game starting at two one doesn't make sense as shown on this tree, so the solution
is not sub game perfect.
In fact, you can show that the rollback equilibrium of a tree is the only solution that is sub
game perfect.
Essentially, the rollback equilibrium is the right way to play a sequential game of perfect
information.
The rollback procedure is straightforward and it will give you the right answer for
any finite, deterministic, sequential, non-cooperative game of perfect information.
This is results usually called Kuhn's theorem and it's a mouthful.
It pretty much means that you can find the best way to play any game that's sequential
and has no chance and no hidden nodes, no hidden information.
Chess is an example.
The games can't last forever because of certain rules of chess.
So it's finite.
It doesn't involve chance, so it's deterministic.
It's obviously sequential and non-cooperative.
And since you know the entire history of the game when you go to make your move, it's
also a game of perfect information.
So Kuhn's theorem says there's a best way to play chess.
If the best strategies are used, every game will end up the same way.
Kuhn's theorem says that one of these three statements is going to be true.
Chess is a guaranteed win for white.
There is nothing that black can do to stop this unless white makes a mistake.
White goes first.
Or two, chess is a guaranteed win for the second player, black.
There's nothing that white can do to stop this unless black makes a mistake.
Or chess is a guaranteed draw, like tic-tac-toe.
Neither player ever wins unless someone makes a mistake.
We saw that there are more possible strategies for chess than there are subatomic particles
in the universe.
Kuhn's theorem tells us that one of those strategy books is the perfect one, one that
would never lose.
One that would in fact win every single game if a winning strategy exists.
Adults don't play tic-tac-toe much.
Unless you screw up, every game ends up with the same result.
It's humbling to realize that chess, for all of its complexity, is exactly the same.
