Welcome back to our discussion of strategic moves, threats, promises, and commitments.
We ended last time by talking about a particular kind of commitment, particularly the commitment
to WED.
Today let's start with a commitment from a real-life business situation.
Once again, it's Boeing and Airbus, those two giants of commercial airplane manufacture.
In January of 1993, Boeing announced that it was going to build a plane with 600 to 800
seats.
This was in comparison to Boeing's largest plane at the time, the 747, which had only
420 seats.
Airbus' largest plane was even smaller, with 330 seats.
Boeing, with its larger planes, dominated the existing market.
But crowding was becoming a more important issue at major airports every year, and market
research suggested that there'd be a market for somewhere between 500 and 1400 of the
new larger planes, the so-called super jumbos.
Not surprisingly, development costs of such a plane were going to be huge, on the order
of $10 billion or so.
The market was big enough to support one producer, but probably not two.
So Boeing's announcement was a strategic commitment.
The message was, we're building this plane, Airbus, whether you do or not.
If you do too, we're all going down the tubes.
So stay out.
If the commitment was taken seriously, then Airbus should stay out of the market.
But was Boeing telling the truth?
Airbus waffled a bit, then split the difference by entering into a partnership with Boeing
to jointly develop the larger plane.
It didn't go very well.
In 1997, Boeing dropped out of the super jumbo market, saying that the market wasn't ready
yet.
So certainly, Boeing's commitment to build the plane was a sham.
What did it accomplish?
Well, remember, Boeing was the king of the mid-sized jets.
In a world without super jumbos, they could expect to maintain that position.
They could make super jumbos, of course, but then they'd be competing with their own
existing planes.
But if they didn't build them, then Airbus probably would and cut into their existing
market.
A tricky situation.
So they played a game by making a commitment that, if believed, would keep Airbus from
developing the unwanted competition for Boeing.
From the looks of it, the commitment was credible enough to buy Boeing four years.
Here's another airplane-related story.
You should be getting pretty good at these strategic move problems by now, so see if
you can figure out what happened here.
It might help you to remember that it's against the law for airlines to engage in price fixing
with other airlines.
Here are two newspaper excerpts from 1992.
Here's the first.
And here's the second.
What's the deal?
Clearly, Continental's commitment wasn't credible, as you can see from the second story.
Well, although the press release was stated as a commitment, it wasn't really.
It was a promise.
And it wasn't to the public.
It was to Continental's competitors.
The promise was, if you raise your rates, we'll raise ours.
They couldn't make this promise directly because of the laws against collusion.
So Continental announced the rise in its rates, then sat back to see what the competitors
would do.
Obviously, when one carrier has higher rates and another has lower ones, that's more business
for the lower priced carrier.
But if both carriers raise their rates, then they both make more money.
As it happened, Continental didn't get enough response from its competitors to follow through
on their promise, and hence the second announcement.
Interestingly, while Continental went back on its commitment to raise prices, it didn't
go back on its implied promise.
That promise was contingent on the competitors raising their prices.
Okay, last time we saw two ways to gain credibility.
Both involved changing your payoffs.
One was contracts with another person, and another was unilateral actions, such as escrows
or upfront investment.
We've also seen some examples of cheap talk, commitments and promises that had almost no
cost, and because of that, almost no credibility.
But there are other ways to gain credibility than changing payoffs.
Most of them trade on the idea that we mentioned earlier, the idea of an iterated or repeated
gain.
They are the hamlet approach, reputation, teamwork, and salami tactics.
The first three involve multiple related gains.
The last involves taking one game and cutting it up into a bunch of littler games.
We'll look at them one at a time.
First, the hamlet approach.
Though this be madness, yet there's method in it.
Hamlet pretended to be mad so that others wouldn't understand his mind through his actions.
This approach is often called rational irrationality.
By past behavior, I convince you that I don't play rationally, or at least that I have payoffs
that are significantly different than the ones that you want to ascribe to me.
If you believe this, you really don't know when my threats are credible or incredible
because I seem irrational.
Imagine that a gunman has taken a hostage.
The police are confident they can get the drop on the gunman.
If they are confident that the gunman is rational in the general sense, they could move in.
We've got you, drop your weapon, or you're dead.
With an irrational gunman, they might not be willing to take that chance, so the rational
man is captured, and the one that's acting crazy is still holding hostages.
Kim Jong-il of North Korea and Muammar Gaddafi of Libya are two world leaders often associated
with this particular approach.
If that's too extreme for you, a second approach is reputation.
In the terrorism game, for instance, Israel has had a long policy of not dealing with
terrorists.
It generally holds to it.
So to deal with terrorists in a current situation destroys that reputation.
This would make Israel more vulnerable to all future crises of this type, and could even
encourage them.
When these facts are taken into account, Israel may find that its long-term concerns of preserving
its reputation might trump its short-term concerns of seeing the hostages freed.
Israel's historical precedent, its reputation, shows that in similar situations it's been
willing to put its money, and its citizens, where its mouth is.
When reputation is factored in, the stated action of not negotiating is actually the
one that they'd prefer.
Reputation for a cooperation can also be effective.
In NASCAR, Del Earnhardt, the intimidator, had such a reputation, and used it to good
advantage.
There's more cooperation in NASCAR than you might think.
On the racetrack, when one car follows closely behind another, when it draths it, it helps
the car behind by cutting the air resistance that it experiences on the track.
Oddly enough, it also helps the car in the front by cutting the turbulence behind the
lead car.
Because of this, a pair of cars can then outstrip a single car traveling alone.
Earnhardt was good at forming such pairings.
He had a reputation for not prematurely breaking the draft.
Of course, eventually, every driver is going to try to win, but Earnhardt's reputation
for driving hard but fair led him to be able to strike a lot of such deals.
He'd talk with other drivers before the race, or on the radio during the race, to make drafting
deals.
We'll return to this kind of deal making, and how to make it happen later in the course.
These credibility techniques can be blended to come up with new variants.
Here's one that comes from combining rational irrationality with reputation.
Suppose that a nation agrees to meet a terrorist's demands, evidently in good faith, but then
at the last moment, double crosses the terrorists.
Their credibility, if honest dealing with a terrorist, is now trashed, right?
What happens next time?
What terrorist in the future is ever going to believe the word of the country that did
this?
Has it effectively destroyed any chance of negotiating with terrorists?
By destroying its credibility, it's given itself credibility not to negotiate with terrorists.
The idea that reputation can be extended to include multiple players, this idea of reputation
can be extended to include multiple players, and when they do that, it's generally called
teamwork.
The players support of a community, and the social values of that community change the
payoffs from the egotistic individual ones to a more group-centered one.
Soldiers are taught love of country and comrade, and the nobility of self-sacrifice for one's
fellows.
When a live grenade is thrown into a foxhole, soldiers should be seen throwing themselves
on top of the grenade to save the other people.
A member of a church shares a social network and a belief system with the others.
One who behaves contrary to that belief may receive the censure of the other parishioners.
These communities act to change the payoffs of their players, either by making the promised
behavior more desirable than the alternative, or by making the natural, selfish behavior
a target of ridiculers scorn.
Even such systems work.
They do so by turning promises into assurances, threats into warnings.
Okay, we've discussed both reputation and teamwork, but there's another way that the
idea of an iterated game can bring about credibility.
A single game can be broken up into smaller games.
Consider the ongoing free trade problems between the U.S. and China.
Let's suppose the game is a prisoner's dilemma where both the U.S. and China would like the
other country to open their markets but prefer to keep their own markets closed.
Well, suppose we don't work with all aspects of the market at once.
We deal with different smaller markets in a sequence of connected games.
Failures to follow through with the deal on, let's say, the electronics market could scuttle
future agreements for, let's say, cars.
Through a series of smaller steps, the promises of open markets may be kept credible.
The problem with this approach can crop up as the deal making nears its end.
The last step of the game is, essentially, a one-shot.
No later games depend on it.
As a result, there's no good reason for either side to cooperate.
As we'll see later, this makes the next to the last game the real last game, in a sense,
which leads to it having the same problem as the last game.
On a nudge from the outside, the entire agreement can unravel because of this last small part
of the deal.
This has often been a problem with the roadmaps to peace in the Middle East.
Small steps can also be used to get away with actions that the other player objects to.
When used this way, it's often called salami tactics.
You cut into the other player's position, slice by slice.
The domino theory, so feared in the Cold War, with communist takeover of one small country
after another, is an example.
Salami tactics are particularly effective when the only threat that your opponent has
is a disproportionate one.
This was a large problem during the Cold War.
Western Europe could be defended with nuclear weapons, but it didn't have enough conventional
troops to stop a Soviet incursion.
We could threaten to drop a bomb over an incident in Yugoslavia, but would we really do it?
One way of handling this problem involving your big gun, if you only have your big gun
in your collection of threats, is based on mixed strategies.
You don't actually threaten to use the big gun, since the threat's too big to be credible.
Instead, if displeased, you let the situation gradually escalate out of control, sliding
out of your hands.
As a result, there's a chance that the big gun will be used, and that chance grows with
time.
President Kennedy used this approach in the Cuban Missile Crisis.
It's terribly dangerous, a technique called brinkmanship, since it carries players to
the brink of disaster.
With brinkmanship, we've changed the mechanic of establishing credibility.
In the last lecture, and so far in this one, we've been looking at changing our own payoffs,
so that the threatened or promised action actually becomes our best choice.
The second way is suggested by brinkmanship.
You make your decisions irrevocable.
You make it impossible to take them back, even if you want to.
That's the idea behind brinkmanship.
No one would ever willingly start World War III over Cuba, not willingly, but let there
be a small chance of it happening when you're unable to stop it, and you have a credible
threat.
Do it just right, and the enemy may have just enough of a threat for them to do what you
want.
Get lucky, and the threat never materializes, and the deal is struck.
If you're unlucky, the out-of-control threat runs its own course to the wool of everybody
in the game.
It's scary stuff.
Fortunately, not all the techniques we're going to be discussing are as white-knuckle
as brinkmanship.
Thomas Schelling had the right of it.
The power to constrain an adversary is the power to bind oneself.
We're finally in a position to understand what he meant.
When it comes to strategic moves, flexibility is your greatest enemy.
This was a thunderbolt to me when I first learned of this.
I'm a man who values the idea of flexibility to be able to respond to situations in the
way that seems to be the best advantage, but I didn't think it through.
What does the credibility of a strategic move, and therefore its potency, hinge upon?
The other player believing that, in a certain situation, you're going to follow through
with a course of action, one you don't want to do.
And the easiest way to convince them of that is to arrange things so that when that moment
comes, you're going to have to follow through.
We've already seen a way of taking things out of your control, besides the role of the
dice that we saw in brinkmanship, the doomsday device.
A lot of stories, including movies like Doctor Strange Love, have revolved around this idea
on a global scale.
There's no denying that the deterrent effect of such a threat is powerful.
The irony is that, for the doomsday device to be effective, it has to be the case that
you're not able to override it.
This means that you run the risk that an accident may bring ruin on everyone.
Real doomsday devices should be no more of a threat than what's needed to prevent the
feared event, but the threat has to be big enough.
As Doctor Strange Love put it, deterrence is the art of producing in the mind of the enemy
the fear to attack.
Doomsday devices do occur in the real world.
Poison pills for companies are an example.
In 2003, Oracle was trying to make a $7.3 billion bid, hostile takeover, of PeopleSoft.
PeopleSoft added a new term into the contracts with their customers.
If their company were sold within two years, and customer support were reduced within four
years, PeopleSoft promised to give each customer a refund.
The refund would equal somewhere between two and five times the licensing fees paid by
that customer.
It was estimated that the cost of such a program would be around $800 million.
It would be simply ruinous that PeopleSoft if it were ever implemented.
But it would only be implemented if someone tried to take over PeopleSoft and downsize
it.
And Oracle had stated it didn't intend to continue to actively support PeopleSoft's
market after the merger.
Oracle recognized the danger of PeopleSoft's move and a protracted and intense court battle
ensued.
The government filed an antitrust case against Oracle, which unraveled with remarkable speed.
The court case about PeopleSoft's poison pill became, in the words of the judge of the case,
court litigation, part business deal.
Eventually, Oracle did acquire PeopleSoft, although for considerably more than the original
bid, it went for about $10 billion.
Oracle laid off some of PeopleSoft's employees but less than it originally intended.
The reason for this, according to an Oracle spokesperson, was in part to placate PeopleSoft's
customers.
So PeopleSoft built a doomsday device, but it wasn't big enough to stop the takeover.
And it wasn't sufficiently irrevocable.
In fact, the refund policy came up for review and re-approval by the board of directors
of PeopleSoft when it expired during the takeover battles.
There is no such thing as a revocable doomsday device.
We talked earlier about the idea of blending different approaches of credibility.
The possibilities are limited only by your imagination.
Let's take a look at another.
We'll blend the doomsday device approach with the earlier idea of reputation.
ABC's prime time provides an example.
Five people, four women and a man, had tried to lose weight, but every approach that they
had tried had met with failure.
They all weighed between 178 and 279 pounds.
All knew their risks to health of obesity.
All were concerned that their weight could shorten their lives and reduce the quality
of their years and so on.
But none of these were strong enough to make them lose weight.
They were all long-term concerns.
They didn't change behavior now.
Prime time made them an offer, which all five accepted.
To begin with, each volunteer was photographed in a skimpy bathing suit, two-piece ones
for the women.
The man was photographed in trunks, but his wife, who was also obese, was photographed
in a two-piece suit as well.
After that, the volunteers had two months to lose 15 pounds.
If they failed, the pictures would be aired on the Jumbotron screen of a sports stadium.
This time, the doomsday machine didn't hold bombs.
It held public ridicule.
Long-term ambitions suddenly became very immediate ones.
Two months, 15 pounds.
What happened?
At the end of the two months, four of the five volunteers had lost the weight.
The one who failed did so by only two pounds.
And it's interesting to note that the one who did fail weighed substantially less to
begin with than the ones who succeeded.
Prime time did a similar experiment using teams of representatives from rival companies.
The company got one point for each person who met the 15-pound goal.
So here the payoffs were changed by teamwork rather than by the doomsday device.
Do you think this would work for you?
Well, the internet has now provided a new way for people to adopt such similar approaches
without the Jumbotron.
A website called stickk.com allows users to specify a goal which they then state publicly.
Stop smoking, lose weight, exercise more, vote, play online games less, break up with
a bad partner, anything you want.
You can inform your friends of the link.
You can even have a friend to associate monitor your behavior to chart your progress and report.
You get positive reinforcement from your community if you're sticking to your commitment and
negative reinforcement from disappointed friends if you don't.
If this isn't enough, you can also make a financial threat to your future self.
Stickk.com will accept payments from you if they'll hold an escrow to be returned to
you when you reach your goal.
If you don't, the money is donated to a designated charity.
They encourage you, by the way, to pick a charity that you really hate.
The structure of stickk.com is not much of a doomsday device or not as much of one as
would hope for.
Self-reporting of success is enough for them to return your money.
Still, the idea is certainly there and an irrevocable stickk site is the stuff of which
horror movies would be made.
Aside from the doomsday device, how can you constrain an adversary by binding yourself?
If you're ever involved in a business negotiation or legal dispute, it won't take you long to
come up with an answer, appointing an agent to act on your behalf.
A labor representative negotiates for the members of a union and may be able to hold
the line in negotiations when a union member individually would fold.
In fact, hiring a representative may help you simply because of the reputation of the
representative, like when you hire a top-notch lawyer.
In other cases, the representative may further your interest by the simple fact that they
are not empowered to change your offer beyond a certain point.
This last advantage is one that you see a lot in car dealerships.
The salesman says to you, I'm on your side, I really want to see you in this, baby.
Tell you what, let me check with my manager and see what I can get you on that trade-in.
Have you ever noticed that the manager never comes out to discuss the matter with you directly?
The very fact that the manager could cut any deal that's at least somewhat in the dealership's
favor would weaken our bargaining position.
Using the salesman as a go-between can be useful even if what the manager secretly says
is, do what you think best.
If the customer doesn't know that the salesman has this flexibility, the salesman can use
that fact to his advantage.
Designating an agent might seem a safer way to lose control than breakmanship or the doomsday
device.
Any way you slice it, though, losing control is a scary thing to do in an important situation.
The trouble is, if you're not changing your payoffs, you have to tie your hands, or at
least others have to believe that you have.
If you can't convince the other players that your decision is irrevocable, then your strategic
move is just posturing.
It won't have any effect because you won't be committed to your course.
It usually takes more than just words.
The difference between being involved and being committed has been compared to a ham
and egg breakfast.
The chicken is involved.
The pig is committed.
Speaking of chicken, how's that for transition?
Speaking of chicken, how do you demonstrate this kind of loss of control in a game of
chicken?
Well, in the classic game, two drivers are speeding toward one another at high speed
and want the other one to swerve.
One way to make a credible commitment is to yank your steering wheel from the steering
column and throw it out the window.
Just make sure that the other driver can see it and in time.
Now you can't swerve in it if you want to.
That's commitment.
Throwing the steering wheel out of the car is an example of a fourth way to make your
strategic moves irrevocable.
Burning your bridges behind you.
Also called burning your ships.
This latter name comes from a little scene that transpired in Vera Cruz in 1519.
The Spanish conquistador, Hernando Cortez, landed at Vera Cruz and learned about the
empire of the Aztecs from the locals.
Cortez determined to conquer Montezuma and plunder all that Aztec gold.
One of the first steps to do so, we're told, was ordering his own ships to be burned.
This increased the size of his force on land by adding the seamen to the army, yes, but
it had a more important effect.
It showed both the natives and the Europeans that there was no turning back for Cortez and
his forces.
This gave those forces a powerful reason to fight to the death and reports say that natives
withdrew from the coastal area in response.
There's actually considerable historical debate about exactly what it was that Cortez
did to his ships and why.
In the mildest version, he runs some, but not all of them, onto a sandbar to prevent spies
from his enemy for reporting on him.
Regardless of the historical debate, the strategy suggested by burning one's boats
is clear enough, though.
If you give yourself no opportunity to retreat, you go all in.
You commit yourself to fight to the death, and this commitment is hopefully strong enough
to discourage your enemies from attacking you.
This idea is actually much, much older than the history of Cortez.
Sun Tzu, in his Art of War, written in the 6th century BC, pointed out the importance
of not burning your enemy's ships for him.
When you surround an army, leave an outlet free.
Do not press a desperate foe too hard.
In the same work, he also said, build your opponent a golden bridge to retreat across.
The idea, of course, is not to let your enemy escape.
The idea is that soldiers who see no possibility of survival other than victory will fight
harder for their lack of options.
One way to sap the will of your enemy is to take actions that will prevent such a commitment,
actions that deny them the opportunity to bind themselves.
Burning bridges occurs in modern times, too, of course.
When a company refuses to diversify, when it sticks to a single product or service, it
credibly signals to its competition that it's willing to fight tooth and nail to preserve
that market segment.
Polaroid did this when Kodak tried to encroach on its market for instant film and cameras,
and successfully argued the case in court.
If you give up your rent-controlled apartment in New York and move in with your significant
other, you've made a credible commitment to the relationship.
If things don't work out, there's no going back.
You've burnt your bridges.
Well, we've talked a lot about different ways to establish credibility.
Five of them dealt with changing your payoffs, contracts, the Hamlet approach, reputation,
teamwork, and salami tactics.
Four more have dealt with taking decisions out of your own hands, brinkmanship, doomsday
devices, negotiating agents, and burning bridges.
There's one last technique that remains, getting the last word and removing yourself from the
situation entirely.
The most extreme example of this, to be blunt, is dying.
The last word is called a will.
Courts place a lot of authority on what a will says, in part because the person you
wrote it cannot be contacted for further clarification or revision.
It is quite literally the last word on what the deceased desired.
The technique has less dramatic applications, of course.
When you rip up the parking tickets that you get in a city where you don't live, you're
doing the same thing.
The effectiveness of removing yourself from a situation can vary greatly, depending on
the particulars of the situation.
It credibly prevents you from later revoking your current plans, but with no representatives
or the decisions that you made, even enforceable.
And as I'm sure you can see, if you leave the perception that you simply refuse to communicate
with the other parties, you can trigger an emotional response that may well churn their
payoffs against you.
Well, we've developed quite a collection of tools for looking at strategic moves, three
types of moves, and ten pathways to credibility.
There are a few things to keep in mind when trying to decide what combinations might help
you.
Using with the status quo, I can either hope to preserve it or to change it.
Encouraging you not to change the status quo is generally called deterrence.
Encouraging you to change the status quo is called compelence.
Threats and promises can both be used for deterrence and compelence, but generally threats
are better for deterrence and promises are better for compelence.
Let's see why.
If I want to make a threat to you, if I want to deter you from an action, things are fine
until you do something.
For example, the U.S. wants to deter the Soviets from invading Western Europe.
To encourage us with a promise would need to say, if you don't invade, we'll do something
nice for you.
But when do we do it?
After a week?
A year?
Fifty years?
We could have an ongoing promise renewed every month, but the problem with promises is,
if they work, you have to pay up.
As long as the Soviets don't invade, we pay.
And one problem with deterrence is, it's sometimes hard to tell if the other side is complying
with your desires because of your deterrence, or simply because they haven't gotten around
to whatever it is that you're trying to deter.
I've never been attacked by a vampire, but is my garlic cologne really the reason?
Threats are generally better than for deterrence because a deterrence situation essentially
sleeps until something undesirable happens.
With a threat, we can say to the Soviets, if you invade, we'll make a full-scale retaliation,
which is what we did say.
To handle salami tactics, we stationed a large number of U.S. troops in Western Europe.
These troops were never enough to handle a full-scale Soviet incursion, but they were
never intended to.
Their presence did mean that the Soviets couldn't make any tiny incursions successfully.
A large incursion would have to slaughter lots of U.S. troops in Europe, and that would
lead to an outcry in the U.S. that would all but guarantee war.
The shelling put it, the purpose of the U.S. troops in Western Europe was to die gloriously.
While deterrence doesn't have a deadline, compelence does.
With compelence, you're trying to change the status quo.
Promises generally work best for this.
When the desired act is performed, the kid gets the grade, the missiles are withdrawn,
the supplier reduces his prices, then the reward is given.
The trip to Disneyland, the economic package, the long-term contract.
There's another difference between threats and promises, too.
A successful threat never has to be carried out.
You don't want to make your threats bigger than you have to in case something goes wrong.
But with a promise, if it works, you're going to have to pay up.
It's something to keep in mind when you're making your promises.
Don't make them bigger than you need to.
