You see it everywhere. It tells us who's a Hall of Famer and who's an also ran, whether
the product is as good as the manufacturer says or a piece of junk. It decides if we
go to war, whether segregation is okay, and whether you'll live free or spend your days
in jail. It determines the laws of our land, the leader of the free world, the limits of
our constitution. It even decided if we have one. It's voting. That hallmark of democracy,
whereby we learn the will of the people so that that will may be enacted. But there can
be problems with voting. One, of course, is that people often don't do it. U.S. presidential
races usually see somewhere a little over 50% of the electorate showing up to the polls. In 2004,
it was 55%. Voter fraud, hanging chads, the electoral college, all problematic. But in some
ways, this is just the tip of the iceberg. We think we have a pretty good idea about what voting
is. At least it's idea. One person, one vote, whoever gets the most votes wins. But that's
only one kind of voting. Plurality voting. We're used to it, but there are a lot of alternatives
available. Plurality voting isn't always the best way to conduct an election. In fact, there are
lots of situations where an argument can be made that it's the worst. Plurality voting works fine
when there are only two candidates. But with more than two, the spoiler effect is a serious
concern. That is, a minor candidate with no serious chance of winning can draw enough votes off of
the leading candidate to reverse the contest between the major competitors. In his entertaining and
informative book, Gaming the Vote, William Poundstone takes a serious look at the effects of the U.S.
presidential elections or the effect of spoiling on elections. He summarizes his careful review with
this. Five presidential elections were probably decided by spoilers. 1844, 1848, 1884, 1912, 2000.
At least two others, 1892 and 1992, are questionable cases. In still another race, 1860, four way
vote splitting and the Electoral College created such ambiguity that it was a factor in precipitating
civil war. In 1844, an abolitionist spoiler put a slave owner in the White House. In 1848, a former
Democratic president sabotaged the Democratic Party's chances. In 1884, a prohibition party
candidate helped elect a supposed ally of the saloon. In 1912, a former Republican president
prevented the reelection of a Republican president. In 2000, a consumer and environmental advocate
elected the favorite candidate of corporate America. Poundstone makes a good case for each of these
elections, but one can always argue hypotheticals. If he's anywhere close to right, though, then over
10% of our presidential elections have gone wrong due to spoilers. That's a pretty high defect rate
on something that's supposed to be the bedrock of our system of government. The spoiler effect is
caused by vote splitting, an idea that isn't hard to understand. As an extreme example, imagine an
election between two candidates where 60% of the electorate prefers candidate B to candidate A. Then
B should win, right? But let's add a third candidate who's almost a clone of B, call them C. They're
like B in every way that matters to voters. Now, a voter who's inclined to vote for B is basically
indifferent between B and C. We'd expect then that B and C would both get about 30% of the vote. The
results of the election, 40% A, 30% B, 30% C, and A wins. This is an extreme example, but elections
that are closer between the two major candidates can be affected by a much smaller spoiler effect. You
need only to drain off a small percentage to reverse the results of the election. Before the,
I'm sorry, in the 2000 election, George W. Bush won Florida by a little more than 500 votes. What
would have happened if Ralph Nader, who received almost 100,000 votes in Florida, hadn't been on
the ballot? Plurality voting puts people who genuinely prefer a third-party candidate in a
difficult position. If they vote sincerely, they throw their vote away. Their candidate isn't going
to win the election. That vote could have gone to their second choice, their most preferred popular
candidate. By the fact they didn't make it, they helped their least favorite candidate to win. Some
people have felt this crisis of conscience so strongly that they've arranged vote trades with
people in other states where the margin is bigger between the major candidates. Isn't there a better
way to do this? The question has been asked quite a few times throughout history. Answers were found,
were lost, and then were found again, usually much later. Today I'm going to discuss with you some
of these methods in the context of an example. Here's a map of four towns in a rural area. A new
hospital is going to be built in one of these four towns. Let's keep it simple and assume that each
citizen feels that the closer the hospital is to his or her home, the better. We're also going to
assume sincere voting, which simply means that the way that people vote reflects the way that they
actually feel. So for example, the 40 people of Easton would have Easton as their first choice,
followed by nearby Northview, then slightly more distant Westlake, and finally the distant
Southville. Get the idea? Okay, let's start with the old favorite, plurality voting. Everybody votes
for his or her own town, and the winner is Southville with 65 votes. Is Southville the best
location for the hospital? If you say yes, you have to be okay with the fact that over two-thirds
of the population got their last choice as the hospital's location. An alternative way of counting
the vote is the Condorcet method, named after the 18th century philosopher and mathematician,
the Marquis de Condorcet, who wrote about it. The Condorcet method is a slug fest. Each pair of
candidates face off in a head-to-head competition. The one that beats all of their comers is the
winner. Let's try it with our towns. Southville loses when paired against any other town. As we've
said, two-thirds of the voters find it their last choice. It was the winner of the plurality vote,
but it's the Condorcet loser. Northview has similar problems. Being so far to the north,
it never gets Southville's vote, and so it loses contests with Westlake. So the only
matchup that's left is between Easton and Westlake. Easton gets Easton and Northview,
which is 85 votes. Westlake gets Westlake and Southville for 115. So the Condorcet winner
is Westlake. It wins a head-to-head competition against any other city. This sounds like a
pretty good system. If you can beat everyone else on a one-on-one match, you're the best choice.
But how about this? Imagine a group of nine friends about to go out to supper. They've
narrowed their dinner choices down to three restaurants, an American one, an Italian one,
and Chinese. Four people ranked the American first, then Italian, then Chinese. For three others,
it's Italian, then Chinese, then American. The last two liked Chinese, then American,
with Italian being their last choice. Plurality vote says to go American. It's got the most votes,
but it also has three people choosing American as their last choice. How about the Condorcet method?
We take them one-on-one. Italian versus Chinese? Seven of the nine people prefer Italian.
American versus Italian? Six of the nine prefer American. So, Italian beats Chinese,
and American beats Italian, so American wins. Not so fast. Compare American and Chinese directly,
and you'll find that five of the nine people prefer Chinese to American. Chinese beats American.
So, the group prefers American to Italian, and Italian to Chinese, and Chinese to American.
Even though the individual voters have transitive order preferences, most favorite to least favorite,
the group as a whole does not. We have a cycle of preferences. This is called the Condorcet
paradox. Simply put, there doesn't have to be a Condorcet winner. This situation probably
shouldn't occur too often in real life, but the frequency that it does occur will occur more often
if voters vote strategically rather than sincerely. When it comes up, a Condorcet system is going to
have to figure out how it's going to handle it. Okay, let's step back for a minute from Condorcet
and look at an alternative system proposed at about the same time by another Frenchman.
It's called the board account, and it trades on the idea that a candidate that's well-liked
by a lot of people is a good candidate. In the board account, voters are going to rank their
candidates from the most favorite to least favorite. Points are then awarded based on the rankings.
If I have a least favorite candidate, I contribute zero points to that candidate. The one I like
just a little more than that gets one point from me, and then two points and so on. If there are
five candidates, I would be giving four points to the one that I like best. Get the idea? Then the
candidate with the most total points wins the election. Let's try it out with our hospital problem.
As you can see, in the first row, each of Northview's 45 residents give three points to their favorite,
Northview, two points to their second favorite, Easton, one point to Westlake, and zero to their
least favorite, Southfield. You can see the figures of the other towns as well,
and the totals are at the bottom of the chart. Those are the board accounts. You can see that
Easton wins with 375 points. Easton wins. We've been looking at three systems, all of which
look fair at first blush. Pluralities said to build a hospital at Southfield. Condorcets said to build
it at Westlake, and now Borda says that the best choice is Easton. Well, we've seen some problems
with the plurality method and the condorcet method. How about the board account? Well, let's see.
It says that Easton edges out Westlake, and the other two are quite far behind. So,
suppose that Northview decided to drop out of the race since it wasn't going to win anyway.
The vote is now among the three remaining candidates, and it would look like this.
You see everyone still voting. There are just three candidates. And look at the totals.
When Northview was a candidate, people thought that Easton was better than Westlake.
But now that Northview isn't a candidate, Westlake is better than Easton.
I want to make sure you realize how weird this is. It's as if I asked you whether you'd rather
have a vacation in London or Paris or Havana. And you say London, definitely. And then I tell you
that actually we couldn't go to Havana anyway. And you say, in that case, I want to go to Paris.
This is getting absurd. It's been remarked upon by Tom Stoppard, and perhaps apocryphally,
by Joseph Stalin, that the counting of votes is what matters, not the casting.
What we're seeing here is that even honest counting isn't enough. We've had honest voters,
responsible counting, sensible seeming voting systems, and we're getting results that are
mutually inconsistent from systems that we can poke holes in with almost ridiculous ease.
Can we plug those holes? Or are we stuck with this kind of nonsense?
Well, that was the question that Kenneth Arrow asked of himself. His answer and the lifetime
of other excellent work in economics made him the youngest man ever to win the Nobel Prize at age 51.
Arrow began with the idea that voters would rank their preferences among all of the candidates
from favorite to least favorite. He then asked himself what properties a good voting system
should have. And he came up with five conditions, but they can be boiled down to four. First,
the intransitive preferences that we saw in condor say voting have to go. If your voting system
says that A is better than B and that B is better than C, it can't go on to say that C is also better
than A. Board account is fine with this, but the condor say method, as we've seen, fails.
In a word, the voting system has to be transitive. Second, the kind of silliness that we saw with
the board account also has to go. The term Arrow gave this was independence from irrelevant
alternatives or IIA. Simply put, it means that if a society decides that A is better than B when
C is around, then it also has to decide that A is still better than B when C isn't around.
It's the London, Paris, Havana kind of thing. Note that plurality voting violates this requirement
too. The spoiler's presence can reverse the outcome of the election between the two leading
candidates. Arrow's third requirement hardly sounds like a requirement at all. It's usually called
unanimity, and all what it says is if every single voter prefers A to B, then the system has to rank
A higher than B. It turns out that with these three simple requirements, Arrow narrowed the field of
all possible voting systems down to just one. There is one way to count votes that is transitive,
independent of irrelevant alternatives, and satisfies unanimity. It's this. We all vote,
ranking all the candidates, and then we gather all the votes together and throw all of them away,
but mine. In other words, dictatorship. Dictatorship is the only system that satisfies Arrow's first
three requirements. And if you add a fourth requirement, as Arrow did, saying that dictatorships
are not okay, then can the Arrow's result says that you're out of luck? No voting system is going to
be able to satisfy these four reasonable sounding requirements. The result is generally called
Arrow's impossibility theorem. It applies to a complete ranking of all candidates,
but a related result, the Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem, makes a similar statement about elections
with a single candidate only. The impossibility theorem upset a lot of people. It seemed to say
that the idea of a democracy was fundamentally flawed. As has been the case with some other
results, like the Gertl and Completeness theorem, or the Heisenberg Uncertainty principle, there's
a tendency for people to take these precise mathematical theorems and extend them beyond
their range of application. With Arrow's impossibility theorem, there were actually
two avenues of study that were worth revisiting. One was relooking at this idea of the independence
of irrelevant alternatives. Was it too strong a requirement? The second idea was to look at
voting systems that didn't rely on ranking the candidate's choices. Were there other
possibilities, not based on ranking, that were worth looking at? Well, other systems had been
looked at, and many are used in other parts of the world. America has, for practical purposes,
a two-party system. If you have plurality voting, you pretty much have to. Other parties aren't
going to get enough votes to get elected, but they do act as spoilers in determining which
of the major candidates gets elected. In fact, it's common enough for Republican and Democratic
parties to provide funding or assistance to third-party candidates precisely because that
candidate will draw votes away from the other parties. But one of the problems of plurality
voting is the tyranny of the majority, written about by John Stuart Mill. If a vote reflects
the will of 51 percent of the population, it leaves 49 percent disenfranchised. And with
more than two options, the plurality might not even be a majority. A different idea is the idea
of proportional representation. I'm not talking for the moment about voting for a single office
like a president. I'm talking about an elected body, like a Congress, constituted so that its
composition reflects the composition of the electorate. The most popular voting system to
accomplish this is the STV, or single transferable vote. It was invented and reinvented with small
variations in the 1800s. It works like this. Let's say there are 15 candidates for five positions.
The voters rank all 15 candidates, admittedly, a bit of work, from favorite to least favorite.
The ballots are then sorted by first-place choice. Get enough votes, the quota, and you're elected.
There are details in the process that make sure that extra votes aren't wasted. If there are
still open seats, then eliminate the candidate who got the fewest first-place votes. His or
her votes now go to the candidate ranked second on those ballots. This procedure continues until
all the seats are filled. If there's only one position to fill, this kind of process is usually
called instant runoff voting, or IRV. It mirrors what would happen in a series of runoff elections,
in which the candidate receiving the least votes is eliminated from all future rounds until someone
has a majority. Let's use it to see where the hospital should be built. Each voter's first
choice is his or her hometown, so in the first round, no one has a majority of votes, 101.
Easton is therefore eliminated, since it receives the least number of votes, 40.
All of the votes from Easton are transferred to their second choice, which happens to be Northview.
Northview now has 85 votes, Westlake has 50, and Southhill has 65. No one has a majority, 101.
Westlake, with the fewest votes, is eliminated, and its votes go to its second choice.
Easton would have been its second choice, but it's already gone, so those votes go to the
leading remaining choice, which is Northview. Northview now has 135 votes and wins the election,
so IRV says Northview. We've looked in detail at four different kinds of
sensible voting systems and gotten four different answers to where to build the hospital.
Things aren't usually this bad. I created this example in part to show you how bad they can be,
but it does show you that the same, these good systems applied sensibly are giving wildly different
results. I've talked about the plurality voting, the Condor-Sea method, and the board account in
pretty much detail, listing both good and bad features. How about IRV? Well, one nice feature
of IRV is that it doesn't require a voter to worry about wasting his or her vote. If you like
Ralph Nader, then Al Gore, then George Bush, you can vote for them in that order. In the first
round of tallies, Nader will have the least vote votes, be eliminated, and your vote will now count
for Gore. IRV is more computationally intensive than plurality voting, but modern computers can
handle that. Votes would take a little bit longer to count, but the delay would be worth it if IRV
were a better voting system. Unfortunately, the system has its own problems, as it must,
from the impossibility theorem. One of the most annoying and bizarre is called monotonicity.
It means that you can actually make a candidate win by ranking him lower,
or make him lose by ranking him higher. As with plurality voting, it's hard for a moderate candidate
squeezed on both sides by more extreme positions to win an IRV election. They may receive relatively
few first place votes, and so be eliminated early on because of that. To get a sense of these problems
and some others, I'd like to show you the results of some lovely computer simulations
that were done by Ka Ping Yi while a graduate student at Berkeley. It's a simplification of
a real election, but it can provide you with a nice insight into the advantages and disadvantages
of these various techniques. Here's the basic picture. You can imagine the candidates and voters
that they can be identified on two issues, for example, social programs and experience.
You could imagine that as you move from left to right on the square,
that the position is increasingly favoring cutting governmental spending on social programs.
Similarly, you can imagine that as you move further up the square,
you move to places where the experience is more and more of an issue.
We're looking at an election with three candidates indicated by the three little circles,
red, green and blue. Given my interpretation of the picture, the green candidate supports
social programs and has moderate experience. The blue candidate doesn't support social programs
and has the same amount of experience, and the red candidate is moderate on social programs,
but has a lot of experience. Now, imagine that the square is lying on a table top.
Pick any point inside the square. For demonstration, you can see that I've picked a point near the
northwest corner. We're going to find out what happens when that point represents the center
of public opinion, what the average voter thinks in this particular election.
Well, we know where the center of voter opinion is, but of course not everyone thinks or votes
the same way. So what I'm going to do is to dump a bunch of sand, 20,000 grains in fact,
on a pile centered on that point on the table. They'll spread out. This is an aerial view.
I'm basically showing you a topographic map of my tabletop. You can see from my demonstration
point, the peak of the pile is in the northwest corner of the table, and the sand gets thinner,
as a pale or yellow shows, as you travel southeast and away from that central point.
Each grain of sand is a voter. The center of the pile is what we took to be the center of voter
opinion, and each voter is going to vote for the candidate that he or she is closest to.
That's the candidate that best matches their preference. The lines I've drawn divide the
square up into three regions. All the grains of sand in the same region are closest to the
same candidate. You can see that the upper part of this picture is closest to the red.
You can also see that this region includes the biggest pile of sand. So red wins this election.
Green gets sand in the lower left region, and you can see by color that there's more sand there
than there is in the lower right, where the sand's quite thin. So green comes in second.
So if the center of voter opinion is where I said it was, in the northwest corner,
then red's going to win the election. I indicate this by coloring that single northwest point,
red. What ye did was to follow this procedure for every possible center of voter preference,
and color each dot with the outcome of that election. Here's what he got.
This is actually the graph for all of the voting techniques that we've been talking about today.
Plurality, Condorcet, Borda, and IRV. If the center of public opinion is closest to a candidate,
that candidate wins. That sounds good. But this picture had the three candidates
symmetrically distributed in the square. Watch what happens when we move them around.
How about when we have a moderate candidate, shown in blue, sandwiched between two others
with more extreme positions? As you can see, the plurality in IRV systems give the moderate
candidate virtually no chance to win, even when that candidate represents the center of public
opinion. Blue actually helps the candidate, red, that he least resembles. The presence of blue
has expanded the red wins region. Both Borda counts and the Condorcet method give the moderates
a better shot than this. Borda tends to give the center's candidates their best shot.
Here's an example of vote splitting. Without the red candidate, blue and green would split along
the line that you see running down the center of the Condorcet picture. Look at how the presence
of the more extreme red candidate splits the vote of green in the plurality vote,
giving blue a sizable advantage. In the Borda count, the opposite effect is true. The red
candidate actually slightly increases green's region of dominance. The situation with IRV
can only be described as bizarre. There are some paths in which, as public opinion moves
straight toward the green candidate, first blue wins, then green wins, then blue wins again,
and then red wins. Runoff systems have this weakness. Public opinion moving
toward your position can cause you to lose. In fact, with more candidates, the IRV approach
may result in pictures like this. Yellow doesn't win when the public is centered on her opinion,
but does win, for some reason, in a patch that's in the middle of red's winning territory.
I was rather disappointed when I saw this, because I thought that instant runoff system
sounded like a promising alternative to the plurality system. Of course, the issue is more
than what kind of particular weird results you can get. That's the question of how often these
pathological results occur in real voting. For example, as I've said, the Condorcet paradox,
A better than B, B better than C, C better than A, is highly disturbing, but some studies suggest
it shouldn't happen that often in real votes. It can't happen, for example, when voters' preferences
are arranged along a one-dimensional scale. Suppose that, unlike the pictures we've been
looking at, that there's only one issue of importance to voters, say taxes. Each voter has his or her
own opinion about how high the tax level should be, and will vote for whatever candidate is closest
to their position. While a man named Duncan Black showed that in this kind of situation,
plurality voting can't cause a Condorcet paradox. Restricting attention to such one-dimensional
preferences leads to some other interesting observations, too. Suppose that we have an
election between two candidates, and imagine that voter concerns can be reduced to a position on a
left-right scale. Let's further assume that the candidate's willing to adopt any position that
will get them elected, and we'll make one further assumption, although we don't really need it,
which is that voters are spread out evenly on that left-right line. What should the candidates,
the players, do? Well, let's put Roger in his honest preference, somewhere to the right of center.
The other candidate, Leigh Ann, may have her natural preference being far left,
but by positioning herself just to the left of Roger, she captures all the votes to the
left of her current position, and at least some of the votes between her and Roger.
So what will Roger do? Obviously, jump to just the other side of Leigh Ann, and then Leigh Ann
will leapfrog him. There's only one Nash equilibrium to this game, and it falls with both of the
candidates being right at the midpoint of the line segment. If the voters aren't scattered
uniformly on the line, the argument still goes through. They stop at the median of the population,
half of the people to their left, and half of the people to their right. They are identical
candidates, and they get each half of the vote. This is Duncan Black's median voter theorem.
In a one-issue, two candidate race, the one that captures the median wins, so play the middle.
Poulster Richard Scammons and political strategist Ben Wattenberg made this point
archly by suggesting that the winner of the election depends on a 47-year-old wife of a
machinist living in Dayton, Ohio. Real-life elections tend to be about more than single
issues, of course, and candidates do more than pander to the whims of the electorate.
Still, it is interesting to note how the winners of primaries tend to move toward the center
in the general election. The median of the Democratic primary voters is further to the
left than the median of the voters at the whole, as large, so the Democrat tends to move to the
right. For the Republican candidate, the opposite is true. As we continue to try to find a way
around Arrow's theorem, one avenue holds promise. Remember, the theorem talks about ranked orderings,
but other possibilities do suggest themselves. Here's one. Approval voting. In this system,
you vote for as many of the candidates as you wish. Vote for all but one candidate,
and you're essentially casting a negative vote for the candidate that you didn't select.
Approval voting is, depending on who you talk to, either quite excellent or terrifically bad.
It depends on where voters decide to draw the line between those of whom they do approve
and those of whom they do not. The only political body that uses approval voting today,
so far as I know, is the United Nations. They use it to elect their secretary general.
Research continues to be done on the effectiveness of approval voting. To use an unfortunate
phrase, the votes aren't all yet in. To me, the most promising voting system at the present
may be range voting. In this system, each candidate is scored on a scale, such as 0 to 10.
The candidate with the highest average score is the one that wins.
Such systems are common on the internet for rating product quality or how entertaining
the video clip is. We can imagine using range voting at the hospital situation, for example,
where ratings correspond to the distance between the city and the hospital. The winner would minimize
the average distance that a citizen would have to travel in getting from their hometown to the
hospital, which seems a reasonable measure, if you're curious, Westlake edges out Easton for
first place. Simulations with range voting look promising, but a lot more research needs to be
done. Most of our analysis here is assumed sincere voting rather than strategic voting,
and that makes a difference. When Borda was informed of how easily his system could be manipulated
by burying the biggest threat to your candidate at the bottom of your rankings, he exclaimed,
my scheme is intended only for honest men. Virtually any system can be gained in this sense,
although range voting so far looks to be less susceptible to it than some others,
and computers can make computationally intensive voting systems like range voting practical.
But given the turnout in our recent elections, perhaps it's worth pointing out the obvious
that no voting system works if we don't vote at all.
