Game theory is the study of interactive strategic decision making.
We've seen that's a broad and rich field for study, and in each of these lectures,
I've focused on a particular aspect of game theory, a particular kind of problem.
To a game theorist, this is the natural order of inquiry.
Study the underlying model.
Once you understand it, apply it as appropriate.
The applications of a single model are often spread over a wide range of disciplines.
But in my remaining lectures, I'm going to reverse this approach.
I'm going to look at one area of application, business,
and see how the concepts of game theory can be applied to address its problems.
It's a natural enough idea.
Think about how a business interacts with other businesses and individuals.
Business is conducted according to a set of rules.
The success of a business depends very much on the decisions made by those with whom that business interacts.
And those others, the other players, are pursuing their own goals, of course.
So running a business is playing a very big, very complicated game.
In many cases, the size and complexity of this game
has been an obstacle to the use of game theory in business.
True, our study has provided us with rules of thumb with parables.
And these apply to any game situation, including those ones of business.
For sequential games, to look forward, you must reason backward.
Threats are effective only if you find a way to make them credible, and so on.
But what's really missing is an integrated step-by-step approach
that will allow us to analyze the game that a businessman is playing.
This gap is what prompted Adam Brandenberger and Barry Nalbuff to write their book, Co-Opetition.
It was at the time of its writing, Brandenberger was a professor at the Harvard Business School.
He now holds the position of J.P. Vallis Professor of Business Economics and Strategy
at the Stern School of Business in New York.
Brandenberger has brought his work to organizations such as IBM, Fidelity Investments,
Merking Company, and Xerox.
Nalbuff is the Milton Steinbach Professor at the Yale School of Management.
He's consulted for companies such as Eli Lilly, Johnson & Johnson, and General Electric.
Both, not surprisingly, have strong backgrounds in economics, game theory, and mathematics.
As I said, Co-Opetition tries to bridge the gap between game theory and business practice.
Game theorists often have little experience with the ins and outs of day-to-day business decision making,
and business people are often ignorant of the ideas of game theory.
In fact, the name of the Brandenberger and Nalbuff's book challenges the traditional view of business as war.
Without using game theoretic terms, they're simply saying that the game of business is non-zero sum.
Business entities work together to create value, then divide that added value among themselves.
Creating the pie is cooperation. Diving it up is competition.
Business is a constant mix of cooperation and competition. It's Co-Opetition.
I think Brandenberger and Nalbuff's ideas are valuable and interesting,
and virtually everything I'm going to say in this lecture, and part of the next,
is going to be coming from their book.
If you find this discussion interesting, I'd encourage you to read Co-Opetition.
It's eminently readable and full of good ideas.
It's also loaded with some very interesting real-life examples, some of which I'm going to be discussing here today.
A game, as we've described it, has three primary parts, players, strategies, and payoffs.
In Co-Opetition, Brandenberger and Nalbuff adopt a different decomposition, better suited for business.
Their system can be remembered by the acronym PARTS, P-A-R-T-S.
The letters stand for players, added values, rules, tactics, and scope.
We'll be discussing each of these components in detail over the next two lectures,
but let me give you an overview right now of where we're going.
Then we'll return to each, giving a more careful consideration of each topic as it deserves.
P is for players.
Who are the other parties involved in your business?
Brandenberger and Nalbuff identify four important roles that these other players occupy,
customers, suppliers, competitors, and complementers.
In a few minutes, I'm going to discuss these roles and show you a handy diagram for thinking about them, the value net.
A is for added value.
This idea is closely linked with the calculations that we did in our last lecture,
computing the shapely values in our discussions of cooperative games.
Determine the size of the pie when you're in the game.
Compare it to the size of the pie when you're not.
The amount by which you increase the size of the pie is your added value.
In business, it's very difficult to get a larger piece of the pie than your added value,
so finding ways to increase your added value or reduce the added values of other players is crucial.
We'll be looking at these soon.
R is for rules.
And we've already talked about changing the rules of the game by using strategic moves,
threats, promises, commitments.
All games have some rules that can't be changed,
but it's quite common in the world of business to have little extra rules.
Rules, for example, that usually appear in contracts as details.
These small, seemingly trivial conditions can greatly increase your bargaining power
when it comes to dealing with other players, in particular with your competitors.
T is for tactics.
And by this, Brandenburger and Nailbuff really mean perceptions or beliefs.
We've looked at a number of these ideas already in signaling, screening, credibility, and bluffing.
To these topics, the authors of Co-Opetition add the use of fog.
This refers to those things which a player suspects to be true,
but doesn't know to be true with certainty.
We'll look at how the presence of fog can help or hurt you in a business deal.
That brings us to S, which is for scope.
In a sense, this last topic is more of a warning and a reminder than a new idea.
The games that we play in business are not really isolated from one another.
It's all one big game.
In particular, two games that we think of as being different are linked
if one of the players thinks that they're linked.
If one player insists that the price for this year's product is tied to the price for next year's product,
then it is.
At least it is until you can convince that player otherwise.
Each part of the parts decomposition provides a lever for changing the game in a way that benefits you.
And the parts approach provides you with an opportunity to analyze these possibilities
in a way that's orderly and complete, not haphazard or hit or miss.
Alright, with that general structure in mind, let's take a look at each of the parts in greater detail.
First, players.
Brandenberger and Nailbuff like to represent the players and their relationships in a diagram,
which they call the value net.
The co-operative approach is going to have us considering in turn
each of these players and their relationships among them.
Here in general form is the value net.
You're at the center, and you can see the other players in your game is occupying four roles.
Customers, competitors, complimenters, and suppliers.
For a particular business, you'd want to replace these general terms in the value net with your specific groups or businesses.
I work at a state university, for example, so our customers include the students, the state, and the alumni.
Along the vertical dimension are customers and suppliers.
Customers give you money in return for your product, your goods or services.
Suppliers give you their product, their goods or services, in return for money.
Suppliers include your employees, by the way.
You give them money, and they give you labor.
The horizontal dimension shows competitors and complimenters.
Brandenberger and Nailbuff define them this way.
A player is your competitor if customers value your product less when they have the other player's product than when they have yours alone.
A player is your complimenter if customers value your product more when they have the other player's product than when they have yours alone.
These definitions provide some useful perspectives.
For example, traditionally, businesses think of their competitors as being in their own business or industry.
This isn't necessarily the case.
Think about video conferencing services and commercial airlines.
The more inexpensive and effective video conferencing becomes, the less necessary business flights will be, and vice versa.
These businesses are traditionally categorized under two different industries, telecommunications and transportation, but they're competitors.
Everyone in business knows about their competition, but the idea of a complimenter is one that receives much less attention.
In fact, Brandenberger and Nailbuff had to coin the term complimenter as they could find no appropriate substitute for it.
Milk is more attractive when cookies are available, and vice versa.
Thus, cookie making and providing milk are complementary businesses.
So are cars and auto insurance, parking lots and shopping districts, or as a nice example given by Brandenberger and Nailbuff, red wine and dry cleaning.
We've defined competitors and complimenters by looking at your relationship with your customers, but they can also arise on the supply side.
If supplying another player makes it less attractive for a supplier to supply you, that player is a competitor.
If supplying another player makes it more attractive for a supplier to supply you, that player is your complimenter.
Brandenberger and Nailbuff point out that in the information economy, supply side complementarities will become increasingly common.
A computer operating system or a computer chip or a new drug is extremely expensive to develop, but once it has been developed, the variable cost of production is tiny.
The more customers a supplier has, the more readily and cheaply each of those customers can get what they need.
If we're going to both hire the same job applicant, we're competitors for that resource.
But if we're both trying to get rail access to the town that we share, then we're complimenters.
The profits promised by our combined business make the rail company more likely to supply each of us because the other one is there.
This example brings up an important point.
When you consider your business relations, don't make the mistake of trying to pigeonhole each into only one of these categories.
An individual or business may occupy multiple positions in your value net.
Maybe, for example, both a competitor and a complimenter.
Movie studios were concerned when video stores opened in the 1980s.
They feared that people would stop coming to the theater to see first-run movies.
To some extent, this concern was justified, and to that extent, video stores and movie companies are competitors.
But video stores also increased their revenues for movie companies dramatically.
Successful theatrical releases generated additional money on video.
They were bought or rented by people who missed the movie the first time or wanted to see it again.
Less successful movies with limited or no releases could still be sold as videos,
and videos also provided free advertising for upcoming movies for the studio.
Today, video sales and rentals generate more money than theatrical releases,
and both markets have grown.
Movie studios and video stores are competitors, but they're also complimenters.
Many businesses can benefit by overlooked complimentary opportunities with other players, even with competitors.
Want an example?
Look at the early days of the auto industry.
What's a terrific compliment for cars?
Good roads.
But at the beginning of the 20th century, there weren't many.
So in 1913, many of the companies associated with automobile manufacture,
General Motors, Hudson, Packard, Goodyear, Tire and others,
got together to build the Lincoln Highway Association.
They built seedling miles along a proposed trans-cant under route called the Lincoln Highway.
Essentially, they laid the foundation for a common complimentary business, interstate highway construction.
It didn't take long for Americans to see the feasibility and the value of such highways.
Congress committed the first dollars to building paved roads in 1916.
By 1922, the country had five trans-continental highways.
Competitors cooperated to kickstart a common compliment.
The value net reveals important symmetric relations in business practices.
On the vertical dimension, suppliers and customers are equal partners in creating value.
Customers and suppliers occupy symmetric positions in the value net.
Brandenberger and Nailbuff point out that it's a mistake to adopt the perspective that the customer is always right.
It's no bargain to generate value for your customer, say by a rushed delivery,
if doing so destroys more than that value in your relationships with your employees,
say by working them through a weekend without sufficient compensation.
They also point out the value of listening to your suppliers as you would listen to your customers.
It may bring to light a new arrangement that's superior, both for you and the supplier, to your old one.
Keep the customer's supplier symmetry in mind.
Brandenberger and Nailbuff point out that virtually every technique for dealing with a customer has its analog in dealing with suppliers.
On the other hand, complimenters and competitors occupy mirror image positions.
Their definitions are identical except that compliments make you more attractive to customers and suppliers,
while competitors make you less attractive to customers and suppliers.
Brandenberger and Nailbuff suggest that complimenters are the most commonly overlooked business opportunity.
You want to put yourself in your customers shoes.
What is it that would make them want your product more?
That's a potential compliment.
Suppliers, customers and complimenters can all help you create value.
In fact, in some cases, even competitors can help you create value.
For example, a potential customer may be unwilling to adopt your new technology unless they know that another supplier exists.
They don't want you to have them over a barrel.
This was the case with IBM and the Intel 8086 chips in the early days of microcomputers.
Well, we've drawn the value net sensibly enough with your business at the center.
It's important to realize, though, that the other players in the game each have their own value nets.
Brandenberger and Nailbuff encourage you to look at those nets as well and to draw them out as best you can.
Explicitly considering your customer's relationship with their customers, for example,
may show you a way to create additional value in that relationship with your customer.
Okay, we've looked at players, those who join you in the value net to create value.
That brings us to the second part of the parts formula.
A is for added value.
As I said, your added value is fairly straightforward to assess, at least in principle.
Look at the total value of the, that's created by all the players with you in the game, the total pie, if you like.
And compare this to the size of the total pie when you're not in the game.
The amount by which your presence increases the size of the pie is your added value.
To get this idea across, Brandenberger and Nailbuff give an example that's classic for game theory.
A little game that they've played with their MBA students at Harvard and Yale.
They've also played it with managers, executives, labor negotiators, and lawyers, but I'll stick to the classroom description.
The reactions are pretty much the same across all groups.
Here's the game.
Brandenberger takes a deck of 52 playing cards, keeps the 26 black ones, and hands out the 26 red ones to 26 of his MBA students.
Supposedly the Dean of Harvard is willing to pay $100 to anyone who turns in a pair of cards, one black and one red, from this deck.
The only stipulation is that the bargaining by the students has to be done on an individual basis, not as a group.
The common first reaction when presented with this game is that Brandenberger has almost all of the bargaining power.
After all, without him, there's no deal. He's got all 26 blacks.
But look at the situation from the point of view of added value.
Together, the players can create 26 matches worth $2,600.
Without you and your red card, they can create only 25 matches worth $2,500.
Your added value then is $100.
By the same light, the added value of every other person with their red card is $100.
Brandenberger, who has all 26 black cards, also has $2,600 of added value all by himself.
The totals of all of the individual added values then is $5,200.
$100 for each student and $2,600 for Brandenberger.
The total pie to be divided is $2,600.
A reasonable expectation would be that each player gets a payment equal to half of his or her added value.
That would mean that when you and Brandenberger pair up, you get $50 for your red card and he gets $50 for his black.
Why is it reasonable?
Well, imagine that Brandenberger made you an earlier inferior offer and that you rejected it.
He goes around and makes deals with all of the other students, and at the end of the game, he comes back to you with one black card.
You have your one red one.
You two are now in a symmetric position. He needs you just as much as you need him.
We've seen in our discussion of the Nash cooperative solution that any division of the $100 between you is a Nash equilibrium,
but an even split corresponds to the Nash cooperative solution.
So the idea that Brandenberger has all of the power in this situation is wrong.
We'd expect essentially a 50-50 split between the teacher and the students in dividing the $100 for a red-black pair.
Brandenberger at the end ends up with half of $2,600 or $1,300. Still not bad.
But here's where things get interesting.
Nalbuff plays the same game with a different group, with one other difference.
He's gotten rid of three of his black cards.
The 26 students each get a red card, but now he has only 23 black cards.
A pair of cards, black and red, is still worth $100.
Your first thought might be that Nalbuff can't expect to do as well as Brandenberger did,
but let's look at the situation from the point of view of added value.
In this new game, with you and your red card, the players can create 23 pairs of cards worth $2,300.
But without you, they can still create 23 pairs worth $2,300.
Your added value? Zero.
And that goes for every other student in the class, too.
Nalbuff's added value is the entire pot of $2,300.
From the perspective of added value, the students can expect only a small fraction of the pie.
If Nalbuff offers you $20 and you refuse, the odds are good that somebody else will be willing to take it,
especially toward the end of the game.
Imagine that Nalbuff has only one black card left and that there are four students with whom he can bargain.
If an 80-20 split is typical, Nalbuff ends up with 80% of $2,300, or over $1,800.
Losing those three black cards actually increased his winnings by $500,
and classroom experiments have borne this out.
In real life, Brandenberger and Nalbuff point out that this was just the kind of game played by Nintendo
in the video game giant in 1988 and 89.
The shortage in game cartridges in that year resulted in Nintendo making a huge amount of money.
In fact, Nintendo makes a great case study in general.
In 1990 and 91, Nintendo held a higher market value than either Nissan or Sony.
When you think that Nintendo's first home video game system came out only seven years earlier
and then think about the relative importance of cars and televisions and video games,
the idea that Nintendo could come anywhere close to the market value of Nissan or Sony seems incredible.
How did they do it?
Well, they created a good-sized pie with other players,
but they structured things in a way where they had almost all of the added value.
Before discussing this more deeply, it might be worthwhile to remind you how the home video game world looked before Nintendo.
In the early 1970s, Atari Corporation created a table tennis video game called Pong.
Over the next 10 years, the home video market went from nothing to $3 billion a year in retail sales for games and systems.
The market was flooded with games for the Atari console, and many of them were regrettably of pretty low quality.
By the mid-1980s, annual sales were down to under $100 million, and the video game market was seen as many as simply a passing fad.
So, how was the Nintendo's story different?
Well, they had a good product, a game system and software that could bring the arcade experience into the home, but that was only the beginning.
To keep costs low, they used a commodity-marked microchip in their consoles.
The console was priced at about $100, which many people believed was actually below cost.
Compare this to the cost of a personal computer at that time, which was about $2,500 or more.
Nintendo had a collection of arcade hit titles such as Donkey Kong and Super Mario Bros.
and programmers who could get the most out of their console.
Sales took off, and Nintendo was in the home game business.
But here Nintendo things did things differently than Atari.
Fearing a glut of low-quality games, they installed a security microchip into their console.
Only Nintendo-approved games would run on the system, so Nintendo had complete control of the software development.
And the licenses that it did grant to software developers had some surprising conditions.
For example, no software house could develop more than five titles a year.
This forced emphasis on quality over quantity and kept the market from becoming saturated.
It also prevented any one software developer from becoming too important to Nintendo's success.
Then, Nintendo manufactured all of the games for the system itself, charging the licensees a big markup on every cartridge.
Finally, an exclusivity clause presented the software-prevented any software company
from porting the same title to another video game system for two years.
In the world of video games, a title that is two years old is positively ancient.
Nintendo, as Brandon Berger and Nailbuff point out, had created a virtuous circle,
one in which they had almost all of the added value.
Consider, suppliers had little added value.
The console required microchips, for example, but since the chip was a commodity chip from the 1970s,
they could obtain them from RICO, SHARP, and others.
Originally, the creators of some characters used in games, such as Mickey Mouse from Disney or Marvel's Spider-Man,
might have exercised some leverage, but Nintendo hit the jackpot with their Mario the Plumber character.
Mario became more popular than Mickey Mouse, and Nintendo actually made money from licensing game characters
for toys, games, and cereal boxes.
So much for suppliers.
How about competitors?
From a practical standpoint, competitors hardly existed.
For those who play video games, there really aren't a lot of non-video game substitutes.
Nintendo's volume of sales had allowed it to move down the cost curve of production.
It had a large collection of great games, more than half of which were often off of the shelf at any given time.
How could another system compete?
They couldn't use Nintendo games on their platform because of that two-year rule that Nintendo had with its software developers.
No, the only chance a new system had was to leapfrog Nintendo, coming out with the next generation system.
Eventually, that's what happened with Sega, but that was years away.
Until then, forget about competition.
OK, how about complimenters?
The Nintendo console was hot, but any one software developer created only a small part of Nintendo's games library,
given that five titles a year rule and the security chip.
Nintendo also developed games in-house, which further limited the value from the other software companies.
Well, that leaves customers.
For Nintendo, these were retailers, and some of them, such as the Megastor's Walmart or Toys R Us,
usually pack a considerable clout.
Nintendo limited their added value by limiting supply, much as Nailbuff did with the card game with three black cards missing.
People wanted more Nintendo games than were available, and the limited supply meant that some retailers weren't going to get them.
The bargaining power was all with Nintendo.
Creating a shortage in a market can be a dangerous game, but as we've seen, Nintendo made it very hard for effective competition to be mounted.
And the limited supply had another effect as well.
The news of Nintendo Mania swept the country and appeared on news broadcasts, especially around Christmas.
It was free advertising for a company that's notoriously stingy when it comes to spending money on ads.
It also created a cachet for the rare games and actually increased the demand for the product.
It appears that Nintendo is following a similar strategy with its Wii video game systems.
So, that's how Nintendo ended up with a market value higher than Nissan and Sony.
Pi for cars and televisions is much bigger than that for video games.
But Nintendo arranged things so that it got to keep almost all of its Pi to itself.
If you can't get a Nissan, you can still get a car.
The added value of a car is much greater than the added value of a Nissan.
But for a while, if you wanted a video game system, you wanted a Nintendo. Period.
Okay, we've discussed P and A, players and added values.
Let's combine them to talk about the one player that we haven't discussed very much. You.
Brandon Berger and Nell Buff point out that the very fact that you enter a game changes it.
An obvious fact that sometimes overlooked.
But it brings up an interesting point concerning the decisions about whether you're going to bid on a job or not.
You see, it might be that your product has little extra value in the marketplace, but does your competition does.
As an excellent example, they discussed the case of the Holland Sweetener company and the market for Aspartame,
better known by the brand name Nutrisuite.
Nutrisuite is an important sweetening agent in diet soft drinks, and they had no really satisfactory substitutes.
Monsanto owned the original patent for Aspartame, as well as the Nutrisuite brand name,
but those patents were about to expire in 1987 in Europe and 1992 for the U.S.
Holland Sweetener decided to enter the market and to challenge Monsanto's monopoly as the patents expired,
making Aspartame's complicated, so it didn't expect a lot of other competition in the market.
The battle began in 1987 in Europe, and Monsanto fought back by lowering prices.
Aspartame prices fell from $70 a pound to less than $30.
Holland Sweetener was losing money and appealed to the European courts, which imposed anti-dumping duties on Monsanto.
Holland Sweetener weathered the storm in Europe and prepared for the war in the U.S., the big market.
But it never got a chance.
Just before the patent expiration in the U.S., both Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola signed new long-term contracts with Monsanto.
Holland Sweetener was dead in the water.
What happened?
Well, neither Pepsi nor Coke really wanted to change suppliers.
The Nutrisuite brand identity was firmly established, and 98% of American diet soda drinkers recognized the Nutrisuite swirl on their diet sodas.
Remembering the new Coke fiasco of 1985, the companies didn't want customers to think that they were fiddling with the recipe.
What Holland Sweetener really had to offer wasn't Aspartame.
It was competition.
With Holland Sweetener in the picture, Coke and Pepsi got deals from Monsanto that gave them a combined savings of $200 million a year.
Great for Coke and Pepsi.
Not so good for Monsanto and Holland Sweetener.
Brandenburger and Nailbuff make this point that companies often give away something of considerable value to customers, their competition.
They suggest that in such cases, companies ought to be paid to play.
In fact, something of this kind did happen in the Holland Sweetener case.
Both Coke and Pepsi realized they'd be at a disadvantage if Holland Sweetener left the market entirely.
In return for a guaranteed contract, Holland did stay in the market and even somewhat expanded its capacity.
While such cash payments might be ridiculous in your business, Brandenburger and Nailbuff list seven ways to get paid to play besides cash.
You can ask for contributions to preparing your bid, or a guaranteed sales contract, or a last look provision.
You can ask for a better access to information about the potential customer, or to bid on other parts of their business too.
You can ask to meet with other people on the company who would appreciate what you have to offer.
You can even ask them to quote a price at which you'd get their business.
It's doubtful that all of these are appropriate for your business, but some of them are likely to be.
Well, so far we've discussed players and added value.
In my next and final lecture, we'll complete this discussion of parts and then conclude the course with some reflections about this tour that we've taken together through the world of game theory.
Thank you.
