Getting the roof trusses into a building is a satisfying milestone.
You are really making progress.
You can see the shape of the finished building,
but if it goes wrong, it goes very wrong.
The erection trusses can be hazardous,
and any collapse can be expensive to fix,
and it takes time and money to put right.
And most of all, people can be injured.
There's been some guys go off overhangs,
and another guy who went through some trusses
who leaned on a truss that wasn't nailed off properly
and went down through and landed on the ground,
and he ended up fairly badly injured.
Until recently, there has been no specific
practical guide available to assist you erection trusses safely.
Now there is.
This industry safety standard provides practical assistance
for principal contractors,
the people who erection trusses,
suppliers of trusses, crane operators,
owner builders, and other building contractors.
It is a guide that has been developed by builders
and roofers and manufacturers,
and is based on the best advice possible.
Coming up with a framework,
or a set of guidelines for frame and carbonists to work with him,
and a practical framework,
so we actually have a greater chance
of actually trying to achieve compliance.
It's a balance between what the regulators would want
for precise, absolutely safe,
no one could possibly get injured,
and the practicalities of installing trusses in a fashion
that won't cost the earth.
So you've got to work that balance in between speed and safety,
and I think the code forms a reasonably happy medium
between the two, if you like.
The Occupational Health and Safety legislation
requires us to control risks to health and safety.
The safety standard is all about managing risks
when we erect trusses.
If we follow this industry safety standard,
we can comply with the law.
The basic aim of this video, based on this standard,
is to show you how to erect trusses safely, every time.
The idea is to identify the risks
and manage them so that everyone is safe all the time,
and so everyone goes home every day.
Simple to say, but hard to do.
Looking at a safer way of working at heights is really important
because the more we look at that,
the more we find better ways of doing things.
Hence, we can reduce the number of injuries and fatalities,
and at the end of the day,
like you see, every worker is able to go home to their family.
If we really want to make sure we safely erect trusses,
we have to go back in time.
Like most important issues in construction,
success ultimately comes down to planning.
A critical part of planning is communication.
You have to consult properly to construct properly.
The principal contractor should consult with you,
the people erecting the trusses,
to ensure that work is planned and scheduled
to minimise disruptions and situations that could affect safety.
I've been building for 34 years,
in that 34 years I've never had a fall from a roof.
Because I plan things before I go,
I make sure I can't fall,
and I make sure that there is nothing underneath me if I do fall.
An unstable area is a dangerous area.
You should discuss the loading and unloading sequence
of the trusses at the factory and on site.
This can have a big impact on reducing manual handling risks.
Our safety standard, like with a lot of current legislation,
puts a lot of focus on planning.
Planning the activity from a get-go.
You should discuss the size and type of crane required
to lift the trusses.
And you should discuss the access and safe positioning
of the crane and whether you need a doger.
Discuss the perimeter scaffolding you need on site.
Discuss the weather.
Will it change the site conditions?
Discuss the manual handling risks.
Are there unusual, heavy or awkward frames or trusses?
Is there difficult access?
There is risk on all building sites.
So you've got to minimise the risk.
So you get on site, show what the risks are,
point them out to your workers so they know where the hazards are,
where the risks are, so you're minimising your effect.
If you go on site and the fellas don't know
there's hazards or risks there,
they'll go in that area.
One of the best ways to work safe
is to make sure everyone has had the right training.
So before starting work, everyone erecting trusses
must have done basic training.
Everyone must have completed OHS
general induction for construction work.
You have to have completed a work activity induction
and you have to complete a site-specific induction.
And you have to consult with the people erecting the trusses
in preparing the safe work method statement.
The place where you are going to work needs to be assessed.
Every site is different, so every site assessment will be different.
Different hazards and different solutions.
The safety standard recommends you assess each work site.
The principal contractor and the people erecting trusses
must undertake a site risk assessment
prior to commencing work.
And all significant hazards must be identified, assessed and controlled.
Site hazards include such things as high work areas,
heavy or difficult loads,
electric power, sun, heat, rain, slippery surfaces, power tools and so on.
You search the site for the hazards
and there are usually quite a few.
The next step is to work out which of the hazards
pose the greatest risk.
One of the biggest hazards in erecting roof trusses
is that you have to work at heights.
It may only be a few metres, but a fall from that height can kill you.
That is a hazard.
And because you are erecting heavy trusses on top of the walls a lot of the time,
the risk is high.
Now you have to work out what you are going to do
to reduce the risk of those hazards being a problem.
You can reduce the risk by reducing the number of people
who work at heights.
That is risk management.
Identify on the hazard,
assessing the risk and controlling the hazard.
We have to make sure all our plant and equipment
is working properly and is used safely.
We have to examine our electrical plant,
ladders and ramps, power tools including
pneumatic tools, cranes,
scaffolding and roof edge protection.
Preparation.
You have checked that everyone has training
and you have identified the hazards on each work site
and worked out how to assess and control the hazards.
And thirdly, you have made sure that the plant and equipment
is working properly and is used safely.
All this before we live to trust.
Good planning is a powerful tool for safety.
It only takes one mistake and you have a catastrophe.
You can use several safe methods to erect roof trusses.
If the size, weight and positioning of the roof trusses
pose a risk to health and safety,
then a crane with a certificated operator must be used.
The first method is to use a crane
if the erection height is too great
or trusses too large for manual handling.
The trusses must be craned into position,
laid flat and suitably supported prior to erection.
Where trusses cannot be self-supporting,
use temporary props or internal walls for support.
You must ensure that all wall frames
are sufficiently braced to withstand loads during construction.
You can lift the trusses by hand if they are lighter
or the lift is lower.
Separate the smaller trusses for single-storey roofs from the pack.
Lift them individually into position along the top plates.
If the truss needs to be repositioned,
you should do this from below to avoid working at heights.
The trusses are in position.
Now comes the crucial phase of erecting them,
and these are the recommended methods of erecting trusses.
The critical stage is erecting the first two trusses.
Think it through first.
Erect the first truss at the location specified by the roof manufacturer.
Now you can erect, fix and brace the first and second truss in several ways.
One method is to use a crane to lift and position trusses.
Set up an appropriate working platform,
no greater than two metres from the floor at each end,
where the truss is to be fixed to the top plate,
or use a ladder.
If a perimeter scaffold system is installed,
work from the outside.
Fix temporary braces to solid fixing points,
ready for connection to the truss.
The braces can be timber,
of adequate size and length, fixed by nails.
Guide the first truss into position while supported by the crane.
Use a minimum of two people, one at each end,
to fix the truss to top plates and to the temporary braces.
At this point, the first truss should be in a stable condition.
Erect the second truss using the same procedure,
temporarily brace the second truss to the first truss.
Another method is to lift the trusses into position manually.
Set up an appropriate working platform,
no greater than two metres from the floor level,
at each end, where the truss is to be fixed to the top plate,
or use a ladder.
If a perimeter scaffold system is installed,
this work can be done from the outside.
Now, fix temporary braces to solid fixing points,
ready for connection to the truss.
The braces can be timber, of adequate size and length, fixed by nails.
Fix skid blocks to the top plate, at first truss position,
to prevent the truss from slipping during standing.
Use a minimum of two people, one at each end,
to stand the first truss.
A third person may be required at mid-span
to assist in stabilising a long-span truss.
Additional roof trusses are not to be erected
unless the prescribed fixing, racing,
and any additional support requirements
have been undertaken for the first and second truss.
Each subsequent roof truss is placed,
with each end of the truss controlled by a person
on the working platform or ladder.
A third person at the apex may be required to assist.
Each subsequent roof truss is fixed
and braced according to the manufacturer's specifications,
using safe methods for working at heights.
Temporary ties or bracing for roof truss erection
should be fixed according to Australian standard AS4440,
installation of nail-plated timber roof trusses.
This standard requires that temporary ties be used
on the top cords at spacings no greater than 3 metres
and at spacings no greater than 4 metres on the bottom cord.
If the person erecting trusses is to be supported
by the bottom cords of the roof trusses,
the ties or bracing must be no more than 3 metres apart.
All bracing and fixing should take into consideration
or impose loads during the course of construction.
As such, flat strapping, or an equivalent,
or trimmers nailed to the face of trusses,
where the nailing is from the outer face of the truss,
must not be used.
We should use safe work methods to erect
gable roof assembly and verge truss assembly.
Diminishing truss, verge truss, verge trimmers,
gable studs, or droppers.
Where practical, elements of the roof structure
should be pre-assembled on the ground as a complete unit
and lifted onto the supporting structure.
Go to boots, hangers, and the like should be installed
to the manufacturer's specifications
prior to working in the truss space.
MUSIC
MUSIC
There are many serious hazards working at heights.
This is probably the most important message of the safety standard.
To erect trusses, you have to work at heights.
The main thrust of the safety standard is to allow erectors
to walk the trusses under controlled conditions.
When trusses are erected at up to 600 millimetre centres,
you can, under controlled conditions,
use the bottom cords of erected and braced trusses
as access and fore protection.
At no time is any person to stand on
or work from an external wall top plate
without suitable fore protection.
You can use trusses, but a no-go zone applies.
No one can work in the area of the erected framing
where the height from the top of the bottom cord
to the top of the top cord is less than 900 mills.
No one can work within 1.2 metres of the outside wall top plate.
If you're any closer than 1200,
when you fall, you pass your waist
and you'll end up going straight over the roof.
So always work 1200 back off the plate,
which is a zone where if you fall,
everyone's from feet to waist is about 1200.
So you will not go straight over.
It is a catch zone where you grab hold of the plate
or land on the plate and save yourself.
Staying in a position where you can't fall out of the building
or can't fall through into the building
is the key of the no-go zone.
To manage the risk of falls,
you have to follow the following conditions.
Have the trusses braced at a maximum of 3 metres.
You have to be a competent person,
fully trained to walk the trusses.
You have to have suitable footwear
that provides a good foothold.
You need to be supervised by a competent person
in the erection team.
The bottom cord has to be checked for defects.
Erecting trusses is different from a lot of other work
in construction,
but the risk of falling is ever-present
and has to be managed.
This way of using the trusses for fall protection
is practical, but you have to follow the guidelines
to make it safe.
Some trusses are tall and you have to work near the top.
If the apex or other high bracing points
cannot be reached,
use whaling plates to reach the apex or high points.
Fix whaling plates for standing
or supporting temporary work platforms
at the appropriate height.
The whaling plate should be fixed to the face of the truss
according to the manufacturer's recommendations
to ensure the load is transferred to the bottom cord.
The whaling plate should be timber
of 70 by 35mm F5
or equivalent
to a maximum of 1500mm long.
Fixed at each end by a minimum of 265mm
by 3.15mm nails.
If we are using ladders for access,
they should have non-slip feet
and be secured against displacement.
There should be a safe landing place
when stepping off the ladder,
and the top of the ladder should extend
1 metre above the landing place.
You can use timber railings
installed at the point of manufacture.
You can install temporary studs.
Temporary timber handrails should be checked
for their quality and their effectiveness
to prevent falls.
We can use scaffolding
as good edge protection on low pitched roofs,
providing the guard rails of the scaffolding
extend at least 900mm above the roof.
Or scaffolding over 4 metres
needs to be constructed by a qualified scaffolder
and comply with standards.
The first floor perimeter edge protection
must not be removed until all openings
and penetrations are otherwise protected.
Temporary timber handrails should be checked
for their quality and their effectiveness
to prevent falls.
Where a void exists,
no one is to work on the first floor or above
unless a void protection system is installed.
If you want to be safe all the time,
everyone has to be trained and qualified
and consulted.
You're going to rely on each other.
Others rely on you.
You have to know what you're doing.
So, you all need training and qualifications.
Manual handling heavy loads around building sites
can affect our working lives.
And it shouldn't.
You should be able to do our work and stay safe.
So, what should we do about eliminating
or reducing the hazards of manual handling?
Like everything else, if we want to work safe,
we have to think and we have to plan.
The best thing we can do is to avoid manual handling entirely.
Take an example.
We have to erect frames.
Think about mechanization and using handling aids.
For example, we could use a crane.
It may seem obvious,
but that is the best way to eliminate
the risk of manual handling injuries.
Use machines.
You can use a checklist to assess
the risk of manual handling injury.
We might find the risk of manual handling injury
is greater if any of these issues are present.
The tasks, do they involve
holding loads away from the body,
twisting, stooping or reaching upwards,
large vertical movement,
long carrying distances,
generous pushing or pulling,
repetitive handling,
insufficient rest or recovery time,
a work rate imposed by a process.
We might have assessed
that there is a risk of manual handling injury.
So, what can we do to control the risk?
How can you make the work safer and easier?
You can make the load lighter or less bulky,
easier to grasp, more stable,
less damaging to hold.
We are all at risk of manual handling injuries.
And they can be disabling,
painful and just plain inconvenient.
But we can take control
by working smart and planning
and good investment.
We can eliminate manual handling injuries.
Employers have to provide
personal protective equipment
so that they can be used
Employers have to provide personal protective equipment
and workers have to use the equipment.
That includes you if you're self-employed.
The PPE requirements for working on site
are pretty generic.
Sunshine exposure to the elements,
that sort of stuff is standard
and working with power tools, electricity,
things that cut timber or nails into them.
Again, you have to use the PPE required.
There are four areas of personal protective equipment
to consider using it.
You may use safety harnesses,
you need appropriate footwear
such as rubber sold shoes
with non-slip tread
with or without steel caps.
You should use eye protection
and you can consider using hearing protection.
One of the long-term hazards
is exposure to the sun.
You should protect yourself every time you work outside.
This means sunscreen, hats
and covers for your legs and arms.
Clothing should be comfortable
and not snag.
Or personal protective equipment
should be regularly inspected
and replaced where necessary.
In certain situations
the spacing of the trust may exceed
600mm centres
in which case other fore protection must be provided.
You can use fore protection including
mobile scaffolding systems
compliant with Australian standard
AS1576 scaffolding Part 1
general requirements
and Part 3
prefabricated and tube and coupler scaffolding
and Australian standard
AS4576
guidelines for scaffolding.
You can use mesh or netting
or fencing and handrails
with adjacent trusses
installed to the manufacturer's specifications.
You can use elevating platforms
including motorised single person lift platforms
compliant with Australian standard
AS14183.10
The people who wrote the safety standard
have provided a useful checklist.
If you ask yourself these questions
honestly and take the appropriate action
you will be managing safety on your job.
A lot of questions were raised about
the time that would take
to do a lot of these things in a certain fashion.
It seems that working with industry
has helped in this manner
allowing to provide practical guidance
that is actually realistic
in safe election trustee.
This way it uniforms the whole of Australia
and everyone knows the standard practice.
The essence of using the code right
means that the individual can do their job
within a good time frame,
make the money they need to make
and still come home at the end of the day.
Getting the roof trusses into a building
is a satisfied milestone.
The critical thing is to do it safely
and efficiently.
If you are organised you'll save money
and time and possibly a life.
And that is worth all the thinking
and all the effort.
