Welcome to the sixth lecture in our course on quantum mechanics.
In the last few lectures, we've explored the quantum idea of wave particle duality,
the idea that applies to both light and matter, the idea that everything has both wave and
particle properties.
You have light waves, but you also have photons.
You have electrons, which are particles, but the electrons also have wave properties.
And this idea has been quite successful at explaining things about the microscopic world,
everything from the photoelectric effect to atomic structure.
But it is, nevertheless, a very curious idea.
Particles and waves are very different.
Think of a particle.
Here's our baseball.
A baseball at each moment has an exact position in space and an exact velocity, or if you
prefer, an exact momentum.
So over time, the particle describes a definite trajectory through space, a definite exact
path.
At every point in time, it has an exact location.
And that path that it follows through space is determined by Newton's laws of motion.
It describes the shape of the path of the baseball.
But a wave is a very different sort of thing.
A wave spreads out.
And so our business today is to explore the implications of that fact, to say what it
means for the wave to spread out, and to say what it means for the quantum wave describing
a quantum particle to spread out in space.
Today we're going to talk about the uncertainty principle.
But first, we need to talk about the phenomenon of diffraction.
It's a wave phenomenon.
Every sort of wave exhibits diffraction.
So we imagine that a wave hits a barrier that has an opening in it.
Sounds like the two-slit experiment, except in this experiment we only have one opening,
one slit.
And we'll say that the width of that slit is w.
Now beyond this barrier, the waves that pass through the slit spread out into space, and
that spreading out after you pass through one slit is called diffraction.
It's called single-slit diffraction.
So how much spreading out happens?
Well, it depends on a particular ratio.
The ratio between the wavelength lambda and the width of the slit w, the wavelength lambda
over w will determine how spread out the waves become downstream of the slit.
If you have a narrow slit, then w is very small, and the ratio lambda over w is very
large.
And so the waves spread out in a wide pattern beyond the slit.
On the other hand, if you have a very wide slit so that the ratio lambda over w is very
small, the denominator is very large so that the ratio is very small, the waves do not
spread out very much at all.
You have a very narrow pattern of waves on the downstream side of the slit.
Okay, so how can we understand this?
Let's take an everyday example.
Imagine that you're standing next to a wall, and on the other side of the wall is a friend
of yours, and in the wall there's an open doorway.
But the open doorway is not exactly between you and the friend, the open doorway is off
to the sod.
And now let's suppose that the friend speaks aloud, the friend says something aloud.
What happens to the sound waves?
Well, sound waves, as we saw, are relatively long waves.
Their wavelength is maybe a meter in size, maybe a little less, maybe a little more,
something like a meter.
And so the ratio of that wavelength to the width of the door is pretty large, might even
be bigger than one.
So the ratio lambda divided by w is large, that tells us that the diffraction effect,
the spreading out of the sound waves after the doorway is very large, so the sound waves
spread out in a very wide pattern.
As a result, we can actually hear our friend's voice, even though the sound has to go around
the corner.
The sound doesn't go around the corner so much as the sound waves spread out after they
pass through the doorway.
So even though our friend's on the other side of the wall, we can still hear him.
On the other hand, what about light waves?
Well, light waves are a different sort of wave, they're electromagnetic waves instead
of pressure waves.
More to the point, light waves have a much shorter wavelength.
Their wavelength is a million times shorter than the wavelength of sound.
So the ratio of wavelength to the width of the doorway, lambda over w, that ratio is
exceedingly small.
And that means that the diffraction effect is exceedingly small.
That means that the light waves do not spread out appreciably as they pass through the
door.
The light waves don't go around the corner an appreciable amount, and that means that
even though we can hear our friend, we can't see our friend, because the light doesn't
go around the corner, because the doorway is wide and the light waves are very narrow.
Diffraction effects are completely negligible.
Okay, so you can understand diffraction if you understand why you can hear your friend,
but you can't see your friend around the corner.
But you could imagine making that door in the wall much, much, much narrower, thousands
or tens of thousands of times narrower.
And maybe you'd begin to see some diffraction even with the light waves.
And so in fact, what you're suggesting is to do the experiment of single slit diffraction,
which we've set up to do as a demonstration for you today.
And you may recognize this setup.
This is very similar to the setup we used for Young's two slit experiment back in lecture
two, when we found out that light travels as waves.
And once again, we're doing a wave experiment on light about its wave properties.
It's a little bit different, though, as you'll see.
We have a light source.
We're using our laser again.
Once again, the only thing that you need is a light source that has only one wavelength
of light produced, a very well-defined wavelength.
Laser is very convenient.
And we shine the laser at this little gizmo right here.
What is it?
It's a barrier, and there's a narrow vertical slit in the barrier, and this is the part I
like.
I have a knob here, and I can make the slit wider and narrower by turning my little knob.
And then I take whatever comes out of the slit, and I project it onto the screen so
we can both see it.
So let's look at the pattern produced by the slit.
The laser on.
I may have to adjust a little bit and turn the knobs and put on the glasses.
So what we see is a broad smear of light in the middle of the screen, and there are also
some dimmer spots on each side of that central smear of light.
Now the slit, I want to emphasize, the slit is vertical.
The smear smears out horizontally, so that's something to remember.
But also, I want to just focus our attention on the central spot.
The central spot is twice as wide as any of the others, and those spots on the side are
much, much dimmer.
In fact, the central spot is more than 20 times brighter than the ones on the side, so
I just want to talk about the center where most of the light is.
All right.
What I'm going to do is I'm going to vary the width of the slit.
And as I vary the width of the slit, we'll see what happens.
Let's try a wider slit.
Let's open up the slit a little wider.
And when we do that, the pattern gets narrower.
It also gets brighter because more light gets through, but the pattern gets narrower.
Everything shrinks toward the center, because when I make the slit wider, the ratio of the
wavelength to the width of the slit becomes smaller, and therefore there's less diffraction.
Now let's make the slit narrower.
As I make the slit narrower, the pattern gets wider.
It also gets dimmer, of course, because less light is getting through, but it gets wider.
It may be quite wide on the screen.
Why?
Because the amount of diffraction depends on that ratio, wavelength to the width of the
slit.
So if the width of the slit gets smaller in the denominator of that ratio, the size of
the ratio gets larger, there's more diffraction, stronger effect.
So there's a trade-off.
The trade-off is between the width of the slit and the width of the pattern.
The narrower the slit, the wider the pattern.
The wider the slit, the narrower the pattern.
Okay.
Now we did that experiment with light, but of course, we could do the same experiment
with electrons.
Diffraction is an effect that is true for every kind of wave.
So for electrons, we could imagine the de Broglie waves of the electron passing through the
barrier.
They undergo diffraction and spread out on the other side when the de Broglie waves reach
the screen.
What that means is that the electrons land on the screen, randomly, of course, because
the de Broglie waves are waves of probability.
The electrons land on the screen in an unpredictable way, but they land in a pattern that's wider
if the slit is narrower.
The pattern is narrower if the slit is wider.
The electrons, if you will, are sort of scattered to one side or the other as they pass through
the slit.
They're scattered more through a narrow slit than through a wider slit.
This is very strange behavior for a stream of particles.
It's so strange that, in fact, as we'll see, it has an amazing implication that wave diffraction,
together with the wave particle duality of quantum mechanics, sets a limit on how well
the particle properties are even defined in the quantum world.
So let's think about that even more carefully.
There's an electron passing through the slit.
Now, as it passes through the slit, we kind of know where the electron is, at least in
the side-to-side direction.
It has to actually be passing through the slit, and we know where the slit is.
We know its lateral position.
Let's label that lateral position x.
And so we know the value of x for the electron that passes through the slit.
We don't know it exactly, however, because the slit has a certain width, and we don't
know where the electron passes through the slit.
But it could be anywhere, but we know x to a certain uncertainty.
There's an uncertainty in the lateral position.
And the uncertainty is denoted by the capital Greek letter lambda.
That looks like a triangle, and so, not lambda, delta, capital Greek letter delta, which looks
like a triangle, delta x is the uncertainty in its lateral position.
And here, I would say that delta x is about equal to the width of the slit.
It could be anywhere in the slit.
Now, because of diffraction, the de Broglie wave spreads out beyond the slit, and when
it reaches the screen, the electron could land one place or another.
It could wind up right in the middle, or it could wind up a little bit to the left, or
it could wind up a little bit to the right, because the probability pattern is spread
out.
So in other words, after the slit, the electron could go to one side or the other.
After the slit, there's an uncertainty in the lateral velocity, the side-to-side velocity
of the electron.
The side-to-side velocity of the electron is zero on average, but it could be plus or
minus a little bit.
It turns out it's going to be a little bit easier to talk about not the lateral velocity
of the electron, but the lateral momentum of the electron.
The electron has zero lateral momentum, called P. It's P equals zero on average, but there's
an uncertainty, delta P, in the lateral momentum.
And a wide diffraction pattern means that delta P is pretty large.
It means that I can't tell exactly for sure whether the electron is going to be going
to the left or to the right.
And I have a great deal of uncertainty about that, so I don't know exactly where it's
going to wind up at the screen.
So a wide diffraction pattern means delta P is large.
A narrow diffraction pattern means the broy wave is confined to a very narrow region of
the screen, and that means delta P must be very small.
I know pretty well that the momentum is taking it from here right to that spot, not much uncertainty.
Now because narrow diffraction patterns correspond to wide slits and vice versa, and because
the width of the slit has to do with the uncertainty in lateral position and the width of the pattern
has to do with the uncertainty in lateral momentum, it turns out there's a trade-off.
A trade-off between uncertainties, delta X and delta P, uncertainties in the position
of the electron from side to side here, and the momentum from side to side of the electron
as it leaves the slit.
The smaller one of those uncertainties is, the larger the other must be.
That just follows from diffraction, and because everything has wave properties, according
to the principle of wave-particle duality, that means that everything exhibits diffraction,
and that means that this trade-off between uncertainty in position and uncertainty in
momentum is universal, and it applies to everything.
Okay, we've now arrived where Werner Heisenberg arrived in 1927.
Werner Heisenberg was a brilliant young German physicist, he was a protege of Niels Bohr
at his Institute for Theoretical Physics at the University of Copenhagen, and Heisenberg
realized that there is a basic trade-off in nature due to wave-particle duality in quantum
mechanics, and this basic trade-off is called the uncertainty principle.
So let's suppose that delta x and delta p are the uncertainties in a particle's position
and momentum, respectively.
The uncertainty principle tells us that delta x times delta p, the product of the uncertainties
in position and momentum, has to be greater than or equal to what, h.
There's Planck's constant again, Planck's constant appears in the uncertainty principle,
the product of the uncertainty of position and the uncertainty in momentum has to be
greater than or equal to Planck's constant.
This means that no particle can have a definite position and a definite momentum at the same
time.
It means that the more definitely we know where the particle is, delta x being smaller,
the less definitely we can know where it is going.
Delta p is larger.
So there are a couple of important points about this great principle of physics.
The first is that the relation is an inequality, not an equation.
In other words, we can always be more uncertain than the uncertainty principle tells us.
We just cannot be less uncertain.
Nothing prevents you from being as uncertain as you like, but the uncertainty principle
tells you that you cannot be more certain about both position and momentum than the
principle allows.
The second point is that our definitions of uncertainties, the delta x and the delta
p, are pretty vague and fuzzy.
You may have noticed that we didn't work really hard to define that exactly.
Maybe that's appropriate.
Maybe it's appropriate that our definition for uncertainty is a little bit uncertain.
But in fact, it is possible to define uncertainty in a more mathematical way, more exactly.
If you do that, then the right-hand side of the uncertainty principle might look a little
bit different.
The right-hand side would still involve Planck's constant, h, but it might include some numerical
factors like 2 or 4 or pi or something like that.
However it works out, the basic point is unchanged as an escapable trade-off between uncertainty
and position and uncertainty and momentum.
Note that Planck's constant is extremely small, as we've seen.
In ordinary units, Planck's constant is 6.6 times 10 to the minus 34th power joule-seconds.
In decimal notation that would be 0.00033066 joule-seconds.
So that means if you take a large-scale object like a baseball, we can easily know the baseball's
position and its momentum to 12 or 15 decimal places each and still respect the uncertainty
principle.
The uncertainty principle is peanuts for a large-scale object like a baseball.
And so a macroscopic object like a baseball can have a well-defined position and momentum,
pretty well-defined, at every point in time.
It can follow a pretty well-defined classical trajectory.
And so classical physics applies pretty well to a baseball.
But for a microscopic particle like an electron, the uncertainty principle is a big deal.
So, for example, consider an electron inside an atom.
Delta X, the uncertainty and position of the atom, can be no smaller than the diameter
of the atom.
We know that the electron is in there somewhere.
Its uncertainty is very tightly confined by the fact that it's bound to the nucleus of
the atom.
And because delta X has to be pretty small, the resulting delta P, the resulting uncertainty
and momentum, is pretty large, especially for a tiny electron.
How large is it?
Well, for an electron in an atom, we cannot even tell which direction the electron is moving.
The electron might be moving this way or that way or anyway, and it might be moving
as fast as a few percent of the speed of light.
So the uncertainty in momentum for an electron in an atom, that uncertainty, is quite substantial
because the electron is confined to a very small space.
So here's another question for the uncertainty principle.
And in fact, this is a question I remember well.
As you may know, one of the steps you go through in getting a PhD is you have an oral examination
with your doctoral committee or your panel of eminent scientists in my case who get to
ask you questions about whatever they want to.
And I remember very vividly a question that was asked to me on my own PhD oral exam.
And the question is, how big is a photon?
Now of course, my instinct was to answer, well, a photon is really, really tiny, but
I smelled a trap.
Luckily, I gave the matter a little bit more thought before I answered.
Of course, we think of a photon as being really, really tiny because atoms are tiny and photons,
we said we said we're tiny, but what we meant when we said the photons were tiny is that
a photon carries a very tiny amount of energy, a very tiny amount of energy in one photon.
But the question was not about how much energy is in a photon, the question is what about
its size in space?
How much room does it occupy?
And when I mean how much room does it occupy, I mean something about what is our uncertainty
about its location in space?
How well do we know its spatial location?
So let's think about the light from a laser.
We know actually the side-to-side uncertainty in position of the photon pretty well because
the photon has to get out the little aperture at the front of the laser, and this aperture
is a couple of millimeters across, so the uncertainty in lateral position is no more
than a couple of millimeters.
What about its uncertainty in position this way?
How long is a photon?
Well the light from a laser is extremely well-defined in wavelength.
That's the beauty about a laser, it's extremely well-defined in frequency and wavelength.
And from wavelength we can determine the momentum, so the photons that come out of this laser
have an extremely well-defined momentum.
The uncertainty in momentum, delta P, is exceedingly small for a laser photon.
As a result, the uncertainty in position for a laser photon is extremely large, and if
you work the numbers, it's astonishingly large.
The uncertainty in position for a laser photon may be as much as a meter or more.
How big is a photon?
It's about this big.
The general lesson here is that when you say that something is small, that requires a
little careful thought.
First of all, small in what sense?
Do you mean small in energy?
Do you mean small in size?
And secondly, small compared to what?
You mean small compared to our everyday scale?
Small compared to the atomic scale?
And so when we talk about the uncertainty principle, we should keep in mind a couple of
nice extreme examples.
One is the electron in the atom, because the electron's inside the atom, its delta X is
really tiny, so its delta P is huge, especially compared to an electron.
Its velocity is this way or that way we don't know, and maybe a few percent of the speed
of light.
That's really, really fast.
And the other extreme is the photon from a laser.
Because the laser's wavelength is so well-defined, the delta P, the uncertainty in momentum of
a laser photon, is extremely tiny.
And so its uncertainty in position is extremely large, maybe a meter or more.
Now, as an aside, I should mention that there's another uncertainty principle in addition
to the position momentum uncertainty principle.
There's an uncertainty principle that relates time and energy.
So let's mention that.
Let's suppose that there's a process that happens over a very short period of time,
delta T.
We know that it happens sometime in the period of time, delta T.
For example, suppose we have an electron in an atom that jumps from one energy level to
another.
We know that happens in some short period of time, delta T.
Now there's an energy involved in this process, and that energy is well-defined within an
uncertainty, delta E.
Then it turns out there's an uncertainty principle that relates the two.
It must be that delta E times delta T is greater than or equal to H, Planck's constant again.
And that time-energy uncertainty principle tells us that things that happen very fast,
things for which delta T is extremely small, have very poorly defined energy.
Delta E is very large, our uncertainty in energy is very large.
So for example, very short-lived energy levels in an atom, energy levels that a particle
leaves rapidly, say it jumps down to a lower energy level very, very rapidly, those very
short-lived energy levels in an atom are actually not very sharply defined.
Those energy levels have a considerable uncertainty in their energy.
The light from a laser, of course, comes from, the light from a laser is very well-defined
in energy, the photon comes out very well-defined in energy, and that means that the light from
a laser actually comes from long-lived atomic energy levels, which is an interesting point.
So this is the time-energy uncertainty principle, a trade-off in our uncertainty about energy
and time, analogous to the position-momentum uncertainty principle, a trade-off in our
uncertainties of position and momentum.
And why do I bring up the time-energy uncertainty principle?
Well, as we'll see later on, this is an uncertainty principle that is of huge, maybe even cosmic
importance, as we'll see in Lectures 17 and 18, so stay tuned for that.
So wave-particle duality and diffraction lead us to a fundamental trade-off.
The more we pin down a particle's position, the less well we know its momentum.
That's the uncertainty principle.
Heisenberg argued that this was really not an uncertainty principle, it's an indeterminacy
principle.
What do I mean?
He meant that an electron is not the sort of thing that has exact values of position
and momentum at the same time.
An electron is the sort of thing for which x and p, position and momentum, are always
a little bit indeterminate.
Sure, we call an electron a particle, we use the particle language to talk about electrons,
but a quantum particle is not quite as perfectly particle-ish as our thinking suggests.
Our ordinary particle language that we inherited from our experience with classical physics
has limits set by the uncertainty principle.
Now that's kind of a big claim that Heisenberg is making.
There's a big difference between saying the particle has exact values for x and p, but
we don't know them, and saying the particle does not even have exact values for x and
p.
It's one thing to say that the particle follows a trajectory through space, but we don't know
what trajectory it is, and saying there is no exact trajectory for the particle to follow.
What's the difference?
Well, it's kind of a philosophical difference, but let me try to get it this way.
One of them is a statement, though we don't know, is a statement about our ignorance.
We might hope by being clever to find out more about the particle's position and momentum.
There is, after all, more to find out there's an exact position and an exact momentum.
So we could hope by means of a very clever experiment to beat the uncertainty principle.
The other statement, the statement that it does not have definite position and momentum,
says that nature itself is truly, fundamentally, irreducibly, and inescapably fuzzy and indeterminate.
And that statement will require a more radical revision of our thinking about the world.
So, which is it?
Are the uncertainties in quantum mechanics due to our own lack of knowledge?
Or due to nature's own lack of definiteness?
That's a perplexing question.
It's at the center of a long, passionate debate about the meaning of quantum mechanics, a
famous debate.
The debaters were two of the founders of quantum mechanics, Niels Bohr and Albert Einstein.
And this debate was one of the most influential and important debates in the history of science.
And that's our business next time.
We'll talk much more about the debate over the meaning of uncertainty next time.
I'll see you then.
