Music
Welcome to the eleventh lecture in our course on quantum mechanics.
We've just finished our introduction to simplified quantum mechanics.
Now we're experts at, or at least acquainted with, quantum systems, quantum states,
superpositions of states, amplitudes, probabilities, and so on.
And we've used our new quantum language to explore two physical systems in depth,
the photon in the interferometer and particles like electrons with intrinsic spin.
Now we'll be moving into section three of the course.
I'll look at several different particular topics in quantum theory,
and we'll begin section three with a look at the theory of identical particles.
All electrons are identical. All photons are identical.
Well, what does this mean? How can quantum theory describe that?
What are the implications?
This is an amazing story that we'll be telling.
It's so amazing that it will keep us busy for the next four lectures.
So let's begin.
Here's our essential point.
Macroscopic classical objects and microscopic quantum particles have a different sense of identity.
Macroscopic objects obey the snowflake principle.
No two macroscopic objects are exactly alike.
Well, how do we know about snowflakes?
That's a common saying, but is it really true that no two snowflakes are alike?
Well, in fact, scientists have actually caught and photographed many thousands of snowflakes.
There's a research group at Caltech that has perfected the technique
and been doing this for years, and it's real science.
It aims at categorizing the crystal patterns formed in snowflakes
and relating those patterns to different cloud conditions
in which the snowflakes form, and the pictures they come up with are beautiful.
Now, very rarely, two extremely simple snow crystals, which are just hexagonal in shape, do look similar.
But in fact, no two snowflakes are exactly alike.
And that's a general principle about the world.
Every macroscopic object can be uniquely identified, at least in principle.
For example, identical human twins.
We call them identical, and indeed, they're genetically identical, but they're different individuals.
For example, they have very similar but different fingerprints, similar overall patterns but different in detail.
They can be identified by their fingerprints.
Or suppose we consider two pennies.
Two pennies.
Imagine we put these two pennies in a box, and we shake it up, and we draw one out.
It actually makes sense to ask, which penny did we pull out?
Because the two pennies are physically distinguishable.
If we examine them closely under a microscope, like a forensic detective, we would find a clue.
We find that one of the pennies has a microscopic scratch on Abe Lincoln's nose, and the other one doesn't.
And so the scratch would be a way of identifying which penny we meant.
Or think about the pennies in another way.
Suppose we played a game in which I arranged the two pennies on a table,
and then allowed you to examine the pennies as closely as you liked, and then you turned your back.
And while your back is turned, I either exchanged the pennies, or I don't.
Now you turn back around, and your job is to figure out whether or not I swapped the pennies.
Now if you're very careful and painstaking, then you can always win, because you can tell the pennies apart.
The swapped configuration of the pennies is physically distinguishable from the original configuration.
Now why is this?
The reason is that macroscopic objects like pennies are very complicated.
They're composed of trillions upon trillions of atoms.
And it's practically impossible, impossible as a practical matter, to have exactly the same atomic arrangement and so forth for two macroscopic objects.
There are always microscopic identifying characteristics.
Microscopic ways to tell one object from another.
These microscopic identifying characteristics act like the serial numbers on currency.
Each one has its own identity, individual identity.
And so macroscopic objects obey the snowflake principle.
No two of them are exactly alike.
Now quantum particles do not obey the snowflake principle.
All electrons are exactly identical to each other.
Electrons here and electrons in distant galaxies exactly identical to each other.
The electrons may differ in location.
They may differ also in their spin as we saw last time, but otherwise the electrons are exactly the same.
They have the same mass, they have the same electric charge, all the properties of the electrons are the same.
So if I put two electrons in a box and I shook it up and then I drew one out,
it doesn't even make sense to ask which electron we've pulled out of the box.
Because there are no microscopic differences, but to be used as serial numbers on the electrons.
Electrons don't have individual identifying marks.
Now this same thing is true for two photons or two protons or two atoms that are of exactly the same type.
Now we said that macroscopic objects were like two pennies.
Even if they're similar, you can always tell them apart.
But you know, there's actually a common everyday situation in which this is not true.
So let's suppose we deposit two pennies in your bank account.
And the next day you go to the bank and you withdraw one penny.
Which penny did you withdraw?
The question doesn't even make sense.
Bank accounts are not shoeboxes with your name on it in the back with cash in it.
Bank accounts are a more abstract reality.
And in fact that's true about money in the modern age in general.
Money is actually a representation of abstract accounting information.
It's not tied to ordinary physical tokens.
And so pennies lose their individuality in the banking system.
So if we wanted to sum up the situation about classical macroscopic objects and quantum particles,
we might say that classical objects are like money in your pocket.
You might have this coin or that coin and you can tell the difference.
On the other hand, quantum particles are like money in the bank, less tangible, but still real.
Alright, I want to take a bit of a detour.
Because this problem of identity, the identity of different objects,
whether they can be identical or whether they are distinguishable,
actually came up in the late 19th century in the context of classical physics.
And that's an interesting story and I think it's worth telling here.
So let's consider a container of gas, a tank of gas.
And this tank has a partition in the middle, a wall that prevents the gas on one side from getting into the other side.
And let's suppose that we're able to remove the partition, if you will, open the valve, remove the partition,
and put it back again as we like.
So this is our situation, container, it has two halves, there's a partition in the middle,
it can be removed and put back in and it contains gas.
So now let's suppose that we put different gases in each side of the container.
Let's suppose we put nitrogen in one side and oxygen in the other.
And of course, we're looking at this from the point of view of a 19th century physicist,
so we know that the gases are made out of atoms, or in this case molecules,
because oxygen and nitrogen come in diatomic molecules.
And so there are nitrogen molecules on one side, oxygen molecules on the other.
Two elements are separated.
Now, we remove the partition.
And we allow the gas molecules to move around, gas molecules fly around, the gas is mixed together.
And after a while, we replace the partition.
And so when we replace the partition, half of the gas is on one side and half of the gas is on the other.
But now the situation is actually very different.
We have nitrogen and oxygen mixed together on both sides of the container.
And it might be a lot of trouble to separate the gases again.
We might have to lower the temperature of the container.
And at about 190 degrees below zero, the oxygen will liquefy and the nitrogen wouldn't.
And then we can draw off the nitrogen and we can put the oxygen in the other side.
It would be a lot of work. It would be a big mess to unmix the gases.
All right, now let's try the experiment again, except let's put the same gas on each side.
Let's put nitrogen on each side.
So we have nitrogen molecules on the left and nitrogen molecules on the right.
Now we remove the partition.
The gas molecules move around. The gas is mixed together.
And now we replace the partition.
Now the new situation is really no different from the old situation.
We still have a tank with nitrogen molecules on both sides of the partition.
So the two experiments, the experiment number one with two different gases and experiment number two with the same gas on each side,
they seem to lead to very different results.
In experiment number one, there's what's called irreversibility.
Now that doesn't mean that we actually can't restore the original situation,
but it does mean that a change has occurred that we'll have to work at to undo.
We'll have to do work on the system to restore the original state.
There's an irreversible change in that sense.
Whereas in experiment two, when we put the partition back into the gas,
we've actually restored what is essentially the same situation we started with.
We've made no real change. That is a reversible situation.
Now this set of thought experiments was pondered in the last decades of the 19th century
by the American physicist Josiah Willard Gibbs.
And he said, if nitrogen molecules had distinct identities,
if nitrogen molecules had little serial numbers on them so that you could tell one nitrogen molecule from another,
then both experiments, he said, are irreversible.
Experiment one is obviously irreversible because we mixed the gas together,
but experiment two is also irreversible, Gibbs said, because we've mixed up the left-hand and right-hand molecules.
There was a certain set of molecules on the left-hand side of the tank at first.
And perhaps somewhere, someone has an enormous list, which is a list of all the serial numbers of all the nitrogen molecules on the left-hand side.
And similarly, there are certain nitrogen molecules with their serial numbers on the right-hand side.
But when we withdraw the partition and the molecules get mixed up and we replace the partition,
those lists are no good anymore. There's a new situation.
So if nitrogen molecules have an individual identity, said Gibbs,
both experiments involve irreversible changes.
But in experiment number two, we observe as a practical matter that we haven't made any difference to the overall properties of the gas.
That as a practical matter, nobody can really tell that we did this.
Nobody can tell that we removed the partition and put it back in because the molecules are distributed in exactly the same way.
So Gibbs drew the following interesting conclusion.
In order to think about this correctly, we should consider all nitrogen molecules to be exactly the same.
We should consider mixing around the nitrogen molecules to be exactly the same as doing nothing,
because if we exchange the position of two nitrogen molecules, nobody can tell.
That makes no difference in the physics of the situation.
Now this is a very strange conclusion to draw.
And in fact, this thought experiment came to be called Gibbs paradox.
And it was a somewhat mysterious aspect of classical physics until the invention of quantum mechanics and the concept of identical particles.
So that brings us back to our story.
Quantum mechanics, as we said, it is possible for two particles to electron say to be really and truly identical.
And this is not just a philosophical point.
This actually affects the way we apply the quantum rules, the way we apply the language of quantum mechanics.
Now we already know how to apply the quantum rules for a system consisting of a single particle.
So let's imagine two boxes, two boxes A and B, and a particle can be in either this box or that box.
And so we imagine that we have two basis states for a quantum particle, a single quantum particle.
There's the basis state A, which corresponds to being in box A, and there's the basis state B, which corresponds to being in box B.
And these are basis states because there's an observable, namely the what box are you in observable, which has these as the two outcomes.
And of course, the particle also has quantum states, which are superpositions of A and B.
And we must forget that superpositions of A and B mean the particle might not be in a definite box.
It might be somehow distributed among two boxes, just as the photon was distributed among two beams in the interferometer.
Okay, now that's how a single particle behaves.
That's the quantum language for a single particle.
What about a pair of distinguishable particles?
Okay, particles that can be discriminated in some way.
For example, the first particle is a proton and the second particle is an electron.
They're easy to tell apart.
The proton's a couple of thousand times more massive than the electron.
The proton's positively charged.
The electron's negatively charged.
No problem to tell apart.
Okay, so I'll suppose the first particle and the second particle can be distinguished, like a proton and an electron.
Now, among the two particle quantum states,
there's a state which we might call AB, which is in which the first particle's in A and the second particle's in B.
And then there's also a state which we might call BA, in which the first particle's in B and the second particle's in A.
And these two quantum states, which we can represent by kets, represent distinct physical situations.
In AB, it's the first particle that is in A, the other particles in B.
In BA, it's the first particle that's in B and the other one is in A.
And because we can tell the particles apart, we can tell the two states apart.
We can tell the two physical situations apart.
We can ask the question, which particle is it in A?
Now, of course, a pair of distinguishable particles might also be some other states.
For example, the state AA, where both particles are in the same box, or BB.
And there might be superpositions of all of these things.
And we'll talk a little bit later in the course about how to think about all those states.
But for now, let's just think about AB and BA.
Now, let's turn our attention to a pair of identical particles, like a pair of electrons.
The identical particles, the identicalness of the particles, forces us to re-examine our assumptions.
You see, for two electrons, AB and BA do not represent distinct physical situations.
If I say the first electron is in A and the second electrons in B,
or the first electrons in B and the second electrons in A,
you may very reasonably ask, what do you mean the first electron?
What physical meaning can you ascribe to the statement,
oh, this electron is the one that's in A and that electron's in B?
No, electrons don't have serial numbers. They aren't labeled one and two.
All we know is that there's an electron in A and an electron in B.
So AB and BA cannot be distinct quantum states.
Now, there's a very neat way to express this mathematically.
We're using something called the SWAP operation.
And what this does is this is, we imagine, exchanging two particles.
So if we act with the SWAP operation on the state AB, we get the state BA.
You take the two particles and you exchange them.
And if you take SWAP acting on BA, you get AB.
And so the SWAP operation just exchanges.
Now, that's how it works out for two particles.
What if you have more than two particles?
You may have noticed there's more than two particles in the universe.
More than two electrons.
What if you have many particles?
Well, then you actually need lots of SWAP operations.
You need a different SWAP operation for every pair of particles.
You need to be able to exchange that pair of particles.
All right.
Let's go back to two particles.
For a state, which we represent, of course, by a ket state of two identical particles,
then it must be the case that the state and SWAP acting on the state
must be physically equivalent quantum states
because the particles are identical.
They're indistinguishable.
Remember our penny swapping game.
If we played the penny swapping game with two electrons,
you turned your back and I either exchanged the electrons or I didn't,
you'd lose.
You wouldn't be able to tell whether I exchanged them or not
because the electrons are identical.
There's no physical difference between the physical situation with the electrons this way
and the physical situation with the electrons that way.
So the state and SWAP the state must be physically equivalent quantum states.
Now, what happens if you swap twice?
What happens if you swap the states and swap the particles and then you swap them again?
Well, then you must return to the original situation.
And symbolically, we can write that SWAP squared acting on the state,
which is SWAP acting on SWAP acting on the state.
This gives you back the state.
SWAP squared is the same as doing nothing.
All right.
So what possibilities does quantum mechanics admit?
Well, it turns out that quantum particles come in two possible types,
depending on how the SWAP operation works.
And the first type was identified by Sachin-Rabose and Albert Einstein,
and they're called Bose-Einstein particles, or bosons.
And the boson rule is very simple.
If you have a pair of identical bosons, then SWAP acting on the state gives you the state.
SWAP doesn't affect the state.
The quantum state is completely unchanged when we swap the particles.
And there are actual particles that are bosons that follow the Bose-Einstein rules.
And some examples of bosons are photons.
Photons are bosons, it turns out.
And if you consider helium atoms, entire helium atoms, they can act as bosons as well.
The other possibility was discovered by Enrico Fermi and Paul Dirac,
two of the great early quantum physicists,
and they're called Fermi-Dirac particles, or fermions.
And the Fermion rule is that for a pair of identical fermions,
if you swap the state, swap acting on state, what do you get?
You get the negative of the state.
You get the minus one amplitude times the state.
The quantum state acquires a negative amplitude when you swap the particles.
Now, of course, we saw this negative amplitude business before.
And we know that if you multiply the state by minus one,
it doesn't change any of the probabilities of any measurements.
We know that state and minus the state are actually equivalent physical situations.
So this is okay. This is a possible quantum rule.
You can have an electron and an electron.
When we swap it, we get a state that has a minus sign out front,
but that minus sign has no observable consequences, and so that's okay.
And it's still the case that two swaps cancel out,
because if I swap twice, I just get two minus signs,
two minus signs makes a plus sign,
so swap squared acting on the state gives me the state just as it should.
Now, there are lots of examples of fermions.
Electrons are fermions, protons are fermions, neutrons are fermions.
Notice, once again, that all of the basic constituents of ordinary matter are all fermions.
All right. Let's sum it up.
There are two boxes again. There's A and B,
and let's suppose we know that there's one particle in each box.
What's the situation if there are, if the particles are distinguishable?
Well, there are two distinct states.
There's the state A, B, where the first particle is in one box,
and the second particle is in the other,
and there's the state B, A in which the particles have exchanged positions,
and these are distinguishable situations quantum mechanically,
so they're distinct states.
And of course, superpositions of these things are also allowed.
So there's more than one physically distinct state
for a pair of distinguishable particles in this situation.
But suppose we're talking about bosons.
Then it turns out there's only one distinct state,
and that one distinct state turns out to be,
remembering our favorite number, S, the square root of one-half,
S times AB plus S times BA.
And this is called a symmetric state.
Since if we apply the swap operation to it, AB becomes BA and vice versa,
and so this state actually just becomes itself.
The state is exactly unchanged if we apply the swap operation,
and so it's called a symmetric state.
What about fermions?
Again, for a particle in each of the boxes, there's only one distinct state,
and that distinct state is, that state is,
S times AB minus S times BA.
And if we apply the swap operation to it,
swap of AB becomes BA, swap of BA becomes AB,
when we apply the swap operation to it,
we actually get from the state to the negative of the state.
The swap of the state is minus S times AB plus S times BA.
And so this state, which is the only possible state of these two fermions,
one in each box, is called an anti-symmetric state,
since we get a minus sign when we apply swap, anti-symmetric.
It's kind of symmetric, but you pick up a minus sign, that's the anti-part.
Okay, so we have bosons and we have fermions.
Those are the only two types of particles we can have in quantum mechanics.
There's actually one final wrinkle.
If you take two identical fermions, or indeed an even number of identical fermions,
and you combine them together to make a composite particle,
then the result is actually not a fermion, but a boson.
Why?
Well, when you swap two fermions, that yields two minus signs, which cancel.
So an ordinary helium atom has two electrons, two protons, and two neutrons in it.
And ordinary helium atoms collectively act as bosons.
So you can make fermions together, act like bosons.
The reverse is not true.
You can't make a composite particle of bosons and have it act like a fermion.
That's kind of interesting.
So quantum particles come in two varieties.
There are bosons and there are fermions.
And the difference between bosons and fermions is just a single minus sign,
the minus sign in the swap operation.
It seems like a small thing.
But as we'll see, this has tremendous consequences.
Now, let me indulge a couple of minutes in sort of a personal philosophical observation about this subject.
And that is that macroscopic objects, the objects of our experience, our direct experience,
they obey the snowflake principle, the principle that no two of them are exactly alike,
because they are immensely complex.
The electrons and so on that inhabit this microscopic realm we're exploring do not obey the snowflake principle.
They're not like tiny baseballs.
They're not like tiny pennies.
It's hard to escape the conclusion that electrons are somehow radically simple,
that they're almost too simple for us to comprehend.
We've never experienced in our everyday life anything that simple.
What do I mean?
Well, recall the old Greek idea about atoms.
The Greek atomists said everything we see is made of smaller pieces.
And those pieces are made of smaller pieces and so on.
And maybe the atomists said there's a bottom to this process.
Maybe you can finally get down to a level where there are basic things that really are not made of other things,
indivisible things, the Greek atoms.
And the whole point for the atomists, for the Greek atomists, was that these atoms are simple,
and that all of the complexity of the world arises from complicated configurations of atoms,
but that the atoms themselves are simple, like nothing in our direct experience.
So to me, the story of identical particles offers the most persuasive sort of evidence
that in quantum mechanics we are really getting down to a fundamental level of reality,
a level at which objects are really simple.
They're so simple they can be identical to one another.
All right.
For the next two lectures, we're going to learn all about bosons and all about fermions.
And we're going to do bosons first.
We're going to learn about everything from lasers to superconductors.
And that'll be next time. I'll see you then.
