Welcome to the 20th lecture in our course on quantum mechanics.
We have been discussing the connections between quantum physics and the idea of information.
Last time, we said that there were two distinct kinds of information, classical and quantum
information.
Classical information is the more familiar type to us, it's the kind of information that
can be recorded and stored using ordinary macroscopic physical objects, the sort of
information that might appear in a book.
Quantum information is something new.
Quantum information is represented in microscopic quantum particles.
Now, because of the laws of quantum physics, because the laws of quantum physics are a
bit strange, the laws of quantum information are also a bit unexpected.
And the great example that we saw last time was the quantum no cloning theorem.
We saw that it was impossible, even in principle, to create a device that exactly duplicates
the quantum state of a qubit.
And indeed, this applies to any quantum system, qubits are just the simplest type of quantum
system.
And so, if the device works for some quantum states, it certainly must fail for others.
It can't duplicate perfectly an arbitrary quantum state.
And so that means that quantum information cannot be accurately copied.
Now, it's remarkable to me that so basic and simple a principle of quantum theory was
not discovered until the early 1980s.
It's a far-reaching idea.
Now, if someone were to ask me what is the secret of the universe, I would have to admit
that I don't know the secret of the universe.
But the quantum no cloning theorem would be one of the three or four things that would
pass through my mind.
Why?
Well, consider how we come to know about the quantum world.
Let's do an experiment.
We set up apparatus, we make a measurement, we get a result.
What is a measurement on a quantum particle?
Well, it's nothing but an attempt to turn quantum information into classical information.
It's an attempt to take some aspect of the quantum world and make copies in our data
records, in our brains, and where we can communicate it to everyone.
And that process is necessarily imperfect.
The information in a quantum particle is unique.
It's necessarily uncopiable.
And so we have only imperfect access to the quantum world.
Now, this time, we're going to see how quantum information and the no cloning theorem play
out in action.
We're going to see how the laws of quantum physics will help us to keep secrets.
We're going to talk about the subject of quantum cryptography.
So let's begin.
Cryptography is the science of keeping certain information private,
keeping it away from unauthorized access.
And this science of cryptography has been around for a couple of thousand years,
and it's been on solid mathematical footing since about the mid-19th century.
And over time, it's become a subject of huge importance.
So let's reintroduce Alice and Bob, the protagonists who performed our thought experiments last time.
And indeed, Alice and Bob are also the protagonists of cryptography thought experiments,
as well as quantum information thought experiments.
And in fact, Alice and Bob originated in cryptography.
If you go to read journals of mathematical cryptography,
you'll be amazed at how often the main characters of the scientific papers are Alice and Bob.
Okay, our situation is that Alice wishes to send Bob a private message.
Now, in cryptography, we introduce a villain to our story,
the eavesdropper whom we'll call Eve.
Alice and Bob don't want the eavesdropper to learn the message.
Eve, on the other hand, does want to learn the message.
And to do that, Eve might cap their phone lines,
Eve might make copies of their emails, Eve might open their letters.
So what are Alice and Bob to do? How are they to maintain their privacy?
Of course, the way they go about it is to use encryption.
Alice and Bob are going to represent the information in their message in an unfamiliar form.
So, for example, they might use what's called a simple substitution cipher,
where each letter in their message is represented by another letter.
So A becomes X and B becomes Q, and so on. That goes back at least to Roman times.
And so when you write out the message attack at once or buy tech stocks or something like that in our simple substitution cipher,
it would appear at first glance to be a meaningless jumble of letters.
The problem with a simple substitution cipher is that it's too simple.
This is the sort of code that can be broken.
And here's how Eve can do it. In English, some letters are more common than others.
The letters e and t and a are more common than j and x and q.
And the same is true for letter combinations. The letter combination th is very common.
It's also true for whole words. The words the and and are quite common.
And so Eve, by investigating the coded message, can recognize these patterns in the message.
And with a little work, she can deduce the code.
And indeed, there are newspaper puzzles of this type that typically appear next to the comic page in the newspaper.
And with a little practice, you can learn to crack those codes in just a few minutes.
And this process of breaking the code, of penetrating the secret, is called cryptanalysis.
Cryptanalysis is the dark side of cryptography, unless, of course, you're Eve.
Now, the history of cryptography has been an arms race.
More and more complex and sophisticated ciphers have been invented.
And to try to break them, more and more sophisticated mathematical attacks have been developed to attack them.
It's gone back and forth for centuries.
One famous episode in the history of cryptography happened during World War II.
The Germans used a complex machine to encrypt their military information.
The code continually changed and was different every day.
This was called the enigma system.
The enigma machine was the German machine.
And it was such a powerful system for doing this, such a sophisticated code, that they used it everywhere.
All the branches of their arms services used it, and it was very important to them.
But as it turned out, a group of brilliant Polish and British mathematicians using some of the earliest electronic computers
were actually able to break the enigma system.
So the Allies, playing Eve in this case, were able to read a great deal of the German military secret information.
And this triumph of cryptanalysis, the breaking of the enigma code, helped the Allies to win the war.
Okay, so the history of cryptography has been an arms race between more and more powerful means of concealing a secret,
more and more powerful means of penetrating secret codes.
So who wins the arms race?
Well, in fact, Alice and Bob do.
It turns out that there is a perfect, unbreakable means of encryption.
There's a way to encode information so that Eve could not possibly read it.
And this has actually been known for some time.
It's called the one-time pad.
And I'll have to explain that name in a few minutes.
But let's explain how it works.
I'll give you an example of how the one-time pad works.
We're going to represent our messages by strings of bits, zeros and ones.
And as we saw last time, any sort of information can be represented by zeros and ones.
Text, sound, video can all be represented by a string of binary digits.
And we're going to be considering three particular strings of binary digits.
One of them is called the plain text.
This is the message that Alice wants to send to Bob.
The plain text is the message that they very much want Eve not to be able to read.
The plain text is the secret.
Now, in addition to the plain text, there's also another string of bits,
string of zeros and ones, called the key.
It's a string of bits, meaningless in itself, might be completely random.
And the key is known to Alice and Bob, but is not known to Eve initially.
So Alice and Bob already share a secret, but it may be a meaningless secret.
And finally, there's something called the ciphertext.
And this is the actual transmission, the actual string of bits that Alice sends to Bob.
And this is the thing that Eve might intercept.
Eve might see the ciphertext.
So how does Alice produce the ciphertext from the plain text, the message, and the secret key?
Well, what she does is she simply adds them together.
The ciphertext is the plain text plus the key.
And what do I mean by plus?
Well, the easiest way to do this is to use bit arithmetic.
And bit arithmetic is a little different.
If you add zero and zero, you get zero.
Zero and one, you get one.
One and zero, you get one.
That's all very sensible.
But then the other rule of bit arithmetic is that one plus one is equal to zero.
So in fact, in bit arithmetic, anything plus anything is zero.
Zero plus zero is the same as one plus one.
All equals zero.
Okay, so we have an example here.
We have a string of plain text bits.
And I just picked zero, one, zero, one, zero, one.
That's our secret.
And then there's the key, the secret meaningless string of binary digits.
It's known to Alice and Bob, but not to Eve.
And I wrote down zero, one, one, zero, zero, zero.
And then we have the cipher text.
And I just take each bit of the plain text with the corresponding bit of the key.
I add them together.
So zero plus zero gives me zero, one plus one gives me zero, zero plus one gives me one, and so on.
So Bob receives the cipher text.
What does he do?
Well, he can decipher the message.
All he needs to do is add the key again.
If he takes the cipher text and adds the key, that's the plain text plus the key, which is the cipher text, plus the key.
But if I add the key twice, anything added to it, added to itself is zero.
And so I just get the plain text back.
And if you like, you can take our example and you can decipher it by simply taking the cipher text, adding the key and using bit arithmetic.
I'm giving you the details simply so you can play with your own examples.
The point is that with the key, anybody can read the message.
But without the key, Eve can learn nothing about the message at all.
She knows nothing about the plain text.
The message could be anything.
And so if Alice and Bob have a secret key, they win.
They can send their secret message without Eve knowing.
So this seems great.
The one-time pad means that Alice and Bob have won the war in cryptography.
There are just two problems.
The first problem is that Alice and Bob cannot keep using the same key over and over again.
Because if they do, it makes them vulnerable to a particular mathematical attack by Eve.
I won't go into the details.
So if I said to say that if Eve suspects that they're using the same key over and over again, she can rather quickly extract information about their message.
So every time they communicate, Alice and Bob will have to use a new random key.
Once Alice and Bob have a key that is secret from Eve, they're safe.
But they have to do that, which brings up the second problem, the big one, the problem of key distribution.
How can Alice send Bob a new key without Eve reading it?
Because if Eve gets a copy of the key, she can read the message.
Anybody with a key can read the message.
Well, they're going to have to take special steps.
So one thing they might try to do is Alice puts the key in a locked box, special locked box, and she sends it to Bob.
And then Bob examines the box very carefully for Eve's fingerprints to make sure that she didn't tamper with the box and open it up.
And if they find signs of tampering, then they just don't use the key, and that's okay.
Eve would still lose then because the key is not interesting.
The key doesn't mean anything.
If Alice and Bob don't use the key, then even if Eve knows it, it doesn't help her read the message.
But you know, maybe Eve was able to break into the box and make a copy of the key without leaving any traces.
That's always possible in principle because classical information, which the key is, is always copyable.
So Alice and Bob might be fooled and think that their key is secret.
And if Alice and Bob think the key is secret, they might use it, and then Eve wins.
Eve would be able to read their messages.
So there's a disturbing fact, a fact that is, that's really kind of upsetting, and that is that no classical method of key distribution can be 100% secure from Eve.
Alice and Bob might take all kinds of precautions so that when Alice sends the secret key to Bob by special courier or some other means that Eve won't read it,
but as a practical, as a mathematical fact, there's nothing they can do to be 100% sure that Eve doesn't intercept the key and make a copy.
And the history of cryptography is full of examples where the key is compromised in this way.
Alright, so much for the history of cryptography.
What does all of this have to do with quantum mechanics?
Well, in 1984, Charles Bennett of IBM Research and Gilles Brassard of the University of Montreal showed how to use quantum mechanics to solve the problem of key distribution.
They invented quantum key distribution.
And the particular scheme for doing this that they invented is called BB84, Bennett Brassard 1984.
And BB84 marks the birth of quantum cryptography.
So to really get a feel for it, for how this works, we're going to give you an overview of how the BB84 scheme works.
There are some details we're leaving out because as good cryptographers, Bennett and Brassard, tried to anticipate all possible things that Eve could do to attack.
But here's the basic scheme.
And you have to imagine the scheme proceeding in a set of rounds. It's like a game.
First one move, then the other, then the other.
So the first round, the first move, is that Alice sends Bob a series of spins, a series of qubits.
And what states does she send the qubits in?
Well, she chooses them randomly from up, down, right, or left.
She sends any of those with equal likelihood.
Now notice, and we discussed this last time, notice that no measurement can exactly identify all of these states.
Nobody can come and do an experiment on these spins and determine exactly which of these states Alice is sending in a particular spin.
So Alice sends these, she of course keeps a record of which ones she sent.
She sends these, and then Bob receives them.
Now we're ready for round two.
What does Bob do with them? He makes measurements.
But what measurement does Bob make?
Bob doesn't know what measurement to make.
So he just measures at random.
He either measures z, or he measures x.
He chooses randomly.
Then he measures z, and then he measures x, and then he measures x, and so on.
And he gets the results.
All right.
Now, sometimes the measurement that he makes is appropriate.
In other words, the spin is either up or down, and he measures the z component of the spin, and that tells, the result tells him which one it is.
But sometimes the measurement he makes is inappropriate.
Maybe he measured the z component of the spin, but the spin was either right or left.
Then his measurement didn't tell him anything about what Alice prepared.
Now we move to round three, the third move of the game.
Alice and Bob now talk on the telephone.
Now Eve might be listening in.
So the conversation that Alice and Bob have is a public conversation, essentially.
They're going to permit anybody who wants to listen in on this conversation.
Now Alice doesn't say which states she sent.
And Bob doesn't say what the measurement results he obtained were.
They keep those things secret.
But in the conversation, Bob does say which measurements he made.
He said, oh, I made a z measurement, and then I made an x measurement or whatever.
And Alice does tell him whether he made a good measurement or a bad measurement.
What does it mean to make a good measurement?
Well, a good measurement is one in which Alice sends up or down, and Bob measured z.
So his measurement result actually could tell which state it was.
Or another good measurement would be if Alice had either sent right or left,
and Bob measured the x component of spin, then his measurement result, plus or minus one-half,
would tell him whether the spin was right or left.
So Alice tells him which measurements he made were good.
And she also tells him which measurements he made were bad.
For instance, if Alice sent either up or down, and Bob measured the x component of spin,
he wouldn't find out anything.
That measurement result wouldn't tell him anything about which spin it had been.
Similarly, if Alice had sent left or right, and Bob had measured z, that would be a bad measurement also.
And about half the time, Bob's measurement is bad.
Now, what do they do?
Well, they agree to just discard the bad measurements.
They don't use them.
They only keep the good measurements.
And in the good measurements, the result of Bob's measurement tells him which state Alice sent.
So if he gets a plus or a minus one-half, that will determine whether they're going to make that key bit zero or one.
They can use just the good measurements to establish the secret key,
because both Alice and Bob will know the results of those measurements.
Now, this public conversation that Alice and Bob had seems to say a lot.
Say, oh, I made this measurement. I made that measurement.
Oh, that was a good measurement and so on.
But actually, it tells even nothing, because it tells even nothing about the results of the measurements.
Afterwards, Alice and Bob know the key, because they both know enough to figure out what the results of the measurements were.
But Eve finds out nothing about the secret key.
The public conversation is full of information that tells her nothing about the secret key.
But I have sort of left out one thing that Eve might do.
Eve might catch the spins on the way from Alice to Bob and just look at them.
But what does she do with the spins?
Well, she can't make a copy. She can't make her own copy of the spins because of the no cloning theorem.
So what might she do? Well, she might make her own measurement on the spins.
But she can't make any measurement that will completely determine whether the spin is up, down, left, or right.
There's no measurement that will determine which one of those four states it is.
So whatever measurement she makes, she'll sometimes make the wrong measurement, just like Bob.
She'll sometimes measure the wrong spin component.
And if Eve measures the wrong spin component, that will randomly disturb the state because of update rule number two.
Remember our original rules.
That says that when you make a measurement, that produces a random effect on the state.
So suppose she had done that and then passes the spins on to Bob.
What will be the net effect of that?
Well, it turns out the net effect of that is that it introduces errors at Bob's end.
Sometimes he should get spin up, but because Eve has interfered, he actually winds up with spin down.
And so what Alice and Bob do is they take a whole bunch of bits from their supposedly secret key and they just announce them publicly.
And they look for errors.
And if there aren't any errors, they can be pretty sure that nobody monkeyed with the spins between one end and the other.
But if there are errors, they can say, aha, maybe an Eve's dropper has been accessing our spins and trying to read them.
They can detect Eve's intervention.
In other words, Eve, in attempting to figure out what Alice's spins are, must leave quantum fingerprints behind.
She must necessarily disturb the system in a way that Alice and Bob will be able to detect.
And of course, if Alice and Bob detect Eve at work, they won't use that key.
And Eve loses because Eve doesn't care about the key so much as it's used later on in sending the secret message, the real secret.
Okay, so as a result, there are two possibilities.
Either Alice and Bob wind up with a key that doesn't have any errors.
They did some sampling and checked that.
They're sure, therefore, that Eve cannot have been intervening in the spins.
Eve cannot know what the key is.
It's a secret key for sure.
Or Alice and Bob might detect Eve's activity, and then they agree not to use the key that they generate.
And either way, Eve loses.
Eve only wins if she finds out the key, but Alice and Bob think it's a secret.
The key, of course, is not the important secret message that comes later.
Okay, that is PB84.
That is quantum key distribution.
It seems a little complicated, but in fact, it's actually practical.
This is not just a thought experiment.
It's actually commercial.
There are several companies in the United States and Europe that will sell you a quantum key distribution system.
The system would work using single photons sent over a system of optical fibers.
And soon, they may be actually using orbiting satellites to distribute their photons.
What kind of customers do they have?
Well, large financial institutions, banks, the military, maybe other government agencies.
There's a very specialized need we're talking about.
This is the kind of system that you might invest in when things absolutely, positively have to be private.
That the privacy is guaranteed by the laws of quantum physics.
Then it might make sense to use quantum key distribution.
What is it that makes PB84, the Bennett Brassard 1984 scheme, work?
Well, let's list a couple of things.
One is the complementarity of X and Z measurements.
Bob must choose X or Z.
Similarly, Eve must choose either X or Z, and sometimes she'll choose wrongly.
And from that comes the inevitability of disturbance in a measurement.
The fact that the interaction between a quantum system and the measuring apparatus is not just one way.
There's always a disturbance in the quantum system.
And the central fact, the real important thing that makes it work, is the quantum no cloning theorem.
If Eve had a magic cloning machine, then the game is up.
She will just make copies of the spins as they go by, and then she just does whatever Bob does.
And remember, Bob is going to announce later on exactly which measurements he made.
And she will get exactly the same results for the good measurements, and she'll be able to have exactly the same key.
And Alice and Bob will never find out what she's done.
So a magic quantum cloning machine would mean that quantum key distribution was not secure.
But here's a slightly different question. That's how it works.
But what makes BB84 interesting?
But why should we care about it?
It's kind of an amusing game, but why is it important?
Well, it's a place where quantum mechanics lets us do something that we cannot do classically.
If the world were really classical, if we lived in a classical world, it would be impossible.
But in the quantum world, we can actually do it.
And in this case, the task is 100% secure distribution of a secret key.
What BB84 is, is a quantum solution to an unsolvable classical problem.
Now, we've actually seen such a thing before.
You'll recall back in lecture eight, we talked about the Elitzer-Weidman bomb testing problem.
The problem of determining whether these bombs will explode without actually exploding them.
But that example may have seemed contrived.
The example of key distribution is not contrived at all.
It's a very important real example.
The most important thing to me about Bennett and Brassard's work is that it inspired a real change in attitude among quantum physicists.
The question before BB84 that was asked by researchers in my field investigating quantum mechanics and information.
The question before 1984 was, how does quantum physics limit our ability to communicate?
What insurmountable barriers do the laws of quantum physics put in our way?
But after BB84, the questions were different.
The questions became, what useful things might quantum physics allow us to do?
What new opportunities does quantum mechanics provide?
Quantum mechanics is not a problem, it's an opportunity.
When you change your questions, you can learn some new things.
Next time, we'll have a quick survey of a few new things that we have learned lately in quantum information and quantum computing.
We're going to ask questions about what we can do with quantum physics.
What tasks do we want to perform?
What resources might we use to perform them?
We're going to investigate what are the basic laws of quantum information.
There are some surprises in store, including some new insights into quantum entanglement.
The concept of information is going to teach us things about the quantum world that we never imagined.
That's next time. I'll see you then.
