We've talked about doctors and writers both being keen observers of human nature.
Here's a case where a writer beat the doctors to a diagnosis by over a hundred years.
Charles Dickens had little formal education in literature, writing, or medicine.
His first novel, The Pickwick Papers, was published in 1837.
It included a supporting character, Joe, who is described as greatly overweight, continuously
consuming vast quantities of food.
Joe falls asleep many times throughout the day in any situation.
Over a hundred years later, in 1956, a medical report of a similar case was published.
These medical authors suggested a literary name for their, quote, new condition, acknowledging
that Dickens had described it a century earlier.
So Joe is our patient today, a modern Joe, but one based on Dickens' character.
He's 55 years old, and he comes to our general medicine clinic with his wife.
His chief complaint is, quote, I fall asleep all the time.
Joe explains that his wife made him come in because she says it's not normal.
He falls asleep too much.
Sometimes Joe says he's kind of laughing now.
He even falls asleep while his wife is talking.
That never goes over well.
He's fallen asleep at work more than once, and his coworkers kind of cover for him and
wake him up quickly so he doesn't get in trouble.
But his wife is concerned that he might fall asleep while driving, or he might lose his
job so she made him come in.
What do you mean, you ask, you fall asleep just suddenly?
Joe says he's not sure how it happens.
He just kind of nods off and someone has to wake him up.
Okay, let's step back and think about this problem.
If you've got some kind of sudden falling asleep, or at least some kind of sudden loss
of consciousness, what could it be?
My first thought, is this really sleep?
I mean, could Joe be having some kind of seizure or faint or some other kind of phenomenon
that causes a sudden loss of consciousness?
At first blush, probably not.
Seizures are a brain phenomenon, a sudden electrical storm of sorts.
They're like a hard reset on a computer.
Seizures that affect enough of the brain to cause a loss of consciousness will usually
be more dramatic than this, and certainly a wife or co-worker wouldn't be able to kind
of wake him up quickly from a seizure.
Likewise, a loss of consciousness from a faint, you couldn't instantly wake someone up from
that.
We'll want to ask some clarifying questions, but really, so far Joe's case really is
sounding like someone who just falls asleep a lot.
So if it is sleep, where do we go from here?
There are primary sleep disorders, like narcolepsy, where control of sleep cycling is disrupted,
and sudden sleep can occur, especially right after an emotional outburst, crying or laughing
or something like that.
Or perhaps Joe is just tired, he's not getting enough sleep or enough quality sleep.
His sleep could be interrupted by something like sleep apnea or restless leg syndrome,
both of which can interfere with sleep quality.
Or maybe Joe's on some kind of medicine that makes him drowsy.
This could be prescribed medicine, or something over the counter, or street drugs, or maybe
he's consuming too much alcohol.
Depression.
Depression is also a possibility.
We've run across that diagnosis before, and we know depression can present with excessive
sleep.
That's enough to get started.
Let's hear more of Joe's story.
We glance up at Joe over the paper chart.
We see that he's leaned back in his chair, and it looks like he's fast asleep.
Joe, Joe, you ask.
Let me get a little louder.
Joe, then his wife swats his arm.
He wakes up quickly, the bit of a start.
He says, sorry doc, he rubs his eyes, and Joe continues his story.
He says, as far back as he can remember, he has felt tired a lot.
He doesn't have a lot of energy for exercising, and actually he thinks when he does try to
exercise, he quickly gets out of breath, and Joe says he knows he should exercise more.
He's patting his big belly, but you know it's hard to do that.
To ask about sleep habits in detail, Joe goes to bed at 10.
He says he quickly falls asleep, and he sleeps through until the morning at 6.
That's eight hours, which should be enough.
He says he thinks he sleeps well, but his wife complains that he snores.
Joe says, even when he wakes up, first thing in the morning, he doesn't feel rested.
But it's always been like that.
He often wakes up with a headache, too.
He denies any other symptoms or any change in these symptoms lately.
Really this tiredness, this falling asleep thing, he thinks it's been going on for years.
You ask a few specific questions about narcolepsy, and it doesn't look like that's likely.
Many people with narcolepsy have cataplexy, a sudden onset of sleep with emotional outbursts,
and many have so-called sleep paralysis with a prolonged feeling of being unable to move
upon first awakening.
Joe says, no, he doesn't have these kinds of symptoms.
However, some people with narcolepsy really only complain of excessive sleepiness and
napping, so we may need to investigate further to make sure Joe definitely doesn't have narcolepsy.
That would require a sleep study.
He looked down through the printed list he completed in the waiting room, that's his
review of symptoms with the little check boxes, and there are a lot of positives.
Let me take a moment, a quick medical lingo explanation, that word positive.
In a medical discussion, that means that a symptom or finding is present.
Negative means absent.
So in medical parlance, positive doesn't always mean good.
A positive test for cancer is not good news.
Let's go back to Joe.
He's checked off as positive that he has problems with feeling tired, with headaches,
with shortness of breath, with exercise, with weight gain, and with impotence.
He also says that he sometimes has swollen feet.
Joe denies smoking or drinking or any substance of use.
It looks like he hasn't taken any prescriptions or seen any doctors in years.
The family history isn't helpful.
Joe lives with his wife, and they have two children who have moved away to college.
He works in an office as a customer sales rep, mostly doing desk work and answering
phone calls.
Time for the physical exam.
Joe is a big guy, six feet two, 280 pounds.
He's Caucasian, though he looks kind of ruddy with a reddish kind of complexion.
He's joking, he's engaged, and that makes you think that depression really is unlikely.
His heart rate is 92, blood pressure 134 over 88, respirations 22, and temperature normal.
H-E-E-N-T exam is normal.
His chest wall, when you go to listen to his heart, you can feel it beating very strongly
against his chest.
That's called a ventricular heave, and it can be a sign of an enlarged, overly muscular
heart.
Joe has no murmurs.
His lungs are clear, and abdominal exam is normal.
You cannot feel a liver or a spleen, though you think to yourself, in an individual who
is overweight like this, it can be difficult to palpate these organs even if they were
enlarged.
His pulses are strong.
When you get down to examine his legs and his feet, you notice that, as he said, his
feet are kind of swollen with puffy skin over his feet and up towards his ankles.
You can push the skin down in a pit with your finger.
This finding is called pitting edema.
The neurologic exam is normal.
Joe seems alert, well, and comfortable during the exam.
Okay, we've got a lot going on here, and probably more than first meets the eye.
Let's review a problem list, the main issues that have come to our attention.
We've got excessive sleepiness, a decreased ability to exercise, fatigue, plus on the
physical exam, we found that his resting heart rate is fast.
That's a finding called tachycardia.
His blood pressure is mildly elevated, and his heart is heaving against his chest.
He's also got pitting edema of his lower extremities.
So that's a long list to juggle all in your mind at once.
One strategy to tackle a list like this is to start with one of the problems that's
simpler, maybe one that doesn't have a long list of possible causes.
You think about just one problem, think about what could be causing it, and then see if
any of those explanations could fit some of the other issues on the longer problem list.
Let me give you an example.
Joe's got a fast heart rate, but that's not a good starting point.
The list of causes of fast heart rate is huge from genuine heart disease to anemia, anxiety,
dehydration, thyroid disease, fever, infections, all sorts of things.
So instead of starting with a fast heart rate, let's think about that pitting edema.
What could cause puffy skin that you can press into pit shapes?
As you'll see, the differential diagnosis of edema is smaller and more manageable to
think through.
So starting with causes of edema, I'll bet we'll be able to work our way back to an explanation
that covers everything.
So edema.
The finding of edema means that there is excessive fluid in the spaces between the cells.
Fluid that's kind of seeped out of the circulation and it's just sitting there.
Without belaboring the physiology too much, this kind of fluid buildup usually occurs
from disease of the kidneys, liver, or heart.
Let's see which one seems most likely an hour patient.
Is it kidney disease?
The way kidney disease causes edema is when the kidney starts spilling out protein into
the urine.
Normally, blood proteins are filtered out of the urine and kept in the body, but some
kidney diseases affect this function leading to excessive protein loss in the urine.
Once that occurs, blood protein levels drop and it is the blood proteins that effectively
hold water in the blood through a process called osmotic pressure.
You can think of the protein as a sponge holding onto water.
With less protein in the blood, more water will spill out between the cells causing edema.
Could Joe have kidney disease?
Maybe.
And kidney disease can cause high blood pressure.
So let's keep that in mind.
Liver disease can also cause edema.
Those blood proteins that hold the water, they're made in the liver.
So once the liver protein synthetic function is affected, there will be less blood proteins
to do many jobs, one of which is to hold water in the circulation.
Patients with liver disease can develop edema of the extremities like Joe has.
But there are no other findings to suggest liver disease.
There's no jaundice, no abdominal swelling, or pain, and there's really nothing in the
history to suggest a cause of liver disease, such as excessive alcohol consumption.
Still, we'll be looking for any evidence of liver problems in our further evaluation.
Finally, the heart.
Heart disease, and in particular, a kind of heart disease caused called congestive heart
failure will cause edema.
In heart failure, the heart does not deliver enough blood to the body tissues.
The kidneys sensing decreased blood flow will hold onto water and salts, thinking that the
body is in effect dehydrated, that there is insufficient blood.
In fact, there's plenty of blood, but in heart failure the kidneys are fooled because blood
is not flowing effectively.
So the kidney holds onto our water and salt, mistakenly trying to fight the apparent decrease
in body fluid.
The net effect is excessive retention of water and salt, and that extra fluid becomes edema,
not only edema in the legs, but often extra fluid in the lungs, causing shortness of breath
and exercise intolerance, and extra fluid in the abdominal cavity, as well, that's
called ascites.
We might not be able to appreciate ascites because of Joe's obesity, but he did complain
of shortness of breath and an inability to exercise.
These symptoms, like the edema, could be caused by congestive heart failure.
So does Joe have heart disease?
There were some other clues.
He has a fast heart rate and hypertension, and he's got that ventricular heave, that
big lift feeling over his chest with each heartbeat.
Heart disease and congestive heart failure in particular could explain many of Joe's
findings.
Can we fit that in with the bigger picture here, the falling asleep all the time?
That's the concern that brought him to the doctor?
I think we can.
But first, let's check our lab and other data to make sure we're headed down the right
road.
We need to close the door on some of these other mentioned diagnoses that are still possibilities.
Let's start with blood tests.
A CBC, complete blood count, has a normal white cell count and platelets, but the measurement
of his red cells is actually elevated above normal.
We've seen anemia, that's a low red cell count before, but this is kind of the opposite
thing, a high red cell count, that's called polycythemia.
Remember the physical exam, when I mentioned that Joe's complexion was kind of red or
ruddy looking, now we know why.
He's got a high red blood cell count.
Can this fit into what we already know?
There aren't a lot of causes of a high red cell count.
One of them is a disease like polycythemia vera, which is in a way similar to cancer
where there is poor regulation of the proliferation of red cells, the marrow turns out too many
of them.
Also any condition that causes chronic low oxygen will trigger the body to increase the
red cell count to compensate.
This takes place via hormone called erythropoietin produced in the kidneys.
Examples of this include people who smoke or people who live at high altitudes or lung
or heart conditions that decrease the amount of oxygen in the blood.
There's that mention of heart disease again.
Are we getting closer to a diagnosis?
Let's check blood chemistries.
The tests of kidney function and liver tests are completely normal.
Remember we had said edema can be caused by liver, kidney or heart disease, though it's
now looking like we can forget about the liver and the kidneys.
With your analysis, it's also normal there's more evidence that Joe's kidneys are healthy.
But there was one result from the chemistries that stood out.
A measurement of serum bicarbonate was high.
Okay, understanding that, I promise we'll go a long way towards understanding what's
going on with our patient.
Normally, there's a balance between acid and base in our bodies and mechanisms are in
place to keep your blood pH at pretty much exactly 7.4.
Sure enough, we do another test called an arterial blood gas.
A sample of arterial blood is taken to quantify pH, oxygen and carbon dioxide.
The blood pH is normal, 7.4, but the blood CO2, the carbon dioxide, is very high.
That blood carbon dioxide acts as an acid.
So to compensate and to make sure the pH stays normal, the body is holding on to extra
bicarb, that's a base.
The blood bicarb is high to compensate for high CO2.
By the way, the blood oxygen level was a little bit lower than expected too.
Low blood oxygen, the body compensates for that by making more red cells.
And Joe's doing that.
High blood carbon dioxide, the body compensates by retaining bicarb to keep the pH normal.
Okay, I know we've got a lot of diagnostic plates spinning in the air, but a lot's going
on here.
Joe has several indications of heart disease, including edema with really no other explanation,
and now some kind of issue seems apparent with his lungs or breathing.
His blood oxygen is low and his blood carbon dioxide is high.
Keep those facts in mind, that's what to focus on now.
How to proceed.
We need more information about lungs and heart.
A good test of both is a chest x-ray.
On Joe's film, his lungs look fine.
There's no pneumonia, there's no collapsed lung or anything like that.
As far as we can see, his lung tissue itself seems fine.
But his heart, on the x-ray, it's enlarged.
The silhouette we see of his heart on the film is too big.
Let's think back to the history, the physical.
Let's think back to what we already know.
And especially, and you knew I was going to bring this up again, the chief complaint.
Why did Joe come here today?
We've found there is something going on with his heart and his body isn't getting enough
oxygen and he's not effectively blowing off his carbon dioxide.
But really, why Joe came to see us was his chief complaint, quote, I fall asleep all
the time.
Now, heart disease can make you tired, sure, but falling asleep all the time.
Joe even fell asleep during our interview.
That's kind of odd, isn't it?
Joe said he gets enough hours of sleep, though he wakes up still tired.
But what was that that his wife said?
He snores.
You head back into the exam room to talk to Joe and his wife.
What do you mean, you ask?
He snores.
How much snoring?
Oh, his wife, Mrs. Joe, she says you wouldn't believe it.
He snores and gasps and mutters and snaps awake and he rolls over and it's a huge amount
of noise over there on his side of the bed.
Joe is a big guy, remember, quite overweight.
And now we know there are gasps and pauses in his breathing all night long and his blood
oxygen is low and his blood carbon dioxide is high.
We've got our diagnosis.
Joe has obstructive sleep apnea and worse, he's now developed complications from that,
congestive heart failure caused by chronic hypoventilation.
The modern name for this, the whole package, is the Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome.
It was first described in the medical literature in 1956 in a case report which named it Pick
Wikian Syndrome after the character Joe and dickens the posthumous papers of the Pickwick
Club or the Pickwick Papers.
Let's go back through the physiology.
During sleep, Joe's upper airway flops closed.
That causes the snoring and gasping.
During these events, blood oxygen falls and blood carbon dioxide rises because essentially
Joe just stops breathing.
He struggles, he wakes, and he gasps to normalize ventilation, but this is happening so often
that his body has trouble compensating and normalizing his ventilation.
Worse, over time, exposure to high CO2 actually blunts the body's response to that CO2.
Actually Joe has gotten somewhat used to these ventilatory pauses.
In part, this may be from sleep disruption and exhaustion, though there are hormonal
changes that occur too.
So he has these events when he stops breathing and his body is kind of getting used to them
and his body is kind of getting used to high CO2.
Compensatory mechanisms like holding onto bicarb and making more red blood cells are
kicking in.
But there's more physiology here that starts to go wrong and it concerns the heart and
the lungs.
When lung tissue is under-oxygenated, the blood flow to those parts of the lungs shuts down.
That's normal physiology and it makes sense.
The body sort of shunts blood to an area of the lungs with more oxygen and it does this
by constricting blood flow to areas with less oxygen.
But what happens if all of the lungs are under-oxygenated?
The blood vessels throughout both lungs constrict.
But the blood's got to get through so the heart has to pump harder and harder.
Like any muscle, the heart, when it exercises more, will hypertrophy or grow larger.
This actually diminishes the efficiency of how the heart muscle contracts, forcing the
heart muscle itself to need more oxygen, which is becoming less available.
You can see we're heading into trouble here.
Joe's tiredness is from sleep apnea, from frequent interruptions in sleep that are preventing
him from getting good rest.
His tiredness is compounded by chronic low oxygen and high CO2, which have led to heart
failure from what is called pulmonary hypertension, that high resistance to blood flow through
his lungs.
That's a physiologic effect of chronic under-ventilation.
The correct medical term, we've used this word before, it's hypoventilation, meaning
basically breathing less than one should.
There were a few other things on the review of systems, which are also part of the Obesity
Hypoventilation or Pick-Wickian Syndrome.
These patients have frequent headaches, especially in the morning, perhaps related to poor sleep,
poor ventilation, or maybe both.
Joe also reported a poor ability to exercise, because his heart is already working as hard
as it can.
If he tries to exercise, there is no cardiac reserve left to pick up the pace.
His heart is beating rapidly, his blood pressure is high.
These are part of the neurohormonal response to heart failure.
The body is trying to get as much blood flow as possible out of a failing heart.
A rectile dysfunction is also a common complaint of those with sleep apnea and sleep hypoventilation
syndrome, as well as other men who have heart failure for other reasons.
Let's go back to that phrase, heart failure.
It's a term that doctors use that might not mean what people think it means.
It does not mean that the heart has stopped working entirely.
It means that the heart's pumping power is decreased and that it is not delivering enough
blood to the tissues.
It can be caused by coronary artery disease that leads to a heart attack that kills some
of the heart muscle, or it can be caused by a problem with a heart valve so the blood
doesn't flow efficiently in the direction it's supposed to.
Or heart failure can be caused by problems with the working of the heart muscle itself.
This can occur with severe thyroid disease or muscular dystrophy.
Heart failure can also occur because of a problem with the heart rhythm.
In any case, whatever the cause of heart failure, some of the symptoms that result are the same.
These include exercise intolerance, that's an inability to stay physically active, plus
fluid and water retention.
That's the edema we saw in Joe's legs.
The water retention can also occur in the abdomen and lungs, and that's what's called
congestive heart failure.
There is often also a rapid or irregular heartbeat, dizziness, fatigue, and weakness.
Congestive heart failure, abbreviated CHF, is the leading cause of hospitalization in
the US among patients older than 65, and it's one of the most common causes of death.
To confirm Joe's diagnosis, a sleep study can be done, though honestly in this case
the history and physical are so clear that I'm not entirely sure it's necessary.
A sleep study entails having a patient sleep while hooked up to several monitors.
These can detect via brain waves what part of the sleep cycle a person is in.
Simultaneously, the monitors check blood oxygen level, plus monitors on the chest while can
detect if a person is making an effort to breathe.
Another sensor can detect airflow through the nose or the mouth.
And if necessary, yet another sensor can even measure the carbon dioxide in the exhaled
breath.
Joe's sleep study confirmed that he has many, many complete apneas at night, during which
his blood oxygen falls dramatically.
During some of the apneas, he struggles to breathe.
During others, Joe doesn't even try.
So he has a mixed picture of both obstructive apnea when the airway closes up and what's
called central apnea, where the brain isn't even driving breaths.
This is typical of Pickwickian syndrome.
By the way, the sleep study also confirmed that Joe does not have narcolepsy.
The treatment of the Obesity Hopo Ventilation Syndrome starts with weight loss.
This is not easy to do, and often patients are not successful in losing the weight.
But if weight can be lost, sometimes even a small percentage, there can be a big improvement
in sleep quality and ventilation.
For a patient like Joe, who is already in heart failure, weight loss is still a goal,
but will start more aggressive therapy right away.
This will include ventilatory assistance during sleep using a mask device that can provide
positive pressure.
That's a sort of a push on the air to keep the airway open and to make sure there is
airflow in and out.
The device also makes sure that enough breaths are taken each minute to ensure adequate ventilation.
Joe also needs treatment for his heart failure.
This may include diuretic medicines to increase urine output and decrease retained fluid.
It may also include medicines to get the heart to pump harder or more efficiently, plus medication
to control Joe's blood pressure.
If treatment of his obesity hypoventilation syndrome itself is successful, his heart can
recover and he may not continue to need these heart medicines.
But for now, I don't think there is time to wait and see.
The most aggressive therapy to help patients like Joe lose weight is bariatric surgery,
which includes methods like stomach stapling or intestinal bypass to decrease the amount
of food he can eat or decrease the amount of calories that he can absorb.
In Joe's condition now, with heart failure, this kind of surgery is just too risky, but
perhaps with some improvement, he may be able to tolerate bariatric procedure later.
Improvements in bariatric techniques are making the surgery less risky, but they're still
not suitable for patients like Joe.
We've discussed obesity before while talking about type 2 diabetes.
Now we know it can also lead to heart failure.
Obesity also contributes to orthopedic problems like bad knees and hips, high blood pressure,
coronary artery disease, some cancers, cholesterol disorders, stroke, liver, and gallbladder disease.
The list goes on and on.
At this point, obesity contributes to more ill health, poor quality of life, and early
death than smoking.
Yet, we still don't have a good handle on the best ways to prevent or treat obesity.
Certainly, overeating plays some role as does decreased physical activity.
We know that obesity results when someone regularly takes in more calories than needed,
but there is far more to the modern obesity epidemic than that.
There seem to be neurohormonal and psychological factors, genetic influences, and changes in
gut function, perhaps related to bacterial colonization.
We know that factors in early life, even influences on the developing fetus before
we're born, contribute to obesity risk.
Something as simple as a lack of sleep seems to be another risk factor, though we don't
understand why.
Disentangling these factors to come up with a comprehensive, workable, and effective way
to prevent and treat obesity is emerging as the health challenge of the 21st century.
Our next case is a much younger patient, a four-month-old.
We're in the ED, the parents are scared, and we're pretty scared too.
See you next time.
