In our Grand Rounds series, we've met patients in the emergency department and in medical
and pediatric clinics.
Today we're going to step out just a little further.
We're part of the Soviet Union's sixth Antarctic expedition, one of 12 men dropped
off in February 1961.
Our task is to build a new permanent base station on the Schermacher Oasis, plateau about 50
miles inland.
The base, named Novo Lazarevskaya, took nine weeks to build in the balmy Antarctic summer,
when temperatures usually hover around freezing.
We finished it just in time and our ship left just before winter descended and the seas
froze over.
We will have no further support and no contact with the outside world for eight months.
In the upcoming long winter, the daily average temperature is about negative 10 degrees Fahrenheit
and there is darkness for about 20 hours a day.
There's only one person in the group with medical training and that's you, a 27-year-old
surgeon who is the team's doctor, driver, and meteorologist.
We've got a small medical station with basic tools, some intravenous equipment, some pain
medicines, antibiotics, and an autoclave for sterilizing instruments.
That's about it.
Fortunately, all of the researchers are young, healthy men and other than frostbite and boredom
we're not expecting much in the way of medical problems during our 12-month stay.
Unfortunately, you wake up this morning.
It's April 29, 1961 and you don't feel so good.
The first thing you notice is nausea.
So we'll use that as our chief complaint.
Nausea is not a very pleasant sensation.
It's the feeling you have when you think you have to vomit or you think you're going to
vomit.
The differential diagnosis overlaps with vomiting and it's one of those large lists that includes
all sorts of problems from common and minor things to rare but very significant emergency
health concerns.
As always, keep an open mind.
Remember the point of thinking through a differential diagnosis is so you remember to at least consider
every possibility.
You will not see something that you aren't looking for.
When the list gets large, as they often do, we need some kind of organizational scheme,
some way to hold the list together so nothing falls between the cracks.
One way you could make a list is to think of the most common things first and sort of
work your way down from there.
That would work, of course, most of the time because common things occur commonly.
But I'm not so sure that's the best way.
The point of the list is a mental reminder and it's the uncommon things that we are
most likely to forget.
So I don't think we should leave those things for last.
So today, let's start with the most serious conditions, the stuff we really don't want
to miss and then work our way down to less serious things that could be safely diagnosed
later.
If we first think about the serious things first, we're less likely to miss anything
important.
As a further memory jog for nausea, let's see if we can come up with two separate lists.
One of things within the abdominal cavity, then things outside of the abdomen.
Okay, we're ready to think.
We'll start with nausea caused by something within the abdomen, remembering first the
most serious and immediate disorders.
The top one to remember is anything that obstructs the gut and prevents food from traveling
through.
Those conditions need to be fixed quickly.
One example of an anatomic obstruction would be a volvulus where a section of gut twists
around itself and gets blocked.
That is a surgical emergency.
Intestinal obstruction can be physical as with a volvulus or it could be related to
damage, infection, or inflammation in the gut wall that prevents normal muscular contractions.
This condition is called an ilias.
The vomiting that is caused by intestinal obstruction is often described as bilias that
is showing a green or a yellow color from bile.
That's not always present, but when vomit does contain bile, it's important to think
about the possibility of an obstruction.
We also want to consider any illness of any organ within the abdomen, including all of
those kind of itis conditions.
Hepatitis, that's liver inflammation, pancreatitis, appendicitis, cholecystitis, that's inflammation
of the gallbladder.
Of course, ordinary mild infections of the gut, viral or bacterial infections can cause
nausea as well, but those aren't going to cause serious harm quickly.
So we'll leave them for last.
On this version of our differential list, don't forget many diseases outside of the
abdomen can also cause nausea.
These can include very serious things like a myocardial infarction or a heart attack.
Any condition that increases pressure in the brain, including tumors or bleeding, can cause
vomiting, though typically without nausea.
There are also less serious but still miserable conditions, including inner ear disorders.
Many medications cause nausea, almost any medication really, and nausea can also accompany
kidney disease, thyroid illness, diabetes, liver failure, and alcohol or other intoxications.
Do you think all of this was going through your head when you woke up in Antarctica?
Probably not, at least at first, but now a few hours have gone by and you're not feeling
any better.
You don't feel hungry and you skipped breakfast.
By noon, you're starting to run a fever and starting to develop more abdominal pain right
around the navel in the middle.
You still feel nauseous, though there hasn't been any vomiting.
You're now running a fever of 100.9 degrees, not too high, but enough to add to your discomfort.
Even though you've been stoic and haven't complained, your fellow researchers at the
station have commented that you don't look so good.
They've also been kind enough to point out that the closest doctor, other than you, is
over a thousand miles away.
And there's a huge snowstorm and you don't have any aircraft anyway.
You are on your own.
Sometimes time can be one of the best diagnostic tools.
It's been about six hours and the story has evolved.
Let's see what's happened to that list of causes of nausea.
Could this still be an abdominal obstruction?
I don't think so.
There hasn't actually been any vomiting, an infection.
That sounds fairly likely, in a way, a fever has started and that's always suggestive of
a possible infection.
But we've been on an isolated antarctic station for months and no one else has been sick.
Where could an infection have come from?
Could this be a heart attack?
I doubt it.
We're six hours into this and there really ought to be chest pain or arrhythmias or other
symptoms in the chest by now.
Instead, we've got this worsening belly pain and a new fever.
We're taking no medications and we had a thorough medical exam and a series of blood tests when
we volunteered for this mission.
None of those tests a few months ago had showed any problems at all.
So chronic illnesses like diabetes, thyroid disease, or kidney problems, all of those
seem unlikely.
At this point, it's time for a physical examination.
Can we even do an exam on ourselves?
Well, we might as well try.
The temperature is now 101.1, pulse 100, respirations, well, we can't really count our own respirations
if you concentrate on your own breathing.
That always changes the rate.
But we're not feeling short of breath and we're not coughing.
So we're not really worried about our chest or our lungs.
Still, we try to listen to our own heart and lungs the way medical students do when they
practice and as far as we can tell, everything sounds okay.
Speaking of sounds, we usually use our stethoscope to listen to hearts and lungs, but it's a
clever tool for other things too.
We're going to listen over the abdomen.
Ordinarily, you hear through the stethoscope all sorts of abdominal noises, what are called
bowel sounds, they're kind of gurgly sorts of noises.
They're normally present all of the time because even when you're not thinking about
it, your gut moves constantly pushing food around.
We listen now to ourselves and we hear nothing, nothing at all.
The gut is not moving.
Do you remember what that condition is called?
It's an ileus, sometimes referred to as a paralytic ileus.
It means that the intestinal tract is in some kind of serious trouble.
Now ileus is not a specific diagnosis, it's more of a marker or a finding that means something
serious has gone wrong to shut down the normal movement of the gut.
Ilius can be seen after abdominal or pelvic surgery or during any kind of serious illness.
It can be caused by certain medications too or by muscle or nerve disorders like Parkinson's
disease.
But in this case, what fits best with a presentation and worsening abdominal pain is some kind
of serious infection or inflammation of the gut itself.
Let's palpate now, gently feeling the abdomen.
It seems okay, there's no mass that we can feel, though it kind of hurts everywhere.
In fact, it seems to kind of hurt worse when we press down.
The belly has become tender.
That word tender, it's a very important thing to look for on a physical exam.
Tenderness is different from just pain.
Pain means it hurts wherever the patient points.
Tender means it hurts even more when you touch and examine that part.
For instance, a toe that's stubbed and bruised will hurt, but a toe that's stubbed badly
enough to break the bone, that's going to be tender to touch.
Or an insect bite or a bee sting, that's going to be painful, maybe with some redness
and swelling too.
But if the swollen area is actually tender to touch, there might be a secondary infection
or a retained bit of the stinger under the skin at the site of the wound.
Tenderness has to be tested carefully.
You don't want to just mash around, that's cruel and it makes people apprehensive.
Start gently, deliberately starting with an area of the belly that isn't in pain and
try a little distraction.
Watch how patients react when you touch, first lightly, then a little harder.
You usually don't have to ask if it hurts, just see what the patient does, you'll know
if you've found tenderness.
A lot of people have belly pain for a variety of reasons, but belly tenderness, pain when
you gently palpate or touch the belly, that means there is inflammation in the abdomen,
a finding that suggests peritonitis.
That's a general term, peritonitis, which means inflammation of the lining of the abdomen.
The lining of the abdomen is the peritoneum, so inflammation is called peritonitis.
This can be caused by infections or serious inflammation within the gut or can arise spontaneously,
especially when there is an immune compromising condition.
Peritonitis is serious and is associated with specific physical findings on the exam, the
main one being tenderness.
There's other physical findings with peritonitis that we could look for too, and one of them
is a silent belly or ilias.
We've got worsening abdominal pain and a silent belly when we listen, that's the sign of
ilias, and now tenderness, that's peritonitis, and that's not good.
Again, we're thinking to ourselves, the closest other doctor is over 1,000 miles away.
The pain now, it's getting worse.
It's been a few more hours, it's actually been 10 hours since we woke up with a nausea.
Now the abdominal pain is severe and has moved from the middle down to the lower right side
of the belly.
It hurts especially when you move or when you try to walk, so you just want to lie still.
If you could repeat your abdominal exam, you'd find that bowel sounds are still absent and
touching the belly increases the pain.
Touching on the left side of the belly increases the pain in the lower right.
If you even jiggle the bed a little bit, it hurts in the lower right, even worse.
We've just diagnosed ourselves with appendicitis.
By the way, this is a true case.
It happened to a 27-year-old Russian physician, Leonid Rogozov.
During the 6th Soviet Antarctic Expedition in 1961, his son, Vladislav Rogozov, himself
an anesthesiologist, he collected the details of this case and published it with photographs
in the British Medical Journal in 2009.
I've embellished and added in some of the details, but what happened next is directly
from Dr. Rogozov's account.
This is a quote from his own journal, 1830.
I've never felt so awful in my entire life.
The building is shaking like a small toy in the storm.
The guys have found out.
They keep coming by to calm me down.
Now everyone's running around preparing the autoclave.
We have to sterilize the bedding because we're going to operate.
By which Dr. Rogozov meant, I'm going to operate on myself.
At this point, he knew his diagnosis and he had decided, quote, I just can't fold my
arms and give up.
With the help of three other men, he positioned himself on the left side, semi-reclining.
He injected himself in the skin with a local anesthetic, procane, similar to the novacane
commonly used by dentists.
Then the patient made about a four-inch incision through his own abdominal wall.
His assistants held mirrors and handed him sterile instruments as they were needed, though
afterwards Rogozov wrote that he was really doing the surgery by feel.
The reversed images in the mirror actually made it more difficult to work.
Because of weakness and nausea, he took frequent rests during the procedure.
Rogozov found a grossly inflamed appendix with a small perforation.
After pouring an antibiotic solution directly into his abdomen, Dr. Rogozov removed his
own appendix.
The surgery took just under two hours.
His pain and fever resolved within just a few days, and in two weeks, he was able to
resume his responsibilities.
He completed his entire assignment at the Antarctic Station after what has become the
most famous case of self-surgery ever reported.
Appendicitis refers to acute inflammation of the appendix, and it's the most common
abdominal surgical emergency.
About 25,000 appendectomies are done in the USA each year, though the incidence is much
lower in the developing world.
But one in fourteen of us will experience appendicitis during our lifetimes and will
get our appendix removed.
The appendix itself is a small hollow tube, more like a small pouch about four inches
long that comes off the beginning of the large intestine, in the lower right of the abdomen.
Sometimes it's referred to as the vermaform appendix, that word meaning shaped like a
worm.
It's thought that the appendix in humans is a vestigial organ, a vestige of a structure
that's perhaps important for the digestive processes of other animals, though not for
us.
There are immune cells in there, so some have speculated that the organ serves to help the
immune system develop in the fetus actually before birth.
We know that removal of the appendix at any age doesn't lead to any loss of function.
Emission of the appendix occurs if anything obstructs its opening.
About 30% of the time there's what's called a fecalith, a stone-like piece of stool, though
more commonly it's not specifically known why the opening to the appendix became blocked.
Whatever blocks that opening, once it's blocked, normal mucus secretions cannot drain and the
appendix swells and becomes distended.
Swelling of any of the hollow organs causes pain, which is first sensed by the nerves
within the gut itself.
This pain is kind of crampy and usually not severe at first, it's usually first felt
in the middle or upper belly, near the belly button.
Continued swelling leads to a decreased blood supply within the wall of the appendix, an
invasion of normal gut bacteria which can now multiply, unchecked.
The inflammation then spreads through the wall of the appendix and presses on the side of
the inside of the abdominal cavity.
That's when the pain becomes more sharp and focused and intense, localized over the right
lower quadrant of the belly.
At this point, there are usually signs of peritonitis, including marked tenderness.
Without treatment, perforation of the wall of the appendix will occur, spilling infected
contents into the abdomen.
In the past, this was often fatal, though modern surgical techniques and antibiotics
mean that the overall mortality, even after a perforated appendix now, is low.
Still, it's best to diagnose and treat appendicitis before the appendix ruptures.
Almost all patients with appendicitis have pain.
The classic story, which by the way doesn't always occur, is pain that begins suddenly
in the middle of the abdomen and then 6-24 hours later moves to the lower right, becoming
sharper and more focused.
The pain, especially once it is moved, is made worse by movement of the patient or tapping
on the abdominal wall, so patients with appendicitis classically want to lie very still.
Or if they do walk, they walk slowly, hunching over to the right.
One recent report showed that a history of increased pain while driving to the hospital
over bumpy roads correlates well with an appendicitis diagnosis.
There is also often nausea and less often vomiting.
Anorexia, that is, a lack of desire to eat, is nearly universal and can even be the very
first symptom, especially in children.
Fever is seen sometimes, most typically low grade.
Fever is more common and sometimes higher if the appendix has ruptured.
Pendicitis doesn't follow the typical pattern of presentation in young children or babies
or in elderly people, so those ages have a much higher rate of delayed diagnosis and
perforation.
The diagnosis of appendicitis can also be especially challenging in women who can have
similar symptoms with pelvic conditions, including tubal pregnancy, ovarian rupture,
or torsion, or complications from pelvic infections.
Also, some people have a somewhat unusual anatomy, though appendiceal pain is usually
felt in the lower right, the appendix can sometimes refer pain more to the back or on
the side and even be located on the left side in rare cases.
Our case today relied, of course, on the history and the physical examination, and these remain
essential to making the correct diagnosis in a timely manner.
Though there is no single feature on the history and physical that's 100% diagnostic,
a combination of findings can be reliable indicators of appendicitis.
The most useful findings are, number one, pain in the lower right side.
Number two, pain that begins in the middle of the abdomen and moves to the lower right
side.
And number three, findings that suggest peritonitis.
Those include some we've mentioned before, like tenderness, or pain that's triggered
by motion, but also a finding called rigidity that refers to an involuntary tightening of
the abdominal muscles.
The belly of a patient with peritonitis will feel stiff and firm.
Also, the time course of the pain, that's very suggestive.
Dr. Rogozov first noticed symptoms in the morning when he woke up, and within a few hours he
developed the findings of peritonitis.
Patients with appendicitis develop severe and worsening pain in a short few hours.
Someone who has pain lasting for several days or more is less likely to have appendicitis.
Keep in mind, though, that these findings combined are very suggestive of appendicitis.
Many patients with appendicitis don't have the entire classic story.
The classic sequence of symptoms is only present two-thirds of the time.
If Dr. Rogozov had had access to a modern hospital, other tests would probably have been done.
Blood tests would have confirmed an elevated white cell count that's almost always seen
in appendicitis, but it's what's called a nonspecific finding because many other conditions can also
elevate the white count.
Blood tests could also have ruled out liver and pancreas disease, and in a woman of childbearing
age, a pregnancy test would have been essential.
A plain x-ray can be done to help the evaluation.
If a fecalif is seen, that can be diagnostic of appendicitis, though it's not usually present.
However, an x-ray can help provide clues for other sources of pain, like a kidney stone,
and it could show findings that suggest an abdominal obstruction or perforation.
Advanced imaging is now often used to confirm the diagnosis of appendicitis or to rule out
other conditions.
Ultrasound can be used to visualize an enlarged appendix with a thickened wall, though this
requires good technique and the accuracy of ultrasound depend on the operator, as well
as patient characteristics.
For instance, it's difficult to get a good abdominal ultrasound on an obese patient.
Even under ideal situations, often a normal appendix can't be seen on ultrasound, which
limits its ability to rule out appendicitis.
However, ultrasound may be especially useful in women to look for other pelvic conditions.
CT scan is considered the preferred test, if necessary.
It is not as operator-dependent and has an overall accuracy of at least 95%, and can
also diagnose abscesses and perforations.
However, CT scans do expose the patients to some ionizing radiation, and there's growing
concern that the overuse of CT scanning, especially in children, could be contributing to the later
development of cancers.
However, if the diagnosis is unclear, a CT scan may be very useful prior to surgery.
When the diagnosis of appendicitis, based on the history and the physical exam, is very
likely it is preferable to go to surgery without any imaging at all.
Historically, about 20% of the time patients taken to surgery for suspected appendicitis
turn out to have a normal appendix.
Extremes of age, children, the elderly, the young and the old have a higher rate of misdiagnoses
as do women of childbearing age.
That 20% figure is probably higher than what's seen now, perhaps in part because of the availability
of imaging.
But there will continue to be a certain rate of false diagnoses because of the nature of
appendicitis.
We know that earlier intervention results in simpler, more successful surgery with fewer
complications, but we also know that the diagnosis is less certain early on.
A reasonable period of observation, while repeating the abdominal exam, say four to
six hours, can be very useful diagnostic tool.
However, waiting and waiting until the diagnosis is 100% sure isn't a good idea.
Sometimes it's best to just go to the OR even knowing that there is a chance that the appendix
is actually not the cause of the symptoms.
Does every case of appendicitis need to go to the OR?
In the past, yes, a perforated appendix was usually fatal.
But we do have other options for selected cases.
If surgery is unsafe, either because the patient is too unstable or has another condition that
precludes surgery or because there isn't an available facility, giving intravenous antibiotics
is an alternative to prevent complications until surgery can be scheduled.
With antibiotics, some patients can have their complete resolution of their appendiceal
inflammation, but many will have recurrences and will need an appendectomy later.
In the case of a perforated appendix, treatment can be either an immediate appendectomy or
a prolonged course of IV antibiotics, usually after CT or ultrasound-guided drainage of
the infected fluid.
An appendectomy can be done a few months later after the inflammation has settled down.
Now Dr. Rogozov performed his surgery the traditional way, called open surgery, through
an incision over a classic spot on the abdomen called McBernie's point.
You draw a line from the anterior-superior iliac spine, this hard part in front of your
pelvis, up towards the belly button.
You go one third of the way up that line and you're right over the base of the appendix.
That's where Dr. Rogozov made his incision.
These days, appendectomies are often performed using minimally invasive surgical techniques,
using a laparoscope.
There are a variety of techniques, but the basic idea is to make one or more small incisions
through which a scope, basically a camera and a light source on a stick, can be inserted.
When the abdomen is inflated with carbon dioxide gas, that's used because the gas can be reabsorbed
by tissues and it's not flammable.
Through the laparoscope, the surgeon can see everything.
Laparoscopy can be especially useful when the diagnosis is less clear, because the surgeon
literally can see throughout the abdomen.
If appendicitis is confirmed, the appendix can be removed with the help of additional
instruments that can enter the abdomen through one or more other small incisions, or alongside
the scope.
Recovery after an uncomplicated routine laparoscopic appendectomy is very fast and many patients
will go home from the hospital in less than 24 hours.
Laparoscopic appendectomy has many advantages.
There's better visualization of the entire abdomen, smaller scars and quicker recovery.
However, the procedure takes longer and it's more expensive, requiring more high-tech equipment.
When you're stuck in the Antarctic, you have to use the traditional open approach.
By the way, if you're curious about what happened to Dr. Rogozov, his story was a sensation
in the Soviet Union and he was awarded the Order of the Red Banner of Labor.
He resumed working as a surgeon and medical instructor later serving as the head of surgery
at a hospital in St. Petersburg.
Rogozov himself insisted that there be no glorification of his deed.
Only a small bulletin about his surgery appeared after his return in 1962.
He died in 2000 at age 66.
In 2009, his son published the first comprehensive account of his self-appendectomy in the Antarctic.
I don't think many physicians will ever duplicate this story.
Though, actually, one other doctor did do something similar.
In 1999, Dr. Jerry Nielsen, working as the only doctor at an isolated station near the
South Pole, discovered a lump in her own breast.
She performed her own biopsy and using airdrop supplies began therapy for cancer.
Next up, not every case starts in the ED or a doctor's office.
When you're an emergency physician, you're always on the job.
See you next time.
