What do these three people have in common?
A teenager failing school, a 40-year-old woman who has lost 10 pounds in the last few
months, and a 70-year-old man who is becoming more and more forgetful.
There's one diagnosis that can account for all of these symptoms.
Here's another hint.
It's the most common cause of death in young adults aged 25 to 35 in the United States.
We've got a 15-year-old patient today, Trevor.
He's brought into our office by his father.
When asked, he has no chief complaint, or at least he's not willing to say one.
What can we do for you today?
You ask.
Trevor looks down at his feet, and he doesn't answer.
His father fills in.
He says Trevor is failing school, and he and the boy's mother don't know what to do with
him anymore.
They've taken him off the football team, and that didn't seem to matter.
They've taken away all privileges, and they even offer to buy him a car for his 16th birthday
if he passes all of his classes.
But Trevor just doesn't seem to care.
The remainder of the history is taken almost entirely from Dad.
Once or twice, Trevor speaks up to mutter a few words to correct something his father
says.
Later, we'll ask Dad to step out of the room to hopefully get some more information directly
from our patient.
But for now, it seems we're going to have to rely on Dad to tell us this story.
Trevor had been a pretty good student in the past, kind of in the mostly B range, an occasional
C. Reading had always been especially difficult, but he's made his way through to 9th grade,
more or less, on level.
He attends the local public school.
Over the summer, he had seemed excited about moving into high school and joining the football
team.
But towards the end of summer, he seemed to become more withdrawn.
He made the junior varsity team and did okay academically at the start of the year, but
by October he was bringing home failing grades and tests, and was missing a lot of homework.
Sometimes he'd do it and not bother to turn it in, and other times he just wouldn't do
it.
His teachers have sent comments home that he wasn't paying attention in class and that
sometimes he would fall asleep.
You ask Trevor directly, what's going on?
He looks up, he says, for those of you who are less used to teenagers, that probably
means, I don't know, Dad chimes in.
He's always up in his room.
I think he's sleeping all the time, or maybe he's doing drugs.
That gets a rise out of his son.
Trevor actually looks up and he says, I am not doing drugs.
You always think that, then he looks down at his feet.
Well, at least he said something, right?
Okay, it's time to step back and think about what's going on.
We need a brief differential diagnosis.
We've got a teenager who's doing poorly in school and who is maybe falling asleep in
class.
I'd break the differential down this way.
Group one includes psychiatric problems.
Here would go depression or other mood disorders plus substance abuse and attention deficit
disorder.
Less commonly, something like schizophrenia can begin at this age.
Group two would be what we'll call primary school problems.
I'd include bullying or social issues at school here or perhaps a learning disability.
In group three, go primary medical problems.
Here could go disorders that prevent adequate quality of sleep or things like narcolepsy
that cause excessive drowsiness.
You'd also include any primary brain disorder that could prevent learning or focusing.
Hypothyroidism, among a lot of other symptoms, can cause cognitive slowing and perhaps excessive
sleepiness.
What's especially tricky here in this case is that there's a lot of overlap between the
groups.
For instance, if for some, quote, medical type of reason, he's having trouble focusing
on his lessons, that might be leading to poor self-esteem and perhaps even bullying, which
could lead to social isolation and symptoms of depression.
There could be multiple interconnected things going on here for us to untangle.
Let's see what we can find out from some additional history.
Our patient had been an active football player for several years on the middle school team.
He was good and aggressive and loved playing and he had really been looking forward to
high school level ball.
He had had a few injuries during play, including a broken wrist towards the end of last year
and two concussions that kept him out of several games.
Other than those injuries, he's had no significant health issues.
He's taken essentially no medications and other than regular checkups, he's barely
been into the doctor's office.
Trevor has two older half brothers from his father's first marriage who are both playing
football and college.
His parents are now divorced, that's his father's second divorce, though it sounds like he has
had a pretty good relationship with both of his parents.
During the school year, he lives at his father's apartment because it's closer to school.
Delving into a review of systems, Trevor denies fever or weight loss or any aches of pains
of any kind.
He says he's bored a lot and feels tired most of the time.
Even when he wakes up, Trevor says he still feels tired.
His father denies that he snores or wakes up at night and says he thinks that his son
is sleeping well.
There's no history of headaches, red eyes, trembling, forgetfulness, or running away
or unexplained disappearances.
He rarely goes out with friends and in fact sees very little of his friends from middle
school or the football team anymore.
After all of this talking, our patient seems to be a little more engaged, he's listening
to at least some of the questions and answering some of them with one or two words.
We asked Dad to step outside, let's see what the teenager has to say in private.
Trevor says, I don't know what's wrong, I just can't focus anymore, maybe I have ADD.
I took a friend's Adderall and it seemed to help.
We specifically asked about substance abuse, which he denies, though he admits to taking
his friend's ADD medicine, that Adderall.
A quick side comment here, later on we're going to talk with Trevor about that having
been a bad idea.
He needs to know that taking someone else's medication can be dangerous, but we'll not
interrupt Trevor's story right now.
He says he sleeps okay, falls asleep fairly quickly at night, and gets up fairly easily
in the morning.
Even though he still feels tired, he never falls asleep suddenly without warning and
has never had an episode of sleep or loss of muscle control brought on suddenly by emotions
or laughter.
First last few items are symptoms of narcolepsy.
That's a rare neurologic disorder that can cause excessive daytime sleepiness.
Trevor says his dad is, quote, fine, and they get along fine, and he denies any sort of
bullying or problems with his friends at school.
He says his mom is okay.
I don't know if that ranks above or below fine, but that's the word he used.
He asks, what's something you've enjoyed doing in the last few weeks, something that
you like to do?
Trevor says, I don't think we're going to get much more information from our interview.
Past medical history is entirely unremarkable.
The family history is positive for bipolar illness in an uncle on the father's side.
Father says he himself has taken medicine for depression in the past, but he says he
really didn't need it.
Onto the physical exam.
Trevor is a slender, young, Caucasian male, and his vital signs are normal.
His affect, that's a way of saying the way he's acting or the way he's expressing emotions,
is kind of flat and uninterested.
He's just kind of blah, not really upset or worried or anxious or really anything.
The remainder of a general medical exam is entirely normal.
Specifically, his pupils are normal and normally reactive to light, and he has no trembling
in his hands.
Those might be a few things you could look for, for evidence of substance abuse.
When asked to repeat digits back to you, his answers are so slow and hesitant, but they
are correct.
We do an in-depth neurologic exam and find that his gait, strength, and coordination
are all normal.
Before we come back to the differential, we'll grab a few quick lab studies.
Thyroid tests are normal, a CVC is also normal, and we do chemistries, those are normal too.
We do a urine drug screen that comes up positive for amphetamines.
We already knew that would happen because he admitted taking his friend's Adderall,
which is an amphetamine medication.
No other drugs of abuse were identified.
So now, do we have all of the information we need to make a diagnosis?
I think so.
Let's revisit that original grouping we presented earlier.
Recall that group one was psychiatric diagnosis, group two included school-based problems.
Group three, that was our primary medical disorders.
Let's start with those.
He says he feels fatigued or tired a lot, so we need to consider a sleep disorder that
could affect the quality or quantity of sleep.
Now, inadequate sleep itself is very common among adults and teens.
We don't know the exact amount of sleep that is necessary, but clearly many of us aren't
getting enough, and that could adversely affect concentration at home or work.
One very common cause of insufficient sleep for children and adults are those ubiquitous
screens we've all become so attached to.
For most of humanity's existence, the sun provided the cue that helped us know when
it was time for sleep, though indoor gas and then electric lighting allowed the period
of useful daytime to be extended.
It's only very recently that we've begun staring into light sources in the evenings.
All of those LCD devices, TVs, computers, smartphones, tablets, all of them are light sources, and
we know that staring into them tricks our brains into thinking it's daytime.
Another sleep stealer, caffeine.
Its use has surged among teenagers, and that's another common contributor to poor sleep.
Children and teens metabolize caffeine differently than adults, and the effects of coffee and
sodas may last longer.
Also, modern coffee shop coffee has far more caffeine than what many of us are used to
drinking.
Another common sleep disorder is sleep apnea, sometimes called sleep-disordered breathing.
Loud or interrupted snoring interferes with sustained quality sleep, and children and
adults can have problems with headaches, irritability, somnolence, or poor concentration.
Our history, though, doesn't suggest our patient has a problem with insufficient quantity or
quality of sleep, or of his having a sleep disorder, like sleep apnea or narcolepsy.
Another medical problem we had mentioned earlier was thyroid disease, but the labs have shown
normal thyroid function.
However, our history did uncover one risk factor for another potential medical cause
of cognitive problems.
We know he had been an aggressive and active football player who reported that he had had
two concussions.
Paranthetically, I just say here that if a football player says he remembers two concussions,
it's quite likely that he's actually had quite a few more.
Concussions are an important diagnosis to make, because we know that in a period after
a concussion, the brain is vulnerable to a second injury that can be much more severe
or even catastrophic.
Human deaths have occurred even after relatively mild tackles during the recovery phase of
a first concussion.
It's crucial that after a concussion, a player come off the field and not continue playing
until completely free of symptoms and medically cleared.
Sometimes there are lingering symptoms during a so-called post-concussive phase that can
last days or weeks or even longer.
These can include cognitive slowing, difficulty with sleep, or a depressed or irritable mood.
The length and intensity of this post-concussive phase does not directly correlate with the
intensity of the original injury.
We're also learning more about the long-term effects of concussions, especially multiple
concussions.
There is a risk of permanent cognitive impairment, as well as an increased risk of depression,
other mental disorders, and problems with coordination and movement.
Our patient's history of concussions could be contributing his school problems either
by directly causing cognitive difficulties or by contributing to a risk of depression.
Okay, we've been going into more detail with our group 3 diagnoses, the ones that are essentially
medical problems like concussion or sleep disorders that contribute to school difficulty.
Let's continue working backwards numerically into group 2, our quote, school diagnoses.
This includes social and learning problems that have an adverse effect on performance.
Among the most common school problems is bullying, and I can't stress enough how significant
a problem that can be for kids.
Bullied children and teens do not feel safe in school.
They have trouble concentrating and often develop both depressive and anxious symptoms.
They may themselves lash out and end up with conduct problems, sometimes they're labeled
as the bully, and they're at an increased risk of suicide as well as substance abuse.
Our patient denied bullying, but it's important to ask and pry about these issues with any
child who's having a drop in school performance.
Another school issue that could be part of this picture would be a learning disability
or LD.
These are neurologic conditions that interfere with the student's ability to store or process
information.
Kids with LD have good intelligence and can perform well in some tasks, but often have
one or more specific areas of weakness.
For instance, dyslexia is a specific learning disability that affects language skills including
reading.
LDs can be treated best if caught early by providing additional educational support and
strategies to enhance learning while working on catching up the deficient skills.
Trevor was said to have always had trouble with reading.
We ought to keep in mind that that could mean Trevor has a specific learning disability
that hadn't been recognized yet.
This may be part of why high school isn't going well.
Onto group one, our primary psychiatric diagnoses.
You're probably already getting a sense that these groupings are somewhat artificial.
For instance, we know that concussion can contribute to depression, we know that learning
disabilities can lead to bullying and anxiety and poor sleep, and those can themselves lead
to poor concentration and memory.
We've grouped our diagnoses into separate medical and psychiatric and school diagnoses
to help us as doctors remember to think about those contributors.
And in the real world, these problems overlap in multiple ways, and there's a huge gray
zone that encompasses contributions from all of the categories into one unique patient.
Categories and labels help us think, but shouldn't be straight jackets that prevent us from
appreciating the complex interactions of how our minds and bodies work.
Nonetheless, there are some specific psychiatric diagnoses that are important to consider, especially
because an appropriate diagnosis can help lead us to effective treatment.
Attention deficit disorder, or ADD, probably affects five or 10% of teenagers.
It includes one or more symptoms that include poor attention, hyperactivity, and impulsive
behavior.
The symptoms occur in multiple realms, not just at home and not just at school, and have
been present since a child was young.
ADD is a characteristic pattern of thinking and behavior that has to have been present
essentially throughout a person's life.
It is not a new condition that starts as a teen or adult.
Perhaps it wasn't diagnosed earlier, that can certainly happen, but the characteristic
symptoms have to have been present since childhood.
Also to qualify as ADD, these symptoms have to be severe enough to affect functioning
and performance.
Our patient tried one of his friend's pills for ADD, and he says it worked, but it is
a myth that this means he has ADD.
Anyone who takes ADD medicine will see the effects of the medication, including improved
attention.
Unfortunately, we know that sharing and selling of ADD medicines in high schools and on college
campuses is common, because young people know that the medications work.
We need to do a better job ensuring that these medicines help the people who genuinely have
ADD and aren't diverted for offhand or recreational use.
Does Trevor have ADD?
I don't think so.
His symptoms of poor attention have really been of recent onset, and talking with him
and his family, it's clear that he did not have these symptoms during his early years
in school.
As our patient perhaps having problems with substance abuse, taking drugs that are interfering
with his concentration in school, there are a very broad range of drugs that both teens
and adults take for mood and mind-altering purposes.
This includes what were once known as street drugs, including marijuana and cocaine, plus
the possibility of stolen or purchased medications, including the ADD medication that our patient
admitted using.
Many adults keep a number of medications in their medicine cabinets, and unfortunately,
those can become a target for their own teenagers or visitors to their home.
Other substances of abuse could include alcohol or huffing or inhaling volatile substances
from plastic bags.
Our patient did have a urine drug test that confirmed the presence of amphetamines, but
these sorts of tests don't always turn up every possible drug of abuse.
One new problem we're seeing is the increasing availability of so-called synthetic marwanas,
including chemicals that can be adapted to elude detection by drug screens.
Some of these modern synthetics can be much more medically dangerous and more addictive
than marijuana itself.
In our history and physical, we didn't find evidence of any specific findings that suggest
substance abuse, but will continue to keep that possibility in mind.
There is one psychiatric diagnosis that fits very well, and I think in this case accounts
for a big proportion of our patient's presentation.
Our top diagnosis, based on the history and physical examination, is depression.
It's important to make the distinction between depression, that is the common word, meaning
sadness, and depression, with a capital D, the pervasive emotional disorder with specific
symptoms that span far outside the realm of sadness.
Of course, we all experience sadness related to life's disappointments, bereavement, and
ordinary turmoil.
When we speak of depression as a diagnosis, we're referring to something not only more
intense in quality, but also more broad in its effect on lives and families.
Sometimes the medical diagnosis is referred to as major depression.
Underscore that difference.
The first primary symptom of depression is depressed mood.
This can be something reported by the patient, they say, I feel sad a lot, or something noticed
by the family.
In teenagers, a depressed mood can come across as more of an irritable mood with frequent
fighting and outbursts.
To qualify as major depression, the depressed mood occurs most of the day, nearly every day.
Our patient was at times sad, and at times very irritable.
The second main symptom of depression is a lack of interest in pleasurable activities.
In teenagers, this often presents as social withdrawal, or dropping out of activities,
or spending very little time with friends or hobbies that used to be enjoyable.
One of the other, or both, of these two main symptoms of withdrawal and depressed mood
are always present in major depression.
Our patient had both.
There are also a number of other symptoms, and for a formal diagnosis, at least four
of these must be present to confirm the diagnosis of depression.
So-called vegetative symptoms affect our basic life functions.
There can be significant changes in appetite, leading to either weight loss or weight gain.
Depression can also affect sleep cycles, leading to either reduced or increased sleep.
Even when there is a lot of sleep, fatigue or loss of energy is often reported.
There are also changes in thinking patterns.
Many patients with depression experience cognitive slowing, or a lack of ability to
think or to focus.
Thoughts are often preoccupied with feelings of guilt or worthlessness that may even border
on delusional.
Sometimes patients blame themselves for many things that are clearly not their fault.
There can be pervasive hopelessness and recurrent thoughts of death, which may include thinking
about suicide or planning or performing a suicidal act.
Though the symptoms of depression in children and adults are similar in some ways, there
are some significant differences.
Teenagers are as likely to present with irritability, anger or abusive language as with sadness.
They more often have unexplained body complaints like belly aches, headaches, nausea or dizziness.
In fact, chronic unexplained pain should always raise the suspicion of depression as a possible
diagnosis.
Depressed teens often complain of being bored and have low energy.
They may become extremely sensitive to perceived rejection or lack of success.
Normal absences and decreasing school performance are nearly universal findings in childhood
depression.
Depression is a serious problem.
About 4-8% of adolescents experience a major depressive episode each year, leading to substantial
problems at school and at home.
Depressed teens may fail in school, lose their jobs, or turn to drugs of abuse.
In addition, depression contributes to most cases of suicide, which is now the number one
killer of young adults in the United States.
There are clearly both environmental and genetic factors that contribute to the development
of depression.
Risk factors for children can include a history of neglect, abuse, loss of a parent, especially
the same sex parent, psychosocial deprivation or chronic illness.
However, though these factors increase the risk of depression, most children with chronic
illness do not become depressed.
Familial or genetic factors also play a role in how resilient people can be to life stress.
There are several ways to treat adolescent depression.
Certainly, helping to create a supportive home and school environment is essential as
is trying to gradually get the patient involved back into pleasurable activities and exercise.
Sleep habits and daily routines may need to be normalized.
Any coexisting anxiety or other mental problems, including substance abuse or learning problems,
those need to be evaluated and addressed, even while pursuing active therapy for depression.
Psychotherapy can be effective, especially from mild to moderate depression.
The most well-studied form of therapy is called cognitive behavioral therapy, which at its
core is an application of the idea that our thoughts cause our feelings and behaviors.
Though talking is of course involved, cognitive behavioral therapy isn't just talking about
feelings, it's a focused approach to help patients learn to recognize their own thoughts,
learn how they lead to distressing symptoms, and most importantly, how to change the way
they think about things.
Psychotherapy isn't as effective for more severely affected patients and may take weeks
or months to help.
The other effective therapeutic option is antidepressant medications.
These aren't at all happy pills, they don't work quickly, but over the span of weeks,
these medications can help with the mood and the physical symptoms of depression.
The most widely used group of these medications are called the SSRIs.
Overall, SSRIs are quite safe, they're well tolerated.
However, some studies have shown an increase in suicidal thoughts, though not actions,
in the first weeks of therapy, leading to an FDA black box warning on the label concerning
the suicide risk.
Ironically, the drop in SSRI usage caused by concerns raised by this warning has led
to a net increase in teen suicide, probably because fewer teens are getting effective
therapy for depression.
Our patient today, Trevor, he was not a straightforward case.
In addition to symptoms of depression, there was some evidence of a pre-existing learning
disorder dyslexia, and there was the possibility that his cognitive problems could have been
at least partially blamed on his history of concussions.
A comprehensive psychological evaluation was performed to separate out these factors.
His primary diagnosis was confirmed to be major depression, with his secondary diagnosis
of dyslexia.
For the depression, Trevor was initially treated with medication alone, and after some improvement,
cognitive behavioral therapy was added.
Though he did have to repeat some of that school year, within about four months he was
doing well socially and academically.
We do know that adolescents who experience depression have a high rate of relapse as adults,
so it will be important for Trevor to continue to be monitored.
There is some evidence that early recognition and aggressive therapy of adolescent depression
may lessen the chance of adult relapse, or at least make recurrences milder.
Today's lessons to remember, first, children are not little adults, and health issues in
children and teenagers present differently from health conditions in adults.
Depression in young people may have as major symptoms school problems and irritability
instead of the sadness and hopelessness seen in adults.
Remember, at the start of this lecture I posed this puzzle.
What do these three people have in common?
A teenager failing school, a 40-year-old woman who has lost 10 pounds in the last few months,
and a 70-year-old man who is becoming more and more forgetful.
These may all be presentations of depression to a teenager, irritability, and school failure
to an adult, perhaps disinterest in eating and taking care of herself,
and in an elderly person, disrupted thinking that may seem very much like forgetfulness.
They're all depression, and the good news is depression is a treatable condition.
These are not things that people just have to learn to live with.
Another key lesson from today, a variety of things can cause kids to do poorly in school.
These can include medical problems like a sleep disorder, school issues, or a psychiatric problem.
One last lesson, psychiatric conditions like depression can present with a variety
of both mood and physical symptoms.
In other words, psychiatric diagnoses should always be on the list of the differential diagnosis
of any physical problem, and our differential diagnosis of psychiatric complaints
should always include medical diagnoses too.
The boundaries are often fuzzy and sometimes misleading.
We'll hear more about that next time, when what was thought to be a psychiatric diagnosis
ended up being something else entirely.
What was causing our next patient's peculiar, dizzy spells?
Wait and see.
