Welcome back. We've got a good Grand Rounds case today with a common symptom and a common
diagnosis, one that's probably affected some of you listening today. This particular diagnosis
though can sometimes be tricky to make. Remember, the most experienced physicians know that
sometimes our initial assumptions lead us astray. Keep an open mind, keep listening and
keep an eye on the patient in front of you. It's a mistake to only look for clues that
support what you think you're looking for. In fact, the clues that don't fit are often
the clues that are the most useful, the ones that eventually lead you to the correct diagnosis.
Here's what Lewis Brotherson, a Scottish physician, said about today's diagnosis in 1774.
In its worst stages, this disease affects the well-being of the patient totally and adversely.
Her whole spirit is broken and yet she lives in fear of still more symptoms such as further
pain, the loss of consciousness and convulsions. A 36-year-old woman, Louisa, has come to our
outpatient clinic with a chief complaint in her words of, I'm tired of being in pain all the time.
Now, traditionally in Grand Rounds and formal case reports, we don't refer to patients by name.
Sometimes initials are used or most commonly we just use pronouns and awkward sorts of sentences
that avoid names altogether, but names are important and I think in the long run it's better for
doctors to focus on people rather than diseases. So from here on out in this course, I'm going to give
our patients names. Louisa says that her main problem is pain, abdominal pain, usually in the
lower part of her belly that sometimes gets better and worse but is essentially always there.
It began about four or five years ago and has gotten progressively worse. Because of the pain,
she can no longer work. She's already seen a number of specialists including a gastroenterologist
who diagnosed her with irritable bowel syndrome. Louisa is looking to us, her internists,
to review the whole picture and figure out what's going on.
That word, internist. What does that mean? After your graduation from four years of medical school,
you can call yourself a doctor and put that MD after your name. To actually practice medicine,
you need a license which requires one year of training after you graduate. That year is called
your intern year and the people practicing during that training year are called interns. After
completing that intern year, you can get a license and practice medicine and call yourself
a general practitioner or GP, though that term is not as commonly used now, as almost all physicians
choose to do further training in a residency program. Two more years of training after the
intern year in a residency in general adult medicine will allow you to take the certification
exam to become a board certified doctor of internal medicine or an internist. So an intern
and an internist are two very different terms. Back to our patient who has been waiting patiently
through that explanation to tell more about her story. Louisa says that her pain is usually
in her lower belly below her navel. It doesn't really seem related to eating or to drinking
or to any specific foods. Though she's had some occasional diarrhea, that's not usually a main
problem. Her stools have never been hard, but she's been treated with a mild laxative because she's
reported that passing stool is often painful. The laxative didn't help. She says the pain
doesn't seem to vary with her menstrual periods. She got the impression from a previous doctor
that maybe the pain was was all in her head and she agrees that she feels stressed all the time.
Louisa says she did see a psychiatrist who diagnosed her with depression. However,
the medicine the psychiatrist prescribed didn't help her feel better, so she stopped seeing him.
That's Louisa's story in her own words. Now let's take a mental pause to create a broad
list of possible diagnoses that'll help us know what to ask about and look for when we continue
the evaluation. What we've got here is a case of chronic abdominal pain. One good way to organize
this would be to think about the organ systems in the abdomen, any of which could be a source of
symptoms. You've got the GI system itself from the esophagus through the stomach and intestines.
The respiratory system includes the lungs, which though located up in the chest can cause symptoms
of belly pain. A pneumonia or infection in the lower part of the lungs can hurt in the belly.
Also in the abdomen are the pancreas, spleen, liver, and gallbladder. There's also the urinary
system, the kidneys and bladder, and in our female patient the ovaries and uterus. There are bones
and muscles that hold it all together and blood vessels and nerves coursing through and around
the abdomen. Any of these organs or systems can be affected by a variety of diseases and any of
them can lead to the symptom of pain. Let's see if our review of systems turns up anything else,
or if it can help us focus a bit more on some of these organs or systems. Remember the review of
systems is when we have our turn to ask questions. We'll think about the organs and systems we've
listed and ask further questions about each one. If the pain is from the organs of the GI system,
we'd expect some other GI symptoms. Our patient reports no change in appetite, no nausea, and no
vomiting. There have been no symptoms of heartburn. There's been no weight loss. She had reported
some on and off diarrhea plus painful defecation. Doctors call that dyschysia. So there are some
GI complaints here, though all of them are from low down in the GI tract, way at the end.
We mentioned the respiratory tract or lungs, but our patient denies cough and denies fever.
Pneumonia or really any lung disease is unlikely in a person who has no coughing.
That word, that word denies. For those of you who aren't yet used to medical presentations,
that word might sound odd, but doctors use the word frequently just to report what a patient says.
A patient reports positive things like a fever or sore throat that they have had, and a patient is
said to deny other symptoms when they haven't occurred. Denying doesn't imply that the patient's
lying or that the patient is hiding something. In a medical presentation, denies just means
that the patient says the symptom has not occurred. Pancreas, liver, and gallbladder are
their questions that can rule in or rule out those organs as a source of pain. Luisa says
she's never had any jaundice. That's a yellow color, especially seen in the whites of the eyes,
that can be caused by liver or gallbladder disease. Pancreas disease does cause abdominal pain,
but almost always causes vomiting to a symptom she also denies. So far, Luisa's symptoms don't fit
well with disease of the pancreas or the liver. Urinary problems, including kidney stones or
any blockage of urine flow, will cause pain. But her pain, she says, has never been worse with
urination, and she doesn't recall ever having seen blood in her urine. We may want to check a quick
urinalysis anyway, but at least from the history, urinary issues sound unlikely.
How about pelvic pain? Her pain, she says, does not really vary with menstruation,
but it is down low, and we know that the so-called visceral nerves, the nerves that actually sense
pain from our internal organs, are wired to our brain in a way that doesn't make their sensations
very specific. In other words, a person might feel pain from the abdomen, but the actual site of tissue
disease could be somewhere else. That's in contrast to the nerves that detect pain, say in our skin.
If you feel a pain very specifically on your hand, chances are that there is something going on
right there, but nerves from the inside of the gut don't make a pain sensation exactly over the organ
sending the signals. Appendicitis pain, for instance, begins right over the belly button,
even though the appendix lives in the lower right part of the belly. Anyway, let's keep this in mind.
Though Louisa senses pain low in her belly, it might be so-called referred pain, originating
somewhere else. Let's go back to our review of systems. Could this pain be for muscles or bones
in the abdomen when asked, Louisa denies any history of trauma and denies vigorous exercise or
activities that might cause injury? Also, she says that the pain never varies with the way she moves
and is never particularly worse when she presses on the bones or muscles in her belly. This really
isn't sounding like a muscle or bone problem. One of the most difficult kinds of pains to
track down and to treat can be when pain arises from the nerves themselves. We rely on nerves to
transmit information to or from the brain, but what happens when there is damage to a nerve,
say from being pinched between two vertebrae in the spine or from an infection like shingles?
The pain can feel like it's from out in a limb or in the belly when in fact the pathology, the
disease, is somewhere else entirely. Nerve-generated pain is severe and is often described as burning
or sharp and unremitting, but really it can feel like almost anything. Sometimes nerve issues can
include tingling or weakness, which Louisa denies. That's a good review of systems. To cover the
systems we had suspected could have been the cause of abdominal pain. Let me give you a little teaser
though. There was one question that we could have asked that we've left out. It's actually a question
that's often overlooked. It would have been a great clue too. We'll get back to it later.
After the ROS, traditionally comes our detailed background history, including family history,
social questions, etc. Briefly, for today the family history doesn't offer much. There is no
history of gut problems from either of her parents' side and she has no siblings. Our patient is
married and has no children. Before she became ill, Louisa had worked as a librarian. It's time to
move on to the physical exam. Louisa is a Hispanic woman who appears to be comfortable and well.
Her vital signs are normal. H-E-E-N-T, that is, head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat, reveals
nothing abnormal. Her chest is clear and cardiac exam is normal. When gently palpated, she seems to
have diffuse discomfort of her abdomen starting below her belly button, or maybe she's just
apprehensive about that part of the exam. There are no masses that can be felt, and palpating
externally over her bladder and ovaries doesn't elicit any complaints. A gynecologic exam was
deferred. Our patient was very uneasy about a rectal examination, so none was performed. No rashes
or other lesions are seen on the skin and movement of her legs or contraction of her
abdominal muscles did not elicit any pain. Before we move on to labs and imaging,
let's briefly review what we know. Louisa is a woman with chronic lower abdominal pain.
Though there are many causes of these symptoms, our history, review of systems, and physical
exam fit best with something wrong with the lower GI system, or perhaps a gynecologic problem.
There's also been a suggestion from a previous doctor that somehow this is all in her head.
Now, stress and psychological factors can certainly cause significant and debilitating
symptoms, including chronic pain, but keep in mind that she already looked for help from a
psychiatrist. Also, there's a huge gray zone between symptoms that are physical in nature,
and symptoms that have a psychological basis. Belly pain will be made worse by stress whatever
the original cause of the pain might be. A classic mind-body illness that straddles this line
is irritable bowel syndrome, which a previous doctor had suggested as a diagnosis for our patient.
It's very important, though, that we not put all of our diagnostic eggs in one basket, at least
not yet. We don't yet have all the information we need. Even if the diagnosis is looking likely to
be largely psychological, it's our job to confirm that by continuing to follow up other leads to
rule out other issues that need to be treated differently. Our next step is to look over the
laboratory information. Luisa has actually had quite a few lab tests already, and she thought
ahead, and she brought those records with her. That's a very good idea for any patient to remember.
If you've seen other doctors for the same problem, bring the notes and tests and results of any x-rays
or other studies with you to your new doctor. That may mean you have to ask ahead of time for
copies of these records, but it will save everyone a lot of time and money and can help keep
the diagnostic ball rolling. A CBC or complete blood count was normal. Luisa is not anemic,
meaning she probably hasn't been losing blood in her gut. That was confirmed with a negative
stool test for blood. Knowing that there is no blood in the stool goes a long way towards ruling
out significant gut inflammatory disease or colon cancer. Luisa has also had two blood tests done
to look for evidence of inflammation. These are very important, common tests, so it's worth
stepping back to learn more about them. These two tests are an ESR, sometimes called a sedrate,
and a CRP. Both of these tests will be elevated if there is significant inflammation anywhere in
the body. That includes a significant infection, now not a common cold or sore throat, but an
abscess or pneumonia or something like that. Or they'll be elevated from chronic inflammation
from many autoimmune diseases or inflammation that occurs during cancer. These tests do not
tell you where the inflammation is or what's causing it. Many times the tests are more useful
when they're negative. In a way, a negative or normal sedrate and CRP rule out many serious
illnesses or at least illnesses characterized by inflammation. Luisa has had several of these
done over the years for her illness and they were always normal. Other tests done included
a normal screen for celiac disease and a normal urinalysis.
Luisa has also had an ultrasound study of her abdomen and pelvis. Ultrasound uses high-frequency
sound waves, too high for humans to hear, that are transmitted from a transducing probe into the
body. The sound waves echo off body tissues back to the probe. Tissues of different densities have a
varying ability to reflect sound waves, so the reflected information can be processed into a
visual image. Ultrasound is transmitted at low energies, far too low to affect tissues,
so there are no known ill effects from ultrasound medical studies. There is no ionizing radiation
and typically no sedation or IV contrast is needed. Ultrasounds are sometimes called sonograms.
Also, an ultrasound of the heart is commonly called an echocardiogram or just an echo.
These terms all refer to the same imaging technology.
Ultrasound does have some limitations. It can't peer very far into the body, so it's not as useful
for deep tissues and may be difficult to use in obese patients. Ultrasound also cannot produce
images through bone. Still, it's very useful for looking at the abdominal organs, including the
kidneys, the bladder and the liver, and it's great for gynecologic assessments of the ovaries and
uterus and for peaking at an unborn baby. Louisa's abdominal and pelvic ultrasound revealed no
pathology. Everything looked normal. Is this case perhaps looking more psychological? Some of the
previous clinicians thought so and encouraged psychiatric care. There was one kind of odd
symptom mentioned, though, the dyschysia or painful defecation. That's common with constipation,
of course, but our patient denied that. The GI specialist diagnosed irritable bowel syndrome.
Does that usually cause dyschysia? Actually, no. When asked, our patient said that the GI doc
did want to perform a colonoscopy, but she refused and she stopped going to see him after that.
She was very uneasy about the rectal exam today, too.
It's never too late to ask more questions. Thinking about these other doctors involved in her care,
we ask Louisa, have you discussed these symptoms with your gynecologist?
No, Louisa admits. She hasn't seen a GYN in several years since her failed treatment for infertility.
Even then, she recalls, gynecologic exams were very uncomfortable. And now,
when asked gently about any other symptoms, she brings up one other uncomfortable thing.
For the past several years, sexual intercourse has become very painful.
That was the one question that could have been asked earlier by any doctor
during the review of systems, but talking about sex can be uncomfortable for doctors and patients
both. And these questions are sometimes overlooked.
The most important clues have come together. Our patient has painful intercourse and painful
passage of stool, and now we learn that she's had infertility. Those three symptoms together
are a classic triad for a cause of chronic abdominal or pelvic pain in women. Endometriosis.
Endometriosis is common. It probably affects 15% of women at some degree,
though the extent and severity of symptoms may vary greatly. The normal endometrium is the lining
of the uterus, its tissue comprised of glands, blood vessels, and connective tissue that thickens
and is then shed during every monthly cycle. In some circumstances, this endometrial tissue is
found outside of the uterus. On the inside wall of the abdomen or on the ovaries or somewhere
nearby, it's unclear how this tissue gets there. It could spread during menstruation,
or cells could spread through lymphatic or blood vessels. The cells of endometriosis are normal
cells in the wrong place. We call that ectopic tissue. These misplaced areas of endometrial
tissue are what cause the symptoms of endometriosis. Pain is caused in part from bleeding, which may
be cyclical. Recurring bleeding cycles can lead to scarring, especially because unlike
bleeding in the uterus, the blood from endometriosis cannot be expelled from the body. However,
the extent of endometriosis, the amount of ectopic tissue that can be observed, doesn't always
correlate with the degree of pain women experience. Dischesia, or painful passage of stool, is a
characteristic symptom of endometriosis, and it is also caused directly by the presence of
endometrial tissue near the distal colon, and by resulting scarring and adhesions. Women with
endometriosis may experience painful symptoms intermittently, and they may or may not vary
with their menstrual cycle. About 30 to 40 percent of women with endometriosis have problems with
impaired fertility, perhaps also related to scarring and adhesions that alter the positioning
of the ovary and fallopian tubes. However, even mild degrees of endometriosis without scarring
can lead to infertility.
The treatment of endometriosis needs to be tailored to the individual case. Medical options include
the use of a variety of hormone strategies to reduce the development of endometrial tissue,
or to stop menses altogether. There are also surgical approaches to removing or destroying
the ectopic endometrial tissue through minimally invasive laparoscopic procedures. While this can
be effective in reducing pain and restoring fertility, the degree of success can be difficult
to predict beforehand.
Laparoscopy has been a huge advance in medical technology and has dramatically changed the way
many surgical procedures are done. Traditional abdominal surgery starts with a laparotomy.
That's an incision that opens up the belly so surgeons can get their hands and in the
so surgeons can get their hands and instruments in there. The incision has to be fairly large
to get adequate exposure for the surgeon to work. In contrast to this large incision required for
laparotomy, laparoscopy relies on one or more small incisions through which are inserted a camera
and surgical instruments. The abdominal cavity is inflated so there's room to move around
and the surgeon watches a video feed taken by the camera in the belly.
Simultaneously small instruments inserted through small openings can be used to manipulate tissues.
These can cut or move or suture or staple really really performing many of the same sorts of
things that surgeons can do directly with their hands. Laparoscopic techniques are routinely
used for abdominal surgeries including gallbladder and appendix removal plus many urologic and
gynecologic procedures including the surgical treatment of endometriosis.
Laparoscopic approaches have the advantage of a much quicker recovery. There's less pain,
there's less scarring and there's a reduced risk of bleeding. However they may take a little bit
longer and not all procedures can be done using small laparoscopic tools. The surgeon also loses
the ability to feel and use his or her hands directly. There are also even more advanced
minimally invasive techniques using devices to robotically assist the surgeon through even
smaller or fewer openings or even by using openings through normal body orifices like through the
wall of the esophagus. Louisa decided to pursue more aggressive surgical therapy in part because
she had been suffering for a long time and she was eager to get relief. A laparoscopic procedure
was successful in verifying her diagnosis by direct visualization of the ectopic endometrial
tissue through a scope followed by removal of most of the tissue and scars. Unfortunately
though surgical therapy was effective in reducing her pain Louisa and her husband had to continue
to pursue additional treatments to assist fertility. There's some good lessons here
from our patient's prolonged diagnostic journey. It took several years for the correct diagnosis
to be made which is especially discouraging because there was effective therapy available.
What went wrong and what lessons should doctors and patients learn?
Our first mistake was that there was an incomplete history. We knew that gynecologic issues were a
potential cause of symptoms but we didn't ask about her sexual history. Knowing about one symptom
that intercourse had become painful was a crucial diagnostic clue. It was overlooked perhaps in
part because of embarrassment. Even doctors don't necessarily like to talk about these things.
Still if you're the patient keep in mind that you need to speak up about symptoms that are bothering
you. Don't wait for the doctor to ask and don't assume that if the doctor didn't ask he doesn't
need to know. Another mistake overlooking the necessity for a thorough and complete exam.
Louisa was uncomfortable about anyone performing a rectal exam probably because she knew it would
be painful. But a gentle rectal exam could have revealed specific findings that could have helped
the medical team reach the diagnosis sooner. A gynecologic exam would have been diagnostic
but our patient had stopped seeing her gynecologist either because of discomfort with the exam or
maybe because she was discouraged by the lack of progress in treating her infertility. Some
may not be comfortable doing a complete gynecologic exam and that's fine but someone should have
asked if that part of the exam had been done and if the doctor didn't feel that he or she had the
right skills to do that part of the exam. He should have asked for help by referring her back to the
GYN. That brings us to another issue. A lack of good collaboration on the part of the doctor's
involved. We're supposed to be a team working together but unfortunately the ball got dropped
and more than once. The gynecologist knew there was infertility but that wasn't known to us until
late in the game. We also didn't know that she hadn't had a good GYN exam in several years.
Our patient stopped seeing GI because she didn't want a colonoscopy. That's of course a decision
that she has a right to make but if we knew that earlier it could have been helpful. Sometimes
the best diagnostic tool isn't a blood test or an MRI or anything fancy or expensive,
it's just collaboration. Doctors talking to each other about the case so everyone on the team
knows what's going on. As a patient you can encourage that kind of collaboration, bringing
medical records and tests with you to every visit. Make sure every doctor you see knows about every
other doctor you see and that they all send each other their visit notes so they have each other's
thoughts and plans. Although it's not practical for every doctor to call each other for every
case, when a diagnosis is unclear or when things aren't going smoothly, ask your doctors to get on
the phone. You'd be surprised how often a quick phone call solves problems. The telephone is a
crucial and underused diagnostic instrument. Alright, one more quick lesson. There's an old
saying. If all you've got is a hammer every problem looks like a nail. What this means is that we've
all got our favorite tools and our favorite ways of looking at things. Our patient had been referred
to a gastroenterologist early on which I think was a very reasonable step but the GI doc was looking
for GI diagnosis and in fact the psychiatrist that the patient saw later was looking mostly
for psychiatry diagnoses. That's okay, that's their job but patients do not come with a label on
their forehead that tells you what kind of specialist they ought to see and open mind from all of the
doctors on the team helps avoid our putting on mental blinders that prevent us from seeing
the correct diagnosis. Let's go back to our case. Let's tie up some loose ends about a few alternate
diagnoses that seemed plausible. There was a thought that our patient's pain could be based on
psychological factors and I think that wasn't an unreasonable possibility. Real discomfort and real
pain can be caused in pole or in part by stress and life issues and the way that our minds respond
to the challenges in our lives. People with chronic unexplained pain should look into therapy and
stress reduction to improve the quality of their lives. However, it's a mistake to hand off care
of a patient with chronic pain to a mental health practitioner. Our patient's medical evaluation
should not have stopped once she was referred to psychiatry. We can and we should offer help for
the psychological impact of stressful symptoms even while continuing our medical evaluation and
treatment. In other words, it's not one or the other psychology or physical problems. Most patients
actually have both. That's illustrated well by another diagnosis that was considered irritable
bowel syndrome. This is a common condition leading to symptoms of abdominal pain, bloating, and
diarrhea or constipation symptoms. People with irritable bowel syndrome have no abnormal tests
and no abnormal ultrasounds or biopsies, but their pain is quite real. What irritable bowel
seems to be is an increased sensitivity to the normal sensations of the gut. Symptoms are worse
with stress but don't occur only with stress. The treatment of irritable bowel syndrome primarily
is focused on addressing lifestyle issues, improving the diet, working on stress reduction and
relaxation techniques, and to a lesser degree using medications to reduce the symptoms. Irritable
bowel syndrome is a good example of an illness that kind of straddles psychology and what I suppose
we can call traditional organ-based medicine. Today's case showed how important the history
and physical exam can be, how looking for details is essential, and how we need to make sure that
we do our job thoroughly. We're going to see that theme again and again. Our next case will once
again see that the right question at the right time can lead to the clue that cracks the case.
