During this course, we've had our patient encounters in the emergency department, in
a doctor's office, and in the hospital.
We've been busy.
Today is a day off to do some shopping.
And so far, it's been a relaxing day.
You're in line, and you're ready to check out at target.
The person in front of you collapses to the floor.
We've got no time for a chief complainer history.
There's a woman lying on the floor in front of you.
She looks to be about 50, 50-something.
She's pale, and she's taking what are called agonal respirations, just the barest gasps
that occur when a person is near death.
In moments, even these respiratory efforts stop.
What do you do?
Because we've got a mix of people here at Grand Rounds with varying degrees of medical
experience, I'm going to proceed with the best instructions for what's called layman
bystander CPR.
Depending on your expertise, it may be appropriate to take different steps, but there are certain
basic life-saving steps that anyone can do.
These first few minutes are critical.
Most importantly, it is much, much better to do something than to stand there and do
nothing while you try to remember what you're supposed to do.
We don't need perfect, we don't need to 100% follow the guidelines and the exact methods
of CPR, but we better act fast.
When you come across someone who appears to be dead, this is what to do.
First, make sure the person isn't just sleeping or lying still.
Give them a shake, yell, are you okay?
Now in our example, this person just collapsed in front of our eyes.
You can probably skip this step.
Then yell for help, call out, call 911.
If there are people nearby, point to one of them specifically and tell them to make that
call.
If you're in a public place, like a mall or a sporting event, and someone is around to
help you, tell someone to go get you an AED.
Many places now have these devices available, gyms, department stores, schools, churches,
many places.
If one of these is available, using one as quickly as possible is the single best way
to improve survival.
While waiting for someone to get that AED, start rescue CPR.
Roll the person onto their back.
Start pushing right in the middle of the chest, hard and fast.
These are called chest compressions.
Use two hands, one on top of the other, and after every push, relax so the chest can bounce
back up.
You shouldn't stay leaned into the chest, it's down, up, down, up.
A good rhythm is the beat from the song Stayin' Alive by the Bee Gees.
Push, push, push, push, stayin' alive, stayin' alive.
Then keep going, pushing hard and fast until either trained emergency rescue personnel
show up or someone runs over with the AED.
If you're getting tired, and you will, try to swap out doing those chest compressions
with another bystander.
If you have an AED, use it as soon as you can.
Follow the instructions on the device.
Studies have shown that even school-aged children can use these correctly.
There will be a cartoon on the front showing the steps and a big on button.
Pushing that is the first step.
After that, the machine will have voice prompts to tell you exactly what to do.
You will put a big, sticky pad on the front of the chest that makes sure no one is touching
the victim.
The computerized device will monitor what the heart is doing, and if appropriate, the
device will tell you to push the shock button to deliver a jolt of electricity to start
the heart beating again.
An AED is a smart and safe device.
It will not suggest giving a shock to a normally beating heart, and in fact, the shock button
won't do anything if you push it unless it's safe to give a shock to the victim.
After the shock, the machine will analyze the heart rhythm again and continue to tell
you what to do.
If at any time during the rescue process the victim starts to respond, that is, she starts
to move or takes breaths, stop what you're doing, roll the patient to lie on her side,
and wait for rescue personnel.
There are a few finer points about CPR to review, and for completeness, we'll get back
to those by the end of this lecture.
For now, we'd better continue to focus on this stranger, who has now become our patient.
It was a crowded day at Target, and people quickly went to get help.
You had started pushing on the middle of her chest, up and down, fast, and within a minute,
someone came running up with a bright green box and AED.
You immediately pushed the on button, you ripped through the buttons of her shirt, and
you applied the AED pad.
It's a big sticker with wires that connect to the AED.
You apply that pad right over the middle of her chest, plug the cord from the pad into
the AED, the device lights up, and you hear a loud electronic voice, analyzing, stand
back, do not touch the victim.
Shock recommended, you yell out, stand clear, and push the big red shock button.
The victim jerks as current surges across the pad.
There's a moment of silence.
Then the victim curls up her arms, up towards her chest.
That's when the ambulance pulls up, and the EMTs rush in to take over.
She's moving now, kind of writhing and gasping, and the EMTs put an oxygen mask on her face,
some monitors on her chest, and rush her away.
So what happened?
We didn't really get much of a history or physical, so our differential diagnosis at
this point is brief.
Almost all causes of sudden collapse are from the heart, from some condition that suddenly
stops the heart from beating.
The most common cause of this is what's colloquially called a heart attack, or myocardial infarction.
It's abbreviated MI.
This is when a lack of blood flow to the heart muscle itself causes the death heart muscle
cells.
It's often accompanied by a sudden change in the heart rhythm, a so-called arrhythmia.
Instead of the heart beating in an organized way that effectively pumps blood, it just
kind of quivers.
No blood flow to the brain means that the body will collapse and die quickly.
Sudden arrhythmias can also occur because of other conditions, including genetic predispositions
to sudden death that can run in families.
In this case, we're not really the patient's doctor.
Care will be taken over by the ED, by the emergency department physician.
Still, we're curious about the case, and a quick phone call gets us an informal update.
We later learned that our patient had a second cardiac arrest, that is, another episode when
her heart stopped beating effectively, requiring another shock in the ED.
Other tests and an EKG revealed that she had likely had an MI and she was quickly whisked
off to the cath lab.
A study confirmed blockage of two of her coronary arteries, which were successfully reopened
with a balloon procedure.
She'll probably spend a few more days in the hospital and is expected to make a full
recovery from her myocardial infarction.
Historically, heart attacks have been thought of as a disease of a certain kind of person,
a man, usually a successful, driven type A kind of man.
However, heart attacks are in fact the leading cause of death among women.
One in 30 women will die of breast cancer, one in three will die of heart disease, most
commonly the kind of coronary artery disease that leads to heart attacks.
Though our ability to deal with and treat a heart attack has become increasingly effective,
our patient actually died and was resuscitated twice.
We're still seeing an increasing impact of heart disease.
This is mostly because it is so difficult to effectively modify well-known risk factors
for atherosclerotic heart disease.
The heart is essentially a muscle, a not too large muscle really, but one that has to contract
and relax and contract and relax continuously without a rest, ever.
In an average human lifespan, the heart will beat over two billion times.
Like any other muscle or living tissue, the heart itself needs oxygen carried by blood
through the coronary arteries that course along the surface of the heart, with small
vessels penetrating perpendicularly into the meat of the heart muscle itself.
If these coronary arteries get blocked, there won't be enough blood flow, there won't be
enough oxygen, and parts of the heart muscle itself will be damaged or killed.
The most common reason for blockage of flow through the coronary arteries is atherosclerosis,
the buildup of plaques along the walls of the coronary blood vessels.
A similar process can occur in blood vessels leading to the brain causing stroke or to
other blood vessels affecting other organs.
So the risk factors for stroke and heart attack overlap in many ways.
It's commonly thought that atherosclerotic plaques are made of fatty deposits, but that
is an oversimplification.
Though fats, which we usually call lipids, do contribute to these plaques, there are
also inflammatory cells, scarring and clotting cells and proteins that contribute to the plaques.
In any case, we know that these so-called atheromas start to develop in the teens and
twenties and slowly proliferate.
Longstanding, stable blockages can lead to the natural development of collateral vessels,
new vessels that can bypass the blockage to deliver blood.
Atherosclerotic plaques can lead to symptoms in several different ways.
They can rupture releasing inflammatory chemicals that quickly create a big clot, completely
occluding flow.
That would typically lead to a big, sudden heart attack.
Or small bits of them can break off, flowing downstream to potentially cause a sudden blockage
in a smaller vessel.
Or they can just slowly limit blood flow to adjacent heart muscle.
In that case, symptoms could be milder and could come and go, especially becoming symptomatic
during times of increased heart work, during exercise or stress.
Angina pectoris is the name for these reversible episodes of chest pain.
They're not many heart attacks, there's no cellular death, but rather, they can be
thought of as warning signs of a possible big heart attack later.
The character and kind of pain and other symptoms experienced by people with angina
is similar to the pain of a heart attack, but it is temporary and usually less severe.
So the prevention of heart attacks is really the prevention of the development of these
atherosclerotic plaques.
There is a tremendous amount of research here, looking at multiple overlapping and additive
risk factors.
There are five important risk factors that we stress to prevent heart disease.
First, maintain a healthy lipid profile.
We don't just look at the total cholesterol, the specifics are important, but the bottom
line is that a healthy diet, healthy weight and an active lifestyle lead to more healthful
blood lipids and decrease cardiovascular risk.
Even with great lifestyle habits, some people will still have unfavorable lipids, that's
probably because of genetic factors.
For these patients and for patients who are unable to sustain healthy life habits, medications
may help reduce lipid risks.
Second, keep blood pressure in a healthy range.
Increased blood pressure contributes to the development of plaques and also forces the
heart muscle to work harder and need more oxygen.
As with lipids and cholesterol, a healthy blood pressure depends on both lifestyle and
genetic factors.
Third, keep weight healthy.
Excessive fat tissue contributes to inflammation and atherosclerosis and risk factors for obesity
overlap with those for unhealthy lipids and increased blood pressure.
Number four, prevent and treat diabetes.
Primarily, again, this is a matter of healthy eating, exercising and healthy weight, but
there is a big contribution of genetics as well.
It is not fair to assume that all of these risks are only because of lifestyle choices.
And finally, avoid smoking, which dramatically increases the risk of heart attacks especially
when combined with other risk factors.
So that's prevention.
What about screening for heart disease risk in healthy people to help identify problems
early?
Current recommendations stress low-tech screenings that are safe and effective.
These include measuring blood pressure at least every two years, measuring blood lipids
every five years, following body weight, and screening for elevated blood glucose.
That's a manifestation of diabetes.
That should be started at age 45.
Regular counseling regarding smoking cessation and maintaining healthy diet and exercise
habits is also recommended.
There are also some high-tech tests that may be helpful for people at high risk for
cardiovascular disease.
A stress test forces the heart to work harder while running on a treadmill.
A continuous EKG reading looks for early signs of insufficient oxygen to the heart muscle
called ischemia.
A newer test is a cardiac CT scan to measure calcium deposits around the heart, calcium
being one constituent of those atherosclerotic plaques.
These are sometimes advertised heavily to the general public, and it's unclear exactly
who should get these tests or how to interpret the results.
They're not recommended for routine use.
In our case today, our patient had a sudden collapse in front of our eyes, so there wasn't
time to take a history or even talk about the symptoms.
I don't think we even found out her name, but it's still important to go through the
history and typical physical exam of someone having a less severe heart attack, so we know
what to look for to help decide which patients are likely or less likely to need immediate
therapy.
Let's go through a second case today.
Bob, a 60-year-old man, comes into our internal medicine clinic with a chief complaint of
my chest hurts.
This is not an uncommon complaint, could be a heart attack, could be heartburn, could
just be a pulled muscle or a bruised rib.
In other words, Bob could have something that will kill him in a few minutes, or he might
have something completely unimportant.
How can we tell the difference?
First, we'll do a quick informal assessment just of Bob sitting there.
He's an African-American man, and he looks comfortable.
He's not pale.
He's not sweating.
He's not having any difficulty breathing.
In other words, he looks, and this is a good medical term, okay.
If he didn't look okay, you'd probably want to jump to putting some EKG leads and oxygen
on him, and maybe even calling 911.
But since he's looking good, we can stay cool and work through this in our usual organized
way, starting with more history.
By the way, in these grand round presentations, I'll sometimes mention a patient's ethnicity.
Sometimes a person's race can be a valuable clue.
Some health problems are more common among people of certain ancestry.
Other times, the ethnicity really isn't relevant at all.
You never know at first which clues are important.
Okay.
Back to Bob.
He says he gets these chest pains now and then.
Under mid chest, he points right in the middle here and feels squeezy or like pressure.
To show you, he holds his hand over his chest and makes a fist.
That's actually a pretty good description of the pain of angina or a heart attack.
The pain sometimes comes out of nowhere, or sometimes when he walks the dog, or sometimes
when he argues with people at work.
It usually goes away with rest within an hour or so.
That timing is important.
Chest pain that lasts seconds or a few minutes is unlikely to be cardiac.
Neither is chest pain that lasts several hours without getting much, much worse.
It's the middle timing pain, an hour or so, that's most likely to be angina.
The radiation of pain and other symptoms can be good clues.
Bob says that sometimes the pain will shoot to his left arm or shoulder, or is accompanied
by nausea or sweatiness.
This is really sounding like he's been having bouts of anginal pain.
Though some people having a heart attack have never had angina previously, Bob's history
is very suspicious for potentially serious heart disease.
We'll want to ask about risk factors too, including other health history, smoking, family
history of heart disease.
The physical exam, though, should start with a general overall assessment.
Does it look like this person is in imminent danger?
A very fast or slow or irregular heart rate is very concerning during chest pain, and
blood pressure and respiratory rate should be checked as well.
People having heart attacks often look scared or sweaty or pale, and may have a new murmur
or other irregularities on the heart exam.
Bob looked well, his vital signs were normal, and the remainder of his exam was unrevealing.
Still, we need to move quickly, but we ought to take a moment to make sure we thought of
a broad enough differential diagnosis for Bob's chest pain.
Cardiac causes top the list, including those we've mentioned, like angina pectoris.
By the way, that word angina, it's Latin for strangling or throttling, and refers specifically
to a squeezing sort of pain.
This just means chest.
Bob also could be having a full-blown MI.
Other cardiac causes include pericarditis and inflammation around the heart, or a rupture
or tear of the aorta, the large vessel exiting the heart.
The coronary arteries come right off the base of the aorta, so disruption of the aorta
itself can block the coronaries and cause an MI.
Bury embolism is caused by a big blood clot in the lungs, and can cause chest pain and
shortness of breath.
If this is large, cardiovascular collapse or sudden death can occur.
Chest pain, along with shortness of breath, can also be caused by a pneumothorax, where
air is trapped outside of the lung against the chest wall.
Pneumonia can cause chest pain, particularly with cough and fever, and reflux can cause
a burning pain typically in the mid-chest.
Chest pain can also be caused by neuromuscular conditions, including costochondritis or inflammation
of the edge of the breastbone.
GI conditions, like ulcers or reflux, can also cause chest pain.
And finally, chest pain is a not uncommon manifestation of anxiety or panic attacks.
Bob's work up from here will go quickly.
One practical tidbit.
With any patient who may be heading to the operating room, and yes, we're suspicious
that Bob is having a heart attack and may need to go right into the cath lab, it's best
to not allow the patient to eat or drink anything.
If sedation is needed, it's safest to be done on an empty stomach.
Now if it's a big emergency and it's not safe to wait, sedation can be done right after
a meal, but it's best to think ahead to minimize risks.
Bob is now, as we say, NPO, nothing per oral, or in normal words, nothing to eat.
We get an EKG.
This records the electrical activity of the heart and can show changes suggestive of either
angina or an evolving myocardial infarction.
It's quick and it's easy.
Yes, here in our office the EKG looks very suspicious.
We make a quick call and get an ambulance over here to get him to the ED as soon as
possible.
There, blood tests are done to specifically look for elevations in what are called heart
muscle enzymes.
When heart cells die, they release specific compounds into the blood that we can test
for.
If those enzymes on the blood tests are up, that confirms a heart attack.
Bob at this point says he really doesn't even feel that bad.
It's been said, by the way, that the first two symptoms of a heart attack in a man are
chest pain and denial.
His chest still hurts, but he says, really doc, this isn't what I thought would be a
heart attack.
That's an important lesson, though the chest pain of an MI can be severe.
Some people find that it doesn't really have to hurt so much.
Be suspicious of chest pain not only when it's severe, but also in cases like Bob's
when the character is squeezy or pressurized or when it radiates to the left arm or when
they're sweating, nausea or vomiting.
The surrounding symptoms and character of the pain are more predictive of heart disease
than the intensity of the pain itself.
The treatment of a heart attack is started quickly.
Heart treatment begins before the diagnosis is actually confirmed.
Basic things are done as soon as possible.
Oxygen is administered.
More oxygen breath in provides more oxygen for the blood to carry, at least potentially
increasing oxygen delivery to heart muscle if there isn't a 100% closed artery.
Aspirin is typically given to prevent further clotting, along with a medicine called nitroglycerin
to widen the arteries, bringing in more blood.
Medicine to treat the chest pain itself should also be given.
There are also more definitive treatments used to treat a confirmed MI.
One is the administration of a thrombolytic drug.
Thrombus means clot and lytic refers to destruction, so thrombolytic drugs are our quote, clot
busters.
These work best if given quickly, before the clot gets thick and hard to break down.
Although the quicker blood flow can be restored to the heart muscle, the less heart tissue
will be damaged.
Another option that's widely used is to quickly perform both a diagnostic angiogram and then
if possible an angioplasty.
These procedures are done in the CAT lab, that's short for catheter, and involve using
a thin tube that snakes up from the artery and the top of the leg towards the heart.
Through this catheter, a small amount of dye can be injected so the inside of blood vessels
can be seen under a kind of moving picture x-ray called a fluoroscope.
With this technique, the exact blocked area of coronary vessel can be seen, and if it's
in a suitable position, a small balloon can be snaked up through the same catheter, put
near the blockage, and expanded to allow blood flow.
Sometimes a small metal tube called a stent is left in place to hold the vessel open.
If an angiogram confirms one or more blockages, but balloon angioplasty is not possible or
not successful, an open surgical procedure can be done to move blood vessels, usually
from the leg to the outside of the heart to bypass the blockages.
This is called a coronary artery bypass graft.
Sometimes it's abbreviated CABG, so it's pronounced cabbage.
Recovery from this kind of surgery takes much longer than after angioplasty.
Whether by thrombolytic drugs, angioplasty, or coronary bypass surgery, restoring blood
flow will only prevent further cellular damage.
It will not revive dead heart tissue.
Some heart repair is possible, but it takes a long time for muscle tissue to grow and
adapt.
Care during and after an MI also involves monitoring for and treating any problem with
the heart rhythm, either using medications or a pacemaker.
Blood thinners are also used to prevent the spread of clots or the creation of new clots
in the blocked vessel or where angioplasty or a cabbage was performed.
Medications are also used to control blood pressure, pain, and anxiety.
After leaving the hospital, aftercare includes not only medications, but also a plan for returning
to or developing a reasonable exercise plan, as well as education and counseling to avoid
lifestyle risk factors.
I want to go back to our first patient, the one at the department store, to expand on
some of the instructions for bystander CPR.
The newest guidelines have de-emphasized some of the traditional parts of CPR that had been
taught.
Rescuers are no longer encouraged to even check for an open airway in breathing.
That used to be the first step, but that's been dropped.
Because it turns out that the faster you start pumping by pressing on the chest, the better
chance the victim has of surviving.
Don't check the pulses, don't mess with the airway, don't even bother with mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation or rescue breaths.
Now jump in and push hard and fast while calling for help and while calling for someone to
get you an AED.
An AED is an automatic external defibrillator.
It is the single best way to restore a normal heart rhythm, and it can be used by almost
anyone.
The faster the heartbeat can be restored, the better the chance of life and recovery.
There are some situations where other approaches to CPR are needed.
First, you have to be safe yourself to do CPR.
If a victim is in a busy street or is drowning, it may not be safe for you to approach.
Do not endanger yourself to do CPR.
Also, children and babies need a different kind of CPR.
For young people, it's unlikely that a cardiac problem has caused their collapse.
Much more likely, it's something like choking or a problem with breathing.
For children, you should open the airway and give rescue breaths before pressing on the
chest.
For any choking victim, adults or child, remove any visible blockage from the airway before
proceeding with CPR, but even if you can't inflate the lungs, continue those chest compressions.
I would hope that no one would hesitate to help a stranger who has a sudden collapse,
but some people might worry about malpractice lawsuits that might occur if resuscitation
is unsuccessful.
Every U.S. state and many countries have so-called good Samaritan laws that protect people from
lawsuits if they stop to help someone who appears to be in mortal danger.
There's a side topic here, just to mention briefly.
So far, we've mostly concentrated on heart attacks from atherosclerosis, which mostly
affects older people.
Much more rarely, sudden death can occur in a young, competitive athlete, though it's
possible that this was caused by an MI, sudden cardiac death in a young person is much more
likely to be related to an inherited genetic condition that predisposes the heart to arrhythmia.
Risks to look for, most importantly, are a family history of sudden death for any reason,
less than 40 years old.
Even something like a drowning or a car accident may have, in fact, been triggered by an unrecognized
cardiac event.
Also, any athlete with a history of fainting or chest discomfort during exercise is at
elevated risk.
Individuals with personal or family risk factors should certainly have a screening EKG and perhaps
a comprehensive exam from a cardiologist prior to competitive sports participation.
A suspected cardiac arrest should immediately trigger several events, all as soon as possible.
Activation of the emergency response system, CPR starting with chest compressions, and
getting an AED in place and activated as soon as possible for rapid defibrillation to restart
the heart.
Take care should be followed by transport, advanced life support, and then definitive
cardiac care.
Bystanders should not hesitate to jump in when help is needed.
Next time, it may be your life that a stranger saves.
Part of your medical school experience will be formal training in advanced cardiac life
support, but I encourage everyone to take at least a basic CPR course.
Our next case is a younger patient, a teenager.
He's certainly an angry, he's not doing very well in school.
Could this just be a normal teenager or is there something else going on?
We'll find out next time.
