Doctors are interested in people, not just what makes them sick, but also what makes
them tick.
In that way, they're a lot like writers, and sometimes doctors can learn some interesting
things from novels and stories.
We'll be doing that more than once in this course.
Here's an example you might recognize.
It was much pleasanter at home, thought poor Alice, when one wasn't always growing larger
and smaller and being ordered about by mice and rabbits.
I almost wish I hadn't gone down the rabbit hole.
That's a quote from Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland, a fantastic tale published
in 1865.
Alice goes down the rabbit hole for adventures with all sorts of creatures.
People have speculated about how Carroll could have thought of this idea of shifting perspectives.
Does Alice get small, or does the world around her get large, or is it just her imagination,
or maybe something else that makes the world seem to change size?
We'll get back to that later.
First, we're in the emergency department tonight, and we've got a patient who's just
about fed up.
Gordon's chief complaint is, I've got another one of these sinus headaches.
The patient is a 42-year-old male who's actually well known in the emergency department.
Even before we went in to see him, one of the nurses came by to give us a heads up.
That guy is always in here.
He just wants drugs.
Well, maybe so.
Maybe not.
Let's see what the story is.
Gordon, at first, he doesn't seem very happy to talk to us.
The lights have been turned off in the small exam room, and he's lying there with a sheet
pulled up over his head.
He complains that it's the same thing again and again, and we ought to just read his file.
It's all in there, he says.
But Edie Docs, we're not really big on reading.
We prefer to hear the story ourselves from the beginning.
We take a seat and let Gordon talk.
He says, again, it's a sinus headache.
He knows what it is.
He gets them all the time.
This one began earlier in the day with a severe headache starting kind of over his right eye,
though it's now spread to both sides of his forehead.
He says, when he gets these, he almost can't think straight, and his nose gets all stuffed
up.
Gordon says, I knew even this morning that I was going to get one of these.
I just knew it.
Then our patient refuses to speak to us anymore.
He ducks back under his covers and says it hurts to talk and tells us to leave and bring
back his medicine.
We decide it's time to step outside.
The nurse brings by a stack of paper from his last few ED trips.
This is an old hospital and the records aren't computerized.
Sure enough, he's had six emergency department visits here in the last four months.
Every time he complains about headaches and ends up getting IV fluids and pain medicines,
then he stays a few hours in the ED, feels better, and leaves.
You note that he's been told to follow up at various times with his own physician and
with an ENT specialist to look into sinus disease and with a neurologist.
It's unclear whether he's followed up with anyone.
By the way, real emergency physicians don't call it the ER, it's the ED.
In other words, it's not a room, it's a department.
Okay, let's step back and think about headaches.
The classification of headaches starts with one question.
Is this a primary headache or a secondary headache?
Secondary headaches are ones that occur without any other abnormality or specific pathology.
These include migraine, tension, and cluster headaches.
Though these kinds of headaches can be very painful and disruptive to life and work, they're
sometimes thought of as benign headaches because they don't get worse and worse and no one
dies because of them.
In contrast, secondary headaches are headaches caused by something else, something else that
can be directly identified and treated.
These include headaches from a brain tumor or an intracranial bleed and abscessed tooth,
meningitis, or as our patient suspects, a sinus infection.
Sudden or severe high blood pressure can also cause headaches, though the majority of people
with high BP actually have no symptoms at all.
The secondary headache category also includes headaches that accompany many viral or bacterial
infections like influenza or strep throat or headaches caused by trauma.
They can also be caused by metabolic disturbances, including low oxygen, for example, from altitude
sickness or from low blood sugar or from substance abuse or withdrawal.
That's just a partial list to get started.
The list of secondary headaches is really very, very broad.
When we've got one other idea, the nurse has suggested that our patient is really here
because he's seeking drugs.
That is a possibility.
We're going to need more history here and a physical exam.
It's time to head back into the exam room.
In the meantime, we've ordered a dose of pain medicine, a mild narcotic.
We say to our patient, I know this has been rough for you.
I see you've been here a lot for these headaches.
I need to ask you some questions to see if we can get to the bottom of this to help you
feel better today, but also to try to keep you from needing to come back to the emergency
department so much.
Gordon peeks out from under his covers.
He gradually sits up and answers our questions.
Headaches are almost always diagnosable based only on the history with a physical exam to
confirm suspicions.
This is not a high-tech diagnosis.
We're going to go through some crucial questions, one by one, to illustrate how an in-depth
history works.
Our most crucial headache question, is this your first headache or your worst headache?
That's very, very important.
Things like an intracranial bleed will cause a severe worst ever in your whole life headache
and that's a huge red flag for immediate action.
In this case, no, it's not the worst or the first.
Gordon says, this feels like every other sinus headache he's ever had.
He says he's had these for the last 10 years and he knows what they feel like.
Every one of these headaches, he says, feels about the same.
More questions.
What happens when the headache starts?
What symptoms develop along with the headaches?
With migraines, there is often an aura, a visual or an auditory phenomenon flashing lights
or something like that that precedes the headache.
Now Gordon says, no, that never happens.
His headache starts with, well, just a headache.
When the headache gets severe, he says, he gets a very stuffy nose and a stuffed up feeling
in the sinuses above his right eye.
Does the pain spread around?
Yes, Gordon says it's now all over my head, but it always starts over the right eye.
What does the pain feel like?
It's a throbbing sort of pain, Gordon says.
You ask, are you stuffy all the time or just with the headaches?
He says, no, no, just with the headaches.
And he adds, he's seen an allergist and an ENT and they didn't do him any good.
Is there anything that makes the headache get worse or get better?
Gordon says that they usually get better if he just lies down quietly.
If he tries to work, they get worse.
He says it's not the position of his body, the headaches do not get particularly worse
when he stands up.
It's more than any kind of work or activity.
That's what makes it worse.
He also denies that the headache is worse when he coughs or sneezes or strains to lift something.
Are you taking any medicines?
No, no, he says.
He was prescribed allergy medicine and it didn't help.
He just takes ibuprofen when it gets really bad and then, if it's not getting better,
he comes to the hospital.
How many times you ask, have you taken ibuprofen?
He says he's taken it a lot lately, at least once a day for the past two weeks.
Gordon denies any other medicines or street drugs.
He says he hates coffee and doesn't drink tea or caffeinated sodas.
He works from home as a customer service rep, fielding incoming support calls.
So we ask what happens when you get a headache?
He says most of the time he takes ibuprofen and goes to sleep and usually when he wakes
up he feels better and can get back to work.
Only sometimes he says he can't sleep and it gets worse and worse so he comes to the
emergency department.
The ED staff was leery thinking Gordon was a, quote, drug seeker.
Does this sound like a drug seeker?
Gordon did indeed follow up with an allergist and an ENT and he says most of the time he
treats his own headaches at home and doesn't come in.
You look at the ED records again, usually he's discharged home without any prescriptions
at all.
He's not asking for medicine.
He's asking for relief.
Ask yourself, as healthcare providers, have we done a good job for our patients so far?
It's time for the physical exam.
Our patient is sitting up now, he looks reasonably comfortable.
The vital signs are entirely normal, including normal blood pressure.
His neck is not stiff.
H-E-E-N-T exam reveals cloggy nasal sounding speech.
There is no nasal discharge and no post-nasal drip.
His eye exam is normal, including normal pupils and normal pupil constriction to light.
With an ophthalmoscope, we can see all the way back to the back of his eye and we confirm
that there is no increased pressure in the cranium pushing the nerves at the back of the
eye forward.
We move on with the exam, chest, lungs, heart, belly, they're all normal.
In a headache evaluation, the neurologic exam is very important, especially to look for asymmetries
and strength or reflexes or anything else abnormal that could hint at a physical problem
with the brain or with the spinal cord.
We make Gordon count backwards by threes as a way to test his cognition and we make him
walk on a straight line to check his balance.
We check his strength by having him hold his arms out for 20 seconds.
Everything here, neurologically, is normal.
Fortunately, our patient Gordon seems to be feeling better overall, so we step back outside
to decide what to do next.
Let's come back to the first decision point in the headache evaluation.
Is this a primary headache or a headache secondary to something else?
We've already got a lot to reassure us.
We know this isn't a tumor.
Anything growing in the brain will cause progressive worsening symptoms.
He's had these headaches for years and they're stable.
It is not a tumor.
It's also not an intracranial bleed because it's not a worst or first ever headache.
He doesn't have a fever or a stiff neck, so meningitis is ruled out.
Really the recurrent non-progressive nature of his symptoms and the lack of any abnormal
findings on the physical exam weighs against any kind of serious secondary headaches.
There are just a few other red flags to review, a few more indications that a patient is at
higher risk for a serious treatable cause of headache that we don't want to miss.
We already have the information, but let's go through the most important hints again.
Headaches that change with posture or with things like straining or coughing may be related
to either too much or too little pressure in the cranium.
This could be caused by tumors or other conditions that interfere with the normal flow of fluid
around the brain.
Our patient doesn't have a history of this kind of headache.
Any patient with other health conditions like cancer or HIV may need additional evaluation
for headaches because they're at risk for a variety of intracranial complications both
from these diseases and also from the medicines used to treat these diseases.
Also the age of the patient is important.
Most primary headaches begin in the teen years through perhaps the thirties or forties.
It is unlikely for someone in their fifties say to first develop migraines or any other
primary headache.
Our patient is forty-two and he's had headaches for ten years, so that's reassuring.
But if this were new headaches in someone over fifty, even with an otherwise normal history
and physical, we might need to be a little more cautious of our diagnosis.
So to summarize, our red flags for potentially dangerous or secondary headaches are, number
one, a progressive nature headaches that are getting worse and worse.
Number two, a worst headache ever.
Sometimes those are called thunderclap headaches.
Number three, headaches accompanied by signs of infection like a fever or a stiff neck.
Number four, headaches that change with posture or with coughing, straining or sneezing.
Five, headaches accompanied by an abnormal physical examination, especially something
abnormal on the neurologic exam.
Six would be headaches in people with ongoing medical problems like cancer or HIV and probably
number seven, new headaches in people over fifty years old.
That list will reliably distinguish the primary headaches, that is the main, common, ordinary
headaches from headaches caused by medical problems that may need urgent intervention.
Let's think about that list.
Every single item there relies only on the history and physical examination.
Do we need any CT or MRI scans or blood tests for the vast majority of headaches that bring
patients to the ED or to doctor's offices?
No.
No, we don't.
There is no role for advanced imaging or other tests as long as there are none of these
red flags on a good, thorough, careful history and physical examination.
Now even though imaging is not necessary or recommended, it is often done perhaps with
the goal of reassuring the patient or perhaps as a form of defensive medicine to prevent
lawsuits or maybe it's because doctors think patients expect some kind of scam.
Whatever the reason, advanced imaging is frequently performed during a headache evaluation, even
if there are no red flags that make positive findings likely.
In that case, imaging with CT or MRI is much more likely to find something incidental or
completely meaningless than it is to find something that doctors need to know about.
One more subtle point.
Distinguishing a primary from a secondary headache depends on a thorough, relaxed, complete
history and physical exam that takes time and patience.
Rushed doctors are unlikely to do a thorough job, which means that rushed doctors end up
ordering more tests and scans to confirm what's going on.
OK, our patient Gordon needs no tests, no scans.
We've got all of the information we need to make a definitive diagnosis now.
We've got no red flags at all, so this is very likely to be one of the primary headaches.
There really are only a small handful of common primary headache types.
These are almost always migraine, tension or cluster type headaches.
Let's go through them and see if the history and physical fit into one of those diagnoses.
Tension headaches are common.
They can last from 30 minutes to a week or so and have a pressing or a tightening sort
of quality.
They're not throbbing.
The pain is bilateral, that means on both sides of the head and of mild to moderate intensity.
They're not aggravated by activity and lack nausea and vomiting.
Typically, they're not made worse with lights or loud sounds.
Our patient Gordon has a unilateral, a one-sided headache, or at least it begins unilateral,
with an intense throbbing sort of pain.
This is not a tension headache.
Cluster headaches are less common, but they're really quite characteristic.
The pain is brief from 15 minutes to about three hours.
They begin and stay unilateral and are accompanied by one-sided facial symptoms on the same side
as the pain, perhaps a red or watery eye congestion or a watery nose, one-sided sweating or one-sided
pupil or eyelid changes.
The thing to keep in mind about cluster headaches is how these symptoms are so striking and
always unilateral and that the headaches are really quite brief.
Our patient isn't having cluster headaches.
There's another headache type that may be contributing here and it has to do with medicines.
Many medicines can themselves cause headaches.
If you read those product inserts, the ones with the teeny tiny mouse type, you'll see
that headaches are among the most common side effects of many medications.
But there are also some medications that when overused can trigger what are called rebound
headaches.
This ironically includes all of the over-the-counter and prescription medicines used to treat headaches
in the first place.
That's right, ibuprofen and acetaminophen as well, if used regularly, will lead to
rebound headaches as they wear off.
Often, headache sufferers find themselves taking their medicines for several days in
a row continuously because the headaches keep coming back.
That perpetuates the cycle.
Early treatment medicines should not be used more than a few days in a row and not more
than three days a week to avoid these rebound headaches.
Gordon says lately he had been using ibuprofen frequently and that may have started to contribute
to at least some of his headaches.
Caffeine is also a common headache contributor, especially in people who are used to consuming
coffee and other caffeine sources every single day.
A day then without the caffeine that you're used to may well become a day with headaches.
The withdrawal of habitual caffeine, that's the common headache trigger.
Back to our primary headaches.
The most common primary headache disorder is migraine.
These headaches last four to 72 hours and are unilateral or at least begin unilaterally.
The pain is of moderate to severe intensity and has a pulsating or throbbing quality.
They get worse with activity like walking around or working.
Migraines will always be accompanied by either nausea or vomiting or a combination of what's
called phonophobia and photophobia.
That means that the headache gets worse with light and with sound.
Our patient Gordon didn't use those words, phonophobia and photophobia, but he did hide
under the covers with the lights out.
Though not part of the definition of migraine, characteristically they improve after sleep.
Remember Gordon mentioned sleeping off these headaches too.
So all of this fits.
We've ruled out secondary headaches with our history and physical and Gordon's headache
pattern fits perfectly into the definition of migraine.
That is our diagnosis.
Often migraines are accompanied by changes in what's called the autonomic nervous system.
This is part of the nervous system that's automatic, the things we really don't have
to think about.
It includes the nerves that make a sweat and the nerves that constrict blood vessels and
make the skin look pale.
Some migraine sufferers become pale and sweaty and many feel nausea or abdominal pain from
these autonomic nerve changes.
Autonomic nerves also travel to the lining of the nose and can cause nasal congestion
or stuffiness for an increased tissue swelling, explaining why Gordon thought he was having
sinus headaches.
Think about this case.
Gordon is stuffy in the ED and says he always gets stuffy with headaches, but doesn't that
sound kind of backwards?
After all, if the headaches are caused by sinus pressure, shouldn't the sinus symptoms
come before the headaches?
You'd also expect other symptoms of a sinus infection like cough or persistent pus-like
nasal drainage.
And even the location of the pain over his eye, that's not actually where human sinuses
are located.
We've got sinuses in the lower middle forehead and right behind our eyes and right under
our cheeks, but not really above our eyes.
Gordon is not having sinus headaches.
The appearance of congestion with the migraine had fooled him and his doctors into thinking
that the sinuses were the cause of the headaches.
In fact, most people who are having what's been diagnosed as sinus headaches are having
migraines.
A few other diagnostic pearls, headaches related to sinus infection often feel worse when bending
forward or lying down and are often accompanied by a decreased ability to smell or to taste.
Gordon reported none of these findings.
Okay, back to migraines.
But not all migraines are accompanied by an aura.
These are reversible neurologic signs or symptoms that occur before the headache or sometimes
just as the headache is beginning.
Common auras include changes in vision such as sparkling lights or colored haze.
They can also include auditory hallucinations or weakness or a vague feeling of dread.
I suspect our patient did have an aura.
He mentioned that he could tell when a headache was going to occur even before it started.
Maybe that was one of these vague aura sensations that are difficult to describe, but Gordon
certainly knew that when he had that feeling and what it meant.
Gordon said way at first that he knew in advance before a headache was going to strike.
About those visual changes, a unique phenomenon that can occur with migraine is as a visual
hallucination where things look much bigger or smaller than they really are.
Some people experience this as if they themselves have dramatically shrunk in size and that
everything around them has grown very large.
We remember that quote from Alice in Wonderland, it's thought that Lewis Carroll himself suffered
from migraines that included this kind of hallucination.
This is based on some suggestive drawings he made and records of him seeing what was
then called an oculist or eye doctor.
Perhaps Alice's adventures in Wonderland were inspired by the author's migraine headaches.
We'll never know for sure, but we've adopted a special name for these special visual hallucinations
that make things look smaller or larger or closer or farther than they really are.
These are called Alice in Wonderland syndrome.
Back to Gordon, we've got a firm diagnosis now and we're ready to talk treatment.
Dealing with migraines should always start with prevention.
Many, though not all migraines, have specific triggers.
These can include lack of sleep or hunger or dehydration, sometimes stress or illness
or bright lights, perhaps reading while in the car.
There's actually overlap between migraines and car sickness, especially in children.
Many children who have car sickness go on to become adults who have classic migraines.
People who have migraines should track their episodes to see if some of these common triggers
seem to be part of the problem.
Not all migraine sufferers have all of these triggers, but many have at least some.
And some triggers can be avoided through lifestyle modification, stress reduction, yoga, getting
a good night's sleep, and other simple non-medical steps.
It's also very important for people with migraines to avoid falling into that trap
of medication overuse and to control their caffeine intake.
Beyond these preventive lifestyle strategies, migraine sufferers need an action plan to
start as soon as possible when a migraine begins.
For people who do have a warning aura, the migraine action plan needs to start as soon
as the aura begins, which may be well before the actual headache.
That's good.
A migraine caught early is much more likely to be stoppable.
A migraine action plan should include both medical and non-medical steps.
Usually the patient will benefit from getting to a dark, quiet environment quickly.
Sometimes a small snack, including some sugar, will help, perhaps even including some soda
or coffee with caffeine.
That's right, though habitual caffeine use can lead to migraines, caffeine itself, when
taken at the start of a migraine, can help reduce its severity.
Medicines can help, especially if taken right at the start of the headache.
These can include over-the-counter pain relievers like ibuprofen or acetaminophen.
There are also very effective prescription migraine stopping medicines.
The best of these are in a family called the triptans.
They all work similarly to block a brain receptor that's central to migraine development.
All migraine sufferers who don't get full relief from over-the-counter products should
have one of these triptans available for immediate use when a migraine begins.
They come as pills, nasal sprays, and an auto-injector device that is especially useful for the many
migraines patients who have vomiting with their headaches.
Note these triptans, though they're very effective, they can themselves trigger rebound headaches
when used too frequently.
If despite trigger avoidance and a good action plan, migraines are still occurring frequently,
we ought to consider starting a daily migraine prevention strategy.
This can involve adding a daily medication or sometimes a dietary supplement that can
act as a migraine preventer.
There are several of these available, though some have some side effects.
And now that we have a definite diagnosis, our patient was very happy to learn that there
are things he can do to prevent these headaches and to more effectively treat them while staying
at home.
With a more regular sleep schedule and increased exercise, Gordon was able to reduce his life
stress preventing some of the migraines.
We also prescribed effective medicine to stop his migraines at home and asked Gordon to
follow up with his primary care doctor to explore whether a daily prevention medicine
or supplement would be a good idea.
Over the following six months, he did not return to the emergency department for care.
Can be a very odd sort of disorder, though most patients' main migraine symptom is headaches,
some migraine types cause unexpected neurologic or other symptoms, sometimes without any headache
at all.
Just a few examples, migraines can cause episodes of intense confusion or a stroke-like paralysis
of half of the body or sometimes intense repetitive vomiting with or without abdominal pain or
perhaps episodes of blindness, dizziness, vertigo or trouble walking.
Some of these migraine symptoms run in families.
What distinguishes all of them is that the symptoms are sudden and brief and follow a
similar pattern every time and that in between episodes, all symptoms resolve.
That was a good, satisfying case.
We've got a clear diagnosis and we've got a good effective plan for prevention and treatment.
Sometimes though, cases are a little bit more messy and complicated and sometimes the best
strategies for prevention and therapy aren't so clear.
See you next time.
