This series of lectures is intended to increase your understanding of how doctors diagnose
and treat diseases and how you can improve your own health by being an active and informed
patient.
However, these lectures are not designed for use as medical reference to diagnose, treat,
or prevent medical illnesses or trauma, and neither the teaching company nor the lecture
is responsible for your use of this educational material or its consequences.
Furthermore, participating in this course does not create a doctor-patient relationship.
The information contained in these lectures is neither intended to dictate what constitutes
reasonable, appropriate, or best care for any given health issue, and does not take
into account the unique circumstances that define the health issues of the patient.
If you have questions about the diagnosis, treatment, or prevention of a medical condition
or illness, you should consult your personal physician.
The opinions and positions provided in these lectures reflect the opinions and positions
of the relevant lecture and do not necessarily reflect the opinions or positions of the teaching
company or its affiliates.
The teaching company expressly disclaims liability for any direct, indirect, incidental, special,
or consequential damages or lost profits that result directly or indirectly from the use
of these lectures.
In states which do not allow some or all of the above limitations of liability, liability
shall be limited to the greatest extent allowed by law.
Your lecture is Dr. Roy Benirock.
Dr. Benirock is a general pediatrician, an author, and an educator.
He earned his M.D. at Emory University and completed his residency through Emory's
affiliated hospitals, serving as chief resident and instructor of pediatrics.
He has continued his involvement on the Emory faculty as an adjunct assistant professor
of pediatrics.
Dr. Benirock is board-certified in general pediatrics and practices full-time at Pediatric
Physicians P.C. near Atlanta, Georgia.
He has published two books on parenting and pediatric health topics and writes a blog
for parents and health professionals.
His essays on pediatric health have been widely published on the internet and he has served
as a featured expert on WebMD.com.
Welcome everyone to medical school.
An essential part of learning to think like a doctor is the grand rounds experience.
In each lecture, we'll meet and examine a patient with a medical problem.
Keep your eyes and ears open and see if you can figure out the solution to each mystery.
Today we're in the general medicine clinic and our first patient is a 55-year-old woman.
She's made an appointment to see you, you're her physician.
You start by introducing yourself, then you say, what can I do for you today?
Your patient answers, I never feel good.
These grand round sessions are a traditional part of every medical education.
Each one is an in-depth discussion of a patient case from initial presentation to diagnosis
to treatment.
We'll gather our history, that's the story, the reason the patient came in, then we'll
perform a physical exam and develop what's called a differential diagnosis of what might
be going on if needed, we'll order tests to confirm our suspicions, then we'll come
up with a plan to help the patient.
So what should you expect to learn from these cases?
You'll certainly see a wide variety of symptoms and diseases and you'll get a good appreciation
for how the body works in health and in disease.
More importantly though, by the end of this series you'll have a much better understanding
of how doctors think, how doctors figure out what's wrong with the patient, how we use
our skills to rule in or rule out certain diagnoses, how we come up with a diagnosis
and a treatment plan, and how we work with patients to improve health and prevent and
treat disease.
Obviously, I'm not your physician and I can't give you personal medical advice, that's
what your own doctor is for, but by listening to these lectures you will learn how to communicate
more effectively with your doctor.
Understanding what doctors do and how and why they do it will make you a better patient
and will improve your own health.
Our Grand Rounds case today is the 55 year old woman we've just met who says she never
feels good.
In medical encounters doctors start every case with a patient's age and gender followed
by the so-called chief complaint.
This is a quote usually in the patient's own words of what the main concern is.
Why did this person come to see the doctor?
It's a very important piece of information because it focuses the evaluation on what the
patient is worried about.
Sometimes chief complaints don't end up being the main thing that the doctor is worried
about and don't directly point to the final diagnosis, but it's still something crucial
to know when you're getting started.
In this case, our chief complaint, it's vague, I never feel good.
It doesn't really help us narrow down anything, but it does tell us that our patient is suffering
and always feels bad in some way and maybe has been for a long time.
There could be a clue there.
After the chief complaint, we'll take a history of the present illness, often abbreviated
as an HPI.
This is a story, the patient's story of what's going on when it started, what sorts of factors
influence the symptoms.
When we take an HPI, it's important to let the patient do most of the talking.
We'll give a bit of a lead or a push now and then with questions to clarify the story,
but this is the time for the patient to tell us what's going on, not the other way around.
Our patient says that she used to be healthy and vigorous and used to enjoy playing tennis.
About five years ago, she began to find that her energy wasn't as good.
At about the same time, she broke her wrist and had to stop playing.
She wonders now if maybe stopping tennis was a mistake.
At the time, the doctor who treated her broken wrist thought that her bones didn't look
strong on an x-ray, so she was referred to a specialist and eventually started on calcium
supplements and hormone pills, often used in postmenopausal women to increase bone density.
She recalls that those medicines, there were a series of different medicines actually,
they caused a lot of stomach symptoms and she ended up stopping them after a year.
She was also supposed to take iron because she was told she was anemic, but ended up
thinking that the iron made her stomach feel worse, so she stopped that too.
Still, even after stopping these medications, she's continued to have intermittent belly
aches and constipation and sometimes diarrhea at times, and she often feels loaded and nauseous.
She recalls that she wanted to stop drinking milk.
She had read that lactose intolerance could cause some of her symptoms, but her doctors
didn't want her to stop because she needed calcium for her bones.
Eventually she ignored her doctors and did stop all dairy products, and she thinks that
this has maybe helped a little.
In the meantime though, she had to retire from her job as a teacher because she found
that she just didn't have the energy to stay on her feet all day.
She sleeps well, wakes up feeling rested and seems to eat a healthy diet.
That's our HPI, the patient's story.
It's sometimes helpful to ask questions to clarify some of these symptoms, the onset
and the nature of those symptoms and the factors that make them better or make them worse,
but for now we're going to move on to the next step past this initial history.
The next thing to review is usually the patient's family and social history to see if any of
this background information gives us useful clues.
We already know our patient is a retired teacher.
We learn that she lives with her husband and has two children who have moved away from
home.
Her family health history reveals that her mother died at age 50 of breast cancer and
her father had a stroke at age 81.
She doesn't smoke or drink alcohol and says she doesn't take any prescription medicines,
herbs or street drugs.
She does take a vitamin every day and also takes over-the-counter Pepto-Bismol regularly,
which at least sometimes seems to help her stomach.
Our next step will be a physical exam, but before we get into that, let's pause and
look over the case and organize our thoughts.
We're planning to do a comprehensive physical exam, but it's good to think about what we're
going to look for even before doing the exam.
On any exam, we ought to keep our eyes wide open for clues, but we're more likely to
see those clues if we at least know what we're looking for.
To help stay on track, let's come up with a problem list.
What are the things that are wrong here?
We've got a woman who's been ill for about five years.
She had a fracture and is said to have had decreased bone density.
She has very low energy.
We're told she has had anemia.
That's a low count of red blood cells.
She also has a number of abdominal complaints, including pain, nausea, sometimes diarrhea,
and sometimes constipation.
That's quite a problem list.
Well, have you got it figured out yet?
Actually, you shouldn't have.
If at this point the doctor is thinking of a single likely diagnosis, the doctor himself
is likely to get it wrong.
Our job as doctors isn't to lunge at the first diagnosis that seems to fit, but to keep an
open mind and think about broad categories of problems that we can narrow down as we
get more information.
Thinking of a diagnosis too early ends up anchoring your mind, so you're more likely
to overlook clues that don't fit your expectations.
On to the physical exam.
Our patient is a thin woman and she looks a little anxious.
She's seen a lot of doctors over the last several years and may be becoming, understandably,
a bit distrustful.
Today we're going to focus only on the most pertinent, positive, and negatives from the
exam.
Specifically, her vital signs, that is her pulse, blood pressure, respiratory rate and
temperature are normal.
Her lungs sound clear and her breathing is easy.
Her heart exam and circulation are normal and her abdominal exam reveals kind of a diffuse
mild tenderness wherever you press.
A rectal examination was unrevealing and afterwards a quick test for blood in the stool was negative.
Okay, we've got our chief complaint, I never feel good.
We've got our HPI, some additional history and a physical exam.
It's time to see if we can make a list of possible diagnoses and then narrow and refine
the list based on all of the information we have.
When there are many symptoms, as there are in this case, it may not be possible to fit
all of them into one diagnosis and that's okay.
After all, not everyone with disease X has every single symptom that's typical of disease
X and sometimes people with disease X also have a little bit of disease Y.
Patients do not routinely read medical textbooks and sometimes they don't present with the
exact symptoms they're supposed to have.
Okay, let's start with one symptom, make a broad list of diagnoses and then add symptoms
to her story to see what goes up, goes down or falls off of our list.
Let's start with chronic fatigue.
The most common cause of fatigue is, of course, inadequate sleep.
That can mean not enough hours of sleep or inadequate quality of sleep.
Even if there are enough hours of sleep, if sleep is frequently interrupted, it will not
be restful.
Sometimes sleep is interrupted by severe snoring by the patient or the spouse or frequent
trips to the bathroom or frequent awakenings from a baby.
Another common cause of poor sleep quality is restless leg syndrome, again, either the
patient or the spouse.
In our case, none of this sounds likely, so we can leave sleep problems off of our list.
Fatigue can also be caused by depression.
Now, you may be surprised that I bring up a psychiatric diagnosis so early, but keep
in mind that depression is very common and causes a lot of genuine, serious symptoms and
impairment.
People with depression also complain of a lot of aches and pains, belly aches or headaches,
so this diagnosis in some ways hits here.
We'll keep it in mind.
Another potential cause to add to our fatigue list would be heart disease.
If the heart can't pump enough blood, a kind of fatigue called exercise intolerance can
occur.
That's basically when a person can't keep up with a certain level of exercise as expected.
Our patient's fatigue doesn't really seem related to exercise and her normal physical
exam really doesn't fit with a person who has had significant heart disease for five
years, so let's leave heart disease at the bottom of our list of possibilities.
A number of endocrine problems can also cause fatigue, including diabetes and thyroid disease.
We'll make sure to test for these.
Further expanding our list, anything that causes anemia or low blood iron can cause low energy
or fatigue.
We were told that our patient was diagnosed with anemia in the past.
Could that be the main problem here?
If the anemia is caused by blood loss, say in the gut, from some chronic inflammation
or an infection, that could perhaps explain some of her GI symptoms too.
Many infections can cause fatigue, including a mononucleosis, for example, but our patient's
fatigue has lasted too long for that to fit well.
Many cancers can also make a patient feel fatigued, but again, with a five-year history
that seems unlikely, I don't think you could have symptoms from cancer for this long without
the diagnosis becoming much more obvious.
We'll move cancer lower down on our list.
Many medications, including both prescription and non-prescription drugs, cause fatigue as
do many drugs of abuse.
Our patient tells us she doesn't use any of these products, but we'll keep in mind
that our patients are not always forthcoming about drug or alcohol habits.
This next idea doesn't fit our patient, but it's always worth considering for a woman
with fatigue and nausea, could she be pregnant?
Our patient is past menopause, so we'll leave that off the list.
Okay, that's a good start.
Now let's look at the data we've got and see how we might adjust our list.
Our physical exam didn't reveal a whole lot, but it did focus our concern on the belly.
She had some tenderness there, and a lot of her symptoms seem to be belly-related.
Have we thought enough about problems with the gut that might also cause fatigue?
What sorts of diagnoses can cause nausea, pain, diarrhea, and constipation, and are some of
those same gut diagnoses, ones that perhaps have already appeared on our list of likely
fatigue diagnoses?
We'll go through this list quicker.
There are a lot of causes of acute sudden abdominal symptoms, including many viral infections
and food poisoning, but we can focus here instead on causes of chronic problems.
Irritable bowel syndrome is very common and presents with abdominal discomfort, bloating,
and either diarrhea or constipation, or sometimes both, but it doesn't really cause anemia,
and shouldn't cause fatigue unless, of course, the gut symptoms interfere with sleep.
Abdominal ulcers can cause pain, though not some of those lower-down symptoms of diarrhea
and constipation.
Gallbladder disease could cause pain and nausea, and sometimes diarrhea, though it wouldn't
particularly cause fatigue.
How about inflammatory bowel disease, like Crohn's disease?
That can certainly cause at least most of the GI symptoms our patient reported, as well
as causing GI blood loss, anemia, and fatigue.
We mentioned depression, which could be related to chronic abdominal pain, but we wouldn't
expect anemia with depression unless the patient had stopped eating well.
Lactose intolerance is a common cause of diarrhea and pain, though not constipation and not
fatigue.
How about celiac disease?
That's a chronic disorder that causes malabsorption of nutrients from the gut, leading to a myriad
of symptoms that can include fatigue, anemia, and almost any GI symptom.
In celiac disease, malabsorption of nutrients can also affect the bones.
Decreased absorption of dietary vitamin D, phosphorus, and calcium can cause decreased
bone density.
As you recall, at the beginning of our patient's story, it started with a fracture, and the
suggestion from some doctor that she needed more calcium in her diet.
We've got some good candidates here, several possibilities that can cause her central symptoms
of both fatigue and GI problems.
To confirm a diagnosis from a list, or to strike off other diagnoses as not being possible,
the next step in our evaluation is to order tests.
These could include blood work, or x-rays, or other kinds of investigations.
As we go through our Grand Rounds series, we'll learn more about the ways medical imaging
and blood tests are used.
But for today, let me just summarize the tests that were done on our patient.
A gallbladder ultrasound came back normal, and a chest x-ray was normal, including normal
heart size.
An EKG was normal, further confirming that there was no heart disease.
Blood tests revealed normal blood sugar, meaning she does not have diabetes, normal thyroid
functioning, low vitamin D levels, and mild anemia.
Her sedrate and CRP were normal.
These normal blood tests mean that there was no ongoing inflammation or serious infection.
One last blood test was done, a test for antibodies that are usually present in people
with celiac disease.
And that test was positive.
Our patient then had a gut wall biopsy, and celiac disease was confirmed.
Celiac disease is a chronic illness, primarily of the gut characterized by malabsorption.
The lining of the gut, the small finger-like projections where absorption of food nutrients
occurs, is damaged, and the net effect is that nutrients are not absorbed across the
gut wall into the blood for use by the body.
The primary symptoms of celiac disease are caused by inadequate nutrient availability,
and also by the GI effects of having, essentially, food staying in the gut instead of moving
into your body.
This includes diarrhea and bloating and abdominal pain.
Sometimes constipation can be more of a problem than diarrhea, or, as in our patient, there
can be periods of time when these seemingly opposite symptoms go back and forth.
Many celiac symptoms also occur outside of the gut.
We'll talk more about those later.
Celiac disease was known to the ancient Greeks, who referred to a condition called coliacos,
meaning suffering of the bowels.
A patient case written in the second century described a man with stomach pain who was
underweight, pale, weak, and incapable of working.
That's a pretty good description, still, of a severe case.
The Greek term was translated to the term celiac in 1856.
Around that time, it was recognized that this was a disease that could be managed by diet.
In 1954, Dutch pediatrician Willem Dickey linked the disease to the ingestion of wheat
protein.
It's speculated that his experience seeing patients improve during the famine of 1944
when wheat was scarce, that may have helped him recognize the critical role of wheat in
this illness.
Though the symptoms of celiac disease are varied and affect many organ systems, it only
has one cause, ingesting certain proteins found in wheat, barley, and rye.
These are natural proteins from a family called gluten proteins.
You may also see the term gliadin, which refers to a more specific type of gluten.
Celiac disease is sometimes called gluten entropathy, or celiac sprue.
When gluten-containing foods are eaten by people with celiac disease, these proteins
are modified or processed so that they trigger a cross-reaction with gut tissue.
Basically, the body's own immune system is tricked into attacking healthy cells in the
gut and probably elsewhere, too.
So celiac disease is, in a sense, an autoimmune disease.
The body is attacking itself, but it's an autoimmune disease that has a specific and
avoidable trigger.
It's the gluten proteins that trigger the reaction, and once gluten is no longer part
of the diet, the disease itself can almost always be reversed.
As we've seen, the malabsorption that occurs with celiac disease causes gut symptoms like
bloating, pain, and diarrhea.
It also causes specific nutritional deficiencies, including iron deficiency, with resulting
anemia, vitamin D deficiency, resulting in poor calcium absorption and less calcium in
the bones, sometimes weight loss, and poor growth in children.
Our patient also reported that she thought some of her symptoms could have been made
worse with the ingestion of dairy products.
This could have been a secondary phenomenon, though celiac disease doesn't directly affect
the digestion of milk.
The damage to the gut tissue can reduce the availability of the enzyme lactase, which
is necessary to process the milk sugar lactose.
So some people with celiac disease seem to also have what we'll call a secondary lactose
intolerance.
Secondary here means caused by something else.
So our patient, she was right.
Her symptoms do get worse with dairy, even though a dairy allergy or lactose intolerance
were not her main diagnosis.
In addition to these malabsorption symptoms, celiac disease can include many possible symptoms
outside of the gut.
These arise maybe because of the nutritional deficiencies, or sometimes because gluten
can trigger autoimmune tissue destruction in other parts of the body.
These so-called extraintestinal manifestations, as with the other symptoms of celiac, are
reversible once the patient is placed on a gluten-free diet.
The most common extraintestinal symptoms are easy fatigue and skin rashes, especially a
characteristic itchy rash called dermatitis herpetiformis, which may occur with or without
other manifestations of celiac disease.
There are also a number of neurologic symptoms, including neuropathy, that's a form of nerve
damage that can result in pain or tingling in the extremities, as well as a loss of control
of body movements, which can make walking difficult.
The treatment of celiac disease is simply enough a gluten-free diet, that's simple
to say, but may not be so simple to do.
Wheat-based products are very common in a typical Western diet.
Though wheat is the main food to avoid, people with celiac should also not eat barley or
rye, and it's often suggested that oat products also have to be avoided, because typically
harvested oats are often contaminated with wheat grains that presumably blow across the
crops.
At this time, there are no medications to prevent or treat the autoimmune damage that
occurs when wheat is ingested, and people with celiac disease need to avoid eating gluten-containing
products for the rest of their lives.
Avoiding wheat not only helps relieve the immediate symptoms of celiac, but also reduces
the risk of long-term complications of untreated celiac disease, including osteoporosis and
an increased risk of cancer.
With treatment, our patient's prognosis is excellent.
She was very relieved to learn about celiac disease and became a bit of a gluten crusader
in her household, making sure that there was no way her own food could even inadvertently
be contaminated with wheat.
Within two months of her dietary changes, all of her symptoms completely resolved, and
she was able to resume playing tennis.
She was also treated with extra iron and vitamin D for her anemia and low bone mineral content.
Unfortunately, there is no way to quickly replace years of lost bone calcium, so she
will remain at a somewhat increased risk of fractures for some time.
There's an important distinction to be made between people who have different kinds of
problems when they eat wheat products.
Celiac disease, as we've discussed, is a specific autoimmune disorder that causes malabsorption,
gut symptoms, and other problems, as we saw in our patient.
It's not the same as wheat allergy.
Wheat allergy refers to a different kind of immune-mediated reaction and typically causes
things like hives, vomiting, or sometimes difficulty breathing.
People with wheat allergy do not have celiac disease, and people with celiac disease do
not have wheat allergy.
Another confusing term is gluten sensitivity.
This is a somewhat controversial entity where people have troublesome symptoms when they
eat wheat, but they test negative for celiac disease and allergy.
There's no good test to confirm gluten sensitivity, but there are many people who test negative
for celiac and still seem to feel better when they avoid wheat-containing products.
For many years, the only way to confirm the diagnosis of celiac disease was by intestinal
biopsy.
Dr. Dickey, the Dutch physician who made the link with wheat after World War II, he also
first described the villus atrophy characteristic of celiac disease when biopsies are examined
under a microscope.
Biopsies are still used to definitively diagnose celiac disease and to monitor patient progress.
However, the availability of reliable, relatively inexpensive blood tests to diagnose celiac
has changed our approach to this disease.
In the past, only people with persistent and severe symptoms would undergo the procedure
necessary to get the biopsy, so celiac disease was viewed as something relatively uncommon
and something that always presented with severe gut symptoms.
The availability of these blood tests has made it easy to test children and adults, and it's
become clear that many, if not most, celiac patients have mild symptoms.
Some patients have just unexplained anemia or mild elevations of their blood markers
for liver disease.
Some only have rashes or constipation or GI complaints that may have been labeled irritable
bowel syndrome.
There are probably many people who have no symptoms whatsoever, though they may be at
risk for long-term complications.
The prevalence of the actual diagnosis of celiac disease is about 1 in 1,700 people.
However, when blood donated to blood banks is tested, the rate of positive celiac tests
may be about 1 in 100.
So many people may have celiac disease without symptoms and without knowing it.
The current state-of-the-art blood tests have very good correlation with biopsies, but older
tests were not as reliable.
Keeping up with the advantages and disadvantages of specific tests and especially newer tests
as they're released, that's the physician's responsibility.
The patients should be able to ask, how reliable is this test before the blood is drawn?
There are also genetic tests available, but it's important that patients understand what
these mean.
Most all patients with celiac disease have genetic markers that can be demonstrated in
blood or mouth swab samples.
If you don't have the genetic markers, your lifetime risk of celiac is zero, or at least
very close to zero.
However, most people who do have these markers do not go on to develop celiac disease.
Even among people who are genetically predisposed to celiac disease, with a positive genetic
test, the lifetime risk of developing celiac is probably from 3 to 10%.
So with genetic tests for celiac, a negative test means you have close to zero risk, and
a positive result means you are at some risk, but will probably go the rest of your life
without developing celiac disease.
While there are no medical downsides to a gluten-free diet that there are plenty of
other nutritious foods to choose from, it can be difficult to maintain this diet, as
required for the rest of someone's life.
That's why we usually confirm positive celiac antibody tests by biopsy.
This may be especially important in children who tend to be picky eaters and may not take
well to a gluten-free diet.
Our patient today presented with a constellation of symptoms with a history of several seemingly
unrelated problems.
She had had a broken bone and was noted to be deficient in vitamin D. She was also anemic,
or deficient in iron.
She had very low energy.
She had a number of different GI complaints spanning several years, some of which seemed
to come and go, perhaps at times related to the ingestion of milk.
The key here to making the diagnosis was to get all of the information together and to
think broadly about what could account for everything.
Listening to the patient tell her story was the source of our best clues.
And that's something we're going to see again and again.
The history, our most important diagnostic tool, is followed by a physical exam to clarify
our suspicions and to drive some considerations higher or lower on the list of possibilities.
Patients in X-rays are never done to fish around and find a diagnosis, but to confirm
or refute what we already suspect.
That is how doctors think.
Today we've explored the first of our series of grand rounds and you've gotten a flavor
for the organization of these medical mysteries.
Some of the upcoming cases will be diseases you've heard of or perhaps you're very familiar
with.
Others might be a bit more arcane.
All of them will illustrate how doctors and patients should think about diagnosing and
treating disease.
Next up, a much newer disease, one not known by the ancient Greeks.
We'll learn more about that next time.
