Today, you're an emergency physician, but you're not yet at work.
You're just driving on the way to the hospital, heading in to do your ED shift, drinking coffee,
probably.
It doesn't matter what time of day.
If you're an emergency doc, you're drinking coffee.
By the way, the correct terminology is important.
People who work in emergency departments prefer to call it the ED.
The specialty is called EM for emergency medicine.
The doctors who work in the ED are called emergency physicians.
So ED is the place, EM is the specialty, EP is the specialist, and ER is a TV show.
A guy in a motorcycle passes you on the left darting into and out of oncoming traffic.
He's just flying along, probably going 60 miles an hour on a two-lane street.
Up ahead of you, you see his back wheel clip the edge of a car as he darts back into your
lane.
The motorbike spins out of control and slams into a concrete utility pole.
Today's Grand Rounds is going to be a little different.
We know exactly what the diagnosis is.
We just saw it happen.
The mystery, the case that we'll see unfold, is what happens next.
What happens to a human body when it's pushed to the edge of survival?
You're going to stop to help.
Your foot's on the brake and you're already pulling over.
In some places, laws require healthcare providers to stop and offer assistance, but honestly,
I don't think people stop because it's the law.
You stop because you can help.
First step, clear the area.
You need to ensure your own safety.
First, making sure no one is going to drive into you or the victim when you stop to help.
You pull over, leaving your blinkers on and leaving enough of your car in the lane to
slow traffic.
Then you call for help.
You're going to do what you can, but you already know that you're going to need an ambulance
and the faster they get here and get the cyclist to the hospital, the better his chance of
survival.
If other people have stopped to help, you can split up the job, say to someone else,
you call 911, but I wouldn't assume that somebody else has called.
Okay, the ambulance is on the way.
The area seems safe and you approach your patient.
He's lying on the ground on his back.
His motorcycle helmet has been crushed and knocked off his head.
You can see the word Tommy airbrushed across the back of the helmet.
Tommy himself is lying awkwardly.
His legs look broken and one shoulder is pushed backwards unnaturally.
These are the things you really can't help but notice and afterwards they may be the
things you remember best.
The initial care of a trauma or a critically ill patient, including any trauma patient,
from any kind of trauma, from motorcycle accidents to injuries during wartime, drowning victims,
a serious fall, anything, starts with what's called the primary survey.
Medical personnel go through five items in order and you always address the step you
are on before you go on to the next step.
There's a handy mnemonic to remember the five steps of the primary survey, A, B, C, D, E.
The point of this primary survey is to identify and immediately deal with life-threatening
problems.
In the field, if there is something that is an immediate threat to life, do what you
can to fix it.
And if you can't fix it, continue support and get the patient transported as quickly
as possible.
Now this primary survey is for medical people, emergency medical techs and nurses, respiratory
therapists, ED docs, people who have been trained.
Laymen are not expected to know or follow these steps.
I do recommend routinely that people take a CPR course, especially parents or those
who work with children or elderly people, so they can feel more comfortable taking the
first steps in an emergency.
For most laymen, the most important steps are to protect the victim from further harm
and to call for help.
Today, you're an ED doctor.
Let's get going on those ABCDEs.
A stands for airway.
Is the airway open?
Can air get into the lungs?
In an awake patient, you can test this by asking the person to speak.
If you can talk or if you can cough, you can move air.
Our patient, Tommy, he isn't really moving and he certainly isn't speaking.
You assess the airway visually.
He seems to have no serious facial trauma that would interfere with breathing.
But in an unconscious patient, you know that he may not do a good job keeping his mouth
open and his tongue pushed forward.
You need to be very careful about moving the head.
With this kind of trauma, there's a very good chance that there's a fracture in the
neck and you don't want to do something that may endanger the spinal cord.
Still, he's got to have an open airway to breathe, so if you need to move the head to
open the airway, you do it.
B stands for breathing and Tommy does seem to be breathing a little bit.
You look, you listen, you feel, you can look at the chest wall.
It's rising and falling, at least some, and you can listen and feel right over the mouth
to tell at least some air is moving in and out.
But they're slow and they're irregular and you're hoping that the ambulance gets there
soon with some equipment and people to help out.
C is circulation.
Is there a pulse?
Is blood being circulated?
Yes, there's a pulse you can feel.
It's not strong, but it's there.
The assessment of circulation in the C-step also includes control of any serious hemorrhages.
If your patient is bleeding, try to stop it with pressure and perhaps a tourniquet.
If too much blood is lost, circulation will be compromised.
For now, you don't see any serious bleeding.
Okay, help has arrived.
The ambulance comes screeching up almost simultaneously with a police car.
The EMTs, those are emergency medical technicians, they jump right in.
Since you're an ED doc, you know that unless you have field experience and training, the
best thing you can do at this point is to get out of the way and let the EMTs do their
job.
That's highly specialized work and it isn't really part of training for physicians.
Attempts to help the ambulance team, especially in a critical situation, will usually just
slow them down.
They're going to start the primary survey again from the top.
Back to A. Tommy's airway is open and more protected now.
One of the techs holds his heads carefully in a neutral position, taking any load off
of his spine.
B. Tommy at this point is barely breathing.
His chest wall isn't moving well.
He's maybe gasping, but he's not moving air.
While one EMT keeps his head stable, another applies a mask over his mouth and nose with
100% oxygen and squeezes a bag to push air into his lungs.
This is called bag mask ventilation and though it can be labor intensive, it's quick to
start once you have the right equipment.
While bagging, you can see Tommy's chest rising and falling so you know air is getting in
and out.
Okay, step B is covered.
That's breathing.
Let's go to step C. C, again, stands for circulation.
Make sure the heart is beating.
Make sure there are pulses.
That's how you know there's blood getting to the body.
Look for active bleeding and try to control it, usually first with direct pressure.
Tommy's got reasonably good pulses for now.
Next is D. D stands for disability, referring to your patient's neurologic status.
There are several scales and ways to judge overall neurologic status, but one of the
quickest and most widely used is the simple AVPU scale.
A stands for alert, meaning a normal alert fully awake patient.
P stands for voice, referring to a patient who isn't fully alert, but at least responds
to your voice either by talking back or moving purposefully.
P stands for pain, meaning a patient who responds not to voice, but only to a painful stimulus.
You is a patient who is completely unresponsive, who doesn't react to your voice or pain at
all.
The EMTs yell at Tommy, sir, sir, are you okay?
He doesn't respond at all.
Sir, can you open your eyes?
Open your eyes.
There's no response.
They do a quick sternal rub.
That's a quick way to give some pain, to check responsiveness, pushing on the chest with
the knuckles, kind of like this.
When they do this to Tommy, he kind of groans and pulls his legs up towards his chest.
So at this point, Tommy is a P on the AVPU scale.
He responds to pain.
E is the last step of the primary survey, standing for exposure and environment.
You need to get a look at the whole body.
If you don't look, you won't see.
For practical purposes, looking at the back is done as a log roll with someone holding
the head neutral.
And in the field, this can be done in one step while rolling the patient onto a firm
board to get him up in the ambulance for transport.
When the team rolls Tommy, you see something not good at all.
It looks like the ribs on one side of his back are crushed inwards.
This means a very serious injury to his lung there and that breathing may become very difficult.
They rush Tommy onto the ambulance.
They scream away.
Lights and sirens are blaring.
You follow along in your own car to the hospital.
You were heading into work anyway.
And now you know who's probably going to be your first patient.
While on the ambulance, a lot is going on.
The crew reports to the ED by radio, sometimes cell phone, and sends in data about Tommy's
status and progress so the trauma team can prepare.
The mantra, the philosophy of the EMTs in a serious life-threatening situation is to
spend a minimum amount of time at the scene.
That's only immediate threats and only if you have the equipment and ability to address
them, and then get the patient as quickly as possible to where he needs to be.
On the way, on route, they do as much as they can to help.
One specific task, along with keeping an eye on those ABCs, is to try to get good IV access.
Get IVs started, big lines, and multiple ones.
EMTs would never delay transport to get those IVs in, but that access is going to be critical
to give medicines and fluids and blood products.
You park your car and head into the hospital.
You know the trauma team is already waiting for the patient, they're gowned and gloved
because they know something messy is coming in.
IV fluid bags are hanging on poles, ready to hook up to the lines that were started on
the ambulance.
As soon as possible, those lines will start running in fluids called crystalloid.
Basically, these are salt solutions to replace lost blood and maintain circulation.
The trauma team includes experienced nurses and techs and a respiratory therapist.
There's also an x-ray technician on hand, right there, to shoot a CCP, that's a C spine
or cervical spine, chest and pelvic x-ray.
That's crucial in serious trauma to tell you if the neck is broken or if there's air
or blood filling up the thorax.
One team member is called the scribe, who stands off to the side with a clipboard, keeping
track of the time and all orders and tasks that are given and carried out.
While your colleagues on the trauma team do their job, you catch your breath for a moment
and shower off the blood from the field.
You also need to take report from and relieve another doctor who is tired after his 12-hour
shift.
Tommy is going to need your attention, but there may be other patients who are critically
ill who will also need your attention in the ED.
In the ED, it's a different sort of medical settings.
In most places, as a physician, you'll make the diagnosis first, then move logically to
therapy.
In the ED, finding a specific diagnosis is secondary.
The main job is to identify the genuinely sick and get them stabilized for admission
to the ICU or the floor of the main hospital.
It's a different sort of mindset, one where time is of the essence, far more so than in
other medical settings.
Things happen quickly.
Speaking of which, it's time to head into the trauma room, right by the ambulance bay.
Tommy is on a bed in the middle of the room so as many people can get to the patient as
possible from every direction, he's strapped to a rigid backboard with a firm collar in
place to prevent further spine or neck injuries.
Lines are in, monitor leads are in place, blood's been sent to the lab and to the blood
bank for typing.
Now you're the conductor and this is your orchestra.
Believe me, your people know what to do, often before you tell them.
You start over, at the top again, A, airway.
Your patient is unconscious after very serious trauma.
You know you need to keep that airway open and now you can do it the best way with a
tube about as fat as your finger called an endotracheal tube or ET tube.
The procedure is called intubation and once the tube is in place, you can hook it up to
either a bag to squeeze manually or to a ventilator machine to pump oxygenated air in and out
mechanically.
Prior to placing the ET tube, medications can be given to relax the muscles and provide
pain relief, though at this point Tommy is unresponsive and not struggling at all.
You intubate Tommy quickly while assistants hold his neck in a safe position, remember
he could still have a significant spinal cord injury.
It's critical that the tube be placed correctly in the trachea to ventilate both lungs.
We listen over both sides and it sounds like air is going in and out, though the sound
is muffled, it's there on both sides.
Other monitors and an x-ray will confirm that the tube is in place.
B, breathing.
Tommy is now not making any effort at all to breathe.
The respiratory therapist has hooked up the ET tube to a mechanical ventilator.
Those muffled breath sounds you heard, that's concerning.
That's what's called a pneumothorax.
Air has leaked out from the lungs into the space between the lungs and the ribs and that
air is preventing the lungs from expanding.
Worse, the air there is under pressure and it's even preventing blood from getting back
up into the chest and the heart.
Remember I said in the primary survey you don't move to the next step until you've
fixed the immediate threat, even though the machine is pumping air in and out through
the ET tube, Tommy's lungs can inflate so he isn't really breathing.
Time for action.
You open a space between Tommy's ribs, actually two spaces, one on each side and insert what's
called a chest tube.
This is again a tube about as fat as your finger and when you cut into the chest to insert
the tube there is a big rush of air out.
Not just air but blood, too.
You push the tubes in and hook them up to suction to keep the space outside of the lungs
clear.
A lot of bright red blood is draining into those tubes and it keeps coming.
But at least now Tommy's chest wall is moving up and down with each breath and listening
to the chest you can hear good breath sounds on both sides.
Monitor show that he's more effectively getting oxygen into his blood.
Take a few breaths yourself.
It's time to move to C again, circulation.
What you find isn't good.
His pulses are weak and blood pressure monitors show a very low pressure of 60 over 20.
You'd expect a healthy young man to have a pressure of 120 over 80.
The blood in his body isn't flowing at a high enough blood pressure, strong and fast.
It's barely trickling.
His heart rate is rapid, 142, because his heart is desperately trying to pump as much
blood as it can.
But Tommy is still losing blood.
He's bleeding into his chest and that blood is pouring out of his chest tubes.
Through those big IVs you start running multiple blood transfusions as fast as you can using
devices to squeeze the bags of blood hard to push them in as fast as possible.
Through other IVs you run more fluids and medicines to support blood pressure.
The blood bank has already been warned.
This is going to be a long night.
While this has been going on, other staff has been exposing the patient, snipping off
his clothes.
Someone is working on getting in an even better line, a big fat IV called a central line that's
going into one of the big veins at the top of his thigh.
You're checking pulses and looking Tommy over to see if there's any other bleeding.
No open wounds are seen, but the abdomen is bruised in the front and now it's becoming
distended or swollen.
You suspect something is bleeding in there, in his abdomen.
It could be a laceration or tear of his liver or spleen or a ruptured blood vessel, but
whatever it is, it isn't good.
He's bleeding inside his chest and he's bleeding inside his abdomen as well.
And that blood loss is going to make it difficult for him to maintain good circulation.
Depending on available technology, there are different ways to proceed when evaluating
bleeding in the belly after trauma.
If Tommy were stable, an abdominal CT scan could find the source of bleeding, but his
blood pressure is very low.
He's far from stable and this is not a good time to move him to the CT scanner.
A procedure called a diagnostic paracentesis can confirm that there's blood in his belly.
It's a simple, quick procedure.
You just put a needle into the abdominal cavity to see if there's blood in there.
Paracentesis won't tell you where the blood is coming from, but it can confirm active
intra-abdominal bleeding, which means that your patient needs to go to the operating
room quickly to stop it.
In our case, we use another option, a handy quick ultrasound in the trauma room.
And that confirms that there is a lot of free fluid that's blood in the abdomen.
The surgeons have been called and they're prepping the OR.
Meanwhile, you're trying to support circulation with transfusions as best you can.
D next is disability.
Remember, at the scene of the accident, Tommy had been P on the AVPU scale, responding only
to pain.
Now, he's not responding at all.
You do a chest rub hard this time, nothing.
And he's not responding to the ET tube, he's not gagging or struggling, and he's not
responding to IV starts or to anything at all.
Pupillary reactions are another way of determining brain function.
You shine a light into a pupil and there ought to be a reflex that shrinks the pupil down.
That will occur even in unconscious patients because that reflex relies on the functioning
of only the most primitive part of the brain, the brainstem.
Not on the big cortex part that does your conscious thinking.
You shine a light and his pupils do constrict slowly, but they move.
There is at least some brain function.
But Tommy has deteriorated.
He's at you, now completely unresponsive on the AVPU scale.
Though a lot of things can cause this, in a trauma situation, the big ones to think
of first are those that could benefit from immediate intervention.
Hypoxia, low oxygen in the blood, that's been ruled out, we've got monitors now, oxygenation
we know is good.
Hypoglycemia, very low blood sugars, that can essentially shut down the brain, but we've
checked the blood sugar with the initial labs, that was okay.
But there are some other causes that I think are more likely and may be more problematic
to fix.
First, there's direct brain injury.
Tommy was going fast and then slammed into a utility pole.
He was wearing a helmet, but at that speed, the sudden kinetic change of his brain slamming
into the skull as his body suddenly decelerated from 60 to zero, that's a whole lot of energy
and could have done tremendous damage to Tommy's brain by directly damaging or killing cells.
Or by shearing the connections between cells and by damaging blood vessels necessary to
deliver oxygen.
This kind of damage can be difficult to assess right after an injury.
But there are other causes of brain injury that are even more important to look for.
Because they may now be causing further damage that might be preventable.
The brain lives in a closed, very hard shell, the skull, that's for protection, but that
can also make the brain vulnerable to damage if there is pressure or swelling inside of
the skull.
Increased pressure in the skull within the cranium can prevent blood from flowing into
the skull to supply oxygen to the brain.
And because there is nowhere for the swelling to go, pressure in the cranium can itself
cause more brain damage as the tissue of the brain is squeezed.
The tissue of the brain can be damaged from this pressure or sometimes the brain itself
can herniate or squeeze out of the hole at the base of the brain where the spinal cord
comes in.
This can be catastrophic because that area of the brain back there, it's where the control
centers for breathing and blood pressure are located.
So brain injury directly or from swelling, which remember can also decrease blood flow
into the cranium, these are all interrelated and they can all contribute to brain damage
and death.
We'd like to get a CT scan to see what's going on in the head, then in the OR a neurosurgeon's
role could be to help open up the skull and evacuate blood collections, relieving increased
intracranial pressure.
Monitors could also be put into the cranium to more directly measure pressure there.
But we've got even more immediate problems to worry about, we've already mentioned some
important reasons for Tommy to be falling further into unconsciousness, but there's
one more reason that's almost certainly contributing, Tommy is in shock.
Shock means that the body's tissues are not getting enough blood.
In other words, there isn't enough perfusion, though there may be enough oxygen in the blood,
the blood isn't getting to where it's needed, so insufficient oxygen is being delivered.
Shock can be caused by a number of different problems, it can be cardiogenic, if the heart
isn't pumping well, it can be what's called septic shock, which is caused by overwhelming
infection.
In Tommy's case, shock is being caused by what's called hypovolemia, there is just
not enough circulating blood, we know he's hemorrhaging in his chest, remember there's
blood coming out of those chest tubes, and we know he's hemorrhaging in his abdomen,
we haven't been able to stop the bleeding, and as fast as we can pour blood in, it's
pouring out.
Shock can affect every organ of the body, the most noticeable immediate and scary symptoms
relate to the brain, shock causes listlessness, lethargy, unconsciousness or coma, but it
can also lead to damage to many vital tissues from poor oxygenation, not enough blood in
the heart muscle itself can cause a heart attack, which will not help the circulation
when the heart cannot pump well, not enough blood to the liver will cause damage to that
organ, and the liver is where essential proteins to make blood clots form, once the liver is
damaged it becomes even more difficult to control bleeding in trauma patients.
Not enough blood to the tissues of the lungs will cause lung damage and resulting difficulty
with breathing and gas exchange.
You can see how all of these problems can pile up, one on top of another, how shock
can lead to a cascade of worsening organ failure, there are also immunologic mechanisms where
damaged tissues from trauma and shock release factors into the blood that themselves lead
to a massive inflammatory cascade, inflammatory over activation and further tissue damage
and circulatory problems.
We're on the phone now with the neurosurgeon, we're on the phone with the trauma surgeon,
the operating room is ready to go.
Someone has reached Tommy's family, his mom and his girlfriend are headed into the hospital.
Under ordinary circumstances, Tommy or someone he's identified as a medical decision maker
would be talking with the surgeon about risks and benefits of intervention, but there really
isn't time, the family isn't even here yet and monitors start blaring, there's a new
noise that cuts through the room, Tommy's heart has stopped.
This is time zero seconds of his cardiac arrest or what's sometimes called a code blue.
You start over, ABC's, airway and breathing are checked quickly, the ET tube is in place,
the ventilator is giving breaths, but the heart has stopped, there's no C, there's
no circulation, a defibrillator is rushed over, you take the paddles, someone squirts
clear cold goo on them to improve conduction, you yell clear, shock once, nothing happens,
shock twice, there's a heartbeat again, more medicines are poured into the IVs to support
blood pressure and to stop arrhythmias.
Four minutes, moments later a second cardiac arrest, a second code blue, the heart stops
again, shock, no response, CPR, chest compressions are begun, then a pause for another shock,
now monitors show bursts of activity from the chest leads, a shaky squiggly line, the
heart is quivering, not beating now, just wiggling in the chest, not pumping blood or delivering
oxygen at all, eight minutes, one more shock, a few good beats, a nurse reports she feels
a pulse in the neck now, ten minutes, the pulse then fades, it gets softer and softer
and chest compressions are started again, there's a routine in the trauma room, even
at times like this, people swap in and out to do compressions to relieve the person who's
starting to get tired, now we notice in a regular spiky looking recording on the heart
monitor, then it becomes just a random squiggle, we're at 12 minutes when the tracing stops
completely, flat again, more shocks, more compressions, 14 minutes, 19 minutes, now we're 25 minutes
without a strong consistent pulse, you, the ED physician, you look at the clock on the
wall, you say the time out loud and you say is everyone okay with this, the team knows
what you mean, it's your call, you're the doc, but you're a team and this is the time
to make sure that everyone is on the same page, everyone in the room nods in agreement,
that's it, you say, thanks everyone for the effort, the scribe records the time of death,
everyone stops, the ventilator is switched off, the team did well, it was, as we say,
a clean code, you need to catch your breath and go meet with the family, you're told that
they're here in the waiting room and they want to come back and see Tommy right away,
I don't know that there's a best way to share this kind of news, this is a very personal
issue of course, both for doctors and for families, I don't think there's a script
or anything that can be used, I do think families should be told together when possible so they
can have each other for comfort, they also deserve to have a quiet area, a private area
and they need to have time with the doctor, sometimes there's a doctor who's gotten to
know the family as a patient slowly wound through an illness or sometimes a nurse or therapist
who also knew the patient may be there to help, the hospital may have clergy or social workers
available too, in the ER after something sudden like this you may be on your own, you tell
the family that you did everything you could but Tommy had very serious injuries and he
couldn't survive, some families will want more details, maybe all of the medical details
and you answer those sorts of questions as best you can and you offer your card even
as the emergency physician for the family to call later when more questions arise.
Then you get back to work, you did what you could, this is the ED where things move quickly
and there's a next patient you need to go see.
