Sometimes, a diagnosis follows logically.
You get your history, do your physical, think it through, and the diagnosis follows.
Frequently though, in the real world, finding a diagnosis requires patience, persistence,
and a little bit of luck.
Sometimes you think you've reached the conclusion, only to find that the patient isn't quite
done with you.
New problems mean rethinking your diagnosis, or diagnoses.
Maybe there's more than one problem.
The real world can be messy.
This idea is illustrated by comparing two, we'll call them philosophies of medical diagnosis.
On the one hand, there's the very appealing principle of Occam's razor.
This basically means that one ought to strive to find the simplest explanation, or the single
diagnosis that fits the picture.
On the other hand, counterbalancing Occam's razor is what's called Hickam's dictum, attributed
to Dr. John Hickam, who is famously quoted as saying, patience can have as many diseases
as they damn well please.
A 39-year-old woman, Sally, comes into the ED with a chief complaint of, I can't stop
vomiting.
Sally, we learn, she has not had a very good week.
She says she's had episodic vomiting and some abdominal pain on and off maybe for a few
months, but this week it's gotten much worse.
Frequent vomiting every time she tries to eat or drink.
Our patient looks pale and uncomfortable, so we don't want to spend a lot of time upfront
with our initial differential diagnosis.
But just to get started, vomiting can be caused by a very long list of problems.
We often think first of GI conditions, infections, the so-called tummy bug, but there are many
other conditions, including intestinal obstruction, appendicitis, gallbladder or liver disease,
or really disease of any of the other organs in the abdomen or pelvis, the pancreas, the
stomach or the kidneys.
Many different medications and toxins cause vomiting, as well as endocrine disorders, and
never forget pregnancy.
Also, this is another group to keep in mind, anything that increases the pressure in or
around your brain, or honestly anything that affects the brain, can also cause vomiting.
That would include migraine, tumor, stroke or trauma.
That is a huge list.
I think it's best to just say, for now, we'll keep an open mind about Sally.
So more history.
Sally says her abdominal pain is crampy, and it's not severe, but it bothers her.
The main thing is the nausea and vomiting, which has lately been many times a day.
She says her urine has been dark and infrequent.
She's had no fevers and no diarrhea and has had no known ill contacts, though she works
as a caterer around a lot of food and food prep equipment.
She's been unable to work for the past week.
A more extensive review of systems reveals that Sally has also had some headaches for
the past few months, and also that she feels she's been unsteady on her feet.
Probably she says because she's been working too much and she's always standing.
She says her feet get numb sometimes and make it hard to stand.
Some past medical history from Sally might be important.
She has high blood pressure and because of severe obesity had a gastric bypass operation
four years ago.
Since then, she's lost about 120 pounds.
She says she's supposed to take pills for her cholesterol and high blood pressure but
doesn't remember what they're called.
She also takes a prescription vitamin every day since her surgery and frequently takes
ibuprofen to help with her belly aches and headaches.
Sally is divorced and denies any sexual activity in the past few years.
Her last period was a few weeks ago.
She smokes cigarettes, she says, and has maybe one or two alcoholic drinks a week.
Okay, there's a lot here already.
The main thing is the worsening nausea and vomiting, but there have been headaches and
this numb feet complaint to remember as well.
Now, let's see what we find on the physical exam.
Sally looks uncomfortable.
She's pale.
She's sweaty.
She weighs 230 pounds.
She has no fever.
Her blood pressure is 174 over 110, pulse 96, respirations 18 per minute.
Her pulses are strong.
Her belly seems a little tender to palpation, diffusely, kind of everywhere you feel.
You try to get her to sit and then to stand up, but she says she's too weak.
There's no edema of her legs and you don't find anything else on her skin exam.
A gynecologic exam is normal.
You try to do a neurologic exam, including asking her to move her hands in certain ways
and doing brief tests of memory, but she waves you away.
She says she feels weak and she's going to vomit again.
It can be frustrating, but sometimes it can be difficult to do a thorough physical exam.
Sometimes it's best to step back and not push, but plan to repeat the exam later when the
patient is feeling better.
So on our exam, the most notable things are the high blood pressure and the fast heart
rate.
Overall, also, she just didn't look very well.
Let's get things stabilized, get the ball rolling, then we'll think about diagnoses.
We've got several indications of dehydration.
She's been vomiting for a week, her heart rate is fast, we've got dark urine and infrequent
urination, and it's doubtful we're really going to be able to help her rehydrate orally
because she's still vomiting.
So we'll order an IV and some fluids, and we'll also give her a dose of a safe anti-nausea
medication.
While that's getting started, we can try to think this through.
We ended our brief differential, the one we mentioned before, the full story, with the
possibility that brain problems can cause vomiting.
Anything from tumors to brain infections to stroke can trigger vomiting, though more typically
brain problems cause vomiting without a feeling of queasiness or nausea.
Sally is at risk for stroke, with her blood pressure and history of high cholesterol.
She's had some headaches, and we cannot get a good neurologic exam.
There's also that weird numbness symptom in her legs.
So do we need to image her brain?
I think so.
Let's get a quick head CT.
It's normal.
What about the gut itself?
Intestinal obstruction is an emergency.
If she's got a blockage for some reason, that has got to be fixed, or resulting damage
to her GI system can be catastrophic.
Remember, Sally had that gastric bypass operation a few years ago.
Anyone who's had surgery inside the abdomen is at risk for adhesions, basically bands
of scar tissue that can later lead to an intestinal obstruction.
And the surgery Sally had could have left tissue in her intestine that could scar down,
causing a tight spot or a stricture that could obstruct the gut.
So among the first studies to rule out things that need immediate attention, Sally gets
an abdominal CT scan.
It doesn't show any structures, no obstruction, though it does reveal some inflammation in
her liver and pancreas, with tissues lighting up brighter than normal on the CT scan.
We'll have to get back to these findings later, because Sally, Sally's getting sicker.
She's thrown up a few more times, and now in the ED, she's just throwing up repeatedly.
The vomit is full of blood.
Sally is becoming hard to wake up, alternating between kind of thrashing around and pushing
people away, and just lying still.
Her vital signs remain about the same, and we check a pulse oximeter, too.
Some labs come back.
Her hemoglobin is very low.
It's 8.
Probably it should be more than 12.
And her chemistry show an elevated liver enzyme and a positive test for amylase, indicating
inflammation in her pancreas.
We also had ordered a pregnancy test, that's negative.
Sally had said that she wasn't sexually active, but you know that people aren't always honest
in the ED.
There's some unanswered questions now, I know, but in the ED, we often have to act before
we get answers.
The main things, she's bleeding in her guts, she's vomiting up blood, and she's already
markedly anemic.
We need to replace lost blood, and we need to stop the bleeding.
Things move fast.
Additional blood tests are done to make sure that her clotting factors are normal.
That's important, because we don't know why she's bleeding yet, and there have been labs
in that CT that showed some kind of liver disease.
The liver is where clotting proteins are made, and if she's not able to clot normally, that's
going to make bleeding worse.
Those blood tests are reassuring.
We also checked an ammonia level.
That's another way of making sure that the liver is functioning okay, that it's metabolizing
the ammonia in the body so it doesn't accumulate.
In severe liver disease, ammonia levels increase, and that leads to problems with brain function,
including delirium and coma.
The surgical and GI teams are called in, and medicine is given to reduce stomach acid.
A blood transfusion and extra fluids are given, and after sedation, endoscope is put down into
her stomach, where three large bleeding ulcers are found.
Those are cauterized, and it looks like the bleeding has stopped.
A whole lot of blood is also suctioned out of her stomach.
Sally is admitted into the ICU for continued observation.
Now technically, Sally is off of our service, we're the ED doc tonight.
But we peek in into the ICU, we follow her chart just to see how she's doing.
The bleeding ulcers explain a lot of her symptoms, but something isn't quite right yet.
The pancreas is inflamed, the liver tests were abnormal.
Is there more to this story?
You leave a message for the GI doc to keep you in the loop, he's now taken over care
since the main diagnosis is the gastric ulcers.
Sally is also started on medication to lower her blood pressure.
The next day, though, doesn't go so well.
Sally's color is better, and her blood tests show that the anemia has improved.
But she still can't seem to get out of bed.
She seems kind of confused, and she can't remember where she is.
You stop by to see her, and she kind of squints at you.
She doesn't know who you are.
She also starts complaining of double vision.
In the ICU, they remain worried about a possible stroke.
She had had high blood pressure and anemia that could have worsened the stroke.
Ahead MRI is performed, which can detect even subtle strokes as well as other brain injuries,
but that's normal.
Since she's complaining of visual problems, the team tries to get her up and wheel her
over to the ophthalmology clinic in the professional building next door, but she can't seem to
stand up straight.
Her gait is very unsteady, and she's very reluctant to even take a few steps, holding
her feet widely apart.
They use a stretcher, and they get Sally next door, and the vision exam is normal.
The ophthalmologist, though, notes that her eyes are kind of darting back and forth.
Back and forth.
She's got nystagmus, that finding we talked about before during our patient with dizziness.
Dizziness can be caused by brain or inner ear disease that affects the sense of balance.
It's time for a quick recap.
Sally had bleeding ulcers and anemia requiring transfusions, though that's been addressed
now.
At this point, she's also got an unsteady gait, complaints of numb feet, odd eye movements,
and trouble with memory.
Plus, we really haven't explained the liver or pancreas problems.
I've said it before, when things get confusing, go back to the history and the physical exam.
Things were rushed the first time.
Let's do it again.
We'll go ahead, we'll leave the ED, we'll head down to the ICU, let's talk to Sally.
Sally says she still doesn't remember last night, but she doesn't repine repeating herself.
She says she's had all of this vomiting but can't really recall much else from the history.
Then she says, Sally says, boy, I could use a drink.
How much do you drink, Sally, you ask?
Not much, she says.
We move on and try to do a more detailed, thorough physical exam, focusing on the nervous system.
Tests of memory and concentration, Sally doesn't do so well on those.
She can't seem to remember things from even a few minutes ago.
Her strength seems okay.
She can move her muscles against the pressure from your hand, but when you try to get her
to stand up, again, she seems very unsteady on her feet.
You also carefully test those reflexes, they're sluggish and reduced, and do tests of sensation
by pricking her with the pointy edge of a tongue depressor.
Sally seems to have reduced sensation in both of her legs, starting about below her knees.
Now a detailed neurologic exam done by an experienced neurologist is very valuable.
You're really good at focusing from the exam on where anatomically the lesion is.
That is, where in the brain or spinal cord or nerves could there be a problem that explains
the physical examination?
Now today we're ED doctors, we're not neurologists, so I'm not going to go into the details of
the neuroanatomy here, but one thing, a simple and important thing is clear from the exam.
Sally couldn't have just one simple lesion somewhere.
Another exam, Sally has evidence of both encephalopathy, brain problems, but also of neuropathy or
myeloneuropathy, problems with her nerves or the spinal cord.
Her memory issues have to be a brain thing, and her reduced reflexes and the reduced sensation
below her knees have to be a nerve or spinal cord thing.
I don't think this constellation of findings together could be caused by a stroke, which
affects only one area of the brain or spinal cord, or a tumor, or a neuropathy that might
be caused by something like diabetes.
No, something more widespread is going on, something that affects both the brain and
the nerves, and the liver and the pancreas, and maybe could the same something cause gastric
ulcers as well?
You're talking with Sally, now she's scared now.
She stopped vomiting blood, but she's weak, she can't walk, and she can tell you're
worried too.
We want to help you feel better, you say.
I think you're going to be okay, but it will really help us if we can work together to
figure this out.
You ask one more time, how much are you drinking, Sally?
Sally tells you she has a bottle or so of gin every day and has had that since her divorce
several years ago.
That was the last piece of information we needed.
Sally's health problems, the liver and pancreas disease, the vomiting and bleeding ulcers,
and now these neurologic problems, they're all manifestations of chronic alcohol abuse.
For combination of memory problems, confusion, trouble walking, and abnormal eye movements
is called Wernicke and cephalopathy.
This is a condition most often seen in people with alcoholism.
It's caused by a deficiency of vitamin B1 or thiamine.
A large dose of intravenous thiamine is administered, and within a day, Sally's memory, gait, and
most of her neurologic problems have improved.
Thiamine is essential to cellular metabolism, though it is necessary for the healthy functioning
of almost all tissues.
The nervous system seems to be especially sensitive to thiamine deficiency.
Thiamine must be ingested.
Humans and other animals cannot manufacture it.
It's widely available in many foods, including whole grains, many vegetables.
And in the developed world, many grain and cereal products are fortified with extra thiamine,
making deficiency rare outside of certain high-risk populations.
In the developing world, where dietary thiamine may be scarce, deficiency can cause the disease
berry-berry.
Manifestations of berry-berry include neurologic problems, lethargy, impairments of memory and
cognition, heart disease, and GI problems.
It is fatal if untreated.
The name berry-berry is interesting.
It may refer to the word for sheep, because it looks like people with berry-berry walk
with an odd gait lifting their feet high up, and that kind of looks like the walk of a
sheep somehow.
The name may also mean the phrase, weak-weak, which is the name in berry-berry it's said
twice for emphasis.
It's not just weak.
It's weak-weak.
Okay, in the United States, berry-berry itself is not common, because of the widespread dietary
fortification of many foods.
However, we do see a version of thiamine deficiency called Wernicke encephalopathy, which is the
combination of mental confusion, unsteady walking, and unusual eye movements.
The most common cause of this kind of thiamine deficiency, Wernicke's encephalopathy, is alcoholism,
which interferes with thiamine absorption and utilization.
Other risk factors for Wernicke encephalopathy from thiamine deficiency include starvation,
AIDS, frequent vomiting during pregnancy, and incorrect baby formulas.
A growing risk group that we need to watch out for is also people who have undergone bariatric
surgery like Sally.
Because the surgery bypasses some of the absorptive part of the gut, patients who have had weight
reduction surgery are at risk for deficiencies of many nutrients, including thiamine.
Sally probably wasn't taking her blood pressure medication, and probably wasn't taking her
prescribed vitamin supplements either.
So Sally had multiple risk factors for thiamine deficiency, alcoholism, bariatric surgery,
and poor compliance with her medications.
The prognosis of Wernicke encephalopathy can be difficult to predict.
When treated early, many of the symptoms can improve dramatically and quickly with thiamine
administration.
However, many patients will continue to have some neurologic impairment.
Some will go on to develop permanent and pervasive cognitive and memory problems that may require
institutional care.
Sally had other evidence of alcoholism.
She had abnormal liver tests, and her CT scan confirmed liver damage.
Advanced scarring of the liver called cirrhosis is most often caused by prolonged alcohol
abuse.
Cirrhosis can also be caused by infections like chronic hepatitis or by obesity.
Cirrhosis may lead to liver failure requiring transplantation, or it may lead to cancer
of the liver.
There is also inflammation of the pancreas called pancreatitis, which can also be caused
by alcoholism or obesity.
Pancreatitis causes intense abdominal pain and vomiting.
Sally may have had multiple causes of her GI symptoms, direct stomach irritation from
alcohol, gastric ulcers, pancreatitis, liver disease, and thiamine deficiency itself.
All of these can cause stomach upset and vomiting.
Can also contribute to gastric ulcers, which led to Sally's abrupt deterioration.
There can be multiple overlapping factors here.
Alcohol itself can damage the stomach lining and prevent healing.
Alcoholics also may not consume regular meals, including fat and protein, that protect the
stomach.
And if cirrhosis has begun, the liver disease can lead to a decrease in clotting proteins,
so the ulcers bleed more.
Liver disease can also lead to increased pressure in the blood vessels in the stomach
and esophagus, which may further increase bleeding.
The effect of alcohol consumption on heart disease and stroke is still being researched.
It appears that moderate alcohol consumption, about one drink a day, may improve cardiac
risk factors, perhaps by its effect on cholesterol metabolism.
But excessive drinking directly damages the heart muscle and increases the risk of heart
attacks and stroke.
It certainly can't be good for people who already have the risks of obesity, high blood
pressure, and elevated cholesterol to add on the risks of excessive alcohol.
People with alcoholism also have an increased risk of some cancers, pneumonia, osteoporosis,
diabetes, neuropathy, and mental illness.
There are also increased risks of death by suicide and motor vehicle accidents, domestic
violence, and other addiction.
Obesityism is frequently associated with obesity, too.
Alcohol itself is a significant source of calories, though it doesn't offer much in
the way of actual nutrition.
It can make you fat.
And of course, obesity then contributes to liver disease and heart disease and diabetes
and everything else that's already going on.
Let's return to Sally.
She was admitted for vomiting and abdominal pain, and turned out to have alcoholic cirrhosis,
pancreatitis, gastric ulcers, and Wernicke encephalopathy from thiamine deficiency.
Treatment in the hospital included endoscopy for her ulcers, blood transfusions, and medical
and nutritional support.
She's ready to go home now, with instructions to take her ulcer medication, high blood pressure
medication, plus several dietary supplements.
Close follow-up has been scheduled with several medical specialists and her primary doctor.
And we've had a heart-to-heart talk with Sally about her drinking.
She's agreed to enroll in an alcohol treatment program.
We'll want to get her re-involved in a weight control program as well.
With the help of bariatric surgery, she's lost a lot of weight, but for good health,
she still has a ways to go.
Continued weight loss will help prevent the complications of high blood pressure and may
also help her liver, pancreas, and stomach disease.
Obesity is a huge problem in the United States, and it's rapidly becoming the most significant
health problem in the entire developed world.
In fact, over-nutrition too much to eat may have already overtaken malnutrition as a cause
of death worldwide.
The causes of obesity are complex.
It's tempting to just look at obesity as a simple consequence of eating too much while
exercising too little.
But clearly, there is more to the story.
Our weights are also influenced by genetic and environmental factors that go beyond just
diet and exercise.
For now, our therapeutic options for patients struggling with overweight are limited.
Changes in dietary habits can lead to permanent improvements in weight and health, but they're
difficult to maintain and don't usually work.
Improving dietary habits can improve health even if weight isn't lost, but again, that
may not be practical, and people who are significantly overweight may not be able to exercise as
much as they would like.
Still, diet and exercise habits should be a part of counseling to help patients of
any age reach or maintain a healthy weight.
There are also some kind of overlooked eating strategies, kind of simple things really that
may help.
People who eat slower tend to consume fewer calories, so slow down and chew and drink
water and talk and have a nice, relaxed meal rather than rushing or eating in the car.
Eating out in restaurants increases calories tremendously, portions are large, and the
restaurants cook with plenty of fat and butter.
Order only an appetizer or split an entree.
Also, the simple step of avoiding calories in soda and other sweetened beverages can
have a huge impact on weight.
For an ordinary adult, just skipping one 12-ounce soda a day, one can a day, for a year, will
lead to about a 10-pound weight loss.
Okay, there's diet and exercise.
What about medications for obesity?
Well, the bottom line at this point is that there are no good medicines available to help
manage weight.
Some may curb appetite a little or might interfere with nutrient absorption, but they have significant
side effects and may actually net increased health risks.
We need better ways to control appetite and calorie intake, but so far, we don't have
those medicines yet.
Now, Sally had had the most aggressive therapy to help with weight loss, bariatric surgery.
After this kind of procedure, patients like Sally are at risk for nutritional deficiencies.
They may not be able to absorb enough micronutrients from ordinary food.
Deficiencies can include not only thiamine, but also copper, zinc, folate, and vitamin
D. Patients need to be counseled before and after bariatric surgery on the importance
of taking appropriate dietary supplements.
Since more and more of these procedures are being done, physicians need to remember the
special risks of nutritional deficiencies in patients after weight loss surgery.
There's a few other loose ends I wanted to come back to in this complex case.
Sally had gastric ulcers, which are erosions in the lining of the stomach.
In the past, it's been thought that these kinds of ulcers were caused by stress or
that they usually occurred in certain individuals with strong tempers, the type A people.
That's really not true.
Ulcers in adults are usually caused actually by an infection, a chronic infection in the
stomach wall caused by the bacteria Helicobacter pylori.
So treatment for ulcers should include testing for this bacteria and treating it with antibiotics
if it's present.
Treatment should also include medications to reduce stomach acid and avoiding especially
medications like ibuprofen or aspirin that thin the gut wall and contribute to ulcers.
Ironically, Sally had been taking ibuprofen for her headaches, which may have made her
ulcers worse.
I also wanted to come back to clarify some terms I used about Sally's liver disease.
Hepatitis means liver inflammation, similar to how appendicitis means appendix inflammation,
or pancreatitis means pancreas inflammation.
In common use, hepatitis is often thought to refer only to chronic infections, the ones
with letter names like hepatitis A or B or C. But other viral infections can also cause
hepatitis or toxins like alcohol or adverse drug reactions or autoimmune illnesses or
actually other things as well.
The blood tests we commonly use to test for liver inflammation are commonly called liver
enzymes or LFTs, which is short for liver function tests.
Though they don't in fact test for functioning of the liver, they only test for chemicals
released into the blood when liver cells die, or actually sometimes when other kinds of
cells die as well.
If hepatitis continues, eventually there will be permanent scarring and fibrosis of the
liver called cirrhosis.
Sometimes the line between hepatitis and cirrhosis is blurry, and sometimes patients
have elements of both at the same time.
This was quite a case today with multiple interconnected diagnoses.
It was a good example of the importance of the history and physical exam, and of watching
for times when the story and presentation can change midway through a case.
Sally wasn't entirely truthful, at least at first, about her alcohol habit, and that
misdirected the initial workup, a good reminder that patients can best help their doctors
by being honest.
But also that doctors have to keep in mind that their information, what they've been
given may not actually be accurate.
Mysteries get even trickier when the clues are wrong, and that can be part of the challenge.
Medical stories can take unexpected turns, but it's still the physician's job to follow
the path even when it goes sideways, or even when the news and the prognosis is not very
good.
More about that next time.
