Welcome back. Let me start today's Grand Rounds with a quote from the literature.
Smart people learn from their mistakes, but the real sharp ones learn from the
mistakes of others. That's a quote from Fable Haven by Brandon Mull. Because I'm
a pediatrician, I can get away with quoting young adult literature like that.
For those of you with preteens or those of you with a taste for children's
fantasy, Fable Haven is a wonderful series. Now all of the cases we're
discussing during these Grand Rounds are fictionalized. I'm deliberately
changing some details to protect patient privacy. However, every single one of the
patients discussed is based on a real case, including the one today. Not all of
them, I'll admit, make the doctors look very good. Our cases leave in the real
mistakes that doctors and patients make. I will tell you I've learned a lot from
my own mistakes, as have all doctors. One of the most important goals of discussing
cases like these is to learn from the mistakes of others, so all of these
mistakes don't have to be made again and again. One more quote to help us get
started. This from a slightly more adult book from Bram Stoker's Dracula. We
learn from failure, not from success. A day in clinic, we're doing general adult
medicine. It's a nice day out, and I think we'd probably rather be walking in the
park than meeting our next patient, who is a new patient to the clinic. She has
brought a voluminous stack of prior medical records, about six inches high, and
we can tell it's loaded with lab reports and letters from specialists. A past
medical record like this can be helpful in a way, but it can also be like taking
a drink from a fire hose. I'd rather talk with the patient first before diving
into a big stack of paper. Leslie is a 45-year-old woman with a chief complaint
of, I'm tired of the itching. She says, she has been in good health until about
nine months ago when she started to develop these itchy rashes. The rashes
appear and disappear quickly, within an hour or so, and they're always itchy. If
they pop up at night, they interfere with sleep. If they occur during the day, they
interfere with work. Leslie says, she's been seeing doctor after doctor, and she
knows she's allergic to certain foods, and none of it has helped. She's tired of
the testing, and she's tired of all the medicines, and she's sick of doctors and
labs and tests, and she's ready to what? You say, you're ready to what? Leslie
answers, I'm just going crazy with this, okay? She starts to cry. You sit down and
you hand her a box of tissues, and you start to sort of idly flip through the
stack of old records to give your patient a few moments to recover. There's a
letter from an allergist, and a letter from another allergist, and a letter from
a dermatologist. Here's another letter from maybe an endocrinologist, and a
letter from a rheumatologist, and then page after page of labs. Many look
normal, though some are flagged in the abnormal column as well. There are all
sorts of scribbles and notes on them. Looking at this stack, you may want to
cry too, but we'll be professional, and we'll hold it together. After a little
while, you say, I want to try to help you. It's going to be hard to go through this
entire record. Can you walk me through it? What happened? What have you been told?
Leslie answers, I'm only here because my insurance changed, and I have to get
referrals from you to see the specialists. Did I mention this is a real
case? Well, anyway, you say, I'd like to get to know what's been going on. I'd like
to see if I can help too. Leslie sighs, then she tells us more. The itchy rash was
diagnosed as hives by her first doctor, who told her it was probably from some
kind of allergy, and prescribed allergy medicines. That seemed to work at first,
but the rash just kept coming back. So he changed medicines a bunch of times, and
then it seemed like the medicine itself, maybe a new medicine, was actually
triggering more of those hives. So Leslie saw an allergist who did a bunch of tests,
and she was told she's allergic to eggs and wheat, which she's pretty much
avoided ever since. They also told her she was allergic to Timothy grass and two
different indoor molds. She tried some different medicines from that allergist
that didn't seem to work, and had some more blood tests, and was then told that
she had a problem with her thyroid. But the endocrinologist said that her
thyroid was okay. And then there were more tests, and she saw a rheumatologist,
and she doesn't remember what he said, and then she saw a dermatologist, or maybe
I think two dermatologists, and more tests were done, and it turns out that
she's also allergic to milk and corn and cinnamon, and avoiding these maybe has
helped some, but she still gets the rash several times a week, and it itches, and
it drives her crazy. Sometimes medicine seems to help the rash go away, but
other times it seems to make it worse. Our differential here, it's not long at
all. There's really only one rash that comes and goes this quickly, and it's
characteristically very itchy. Hives, or what doctors call urticaria. I'm not sure
why we have a different name for hives, but as you've probably already learned
that's typical. Doctors like to have different words for things. Anyway, our
patient has been having recurrent hives for almost a year. Why? More history.
There seems to have been a lot of suspicion of allergies as a trigger, so
we might as well start there. We ask, is there a certain food that triggers the
hives? Leslie says, yes, eggs, wheat, and she thinks dairy, and cinnamon, so we've
got four yes answers. Today's lesson one, when you've got a confusing story, don't
settle for yes-no answers. You ask Leslie, how do you know what happens when you
eat those things? Well, it's different, she says. With eggs, she thinks she gets
her rash about two days later, or maybe three days, depending on the amount of
eggs. It's more quick if she eats more eggs, or if eggs are baked into a cookie,
or bread, or with cinnamon. Leslie thinks the rash begins later that same day, or
especially at night. The night rash, she says, that's often from cinnamon, or even
from something cooked in the same bakery where they use a lot of cinnamon. With
milk, it's okay if she drinks organic milk, but ordinary milk will start the
hives, though sometimes that can start even a week later. With chicken, she can
eat processed chicken, like chicken strips, but not plain, baked chicken.
Yeah, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, you ask. You're allergic to chicken, too? Yeah,
yeah, that was on the last set of tests done by the new allergist. I don't think
I brought those with me. Do you want to see them? And you say maybe later. Okay, so
there's a lot of itchy rash, and it seems maybe related to different kinds of
food. Taking further history along these lines is likely to get maybe even more
confusing. So let's try a different tactic. Let's see if we can figure out what
sort of workup has been done, and what the specialists have concluded. So you
ask, what did the allergists say? Okay, I'm not going to go through the blow by
blow, but she's probably seen three different allergists from two different
allergy groups, and it sounds like at least three sets of blood tests and
skin prick allergy tests have been done. You're trying to pin this down here, and
you ask, so bottom line, did they tell you this was an allergy? What did they
tell you to do? I'm supposed to take these medicines, Leslie says, and these
allergy tests came up positive. What medicines, you ask? Leslie brings out a
brown lunch sack filled with bottles of pills and dumps them out on the table. Do
you take these every day? Which ones? How do you take these, you ask? It's clear
that she just doesn't know. She starts pawing through them and holding them up,
and she can't remember which ones are which. You look at the labels, the
instructions that the pharmacists put on each bottle, and they don't make sense to
you either. Some say for hives, and some have the initials PRN, which is the
doctor abbreviation for as needed. Another added confusion is that doctors
often refer to medications by their common brand names, like Motrin or Adarax.
However, when prescriptions are filled, the pharmacy label may only have the
generic name. So for Motrin, that would be ibuprofen, which many people know, but
for an allergy medicine like Adarax, the label may just say hydroxazine.
Sometimes there are even multiple brands or generic names for the exact same
medicine. This really isn't unfortunate, and it makes communication about medicines
unnecessarily complicated. Today's lesson number two. Insist on clear
instructions. When you see a doctor, you need clear instructions on what to do.
When you're the doctor, you must make sure that your patient understands you,
even if that means writing things down. In fact, really, it should always mean
writing things down, and writing things down means including both brand and
generic names, and avoiding using doctor abbreviations like PRN that ordinary
people might not know. And let's just jump to today's lesson number three.
The more doctors involved, the more the patient has to insist on clarity.
One of the confusing things here is that multiple doctors were prescribing
multiple things and ordering multiple tests. Everyone was making mistakes here,
and more importantly, I don't think anyone was learning anything from each
other's mistakes. One medicine was tried, it didn't work, but the next doctor
didn't know that, and maybe even tried to use the same medicine again.
Okay, so you ask, Leslie, what did the endocrinologist say?
Well, I went to see him because of the thyroid test. Did I bring that with me?
Anyway, the dermatologist said I had low thyroid, so I went to see endocrine,
but he just sent me away. Did he say your thyroid was normal, you ask?
She kind of looked at the stack of paperwork. I guess so, she says.
Today's lesson four, a medical encounter should always address the primary
concerns of the patient. Our patient's concern is a recurring itchy rash,
but she was sent to the endocrinologist because someone thought she had thyroid
disease, so there were really two main issues that the endocrinologist should
have addressed, the rash and the thyroid test. It sounds like from our patient's
point of view, she didn't get clear feedback about either of those issues.
I think we're all getting a feel here that Leslie's adventure is what should
be called in the common medical jargon, a train wreck. This is not really an
atypical case. People have confusing histories and see multiple doctors, and we
do not do a good job with communicating clearly. It's a huge waste of money, but
even more distressing is that situations like these often create worry and anxiety
and make health problems worse. You almost regret having to ask your next
question, so why did the rheumatologist get involved and what did he say?
Leslie answers, I just don't know.
Lesson five, beware when the diagnosis or plan doesn't make sense. This goes for
doctors and patients. As a doctor, if you can't explain the working diagnosis and
plan clearly, it's probably because it's not clear in your own mind. You need to
think more. From the patient's point of view, if you don't understand the diagnosis
and plan, you need to speak up. You need to ask and ask again.
Okay, I'm exhausted and we've got a lot more to cover today, so let's just say that
there isn't any more helpful history and that the physical exam is absolutely
completely normal. Leslie is a well-appearing woman of Asian ancestry who has no
rash right now, but our patient did bring a photo on her cell phone and it looks
like large raised pink-red areas with surrounding pink skin. She says when the
rash pops up, it feels warm and then it always goes away in an hour or so.
By the way, the cell phone is a great diagnostic tool both for photos of rashes
and for videos of funny movements or recordings of peculiar sounds. In this
case, the photo looks exactly like we expected. It's a photo of hives.
Also known as urticaria. Let's go through that stack of labs at least briefly.
There are a bunch of CBCs. All of them look okay. There are sed rates and CRPs.
Those are normal too. So there's no anemia. There's no inflammation. It doesn't look
like there's much of a chance of chronic or serious infections or of anything
terrible like cancer with these labs. There are a few sets of thyroid tests.
Let's see what those are all about. Thyroid testing has changed a lot in the last
20 years. Older tests had been often inaccurate or misleading, but the current
testing is very reliable using only two measurements, a TSH and a free T4.
TSH is the thyroid stimulating hormone. It's produced by the pituitary gland in
the brain to rev up the thyroid gland to work harder, kind of like stepping on the
gas. The free T4, the other test, is the best measurement of the hormone made by
the thyroid gland. Our patient's measurements of TSH and free T4 were all
normal at every test. So Leslie does not have thyroid disease. What was abnormal
was a different kind of test, a test for antithyroid antibodies. However, even when
that's positive, most people who have this never develop any thyroid disease.
It's a marker for slightly increased risk of late thyroid disease. A test like this
don't help management in most cases, and as in this case, just kind of muddied the
water. The test was done, it was positive, but it was irrelevant. By the way, Leslie
had another, quote, abnormal test called an ANA. That's why she was referred to the
rheumatologist. The ANA is another test, kind of like the antithyroid antibodies,
that is very often falsely positive or positive in a way that's irrelevant and
doesn't help the patient. With no other evidence on the history or physical exam
or on any of those other screening labs of rheumatologic disease, the positive ANA
is meaningless, and the test really should not have been done in the first place yet.
Yet there it is, worrying the patient and driving more visits to more doctors.
Today's lesson, number six, treating the disease is not the same as treating the patient.
Our patient wanted relief from a recurring itchy rash. She didn't want to have a bunch
of blood tests and see a bunch of specialists. All of these tests, unfortunately,
led to doctors focusing on the tests, not on the patient herself. In fact, I would say
that the side effects of all of these tests, the worry, the distraction, and the expense
may have been almost as bad as the itchy rash itself. Another blood test was done,
celiac antibodies, which were negative. This wasn't a bad idea because celiac disease
can cause, among a lot of other things, recurrent itchy rashes, including highs.
The current celiac antibody test is actually quite good and rarely has false results,
unlike that ANA and the thyroid antibodies. So adding celiac testing to the initial
screen was reasonable, which leads us to lesson number seven. Whether to do a test
depends on both how likely it is that the patient has the disease you're looking for,
but also on how accurate the test is. Less accurate tests should only be done when
absolutely indicated, or they're going to lead to mischief. In any case, tests should
only be done if the result of the test will be useful. If the result isn't going to
change the plan, the test shouldn't have been done in the first place. Speaking of
less accurate tests, we need to address all of those allergy tests that our patient
endured. In general, there are two kinds of allergy tests, skin testing and blood
testing. Blood allergy testing is often preferred by general practitioners and
non-allergyists because anyone can order it and draw the blood. These kinds of tests
will also not be affected by allergy medicines that many patients are taking. The older
generation of allergy blood tests were based on IgG antibodies. Those are worthless.
Those IgG based tests should never be done, though they're still offered by some less
mainstream labs and doctors. You should just stay away from them. The newer tests based
on IgE molecules are more accurate, but even the best of these current blood tests can
still be misleading. Skin testing is more often performed by allergists because it can
be done in their offices with results available the same day. Those results can be
affected by certain medications. The bottom line for both skin and even the best blood
testing is that these tests have many false positives and can have false negatives too.
They can be helpful to get a clue about what exposures could be triggering allergy, but
should be confirmed before declaring that a patient is actually allergic. So how do
you tell if a patient is really allergic to something? As is so often the case in
medicine, it's not the test. It's the history. Allergies are immune mediated reactions to
exposures to environmental things, including foods or pollen, dust, things like that. Very
characteristically, allergic symptoms occur very shortly after exposures and they're
stereotyped. That's a good word. It means that the reaction is the same every time after
exposure. This is especially true for food allergy, which usually triggers reactions
within minutes or maybe an hour after ingestion. Typical reactions to food allergies
include reactions in the skin like hives or swelling. It can also include GI symptoms
like vomiting or diarrhea or crampy pain or difficulty breathing or coughing. Severe
reactions can lead to low blood pressure and a loss of consciousness. Again, these
usually occur very quickly after a food trigger is eaten. Let's think back to our
patient, Leslie. When we asked her about the foods that could be triggers, her answers
were, they were kind of all over the place. Eggs caused a reaction sometimes, as did
chicken, but it depended on how it was cooked. And a lot of her reactions seemed to be a
day or more later. Does this sound like real food allergies? No, it doesn't. Real food
allergies happen quickly and in general don't depend on how much is eaten or how things
are cooked or combined. If you're allergic to milk, it doesn't matter whether it's organic
milk or not. What's going on is that Leslie had this inexplicable rash that kept coming
and going and she understandably thought about what could have been the trigger. Plus, she
had all of these allergy tests that supposedly were positive. Foods like eggs and wheat are
in many things and if you start to consider foods cooked in the same facility or reactions
that start three days later, I suppose any of her rashes could seem to have been triggered
by some kind of food exposure. But when you dig deeper, there's no consistent, quick,
stereotyped reaction. Chances are, despite the testing, that there is no food allergy
at all that's contributing to Leslie's hives. All of these food tests and restrictions based
on our history were a waste of time. What about this thought that medicines could have
made the hives worse? Well, maybe, yes, some medicines can trigger hives, but her hives
started before any of these medications and continued to appear sporadically. So how do
we know if a medicine is really a trigger? It turns out that though hives are possible with
any medicine, they're really only likely after certain medications like antibiotics or
seizure medicines. Allergy medicines themselves would very rarely cause hives, though since
they're often prescribed in people who are already having hives that come and go on their
own, they might seem to make things worse because of the coincidence of timing. In fact, many
people who think they're allergic to medicines, including antibiotics, are not in fact allergic
and could take that medicine safely. Rashes after medications are not usually caused by
allergy. However, if you've been told that you are allergic to a medicine, don't start
taking it again on the basis of this lecture. Talk with your own doctor about the circumstances
and whether trying that medication would be okay for you.
So, recurrent hives, with no identified trigger, can cause itching and congestion and sniffles,
but they would only rarely cause skin reactions like hives. Leslie tested positive for some of
these, but honestly, there's no reason to think that this would have contributed to her
hives, and again, there was no reason to have done that testing. So, recurrent hives with
no identified trigger persisting for a long time. Leslie's diagnosis is chronic idiopathic
urticaria. This is a condition that's not uncommon and can lead to significant disruption
and very distressing symptoms. That's what Leslie has, and in fact, it was diagnosed by
two allergists and the dermatologists based on their letters. We found that diagnosis.
It was typed right there in the notes, but it was never communicated clearly to Leslie.
There are just a few conditions that can kind of mimic chronic idiopathic urticaria, but it's easy
enough to tell the difference. Allergic contact dermatitis occurs only where there is contact
allergen, where it touches the skin. So, it's in the same place every time, like where a
typical belt buckle or a necklace touches the skin. A so-called fixed drug eruption can be a
recurring swollen area, but it's in the same place every time, and as it heals, it leaves a dusky
area. Honestly, the only rash that occurs like Leslie's, popping up quickly, anywhere on the
body, and then disappearing quickly, is urticaria or hives. Is there likely a specific cause of
Leslie's urticaria? As we've seen, food allergies can cause acute episodes of urticaria, but it's
very unlikely that foods will cause long-standing chronic urticaria without clear correlation.
Some people with chronic urticaria can have hives triggered by physical things, like pressure on
the skin or warmth or cold, but again, these triggers are usually clear from the history.
Many patients with chronic urticaria, like Leslie, have thyroid antibodies, but these don't seem to
be the actual trigger. Usually, thyroid functioning is normal, and these antibodies require no
treatment. Even if thyroid functioning is abnormal, treating the thyroid condition does not help
resolve the urticaria. So, to the treatment, that really is what Leslie is interested in.
What can she do to stop these rashes and become more comfortable? There is good therapy available
for chronic idiopathic urticaria. It's crucial that patients are taught how to use those medicines
correctly. Daily use of antihistamines at relatively high doses every single day can help suppress
the rash. It's important that these antihistamines not be stopped on days when the rash is absent.
Staying on them daily, long-term, even on days without rash, helps keep the rash suppressed.
Sometimes, multiple antihistamines that work via different receptors are used simultaneously.
If maximal, regular, scheduled use of antihistamines is ineffective, daily or every other day oral
steroids can be used. The side effects of this strategy can be significant. To avoid long-term
steroids, other immune modifying medications like cyclosporine can be useful. Even more aggressive
therapies can include the administration of intravenous immunoglobulin or plasmapheresis, a method
of filtering out immune molecules from the blood. Ironically, Leslie actually had the correct
medications in her brown paper bag, but because multiple doctors had given her different
instructions, she didn't understand how to use these medicines correctly.
In our clinic, no further tests were done, and written instructions were provided for the use
of two simultaneous antihistamines. Over the next few weeks, Leslie had fewer flares of
hives, and within three months, she was no longer having any rash. She stopped her medications,
and the rash did return so the regimen was restarted, and she continues to do well with
those medicines about six months later. For the very rare mild flare-up that Leslie does
see, she has a backup-added medicine to take, as needed in addition to her usual routine medications.
Leslie, as is typical for most people with chronic heredicaria, did not have any food
allergies, but food allergies are a significant problem for many people, and they're often
misunderstood. It's important to make a distinction between an adverse reaction to food,
something like the bloating and diarrhea that goes with lactose intolerance and a true food
allergy, because only real food allergies can progress to life-threatening reactions.
Having said that, most food allergies cause only mild symptoms. So, who's at risk for
serious food reactions? The best predictor is what has happened with that food exposure
in the past. Anyone who has had a life-threatening or severe reaction to a specific food is at
risk for that happening again. Also, some foods, especially peanuts and tree nuts, are more
likely to cause more severe reactions than other food allergens. And any person who has
had a history of asthma or recurrent wheezing, who has also food allergies, they're more likely
to experience a severe reaction to foods. Now, these are generalities. If you've got food
allergies or a suspicion of food allergies, work with your own doctor for specific recommendations.
In Leslie's case, there were misunderstandings about the role of food, her actual diagnosis,
and the best way to treat her recurring rash. This unfortunately led to a prolonged diagnostic
journey, including multiple doctors, a whole lot of tests, and most importantly, a significant
delay in helping Leslie. Mistakes were made by both the doctors and the patient, and most
of them had to do with a single problem, communication. For good patient care, it is essential for
you to communicate well with patients, and for patients to communicate well with doctors,
and for doctors to communicate well with each other. We've got a good case lined up for
next time, a mystery with a much younger patient, a baby, who's pale and weak. We'll hear more
about that next time.
