Welcome back to Grand Rounds. We have another famous novelist helping us today. See if you
can sleuth out who it is. It is a capital mistake to theorize before one has data.
Insensibly, one begins to twist facts to suit theories instead of theories to suit facts.
That's a quote from Sherlock Holmes from A Scandal in Bohemia by Arthur Conan Doyle. It
applies very well to detective problems, and it applies equally well to how doctors and patients
ought to think about health. Don't decide on the diagnosis, then look for the observations and
tests that fit your theory. It's better to collect your data, your history and physical,
keeping an open mind, and then see if there's a theory that fits the facts you've collected.
In other words, every diagnosis is a working diagnosis. As the facts change, your diagnosis
might change too. Don't paint yourself into a diagnostic corner, and don't assume that your
diagnosis, even if it made sense when you came up with it, is still correct. When there's new data,
it might be time to think again. We're working at the Student Health Center of a big university today,
seeing college students and faculty. Our patient is a young Hispanic woman. She's 22. Her chief
complaint is, I feel terrible. Elena says she's felt nauseous for several days, started throwing
up today, and now she feels dizzy and weak. There have been no fevers and no sick contacts.
There have been no diarrhea, no abdominal pain, just nausea. She lives in a house she shares with a
few other college students, and no one else has been sick. Elena did travel to Mexico for spring
break a few months ago, but had been feeling well until this week. So what are we thinking about
first? Common things are common. This could certainly be what's commonly called a tummy bug,
or infectious gastroenteritis, a common viral infection that causes vomiting. What we know so
far fits pretty well. Sometimes infections like these include some fever or some diarrhea, which
Elena doesn't have. Often, multiple people in the same house get this at about the same time,
and that's not going on either. Still, common things happen commonly.
What else could this be? We've talked through a brief differential of vomiting before. There is a
very, very long list, including diseases in the abdomen, brain tumors, medications, pregnancy,
migraine headaches, lots of things. So a little more history. Elena has been in good health,
though she has had migraine headaches actually in the past. They make her throw up. But today,
this doesn't feel like her migraine because she's had no headache and it's lasting too long. Elena
sounds pretty smart. She's right about migraines. People who have them learn that each episode is
stereotype. That means for people with migraines, each of their migraines feels about the same.
This illness is different, and Elena is right to suspect something else is going on.
She says her last menstrual period was last week, which should rule out morning sickness from
pregnancy. She says she is not sexually active, takes no medications, and has no contributory
family history. A fairly straightforward history, I think. Vital signs look normal,
with a normal BP of 110 over 66, pulse 88, respirations 12. Her temperature is 99.2 degrees
Fahrenheit. But Elena, she doesn't look so good. She's kind of pale and seems sort of wobbly when
she tries to get up. How many times have you thrown up, you ask? Maybe four times, Elena says.
The remainder of the exam is okay. You try to look for findings that suggest
more severe dehydration, like a dry mouth or a slow capillary refill. That's a quick test. You
squeeze the color out of a fingertip and see how long it takes to come back. Ordinarily, cap refill
is quick in a second or less, but in conditions with poor blood circulation, including dehydration,
this capillary refill will be slow. Elena's capillary refill is brisk and reassuring.
You give Elena a dose of medication to decrease nausea and have her stay in your
office for a few hours. You recheck on her a few times. There's no more vomiting,
and she says she's feeling better. Still, when she gets up to leave, she still seems
unsteady on her feet, almost like she might faint. But she says she's feeling better,
and she's holding down the drink you gave her. You do one test, a quick ear analysis,
and the urine is not concentrated, so you figure she can't be terribly dehydrated.
That's reassuring, so you send her home, with instructions to keep drinking fluids and to call
back if she feels worse again. Actually, the next day, you're still thinking about her.
You have your nurse give her a call, and Elena says she feels much better. Thanks a lot.
Okay, a pretty ordinary medical encounter, and our patient is feeling better. But think back
to that Sherlock Holmes quote. Did we collect the facts, then come up with a theory? Or did we come
up with our diagnosis and ignore the facts? The case was pretty straightforward. Elena had some
vomiting, and she was a little woozy or unsteady on her feet, presumably from losing fluid from
the vomiting. She was a little dehydrated, and fluids perked her right up.
But that doesn't really fit, does it? I mean, if she were really dehydrated, wouldn't her urine
have been concentrated? And wouldn't her vital signs be at least a little off, maybe at least with
a high heart rate? Even backing up to the history, throwing up four times, would that make a healthy
young woman dehydrated? Dehydrated enough to be woozy and unsteady? Anyway, it's four weeks later.
Here's Elena again. She's upset. She's crying, because it's finals week, and she's all stressed
out. And she says, quote, I can't see straight. Elena has never worn glasses before. But with
all of this reading she's doing, she's having a hard time now focusing on the paper. Elena says,
final start tomorrow. She's had no further vomiting, no nausea. She says she's felt fine,
but she thinks her vision, this is her word, it's gone fuzzy over the last few days. It's sort of
gradually gotten worse, and has maybe been worse towards the end of the day. She says she just
thinks she needs glasses. You ask about those migraines. Elena does have a history of those,
and some people with migraines have vision issues, like floaters or sparkling lights during
migraines. But she says this isn't a migraine she's having, and she isn't seeing any floaters or lights.
Things just look kind of blurry. So what could cause blurry vision? Of course,
an optical problem would be the most common thing. This is also called a refractive error,
and it means that your eye isn't focusing the image exactly onto the retina. Refractive errors
can include myopia, that's also called nearsightedness, or farsightedness, or astigmatism. All of these
are common causes of blurry vision, though it is odd for Elena to first notice these at her age.
She may also have a more serious eye condition, like glaucoma, or a detached retina, or dry eyes,
or perhaps a cataract, or a lot of other things that either affect the eye itself
or the optic nerve that brings information from the eye to the brain.
Vital signs are normal, and her eye exam itself is normal. With the ophthalmoscope and other
instruments we've got in the college health clinic, we can look at her eyes through her
corneas and lenses back to the retina. Everything looks normal. Her pupils constrict normally when
you shine light in them, her eyes aren't watery, she has no pain. You do a simple vision chart test,
that's technically called a snowing exam. That's when you cover one eye and then the other from
across the room and ask her to read the rows of letters to measure someone's visual acuity.
Vision is expressed as two numbers with a slash between them, like 2020. That means the patient
can see at 20 feet what most people are expected to see at 20 feet. Vision of 2040
means that what most people can see at 40 feet away, you need to be up at 20 feet to see it.
That second number after the first 20, the higher it is, the blurrier the vision.
Elena has her vision test, and her right eye measures 2020, and her left eye measures 2020.
Elena says she's embarrassed, but she noticed it too, when one eye was covered for the test,
she could see clearly. So, she says it must just be her nerves or eye strain or a migraine,
and she's got to go, and thanks, and Elena takes off to study.
What do you think? Elena's vision was fine when she covered one eye. One eye at a time,
everything is clear, yet she came into the clinic worried that she wasn't seeing right
when she was reading. Something here is not right. We've got some theories, maybe it's stress or a
migraine, but does that really fit the data? Think, would Sherlock Holmes be satisfied right now?
Three weeks go by. Elena's back, she says thanks, she made it through finals, and now she'll be
working as a teaching assistant through the summer until grad school. She says, I'm sorry,
I kind of freaked out last time she laughs. She says her vision has been fine. This time,
today, all she has is a urinary tract infection. The nurse had already had her give a urine sample
to test, and you've got the results right there on your clipboard.
But Sherlock Holmes, think maybe he's sitting on your shoulder this time. He wants the data
before he's going to let you make a diagnosis. So, you ask about the symptoms. Elena says she's
been having urinary accidents for a few days. It's kind of embarrassing. She doesn't even
realize she's done it. She started wearing pads to work. She says she knows it's a urinary tract
infection because she's had accidents like this before, and it's been an infection. She denies,
again, any sexual activity. There's been no fever, and no symptoms like burning or pain with urination.
Elena's vitals are normal, and we do a brief physical examination. Really,
for a simple urinary tract infection, a minimal exam you figure is probably sufficient.
Everything seems okay. The urine dipstick result is normal, with no signs of infection.
There are no white cells, and there's other things that we can test for on that dipstick,
usually positive and infection. No, they're all normal, too. Elena says, I know that dipstick
comes up normal. I've had that before, but it's always a UTI, and I get antibiotics, and I get better.
Sure enough, you flip backwards in the chart, and Elena has been to the clinic twice before in the
last year, seeing another doctor, then a nurse practitioner, with complaints of urinary accidents.
She was treated with antibiotics, and she got better, and her prior urinalesies were always normal.
When a urinary tract infection is suspected, the gold standard test is the culture.
Basically, incubating the urine to see what bacteria, if any, are growing there.
That takes a few days, so we often start treating UTIs based only on the dipstick.
For her last two UTIs, though she was started on antibiotics, the cultures came back negative.
I don't think you're having urine infections, Elena, you say. Of course I am, she replies.
What else could it be? Well, what would Sherlock Holmes think?
Urinary accidents, of course, are normal in little kids who haven't learned to hold their
urine yet. In a 22-year-old college student, something must be going on. Accidents can
happen with urinary tract infections because irritation in the bladder leads to spasms in
urine escaping. But in that case, there is usually pain, especially pain with urination,
which Elena has never had. And of course, her tests for UTIs have been negative.
Our UTI theory does not fit the facts.
Let's think more generally. How about a condition that makes a lot of urine like diabetes?
People with diabetes, at least adults, don't typically have urinary accidents.
They may urinate frequently, but that's different.
Besides, the dipstick Elena has already had several times,
never showed any glucose in the urine. This is not diabetes mellitus.
There is actually a different kind of diabetes, much more rare, called diabetes
encipitus that also causes very excessive urine and frequent urination, but again,
not typically accidents. Whatever is going on with Elena, it's probably not a disease that
causes excessive urine. Instead, we have to think about control of the urinary bladder.
There are two muscles, or there are sets of muscles, that need to work in a coordinated
fashion to both hold urine until an appropriate time and release it.
There is a detrusor muscle that's in the wall of the bladder, and when activated,
it squeezes the bladder closed to expel urine. So this muscle has to be kept inhibited or relaxed
until the right time. There's also a urinary sphincter muscle that keeps the urethra closed.
That muscle needs to be kept active or tightened until it's time to urinate. Then it relaxes.
These two muscles relax and contract under control of the autonomic nervous system.
We don't consciously control each one separately, but the higher authority, your conscious mind,
can inhibit urination until you make it to the bathroom. That's if everything is working correctly.
But what if there is a problem along the pathway from the brain through the spinal cord to the
nerves to the bladder? If it affects the system that keeps the urinary sphincter closed,
that sphincter might be open all the time, and urine could painlessly dribble out.
That's what Elena is reporting. She doesn't have pain or burning like you'd expect from an infection,
but just incontinence. Could this be a neurologic condition?
There are some other things that cause incontinence. Damage to the pelvic floor muscles,
say after childbirth or surgery, can lead to urinary accidents, as can bladder stones or
some kind of tumor. Children will sometimes have accidents from simply holding their urine too
long. But there's nothing in the history or physical that suggests these kinds of problems.
I think we are looking at something neurologic here. We've got plenty of data. We've got plenty
of history. Let's revisit what we know and see if there's a theory that fits all of the facts.
Elena's first illness was vomiting, perhaps from an ordinary gastrointestinal infection.
The dizziness and trouble walking that occurred with the vomiting at the time
we thought was maybe from dehydration. Though even then, that theory didn't really fit.
What else could cause vomiting plus dizziness plus trouble walking?
Something neurologic, something again in the brain that affects the balance centers,
causing vomiting for the same reason people vomit when they're seasick.
We thought Elena had a gastrointestinal illness, but a neurologic illness explains her symptoms
better. Her second illness, the second time she came to the clinic, was for blurry vision.
But her vision, when we tested each eye separately, was fine. What could cause a sense of blurriness
that you only notice if both of your eyes are open? Not many things, really. Any problem with
the eyeball itself, a refraction error like nearsightedness, or a problem like a cataract in
the lens of the eye, or retinal detachment in the back of the eye, or a problem with the optic
nerve from the eye to the brain, any problem anywhere along the system, you'd notice a vision
deficit if you looked through only one eye at a time. But what if your eyes weren't looking
at the exact same image? What if your eyes were crossed just a little bit? Maybe not enough to
really notice two distinct images, but enough so that your brain sees two images slightly out of
phase. What you would notice would be blurriness at the edges of the image, and if you covered one eye,
that blurriness would disappear. Blurring you see with two eyes together that disappears when you
look through one eye at a time means that your eyes are not moving together the way they should.
Diplopia is the medical word for this condition. In children,
Diplopia can be caused by a muscle imbalance, or by immaturity of the control of the eye,
or by some other problems. But Elena hasn't had problems like this before.
New onset Diplopia in an adult can be from a problem with the eye muscles or their nerves,
the nerves themselves, or the brain areas that control those nerves. Elena came in with blurry
vision, so we assumed it was an eye problem. But it was not. It was a neurologic problem.
And let's recap her most recent visit. The reason she came here today is urinary incontinence,
and she assumed it was a UTI. In fact, she had had the same symptoms before and was treated for a UTI,
but the facts, the history and physical exam and urine tests, those don't support the diagnosis
of UTI at all. They support the diagnosis of, again, a neurologic condition.
There's something else, maybe a little odd about these neurologic problems. They're not all happening
at once. Elena seems to have had one problem that kind of gets better than a different one.
Her symptoms are occurring at different times. The incontinence has happened a few times before,
and it's gotten better and then worse again. This is kind of an unusual pattern, don't you think?
Sherlock Holmes is often portrayed as wearing a distinctive hat. You can picture it. It has two
prims, one in the front, one in the back. It's called a deerstalker. We're getting closer here.
We've almost earned a deerstalker of our own. By the way, just something interesting,
the character of Sherlock Holmes was based on a physician, Dr. Joseph Bell, who Conan Doyle
met as a young medical student. The keen observer, Dr. Bell is famous for making diagnoses based on
the patient's appearance. Okay, back to Elena. Let's think about what causes neurologic symptoms.
Could this be a stroke or a series of TIAs? As we saw in the last case, we'd expect the sudden
onset of symptoms followed by, hopefully, some recovery. All of her individual symptoms actually
started kind of gradually over hours or days, not all at once, and all of them recovered 100%.
Could Elena be having a series of small strokes? That doesn't fit the facts well.
How about a tumor, maybe a brain tumor? You'd expect that to cause progressive symptoms as the
tumor grows, symptoms should get worse and worse. They shouldn't come and go, so that doesn't fit.
Some kind of infection, maybe? Again, she ought to either get worse and worse
or just recover. How could infection cause these different symptoms that come and go?
Migraines, maybe. Migraines can cause almost any neurologic symptom, but they're typically
stereotyped with individual migraines causing the same symptoms again and again with each attack.
People with migraines may indeed have double vision or dizziness,
but it ought to be about the same every time. Migraines wouldn't cause double vision once,
vomiting the next time, and urinary incontinence after that.
No, this illness is something unique. A young, healthy woman with neurologic manifestations
that differ and come and go over time. There's really only one likely diagnosis at this point.
Elena likely has multiple sclerosis or MS. Multiple sclerosis is the most common
debilitating neurologic disease that affects young adults. Most cases manifest between the
ages of 20 and 40, and women are far more likely to be affected than men.
There is a strong genetic component to MS. People from certain ethnic groups, especially Caucasians,
who may have had roots in Scandinavia, seem to be the most vulnerable, and MS is 20 times
more common in close relatives of people with MS than in the general population.
But there is more than genetics. Identical twins have only about a 30% concordance,
meaning that 70% of identical twins of people with MS do not themselves develop MS,
despite having identical genetic material.
So, we know that in addition to a genetic vulnerability, there must be important environmental
factors at work. MS is more common in communities farther from the equator, perhaps because of
reduced sunlight exposure leading to lower vitamin D levels. People who move from an area of high
risk to an area of low risk before puberty, but not afterwards, seem to have their lifetime
risk reduced. There have also been multiple outbreaks or clusters of MS suggesting a possible
infectious contributor. There have been many proposed possible infections, though none seems
to be the single cause. Smoking, diet, occupation, and socioeconomic status all may also contribute.
The cause of MS, as with many other health problems, likely relates to multiple overlapping
genetic and environmental factors. MS causes damage to the central nervous system,
meaning the brain and spinal cord. There are two major pathologic features. One is the destruction
of myelin, the insulation around nerve fibers. Myelin makes a sheath around nerve fibers that
dramatically increases the speed and efficiency of transmission of the nerve impulses. Without
myelin, basically, nerves won't work at all, or they might be slow and unreliable. This demyelinization
has been thought of as the main characteristic pathologic feature of MS. However, damage can
also occur from injury to nerve cells themselves. The affected areas of brain tissue are called
the lesions of MS, and at least some of them can be seen on MRI scans. However, the correlation
between what's seen on a scan and the clinical effect of the lesions isn't exact. Small lesions
can cause significant symptoms, large lesions can cause minimal or zero symptoms, and sometimes
symptoms can occur with no visible lesions at all. Lesions in MS can come and go with apparent
healing of some affected areas while other areas develop new lesions. That's very characteristic
of most MS patients. Waxing and waning symptoms as different areas of the central nervous system
become more or less affected. MS is thought of as an autoimmune disorder because there is
activation of the immune system and inflammation leading to damage in the brain. Also, like other
autoimmune diseases, it affects women more than men and starts relatively early in life. However,
potent anti-inflammatory medicines that suppress flare-ups of MS don't necessarily prevent the
long-term progression of MS, leading some to think that there is more to MS than autoimmunity.
There's a lot of research going on, and there is certainly more to learn.
In any case, the symptoms of MS depend on where the lesions are. Vision problems are quite common,
usually caused by inflammation in the optic nerve. There can be sensory symptoms including
tingling, numbness, or pain, or muscle weakness or spasms, or problems with balance and orientation
that may contribute to difficulty walking. Fatigue is also a very common and significant problem
with MS, and fatigue can worsen all of the other neurologic manifestations.
Other common symptoms that can progress or wax and wane over time can include bladder or bowel
problems, sexual dysfunction, problems with speech and swallowing, cognitive and memory issues,
and depression or other psychiatric problems that can be very debilitated. MS symptoms can flare up
at any time, but often seem to have certain triggers. These can include infections, even
relatively ordinary mild infections like a bladder infection or strep infection, can exacerbate
underlying MS symptoms. Environmental stresses like heat or cold or dehydration can be very
problematic, and many patients also find that emotional stress can lead to worsening symptoms
of MS. There are a few tests that Elena needs to confirm the diagnosis. A more thorough
neurologic exam should be done. Remember, this visit today was for a suspected UTI and we skimmed
past the neuro exam, but we need to head back in and talk to Elena, and we need to check her exam
in more detail, including tests of balance and strength and coordination, tests of memory,
a good detailed exam to get more information. Before breaking the news to her, I'd like to
know more about Elena's social support and who she'll be depending on to help her through this.
She's a college student, so technically an adult, but family and friends are going to be crucial.
We'll want to schedule an MRI, and Elena will probably need an LP or lumbar puncture, though
this will probably be done after referral to a neurologist for specialist level care. Many
centers have multidisciplinary clinics for MS patients to provide the services of neurologists,
advanced training nurses, social workers, psychologists, and other medical professionals.
That's where Elena needs to be. But that's not where she is right now. She's 22 years old,
and she's sitting in the college health clinic, and she thinks she has a UTI, although by now she
knows something else is on your mind. Patients can tell. This first conversation, it's important.
We have to tell Elena what's going on. She needs to know. But we don't want to just be
a fire hose of information. Elena does not need to know, for instance, that there's a correlation
between MS and vitamin D status. What she does need to know is this. Elena, we've met a few times,
and we've had a few different sorts of problems over the last few months. I think they're connected,
even though we didn't know it until today. These symptoms you've been having,
I think they're from your neurologic system. I think it's likely that you have multiple sclerosis.
From there, give Elena some time and answer her questions. We'll make sure, though, to ask her
what she knows about MS and whether she's heard of it. Elena may have an idea of what MS is,
and we need to tell her that every case is different, and that her symptoms may be nothing
like those she may have heard about. We don't want to list every possible symptom that anyone
with MS has ever had. Instead, we'll stress that there is a tremendous amount we've learned about
MS, and a lot of new treatments have become available. There are more on the horizon. MS is
common, and we'll try to connect Elena to appropriate support groups that include young
women her age. We're going to help Elena get plugged into the MS clinic. We'll make some calls.
We'll make sure she gets there, and we're going to help make sure she gets the care she needs,
and even though a specialist neurologist will be in charge, we're still going to be there to help.
MS itself is not a fatal disease. Most people with MS have a normal or nearly normal lifespan,
but the effects of MS on quality of life can be very substantial. 20 years after diagnosis,
most patients remain independent and ambulatory, though some will use a cane for balance or an
electric scooter to help prevent fatigue. Some patients, maybe 20%, will actually have very
little progression after their initial presentation. On the other end of the spectrum, about 20% may
have rapidly progressive disease. Most patients fall in the middle with remissions and relapses
and a gradual overall deterioration. Though there is no curative therapy, there are a lot
of options for medications that slow or prevent the progression of MS in many ways to treat at
least some of the lifestyle complications. Next up, a diagnosis that may have become much,
much more common over the last 20 years, or maybe not. There's a lot of controversy about this
diagnosis. What causes it, how to treat it, and even how common it is. See you next time.
