I'm a pediatrician, and one thing pediatricians know is that kids can't always tell you what's
wrong.
With kids, you have to pay careful attention, watch for those clues, and try to take in
the whole picture.
Of course, that's true for adults too, but it's especially true with kids.
Let me quote from a book published in 1942 by Rose Zelegs called Glimpses into Child's
Life about her observations teaching children in Cincinnati, Ohio.
To understand and measure emotional qualities is very difficult.
Psychologists and educators have been struggling with that problem for years, but we are still
unable to measure emotional and personality traits with the exactness with which we can
measure intelligence.
It's now 70 years later, and her observation remains true, studying how the mind works
and how children think is challenging.
We know that children can have potentially devastating problems with the way their emotional
and cognitive minds develop, but how best to identify and help these kids, that's not
always clear.
We're in pediatric clinic today.
It should be an easy day.
It's summer, and we've got mostly check-up schedules, sports and camp clearance forms,
that kind of thing.
The practice of office pediatrics is very different, summer versus winter.
Wintertime, it's coughing and fevers and congestion and misery.
In the summer, our business is typically sunburns and twisted ankles and camp physicals.
Our first patient is James, who is coming in for his routine two-year-old check-up.
On the intake form, there's a box for his parents to write any concerns.
We'll use their comment as James' chief complaint today.
We don't think he talks right.
Let's head into the exam room.
James is sitting on the floor naked, except for his diaper, and he's playing with a few
of those small rubber bouncing balls, what I call the super ball, as a child.
He's rolling them around under his palm against the floor.
James seems completely engrossed with this, so you first introduce yourself to his parents.
Ordinarily, we'll try to focus on the children in these encounters, and I personally usually
say hi to the kids first, but James doesn't look like he's ready to greet the doctor.
Now, well checks or check-ups, they're kind of different from the other medical encounters
we've become experienced with.
In an ordinary encounter, the chief complaint drives what we ask about and what we do.
Everything really starts with the patient's concern, or the parent's concerns, if the
child's too young to tell us.
We focus on the problem that triggered the visit.
A check-up has another focus, surveillance for problems that could be lurking in their
prevention and management.
Pediatric well visits always include an element of what we call anticipatory guidance.
That's a discussion of issues parents can expect to come up and how to handle them before
they've even become a worry.
We also discuss typical growth and what developmental changes to expect and encourage.
Of course, parents and patients at well checks often have a list of their own concerns to
discuss, so we have to balance getting through the things the doctor wants to get through,
plus the things the family wants to discuss.
Well checks needless to say take longer than ordinary sick visits.
Since this is James' well check, we go through some basic information first before addressing
the questions the parents have.
James' growth is fine, he's a little small and slender, but he's growing well.
He hasn't had much in the way of medical problems, just a few ear infections, though he was born
about six weeks premature and spent a week in the hospital after he was born.
We have a developmental questionnaire that parents complete at well checks for young
children to be sure they're progressing as expected and his parents have checked off
concerns in two areas, feeding and communication.
His parents say James started speaking late when he was about 18 months old and that he
just doesn't talk as much as other two-year-old children.
He uses only two words consistently, ball and no.
He'll be able to say words back to repeat back what he's heard, but he doesn't really
use those words to communicate.
They're especially worried because James really hasn't seemed to make much progress
since he started talking at 18 months.
So our first question, does James have a problem we need to evaluate further?
I think so.
By 18 months of life, most kids will have about 18 words.
By age two, most kids will have a word for almost everything they see.
Even if it's not the correct word, it's a word.
Most two-year-olds can also put two or three words together, making a simple sentence.
James, he does seem far behind in at least the expressive part of speech.
In pediatrics, we call this a developmental delay, a skill which most children have required
by now, but in our patient it seems to be lagging behind.
Our second question, what's the diagnosis or why is James behind in this skill?
We need at least a brief differential diagnosis to think about to help direct our next questions
in the physical exam.
Many medical problems can contribute to language or other developmental delays, certainly serious
chronic illness, especially those requiring prolonged or repeated hospitalizations will
set a child behind.
There are also specific biologic diagnoses that could affect James' development and
developmental potential, including genetic disorders like Down syndrome or conditions
caused by problems in the brain like cerebral palsy, also problems like hypothyroidism or
deafness or honestly a huge list of other medical diagnoses.
External factors may also be very influential, things like psychosocial neglect or maternal
depression or lead exposure.
There is also a large category of primary neurodevelopmental disorders.
This includes language delay and autism and cognitive disabilities that themselves may
or may not have a specific biologic marker, they're all considered primary because they're
not caused by specific identifiable medical conditions.
Sometimes multiple environmental, genetic and familial factors contribute to developmental
delay.
And sometimes there really isn't any more specific diagnosis that we can reach at all.
I'm sorry, that wasn't really a brief differential diagnosis, was it?
But it illustrates that we have to keep an open mind and we've got to keep an eye out
for other clues to find the best way to help our patient.
As always, the history is the key.
In this case, we've got to take both a general health history looking for risk factors for
delay, but we also have to get a detailed developmental history to see what skills are
behind and what the pattern of delay suggests.
We'll get to that part next, but first let's see what we can uncover with our general medical
history.
We start with prenatal factors, maternal illness during pregnancy, use of drugs or alcohol,
perhaps a history of prior stilverts or miscarriages.
Then we'll focus on the birth itself, where there are obstetric complications.
We know that James was born prematurely, which itself is a risk factor for developmental
delay, especially if there were complications or a prolonged stay in the neonatal ICU.
We then ask about any prior serious illnesses during James's life, especially focusing on
any neurologic illnesses such as seizures or meningitis or serious head trauma, has
even exposed to lead or other toxins, possibly from mom or dad's work.
Was there any history of very poor feeding or other reasons for James to have prolonged
malnutrition?
Is there any contributory family history, perhaps uncles or siblings or anyone else,
with developmental problems, deafness, blindness, any sort of brain disorder, and the social
history?
It's crucial here.
We'll ask gently, but is there any reason to suspect abuse or neglect or family violence
could one or both parents have mental illness or intellectual disabilities, or has there
been very limited social or financial support?
I also like to ask about how the parents have encouraged James's development.
We know, for instance, that lots of time in front of the TV slows language development
and that children who practice in a walker take longer to learn to walk on their own.
That's a whole lot of questions, but none of them today uncovered a single concerning
answer.
They were still worth asking if for no other reason than at least to get to know this family.
They want to know that you're looking for answers.
Let's move on to our developmental history now.
There's a tremendous amount of information we could look for, and sometimes we will refer
to a developmental specialist to really nail down these details, but for now we want to
focus on answering a few key questions.
Is James delayed only in speech, or is this a broader problem?
Children with broad developmental problems, that is, delays in many areas, are of much
more concern.
We also need to know, what's the pattern here?
Is James just slow to acquire skills, moving upwards, but not at the expected rate?
Or had he been zipping along just fine until a certain point, then suddenly slowing down?
Or is he actually regressing?
Is he losing skills?
Children who are regressing or losing skills are more likely to have a specific diagnosis
that needs more urgent attention than kids who are lagging behind but gaining skills
at their own rate.
We break up developmental skills into several realms.
For each one, we'll want to figure out where James stands, where he is in comparison to
other children, and his rate of acquiring new skills.
We'll often express developmental skills by comparing him to the average of a certain
age, so we might say that James, who is two years old, has the speaking ability of a typical
twelve-month-old.
Two major areas of development include fine and gross motor development.
So we ask about James' ability to use utensils to scribble with a crayon and walk and hop.
We can also observe these skills ourselves during the exam.
For instance, asking James to stack blocks to test his fine motor skills.
James does seem to like to scribble, and he walks easily, but he refused to stack any
blocks for us.
Instead, he just kind of stared at them and then swatted them away.
We also ask about language use, both expressive and receptive, that is, both how James has
tried to talk to us, but also how well he understands our communication with him.
Two-year-olds might be quite shy in the office, so sometimes it can be helpful to review videos
of speech and interactions.
James today seemed unwilling to speak at all, and pretty much ignored what we said to him.
His parents say that he does at least sometimes seem to understand what they say to him at
home.
A crucial area of development to assess, though perhaps this is more subtle, are social skills
and interactions.
All children have behavioral struggles to some degree, especially two-year-olds.
Children certainly have different temperaments and different ways of interacting with each
other and with their families.
So what we're looking for here are especially atypical behaviors that are pervasive and
repetitive and consistent.
We ask about feeding and eating habits and sleep routines as well.
Has there been excessive anxiety or fearfulness, or on the other hand, a complete lack of fear?
How does James respond to noises and sounds and strangers?
Does he like typical toddler activities, like being bounced or swung or playing hide and
seek?
Is he interested in other children?
A favorite question of mine, what are some of his favorite toys and what does he do with
them?
For instance, most two-year-olds like to pretend and like to play acting games, think about
tea parties or pushing toy cars along a track.
When we ask these things, we learn that James is very fussy at mealtimes and will only eat
from one favorite plate.
He likes a very limited number of foods.
His overall behavior is much better if the family follows a set routine.
And even on weekends, they kind of set up a fake daycare in the basement so he can follow
his weekday routine.
His parents say he doesn't really take much interest in strangers either way, as long
as they don't try to talk with him, he'll pretty much ignore them.
At play dates and at school, he spends very little time playing with others.
His favorite toys are three small rubber balls that he brings with him everywhere.
He's got them here with him right now, and he likes to roll them on the floor under his
hand.
He is never like swings, he's never like being bounced, and doesn't seem very interested
in hide and seek games.
We also need to try to assess James' overall cognitive development.
This isn't always easy at age two.
Later, formal intelligence testing can be undertaken, but for now, we'll have to rely
on a few observations.
For instance, by 12 to 18 months, most babies are fascinated by games that include cause
and effect.
Simple things like dropping a ball so mom has to pick it up.
There's also the development of the pretend use of tools or toys by this age, like making
soup in a big pot or pushing a toy to pretend to mow the lawn.
James' parents recall that he used to laugh at games where he threw a ball and the dog
went to get it, and that he definitely remembers where he left things.
He remembers, for instance, where his favorite balls are, better than his parents do.
He also seems to have great problem-solving skills.
Once he moved a chair to get on top of the table so he could reach a toy, and he's managed
to outsmart every baby-proof lock in the house.
It's important to keep in mind that there are no single crucial milestones at any age.
It's not the single thing that James does or doesn't do, but the pattern of skills.
James might not yet know the hand gesture for touchdown, for instance, especially if
his family doesn't watch much football, but he ought to know at least some hand gestures,
like waving bye-bye or pointing at objects when you name them.
Okay, let's catch up and summarize what we've learned.
Aside from preterm birth, James has had no specific risk factors for developmental problems
that we've identified.
And on the developmental history, we've learned that he's about 12 months behind in expressive
language, using only a few rudimentary words.
He may also be a little behind on receptive language skills.
His fine and motor skills, those seem okay.
He has many atypical sorts of behaviors in the realms of social interactions and playstyles.
And as far as we can tell, he seems to be bright and intelligent.
So how concerned should we be at this point?
I think we need to continue to worry.
Children with an isolated expressive delay, that is, there's nothing else atypical in
the developmental history.
They're just kind of late talkers.
They have an excellent prognosis.
Most of those kids do very well and catch up after a bit of a late start.
But James seems to have more going on here, especially with some of those behavioral and
social and interactive skills.
In addition to his speech-language delay, he's not really acting like a typical toddler.
The physical exam is a crucial part of the evaluation of developmental problems.
We'll use that time not only to observe James' skills and interactions, but also to look
for any sorts of findings that might indicate a specific diagnosis or might hint at a certain
kind of diagnosis.
For instance, abnormal head growth, a very small head or a very large head, could indicate
a problem with brain development.
Skin findings, including certain kinds of birthmarks, can hint at an underlying neurologic
disorder.
And an enlarged spleen or liver can be a hint that there is a metabolic disease that could
affect the brain.
Particular attention needs to be paid to the neurologic exam, including muscle bulk and
tone and reflexes, or any asymmetric findings.
It was a very difficult exam.
James did not like to be touched and seemed hard to distract.
But as far as we could tell, the exam seemed normal.
We let James sit on the floor, rolling those plastic balls under his hand to think about
our next steps.
There's one test we know we're going to want, a good hearing test that's absolutely essential
for any child with language delay.
Could this be a problem with hearing?
Of course it could.
If James doesn't hear well, it will prevent him from learning words and could also explain
some of his behavior, especially the limited way he interacts with others.
Fortunately, Upstairs from our clinic is an ENT specialist, and today they've got their
audiologist in the office.
So we send the family Upstairs for a hearing test.
We think about what to do next.
We become suspicious of a specific diagnosis, but we need a little time to think it through
and think about how to confirm it.
So James and his family, Head of Stairs, we think about autism.
Or as it's now more formally called, an Autism Spectrum Disorder, or ASD.
This is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder that's characterized by three distinct, though
overlapping problems, impairments in social interactions, impairments in communication,
and a pattern of repetitive, stereotype behaviors.
A broad umbrella term, pervasive developmental disorder, had been used to encompass autism
and several related disorders, though that's being replaced now with the term ASD, or Autism
Spectrum Disorder.
One of the earliest and most characteristic indicators of autism is the failure of the
development of what's called joint attention.
This is a child's ability to share interests and experiences, or to request things from
others using gestures, eye contact, and verbal communication.
For instance, children without autism, these kids are called neurotypical, they'll point
to things, usually by 12 to 15 months, they'll point when they want you to look at something,
or they'll point when they want something.
They'll also understand when other people point to look at the thing that someone else
is interested in, to share that experience.
There are other ways to share like this, too.
Neurotypical kids will bring toys and things to caretakers to show them what they're interested
in, and during play, neurotypical toddlers will frequently look at their parents to make
sure that they're paying attention, and they'll deliberately sort of show off to get
attention.
There's some research that shows that this failure of joint attention in autism isn't
just characteristic, but that it may be the essential early step that leads to other eventual
symptoms.
This joint attention, paying attention to what parents are paying attention to, and enjoying
positive feedback for doing this, this is exactly how little babies learn to communicate
and interact.
Think of a four-month-old who smiles back at mom when she smiles, then mommy says the
baby's name, and they coo at each other, and they enjoy each other's attention.
This isn't just for fun.
It's how babies learn how important their name is, who they are, and how they practice
the critical skill of sharing moments together to learn to interact.
If that system, that shared attention isn't working correctly early on, it may lead to
missing out on all of the learning and all sorts of social and behavioral skills.
Later on, other typical symptoms of autism develop.
These frequently include repetitive, stereotype behaviors like headbanging or rubbing or spinning
or rolling a plastic ball along the floor over and over again.
Routines can become very rigid, and children with ASDs, and thus their parents too, may
find breaks and routine very difficult.
Now children with autism like to play, and they find their place soothing, but their
place then tends to be different from that of neurotypical children.
They'll perhaps be fascinated by the details of an object or find ways to use an object
that's not based on pretending or on what the object was meant to be used for.
Rather than throw a ball, they'll stare at it as it reflects colors, or rather than push
a toy car, they'll flip it upside down and spin the wheels.
There's a tremendous range of autism, which is why we now refer to an autism spectrum,
and not all children with autism will show all of the symptoms.
Complicating this picture is that many children with autism will also have genetic disorders
like Down syndrome or a history of other medical problems, including fetal alcohol exposure
or cerebral palsy.
And many also develop psychiatric disorders, including anxiety disorders or obsessive compulsive
disorder.
So there's a lot of overlap, and the picture changes as a child develops.
One thing is for sure, and it's crucial to communicate this to parents, no two children
with autism are the same, and the most important challenges to tackle will depend on the individual
child.
By now, James has come back downstairs.
He's had a normal hearing test.
Pediatric audiologists are very gifted at being able to test kids, even when you think
they couldn't cooperate.
Ophthalmologists too, it's quite amazing, really.
Now that we've thought some more about autism, we have just a few more questions for James's
parents.
Does James point to things to show he wants them, or does he look at where his parents
point?
No.
No, they say.
Does he look at where you're looking?
His parents kind of shrug at each other.
I don't think so, says dad.
They say that they've learned that if they need James to look at something, they just
bring it right to him.
Does he ever bring toys to show you?
Or does he sometimes deliberately smile at you, or do cute things just to get your attention
to make you watch what he's doing?
No, says mom.
She's starting to cry a little.
James is playing on the floor again, kind of in his own world.
You give mom a tissue, and this is what you say.
I can tell James is really smart.
He solves problems by himself, and he can take care of a lot of things all on his own.
I can tell that he's been well taken care of, that you love him, and that he loves you.
I can tell, though, that there are some things he really hasn't learned on his own, some
things that many children learn automatically.
He's kind of missed out on some of those skills, like paying attention when you point,
and using talking to communicate.
I think he can learn these things, but it might take him some extra time.
But what's wrong with him, doctor, asks his mom.
Everyone says he's just not right.
It's going to be okay, isn't it?
I'll tell you that the last time I had this conversation with parents, I cried a little
too.
It's not against the rules to be yourself, even for a doctor.
He is okay now, is actually what I would say.
He's James, he's himself, he's smart, and he can learn things.
He does have some challenges, and I'm going to help you through them.
What I think he has is something we call an autistic spectrum disorder, or autism.
Are there things you already know about autism?
Asking that question is a very good starting point.
Well, the conversation goes on from there.
I would try to give the parents a brief outline of what autism is, and I'd stress that early
identification and treatment can really help these children learn these skills.
To me, autism is very much a learning disorder.
Some things that most children learn automatically, kids with autism need to work out, and need
extra help to learn.
However, exactly what information to share, and how quickly to share it, really depends
on how the family is doing.
This kind of diagnosis can be truly life-changing, or maybe even life-shattering.
This dream of their child's future, and a diagnosis like this, can put everything in
doubt.
Parents may blame themselves or each other.
Parents may end up divorced, and siblings may end up with their own guilt as families
fall apart.
This is a time when the family's doctor can be a source of strength and a resource for
support, which is probably more important than spending a whole lot of time right now teaching
about autism.
As the doctor, though, right up front, you want to stress that we have good treatment
for autism, and that most children diagnosed in the first several years of life are able
to make big improvements in communication and social skills.
Now, there are children with more severe autism, and the prognosis for those children is not
as good.
This includes children who have a low IQ, especially children with Down syndrome or
complicating medical conditions.
Sometimes there isn't really any reason why one child is so severely affected, at least
not a reason we understand yet, but that's really the minority of cases.
Most children with ASD are mildly to moderately affected, and therapy and special education
can really help.
I started this lecture with a quote from Rose Zelligs about the difficulty measuring
emotion and personality.
It's actually the same quote that Dr. Leo Kanner used in his 1943 paper that first accurately
described and named autism.
The challenge then and now is understanding how the human mind develops and functions.
There are a lot of controversy surrounding autism, and I'm not going to cover them in
great detail now.
One of them concerns the tremendously increased rates of autism being seen in many areas of
the developed world.
In the United States, autism affects up to 1 in 88 children.
That's a number that pops.
Is there an autism epidemic right now?
Actually maybe not.
Good longitudinal studies over time have shown that the incidence of autism hasn't changed
much when you use the same diagnostic criteria across age groups.
Over the last 20 years, we've changed the definition of autism to become much more
broad, so many more children are being caught under an ever-widening umbrella.
Also, there is an effect of diagnostic substitution.
While the diagnoses of autism have seemed to go up, the diagnoses of mental retardation
and other disorders have gone way down.
We also know that the rates of severe autism haven't changed very much.
All of the increased incidence is seen in more mildly affected children.
I don't mean to downplay that, though.
Even mild manifestations can be very difficult for children and families, and the treatment
can be very costly.
Another huge controversy, what's causing autism?
Briefly, there seem to be both genetic factors and environmental influences as well.
The environmental clues that seem to be the most influential are those that occur very
early in life, or even during pregnancy, though children aren't typically diagnosed
with autism until maybe three or four years of age.
In retrospect, studies of even very young babies, a few months old, show subtle differences
that though unappreciated at the time were evidence that something had already happened
to cause autism.
Early identification seems to be the key to treatment.
We know that young babies are especially capable of learning a tremendous amount.
Their minds are little sponges.
Early therapy to help reinforce the skills of shared attention and early language development
can be very effective.
We need to do a better job finding children like James early on to get them into therapy
as soon as possible.
While there is no medicine that treats the core symptoms of autism, medication can be
used to treat some of the more problematic behaviors.
What's far better than medicine, though, is early hands-on therapy, engaging the parents
to practice and teach the skills that these children need to learn.
Next up, our Grand Rounds will take place in the frozen Antarctic.
You'd better dress warmly.
See you then.
