We've got a puzzler today, a scary case.
This is a common disease and one that we've learned a tremendous amount about in the last
few decades.
On the one hand, this is a disease that can kill a healthy 36-year-old woman in just a
few months.
While in a 90-year-old, it may not need to be treated at all.
Julie, a 52-year-old woman, comes to our general medicine outpatient clinic with a chief complaint
of, I can't play tennis anymore.
Julie says she used to be a very active athlete.
She was on the first women's lacrosse team at her college, and this was many years ago
when there wasn't nearly as much women's athletics for students.
She was also a competitive swimmer and almost made the Olympic team.
She has continued to play softball and tennis and works as a teacher and coach for several
girls' teams at a high school.
However, about 10 years ago, Julie started having mostly right-sided hip and knee pain.
She was diagnosed with osteoarthritis.
She tried medical therapy with painkillers, injections, and steroids, but these weren't
very effective.
Julie really wanted to get back to her active lifestyle, so she had right hip replacement
surgery eight years ago.
She was able to return to active sports, but continued to have some pain now more on her
left side, kind of in the front of her hip, or sometimes more in her left thigh.
She complains now that this left-sided pain has gotten much worse, and she thinks she
needs a referral back to orthopedics for left hip replacement surgery.
It's time to create a brief differential diagnosis.
We've got a case of gradually increasing non-acute hip pain in an active woman with
the history of arthritis.
Seems pretty straightforward, but let's not fall into that trap of assuming that we already
know what's going on.
Arthritis would, of course, be on top of the list.
The word comes from the Greek.
Arthro means joint and itis, meaning inflammation, that suffix itis.
It comes up a lot in medicine.
Appendicitis is inflammation of the appendix, gastritis is inflammation of the stomach.
Arthritis of a joint means that there is more than just pain, but also evidence of inflammation
with redness, warmth, stiffness, or perhaps changes on an x-ray.
In adults, the most common cause of arthritis is chronic overuse.
That's called osteoarthritis.
That becomes much more common with age and is more common in athletes.
Arthritis can also be caused by infection in the joint or by autoimmune conditions like
rheumatoid arthritis or by lupus.
By the way, another term, arthralgia, that's the medical term for joint pain without evidence
of inflammation.
You might also be dealing with a fracture here, probably not a sudden acute fracture
since the symptoms have evolved gradually, but perhaps what's called a stress fracture.
This is bone damage that develops more gradually from overuse.
Stress fractures, they're more common in athletes and especially common in people at
risk for decreased bone mineral density.
They also often appear at the beginning of a training session or when an athlete changes
to a new sport or a new workout routine.
There are other orthopedic and mechanical conditions that can cause hip pain.
These include bursitis, that's inflammation of a little fluid-filled sac that's there
to protect the muscles and the tendons, or tendonitis or inflammation of the thick bands
of tissue that connect the muscle to the bone.
These as well as muscle and tendon strains, they're usually caused by overuse.
So we're seeing here that our patient's active lifestyle has put her at risk for all kinds
of injuries.
One other orthopedic sort of problem that can cause hip pain is called avascular necrosis
caused by decreased blood flow to the bone or joint.
This happens most commonly at the hip and one of the causes is prolonged oral steroid
therapy.
Now Julie was treated with an oral steroid prednisone for several months for her arthritis
years ago.
That's probably too long ago to have caused avascular necrosis now, but it's worth keeping
in mind.
Okay, let's start thinking kind of outside the box a little.
We've got a good list of orthopedic and joint conditions, but hip pain doesn't have to be
related to the actual bones or the joint.
Endometriosis can cause pain in the front of the pelvis near the hip joint.
Also anything that presses or pinches a nerve that goes towards the hip can cause pain to
be sensed in the hip area, even if that pinch is up higher on the nerve.
So for example, a slipped disc pressing on a nerve root in the spine can cause hip pain
down low.
Pitcher on a nerve as it passes through the pelvis is called sciatica and that can cause
hip or thigh or sometimes knee pain.
You can also have pain in the hip area from a hernia or abdominal contents poke out of
a weak area of the lining of the abdomen.
Hip or bone pain can also be caused by tumors including benign cysts or tumors of bone or
cancer of the bone or the bone marrow or the spread of cancer from other places.
Infections of bone called osteomyelitis, those can also cause pain that can begin suddenly
or gradually depending on the kind of infection.
Now let's get some more history and a physical exam.
The pain, Julie says, it gets worse as the day goes on and it's especially bad on active
days.
That actually doesn't really fit with most causes of arthritis, really arthritis causes
stiffness and pain that is worse first thing in the morning upon waking up, arthritis may
also get worse again later in the day with activity.
Julie denies any fever or swelling or redness over any joint which kind of weighs against
this being some kind of infection.
She denies having had any easy fatigue or weight loss, fevers or night sweats that's
reassuring and points us away from many more serious illnesses like leukemia or lupus.
Julie says her pain is at times dull or at times sharp, it's usually in the front of
the left hip and doesn't shoot up or down or reach around towards her spine.
We would have called pain that moves or shoots down a radiating pain and that can be a sign
of nerve compression.
Nerve based pain is often burning in quality and it often is accompanied by changes in
sensation or strength that Julie isn't complaining about.
So there's no radiation, there's no burning, there's no changes in strength or sensation.
This really isn't sounding like pain from a pinched nerve in her pelvis or in her back.
Since some gynecologic conditions were on our differential, we ask about a GYN history.
Julie is now post-menopausal and had a long history of irregular or infrequent periods.
This could have been related to her lean physique and her active lifestyle.
There's a so-called female athlete triad that includes menstrual disturbances, disordered
eating habits and bone mineral loss.
Often athletic women have all or part of that triad and in this case it could have put her
at risk for stress fractures from poor mineral density.
Julie denies having had pelvic pain or painful periods or any sexual health concerns.
We've learned what we're going to learn from the history so it's time for the physical
exam.
Physical signs include a heart rate of 86, respiration 16, blood pressure 106 over 78
and temperature 98.9.
What do you think of those?
They look pretty normal and if you look up the normal ranges for a woman of Julie's age
they are normal.
But she's an athlete and she has been one for years.
I'd sort of expect a lower resting heart rate than 86.
Of course she's in pain and that might explain a bit of a relatively fast heart rate right
now.
More exam.
H-E-E-N-T that stands for head, eyes, ears, nose and throat.
That exam is normal.
Her lungs are clear.
Her heart exam is normal too.
We find a firm mass about the size of an almond under her left armpit.
It's under the skin and it's freely movable and it feels like an enlarged lymph node.
Her belly exam is normal and nothing unusual is found on Julie's skin.
GYN and breast exams are normal as well.
Her hip joints seem to have a normal full range of motion though we find some pain when rotating
her left hip outwards.
Before we go forward let's just briefly think back to our differential.
Are we convinced that Julie has ordinary osteoarthritis?
I don't know about that.
She's at risk for stress fractures and the timing of her pain isn't exactly what's expected
from arthritis plus we've got a little bit about a high heart rate and this single lymph
node in her armpit or axillary area.
I think our orthopedic colleagues would appreciate our digging a little more before sending her
onwards to their clinic.
Our first simplest test is a set of x-rays.
Though her pain is on the left we'll get films of her entire pelvis both hip joints
and both femurs.
Being able to compare the right and left sides can be helpful in finding subtle sorts of things.
We can easily see the titanium hardware from her right hip replacement surgery.
That looks fine.
But there on the left there's an area of bone at the top of the femur near the hip joint
that looks kind of irregular and splotchy.
It's not a fracture.
The bone isn't just broken.
This is an area of abnormal bone, maybe a cyst of some kind or chronic bone infection
or some kind of cancer.
This is not arthritis.
Let's get some blood work.
The CBC shows anemia with a decreased amount of red blood cells.
In general this can be caused by either blood loss or by decreased production of red cells.
The remainder of the cell lines, the platelets and the white cells are normal.
The labs also reveal an increased sedrate meaning some kind of inflammation is going
on somewhere.
Okay, we now know that there's abnormal bone at approximately the site of Julie's pain.
It's unlikely to be a benign or simple cyst of the bone because we've got that increased
sedrate and anemia to explain.
There is also that small lymph node on Julie's exam.
Always keep your eye on those funny unexpected findings.
They're often good clues.
A great diagnostic tool sometimes underappreciated is collaboration between doctors.
Since we happen to work in a multidisciplinary outpatient clinic with his own radiology department,
let's walk down the hall.
Let's see what our radiologist says about those films.
Sure enough, she says that what she's seeing isn't normal bone.
It looks like maybe a chronic bone infection or maybe primary bone cancer or metastatic
cancer spreading from somewhere else.
Our next step is to call our orthopedic surgery colleague.
He agrees that something's fishy on that x-ray and says he'd be happy to jump in and biopsy
it.
But maybe he says we ought to speak with the oncologist first.
So another phone call.
The oncologist shares the team's concern and points out that though primary bone cancer
is possible, that lymph node might mean there is something brewing in the chest area.
Our patient, it turns out, Julie has never had a mammogram.
So one is done the next day revealing a suspicious breast mass on the left.
Now Julie herself has been told the results of the blood tests, the x-ray, and now the
mammogram.
And we need to make sure that we're taking the time to explain to her what's going on
to give her a chance to ask questions and to make sure that she's involved in the medical
decision process.
After consultation between Julie, the primary care doc, the oncologist, and the surgeon,
the decision is made to proceed immediately with an open biopsy of the breast mass.
Although a needle biopsy could have been done, Julie felt that whatever was going on she
wanted to know for sure and she wanted to know as soon as possible.
Tissue during surgery is examined by the pathologist who confirms seeing the abnormal cells of
breast cancer.
The surgical procedure is then extended to remove the chains of nearby lymph nodes, several
of which also turn out to contain cancer cells.
Next a bone scan is performed.
This is a study that involves the administration of an IV chemical that binds especially to
sites of active bone turnover.
The chemical is also radiolabeled, meaning it releases a tiny amount of a radiation tracer
that can be picked up by a scintillation camera.
The bone scan shows increased uptake of tracer at the site of abnormal bone from the x-ray
near the hip joint.
But also along several sites in the spine and on the skull.
Our final diagnosis is breast cancer, with metastatic spread to the local lymph nodes
and bone, both near the hip and other sites.
Julie was told the news at first briefly in recovery after her surgery, but then again
at a longer sit-down discussion with the oncologist who could best explain the prognosis and options
for the next steps in evaluation and care.
Exactly how to do this depends on the situation and depends on the patient.
In Julie's case, she wanted to hear all of the news as soon as possible.
Though in other cases, it may have been better to wait a day or two so arrangements could
be made for family to attend that meeting, or to give the patient a few days to clear
her head after anesthesia.
And doctors also know this, sharing news like this isn't a one-time event.
It isn't one big talk at which all questions are answered.
There's never enough time to answer all questions and sometimes people just can't absorb all
of the information the first time.
Discussions like this should always end with plans for the next discussion and plans for
what issues will be discussed, as well as open-ended time for families and doctors to
share how they feel.
We've got some big decisions to make now about further evaluation and treatment.
But before we get back to Julie's case, let's back up to talk about cancer and breast cancer
screening.
Cancer at its core is a genetic disease, that is, it's a disease that affects the genetic
material of the cells.
Every cell is governed by instructions carried on its chromosomes, the genes that encode the
proteins that control every function of every cell.
Cancer cells are cells that have, in a sense, gone bad.
They've lost the ability to control their own growth and differentiation and grow and
spread far beyond the tissues that they ought to call home.
They've gone bad because of changes in their genes.
There are two kinds of genetic changes that can lead to cancer.
First, there are so-called germline mutations.
These are genes that are present way back in the embryo, passed on from mom and dad,
and they're present in every cell in the body.
These mutations are hereditary, you're born with them, and hereditary mutations account
for about 10% of all cancers.
The second kind of genetic change occurs only in one cell, only in a single cell.
It's a mutation or a mistake that's created when the cellular genetic material is copied
to make new cells.
Sometimes this happens just randomly, it's bad luck, but for many kinds of cancers we
know what things cause at least some or most of those cellular changes.
Including the solar radiation from the sun can disrupt or damage DNA as can environmental
toxins or smoking.
Some infections can also directly cause certain cancers, like cervical cancer, which is caused
by infection with the human papilloma virus.
Or in another example, chronic infections like certain kinds of hepatitis lead to chronic
cell damage that can eventually lead to cancer.
One more example, chronic severe reflux into the top of the esophagus can eventually damage
the cells there, leading to esophageal cancer.
It gets even more complicated.
Though there are both somatic and germline kinds of mutations, many cancers are related
to not one genetic change, but several overlapping conditions.
For instance, someone may have a genetic predisposition in their cells that leads to a decreased
ability to repair the damage from sunshine, so in that person relatively modest sun exposure
can lead to cancer.
Cancer usually arises from a combination of contributions from multiple genes, sometimes
but not always, including hereditary genes that are carried in families.
One very common risk factor for almost all cancers is simply age.
The longer our cells have been alive, the more years they've had to sustain the damaging
hits on their genetic material that lead to cancer.
Almost all cancers increase in frequency with age, and in fact it's probably true that
if we live long enough, eventually all of us will get some kind of cancer.
Of course it isn't one disease, any tissue can develop cancer, and often there are potentially
multiple types of cancer, even in one kind of body tissue, all of which have different
health consequences and different treatments.
But whatever the initial cause and whatever the kind of cancer, what all cancers have
in common is that the genetic mechanism that should have controlled the growth and spread
of those cells, that mechanism fails, and the cell keeps dividing and growing and spreading.
So how does cancer make a patient sick?
The signs and the symptoms of cancer can be almost anything.
They depend on where the cancer is, how fast it's growing, and whether it's pushing on
blood vessels or nerves or other crucial tissues.
It may also depend on whether the cancer is blocking the flow of bile, for instance,
or expanding in the bone marrow and pushing on bone, which can cause pain.
A cancer pressing on the brain could cause headaches or weakness or seizures.
Some cancers themselves release chemicals into the blood that cause symptoms in any
part of the body, like flushing or diarrhea.
Symptoms can also cause symptoms if they spread or metastasize to other areas.
There are sometimes constitutional symptoms of cancer.
These may be prolonged and difficult to explain, including fever or weight loss or marked fatigue.
These symptoms may occur because of the metabolic demands of the growing cancer tissue, or in
part because the body's immune system is trying to attack and fight off the cancer.
However, breast cancer often occurs with none of these constitutional symptoms.
Let's focus back now on Julie's breast cancer.
Is there anything she could have done to prevent it?
Many of the risk factors for breast cancer are what we call unmodifiable.
That is, there's nothing Julie or anyone else could have done.
Gender, of course, is a big risk factor.
Breast cancer is 100 times more common in women than in men.
Age, as we mentioned, the risk of breast cancer continues to increase with every decade of life,
though in general the most aggressive, the most deadly breast cancers occur in younger women.
Breast cancer presenting in elderly women may grow very slowly and may not need aggressive therapy.
There are also genetic risk factors, including several known familial germline mutations
that, if present, may cause a cancer risk as high as 80%.
Women who come from families with a striking history of either breast cancers in young women,
multiple cases of ovarian cancers, or men who have breast cancer,
those women should be screened for these sorts of mutations.
What about lifestyle factors and other ways to help prevent breast cancer?
Actually, having children seems to be a little protective,
but taking birth control pills may increase the risk.
Those aren't huge influences.
Prolonged use of combined hormone replacement therapy, common in the 80s and 90s,
also contributed to increased breast cancer risk.
Alcohol use is clearly a risk factor for breast and as well as other cancers,
as is obesity and a lack of physical activity.
Smoking, including passive tobacco exposure, may also increase breast cancer risk,
at least in some genetically susceptible individuals.
What about screening?
Early detection of life-threatening illnesses like cancer, it's a cornerstone of public health
because cancer detected early prior to spread is much more treatable than advanced cancer.
Screening to detect early breast cancer is especially important for women
with genetic or other risk factors.
There are several ways to screen for early breast cancer.
The first is regular self-exam, checking for lumps or masses or changes in the skin
or anything else new that could be an early warning sign.
Now, no study has actually found that regular breast self-exams prevent death from breast cancer,
but it's cheap and it's safe and it's generally recommended as are breast exams from doctors
or nurses at regular health visits.
But the most effective screening method is the use of mammograms.
Mammography is a breast x-ray looking for changes in the tissue density that can occur
with early cancers.
They can detect breast cancer early and they do save lives, but there is controversy over
when they ought to be done.
Breast cancer in younger women is rare, but it can be more aggressive, so mammography
in younger women may be more likely to show false results from denser tissue, leading
to more unnecessary repeat tests and biopsies.
The consensus now is for screening mammography to be done every one or two years, starting
at age 40 to 50.
Women at higher risk ought to be screened more often and starting younger.
As women live into their 80s or 90s, the question of whether to continue mammography should
be individualized according to risk and overall patient health and expected lifespan.
I want to use this example of mammography to illustrate one potentially under-recognized
facet of cancer screening and actually of the entire assumption that it's always a good
idea to do screening tests.
We assume that it's always a good idea to catch every breast cancer as early as possible,
but is that really true?
A 2012 study looked at the rates of cancer detection in late-stage breast cancer before
and after the era of mass mammography screening.
The number of very early breast cancers detected doubled once women began routine mammos.
That is good, but the rate of late-stage breast cancer presentations, those didn't drop nearly
as much.
They fell only by about 8%.
So if every early breast cancer was going to go on to become an advanced breast cancer,
then this doubling of early pickups should have led to a similar drop by half in advanced
cases.
When the numbers are analyzed and adjusted for other known variables, it looks like about
30% of breast cancers, when picked up by mammography and treated early, would never
have gone on to become serious invasive illness.
Many of those would never have caused any symptoms at all and would have gone away on
their own.
So that's a limitation of early screening.
We can't assume early pickups always prevent late serious illness, though we've learned
more about the genetic makeup of cancers and are better able to predict their behavior.
We still don't really know which early cancers are most likely to spread.
Add to that the other big downside to screening, false positives that lead to further expensive
tests and a lot of worry.
Julie didn't have any family history of cancer.
She was active, she didn't smoke, and actually her history of infrequent periods would have
predicted a lower risk of breast cancer.
Because of that, Julie decided not to pursue routine mammography.
And in retrospect, this did not turn out to have been such a good idea.
Sometimes we just don't have a perfect answer.
Over the next few meetings, the oncologist and surgeon discussed treatment options with
Julie.
Surgery is the primary main therapy for breast cancer.
And surgery alone can be curative when breast cancer is caught early.
In Julie's case, surgery was pursued to remove the bulk of the tumor, the main part, even
though there was already spread to other sites.
For Julie, we know surgery will not be curative, but it can help extend her life by decreasing
the further spread of cancer.
After surgery, many women with early cancer pursue what's called adjunctive therapy.
This refers to things done in addition to the primary therapy, that was the surgery
to increase the chance of cure or long-term survival.
Though theoretically, an early cancer shouldn't have spread to outside tissues, we can't
know if a few cancer cells may have snuck out.
And even a few cells or even one cell can continue to grow and allow cancer to spread.
Adjunctive therapy for breast cancer includes mainly chemotherapy, hormonal therapy, and
radiation.
Chemotherapy refers to drugs given to kill cancer cells or halt their spread.
It's most effective on rapidly dividing cells, and different kinds of breast cancer may be
more or less sensitive to chemo.
The chemotherapy drugs are often more effective when used in combinations.
Though side effects may be very difficult, we have gotten better at managing many of
them.
Many, but not all, breast cancer cells have receptors for female hormones.
If they do, medications to block hormones can prevent cancers from spreading.
Radiation therapy can also be used to destroy rapidly dividing cancer cells, though there
are side effects and dose limitations.
These adjunctive therapies can be used to increase the chance of long-term survival or as palliative
therapy to extend life and provide comfort, even in patients who cannot be cured.
Julie, who was an active, healthy person, she chose very aggressive therapy.
A modified, radical mastectomy was performed immediately followed by chemo.
Radiation therapy was directed at her chest and at the areas of metastases.
She then had breast reconstruction surgery.
For 14 months, apartment feeling ill for several days after each cycle of chemo, Julie felt
well and was able to play some tennis and golf.
However, she then developed sudden seizures, lethargy, and neurologic problems, and was
found to have metastatic disease in her brain.
Following the wishes she had discussed with her family and oncology, as well as radiation
and her surgical teams, chemo was discontinued and radiation treatment for her brain disease
was planned.
However, before that treatment was begun, Julie became comatose and further support
was only given with fluids and pain medication.
Julie died two days later.
William Osler, who was in many ways the father of what we think of as modern medicine, he
said the good physician treats the disease.
The great physician treats the patient who has the disease.
Cancer is a complex illness that can present in many ways, and we still have a lot to learn
about prevention, screening, and treatment.
Julie's story is humbling, and it's a little scary, but even when things turned bleak, there's
always something a physician can do to help the patient, to help with comfort, and to help
ease a patient's journey, even when we cannot stop her disease.
