Eastern Kentucky. Rolling Hills. Bluegrass music. Small towns you'd think may be isolated
and protected from modern worry. But there's an epidemic there that's not getting a lot
of attention. Rock Castle County, a county of about 16,000 people, is seeing one death
a week. In Knot County, more than half of the children don't live with their parents
because of death or abandonment or an inability of parents to take care of their own children.
These kids are being raised by grandparents and aunts and uncles, many of whom later succumb
to the same illness. In Johnson County nearby, school administrators have changed the name
of Parents Day to Guardians Day because so many kids have lost their parents. We're
back in General Medicine Clinic today, picking up some extra shifts for a colleague who's
out on maternity leave. Our next patient, Sandra, is a 35-year-old woman who we've not
met before. Her chief complaint listed on the intake form is constipation. We head
into the room and we meet Sandra. She's a well-appearing woman, a little thin, and she's sitting
on the edge of her chair with a cane propped against one leg. She's got a few bottles of
medicines lined up on the desk there and she reaches out to shake her hand as you walk
in. She says, sorry, it's hard for me to stand up. You say, no problem, you shake her hand
and you sit down across from her. She asks a few questions about you, a little chit-chit,
a little chit-chat because she's never met you before. It's nice when you're not rushed
to spend a little time getting to know patients, even before diving into the medical information.
Honestly, it's nice even when you are rushed, but today we've got a little extra time.
She says her usual doctor is on leave, so she decided to see you because you're new
to the area and she figured you'd be easy to get an appointment with. And she's heard
you're very nice. Sandra is an unemployed teacher. She says she used to work as a substitute
teacher, but she heard her back setting up the background for a school play and she's
been on disability for several months. So what can I do for you today? You ask. The
big problem she says is constipation. It's been going on for about a year and maybe longer
and it's just getting worse and worse. She's brought some of her medicines with her so
you could see what she's tried. Okay, constipation is our main concern. So let's think about
that. It's very, very common, of course, and most of the time it's related to lifestyle
factors and diet, but it can be part of some significant health problems too. Let's put
together a brief differential diagnosis so we know what to ask next. Constipation is
often related to several overlapping factors. Basically, anything that either slows down
the movement of the gut or leads to dry, hard, firm stools is going to contribute to constipation.
Normally, as food is digested and absorbed and travels through the gut, water is absorbed
through the walls of the large intestine. If gut transit is slowed, more water will be
absorbed, leading to firmer, hard, bulky stools, which themselves become more difficult to
push through. So they sit even longer, getting even more dry and more hard. So anything that
either slows the gut or leads to less moisture in the stool is going to be constipating.
Stool moisture has a lot to do with diet, but people who don't drink enough water can
be chronically constipated. Food itself is also important, especially fiber, which helps
trap moisture in the stool. Fruits and vegetables are especially important to keep the bacteria
in your gut active and happy, helping protect the normal structure and function of the gut.
Apart from issues with stool moisture, conditions that slow the muscular contractions of the
gut wall can lead to constipation. This includes, most commonly, an overall lack of exercise,
but also life habits that include ignoring the urge to have a bowel movement. Holding
stool is not good and delaying BMs does not make for a happy colon. Any changes in routine
including travel or pregnancy or life stress can cause constipation, as can normal aging
when the muscles of the gut and abdominal wall start to lose their ability to squeeze
well.
There are some important medical causes of constipation that shouldn't be overlooked.
Many teens and adults have irritable bowel syndrome, which can cause constipation or
diarrhea or sometimes alternating periods of both. Diabetes can affect the nerves in
the gut, leading to disturbed gut motility. Neurologic disorders like stroke or Parkinson's
disease can also interfere with the normal control of the muscular contractions of the
gut wall, as can problems and injuries that affect the spinal cord. Hormonal issues, especially
hypothyroidism, can cause constipation, as can many prescription and over-the-counter
medications.
There can also be an important psychological component to constipation. Anxious people,
and that includes people anxious about having large or painful bowel movements, or people
who are reluctant to have a BM at work or at school, they may put off normal bowel function
contributing to worsening constipation. So this is a big differential with problems ranging
from common and trivial to rare and life-threatening. We'd better pay attention to the rest of the
history and physical. Sandra says she's had some constipation,
on and off, maybe even for years, but it's getting worse. She gets a lot of belly aches
now and really has to strain. She says she's been trying to eat better and drink water and
prune juice, but she can't really exercise much because of her back. She's tried over-the-counter
medications, including stool softeners and laxatives, which haven't helped very much.
There's been no weight loss, no fevers, no blood in the stool. She's had no vomiting,
she's had no diarrhea. There's no family history of gut illnesses or celiac disease.
By the way, celiac can cause diarrhea or constipation. She says she's overall felt okay, but she's
not working anymore because of her back injury.
What happened with that, you ask? About six months ago, Sandra says she was helping move
some backdrops. Basically, these are big, wooden, painted sheets to set up for a school
play and she kind of wrenched her back somehow. She's seen an orthopedist who did x-rays
and thinks she had a slipped disc. She takes pain medicine and she says it's not that
terrible, but she can't move around quickly and now uses a cane to walk. Otherwise, her
past medical history is unremarkable. She's had some hay fever allergies and takes over-the-counter
medicine for that sometimes. Her last menstrual period was a few weeks ago. Sandra now lives
alone. She has one daughter, she's 10, and she's staying with an aunt for the past few
months while mom's back gets better. Her husband, Sandra says, ran off years ago.
On to the physical exam. Sandra's vital signs are normal. She's got no goiter or swelling
over thyroid gland. Heart and lung exams are okay and her abdominal exam is normal too.
Her muscle strength seems normal in all extremities and her so-called deep tendon reflexes are
normal too. Basically, it's a normal and reassuring exam.
Those reflexes, doctors often call those by the abbreviation DTRs for deep tendon reflexes.
That's when we give a little wrap over a tendon, often right at the knee. That triggers a reflex
arc that makes the muscles at the top of the thigh tense up, kicking the leg upwards. Tap,
kick. It's pretty much instantaneous. What this tests is a reflex loop. The tap quickly
stretches the quadriceps muscle of the thigh and there's a nerve that detects this stretch
of the muscle. That information, the feedback that the quad was stretched quickly, that's
transmitted to the spinal cord. There, in the spine, the reflex arc sends a signal back
to that muscle to quickly contract. That counterbalances the stretch. If there's a problem anywhere
in that pathway, from the muscle to the nerves back and forth, or a problem in the spinal
cord itself, the reflex will be abnormal. We're especially careful to compare the kick
in either side. They should look right about the same.
So why are we so hung up on these reflexes in Sandra? Remember, we've got that history
of a back injury. Could something affect the back, the spinal cord specifically causing
constipation? Yes. Nerves from the spine go to the distal colon and they're necessary
to trigger relaxation of the pelvic muscles to allow a bowel movement. Damage to the spinal
cord or nerves can cause what can look like ordinary constipation. So the reflexes are
important here as a way to see if there has been an injury to the nerves or the spinal
cord. Now, Sandra's reflexes are normal. We also observe that her gait, the way she walks
is pretty much normal too, though she leans on a cane. A spinal injury leading to constipation
really ought to have caused other issues like problems walking, changes in those reflexes,
or perhaps numbness in the extremities. For now, we'll say that a spinal problem is unlikely.
Did we learn anything else from the exam? Not really. Overall, Sandra looks good. So
we discussed with Sandra some strategies to address the constipation, including drinking
more water, trying to get some more exercise, improving her diet, and taking appropriate
doses of the stool softeners that she brought along. We suggest she make a follow-up appointment
in two weeks. Sandra seems happy with the advice. She's written some notes down and
she gets up to leave. On the way out, she asks for refills of her back pain medicines.
So we take care of that and we send her on her way. Okay, there. Case over, right? Well,
no. It's two weeks later and you head back into an exam room to see how Sandra is doing.
Not any better doc, she says. She's got her cane and she's got her little bottles lined
up on the desk again. Not much has changed, Sandra says. She's tried what you said. She's
still constipated and she thinks it's even making her back feel worse now because she
has to kind of, has to sit kind of funny and push a lot. You double check doses on the medicines.
They're okay. And repeat the exam, which is unchanged. Okay, it's time to get more aggressive.
You ask her to set up an appointment later that day with your dietitian to review her
food and fiber intake in detail and to order some labs. And you have her increase the doses
of her stool softeners and add a second medication as a laxative to increase the squeezing force
of her gut wall. Recheck two weeks. Sandra walks out with her scripts for medication refills.
A quick phone call now. Remember, as I've said before, the telephone is a crucial diagnostic
instrument. This time you call the orthopedist who had evaluated Sandra's back. He comes
to the phone. He looks through his notes. He says a pretty ordinary injury with minimal
changes on the x-ray that could mean a slip disc. Though honestly, many people have those.
And it's hard to know if that's really causing her pain. He says her exam was okay that he
doesn't think there was any chance of a serious spine injury, but that he had planned to do
an MRI if she didn't improve. Flipping through, he says Sandra's been back to clinic a few times
and there's been a few phone calls. Nothing serious. Just med refills. And last time she
said she thought she was starting to feel better. So he wasn't going to do any more imaging and he
figured everything was okay. The labs came back the next day. Everything looked good. We checked
her thyroid. We checked her celiac antibodies. We checked the CBC and chemistries. All of that
was normal. Two more weeks go by and Sandra has returned for follow-up. This time her face looks
swollen and she's talking oddly. It turns out she had been to the dentist and needed some cavities
filled or something. So she's got wadding in her cheek and her face is still half numb. She says,
I love my dentist, but there's always something there he's got to do. Anyway, Sandra reports no
change, no improvement. If anything, she says her constipation is worse than ever. She saw the
dietician. She says she's even eating brand muffins now and she's trying to exercise and she's taking
her medicines and everything. There's her usual bottles lined up. It looks like she's done everything
she was supposed to do. Today's exam remains normal except she's talking kind of funny from the dental
procedure. We do an especially careful exam of her back and reflexes and gait and she seems fine
though she says her back is actually hurting more now. Her pain medicine bottles are mostly empty.
She mentions that she lost the last prescription we had written and she needed more pain medication
because of the dental procedure. So that's why she's out of meds. So we write for more refills.
Thinking about the worsening back pain and constipation, we've really made zero progress with
that. So we go ahead and order an MRI of her spine. Follow up two weeks. One week later we get a call
from the pharmacist. He just wanted to check. He's a little worried because the dentist had written
for pain medicine too and you've written for a refill and so has the orthopedist and her rheumatologist
too. What rheumatologist do you ask? It turns out there's a rheumatologist Sandra's been seeing.
You asked the pharmacist to go through the medication refills that he's done. It's a lot of
refills. They include your prescriptions for laxatives as well as many refills for pain medicines
from her multiple doctors and her dentist. You're starting to get a bit of a creepy feeling now,
a single prescription that should have lasted a month was filled from multiple doctors and it
looks like she's been taking four times the expected amount of painkillers. Well at least four times
you've only got information from this one pharmacy. The MRI is done and the results come back.
She does have two discs with a small amount of herdeation but neither is pressing on any nerves.
Discs like that could possibly be causing some pain though they're seen incidentally in many
people and probably don't cause any symptoms most of the time. There's no problem with the spinal cord
itself. Sandra comes back for her two week recheck. She seems well. As usual she's got her
bottles lined up. She says the constipation is okay now. It's not better but she says I guess it's
just something I have to live with. You ask about her back. She says it's the same old same old
and you tell her about that the normal lab work that came back. She thanks you for your kindness
and trying to help. Then she asks for a refill on the pain medications. Since your back is getting
better you say it's getting time to get off of these medicines. I think you're using too much of
them. Well the discussion goes on from there. Sandra is apologetic. She says she knows she
shouldn't take them so much and she'll try to cut down but she needs to have them for the bad times
especially at night. You say Sandra look I think all of these pain medicines are what's
causing your constipation. I think we ought to have you seen by one of the addiction counselors
at the pain center of the local hospital. So that you can be safely weaned slowly down from these
medicines. Remember your daughter you say? She's living with her aunt. If we can get you better
off all of these medicines she can move back in with you. That would be great right?
Sandra is crying now. She's really bawling and she's agreeing with everything you say. She needs
to go to the hospital and get off the medicines and thank you so much doctor and I'm going to do that
as soon as I can. You give her one last small refill of the pain medicine and make sure she
knows how to get to the pain clinic and you call over there to make sure they can take her and you
have everything set up for Sandra. She says goodbye. She leaves and you never see Sandra again. She
doesn't keep her pain clinic appointment. You call the pharmacist and he says that she just
doesn't come there anymore. Of course says the pharmacist. She could just be going to a different
pharmacy now and maybe he says she's just got herself a new doctor. This is a sad story and
unfortunately it's the kind of thing that is happening all over the country. Not only in Kentucky
prescription drug abuse or misuse has become a common cause of disrupted lives, lost jobs and
death striking every age from teens through elderly adults. We are not as a whole doing a
particularly good job in tracking prescriptions to identify those at risk and we're doing a terrible
job getting those people the addiction treatment they need. There were all sorts of clues in Sandra's
case. She came to see you in the first place because you were young and inexperienced. Remember
the first time you met she even said that her back injury was kind of vague and her sustained
discomfort was out of proportion to the injury and really was never clearly correlated with any
imaging study. Somehow her daughter had gone to live with another family member. I don't think
that's typical for a mom to send her own daughter away just because of a hurt back and what had
actually happened to Sandra's husband. The one that she said ran off years ago it turns out we
learned later that he was serving time in prison for buying and selling prescription painkillers
and it's painkillers that are the most often abused prescriptions. It turns out that there
are only really three medicines that are commonly used to treat pain or at least three groupings
of medications and within each group they're all similar. The first group only contains one medicine
acetaminophen or Tylenol. It's an effective pain medicine for mild to moderate pain with minimal
side effects when used correctly. It is not addictive. The second group has many brands
available over the counter too. It's the NSAIDs or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The most
common ones in here are ibuprofen and aspirin and there are many others that are available by
prescription. They all work in a very similar way. They're also effective for mild to moderate pain
and have no addiction potential. They're pretty safe. Occasionally and more often with regular
use these kinds of drugs can cause GI upset. The problem is that neither of these kinds of medicine
alone is effective for the most severe pain. For the worst pains the only effective medicines in
general use are narcotics and narcotic derivatives. They're all essentially based on an extract of
the poppy plant the precursor to opium. These medications range from morphine to codeine
with many in between. The group also includes heroin which is another opium derivative.
They can all be used to effectively treat even the most severe pain but all of them are potentially
addictive when used inappropriately. When abused they not only relieve pain but they also get the
user high. So for the many people who suffer from pain especially chronic pain narcotics are an
essential tool for providing relief. One of the biggest obstacles for these patients are
misunderstandings about the nature of drug tolerance dependence and addiction. This leads to the
frequent under treatment of pain which itself ironically can actually contribute to the development
of addictive behaviors. To help patients like Sandra that is to prevent recognize and treat
addiction we first have to make sure we understand what's happening physically and psychologically.
Tolerance is a normal physiologic change when the body adapts or seems to get used to a certain
dose of a medication such as an opioid. By the way many classes of drugs can induce tolerance
but many others do not. When tolerance develops the drug becomes less effective at a given dose
and to get the desired effect the dose will have to be increased. Tolerance is an inevitable
predictable phenomenon that will occur in anyone who regularly uses certain medications.
Dependence is different. In modern medical contexts dependence refers to physical changes
in the body as we adapt to regularly taking certain drugs. Biochemical changes take place
especially in the brain as the body gets used to regular doses of these medications
and if the medication is stopped or reduced quickly physical symptoms of withdrawal will
take place. Symptoms of an opiate or narcotic withdrawal can include sweatiness, agitation,
aches, insomnia, cramping, diarrhea, nausea and vomiting. These can be very unpleasant or severe
but are not life-threatening. Other kinds of medication can cause dependence and withdrawal
symptoms including steroids, antidepressants, anxiety medications and some heart medicines
like beta blockers. So tolerance is one thing the physical adaptation that makes medicine
less effective at the same dose if they're taken long term. Dependence is different that's defined
by the occurrence of physical symptoms or withdrawal when a drug is stopped but neither
is the same as drug addiction. Addiction the way that doctors use the term means psychological
symptoms including compulsive drug use and craving for drugs. People who are addicted to drugs will
continue to seek and use the drug despite worsening physical, social and mental harm
in a sense while dependence refers to the physical symptoms of withdrawal, addiction
refers to a maladaptive psychological need to consume a drug. This definition of addiction
is also used in other contexts such as people addicted to gambling or sex or internet use.
People with addiction may or may not have physical dependencies and may or may not suffer from
physical withdrawal symptoms but they will crave and seek the addiction even at the expense of their
own jobs or relationships risking arrest and social isolation to satisfy their cravings.
Another term that's sometimes used is pseudo addiction. This is seen only in people with
chronic pain that is inadequately treated. These patients are desperate for effective pain relief
and very fearful of worsening pain so they watch the clock closely and may take steps that could
be considered drug seeking behaviors like filling prescriptions early or hoarding pills.
The behaviors associated with pseudo addiction stop completely when the pain itself is adequately
treated. The key to treating pseudo addiction and preventing it from developing into true addiction
is in treating pain correctly. By the way these terms addiction and dependence I've been stressing
their their medical definition in the common literature in lay press the terms are often
used interchangeably which is unfortunate. There is an important difference.
So do all chronic pain patients become addicted to opioids? No in fact most patients treated
with narcotic painkillers will never have addictive symptoms. Now most if not all patients who use
narcotics regularly will develop tolerance physical dependence and the potential for withdrawal
but that's different from the craving and compulsive drug seeking seen with addiction.
In one study of 24,000 patients with chronic pain treated with opioids only seven developed
addiction though it is possible addiction is not a common problem among those treated for pain
and a fear of encouraging addiction should not prevent doctors from treating pain and relieving
suffering. If it's not common in chronic pain patients who are the people who get addicted to
opiates or who get addicted to medications or other things there certainly seems to be a genetic
predisposition though we don't know the exact contribution of genetics it's true that some
people seem to have a higher built-in risk for addiction than others. Beyond that the most
important factor in predicting addiction is the reason the drug is taken. People who take drugs
to get high or avoid life as opposed to people who take medication to treat pain or other medical
problems are much more likely to develop addiction. Looking back at Sandra's case there were some
warning signs she seemed to be doing some doctor shopping it's not clear at all why she changed
to our clinic in the first place and we found out later that she was also seeing other doctors at
the same time there were reports of lost prescriptions and she may have been using multiple pharmacies.
Any of these could have had an innocent explanation but the pattern of behavior at least in retrospect
seems suggestive also it's unclear exactly how that original back injury led to such significant
pain her apparent addiction also caused her to stop working and led to her no longer living with
her daughter. These kinds of negative life consequences are typical of true addiction.
Ironically doctors are sometimes criticized from both sides of the issue.
Doctor and hospital ratings stress how important it is for us to treat pain quickly and effectively
while at the same time federal and state agencies monitor our prescribing habits
and investigate doctors who seem to prescribe too many narcotics. Judging whether pain is real
or exaggerated is very difficult we don't have any kind of objective pain meter add to that the
complexities of the modern american medical system the multiple doctors and pharmacies and it's very
difficult to identify patients at risk for addiction especially when they deliberately cover their
tracks to hide drugs seeking behavior. This is not a good situation and it's contributing to the
suffering of both pain patients who need effective pain treatment and to patients families and
communities struggling with addiction. Back to Sandra again we've been focusing on addiction but
there are other side effects of the use of narcotics one of them is constipation which is
what drove her to our clinic in the first place narcotics can also cause itching vomiting and
nausea and dry mouth they can also cause confusion sleepiness or dizziness and it is not safe to
drive while taking these medications however the most severe symptom the worst side effect
is respiratory depression taking higher doses if any narcotic starts to blunt the automatic drive
to breathe the higher the dose the slower the breathing and at a high enough dose breathing
will stop this is the cause of death and narcotic overdose people seek higher and higher doses to
satisfy their cravings and eventually the dose is high enough to kill at this point in the United
States there are more deaths from prescription opioids than from cocaine and heroin combined
okay are you ready for our next grand rounds coming up is the story of Joe who is tired all
the time what the dickens could be going on we'll see if you can figure it out
