What we call the physical world is nothing but a headset inside consciousness.
So to just see how dramatic the change is, most of us, myself included, have
think of ourselves as tiny little objects in a vast spacetime.
Billions of light years across, you know, the nearest galaxy is 2.4 million light years away,
and that's the nearest galaxy, and they go off.
So I'm just this little tiny, tiny, trivial little chunk of matter in this vast
billions of light years across universe spacetime. That's the way I thought.
And now what I'm realizing is the other way around.
Spacetime is a tiny little data structure in my consciousness,
and I create it on the fly as I need. So that's how outrageous what I'm saying is.
To be very, very explicit, and maybe to shock people, I'm a cognitive neuroscientist,
I'll say this. Neurons do not exist when they're not perceived,
because nothing inside spacetime exists when it's not perceived.
Spacetime itself does not exist when it's not perceived.
It is only a data structure that exists when you create it in your consciousness.
That's the shocking, and that's what I've been having a difficult time
emotionally wrapping myself around. Intellectually, I'm there.
The math has completely convinced me. Our best science can say this is true.
We'll see when my emotions come along for the ride.
Donald, welcome to the show. Thank you very much, Neil. Thanks for having me.
What would you say the central question that's been driving your research the past few decades has
been? Well, I guess a couple little intertwined themes.
One is, do we see reality as it is? Because my background is in visual perception,
and perception more generally. So that's a really interesting question.
What is the relationship between perception and reality?
And the other interacting theme is, what is consciousness, and how is conscious experience
related to everyday life in the physical world and neuroscience?
So those have been the two big themes that I've been pursuing,
and they turn out that they seem to be interacting.
The answer to one seems to affect the answer to the other.
You're pursuing a couple of quite easy questions there, I have to say.
What's underneath this search? Before we started recording, you mentioned,
you come from quite a religious background. What's been underneath this desire for truth and this
search? Yes. My father was for several years a fundamentalist Christian minister,
Holy Roller kind of thing, and so I was exposed to that. But then at school,
I was being exposed to science classes, and they were saying contradictory things.
In a church, the earth was 4,000 years old. In science class, it was millions or billions of
years old, and that's not easy to reconcile. And so I realized that there was this big conflict,
and as a teenager, at least for me, it was hard to figure out how to reconcile these two things.
But I decided that I needed to do that, and I wanted to understand the nature of consciousness
and the nature of human beings. Are we just machines? That came to be the question that
I formulated for myself. Are we just machines, or is there something more? The spiritual sides
seemed to say there was something more. The science seemed to say we're just machines,
and so I thought, if the science convinced me that we're just machines, then maybe the spiritual
stuff is, you know, there's not much to save there. But if there's something about us that's
beyond machines, then that's interest. It doesn't mean the spiritual side that I was taught was
right, but it means that there could be some parts of it that could be saved. And so that was the
question I was asking myself as a teenager. Are we just machines? And I was taking programming
classes. This was back when programming was fairly brand new. I started programming in 1974.
And so that was, we had to use, we didn't even have punch cards. We had to use cards that we
bubbled in by hand with pencils and so forth. So I wrote progress. So I was aware of the programming,
and then I worked at Hughes Aircraft as an undergraduate at UCLA. I worked at Hughes Aircraft,
programming military microprocessors in machine code. Again, starting off with punch cards,
but eventually the miracle of floppy disks came around. So I was into the computer,
and I realized that it was artificial intelligence was what I really needed to understand. Could
we build human AIs that were equivalent to us, that were us? And so I found out about research
going on at MIT in the artificial intelligence lab, and with David Maher, and of course,
Marvin Minsky was the head of the lab, and it was an incredible group there. So I was fortunate
to go to MIT in 1979, be in the artificial intelligence lab, and also was now the brain
and cognitive science department. So I was looking at the human side with the neuroscience and the
machine side with the artificial intelligence, as were many other people, right? That's what
MIT was doing. And so that was how I began to try to tackle this problem. Are we just machines?
And intellectually, you have to be honest, you just have to say, I don't know. And let's go
wherever the science and logic lead us. One thing I could not do was something I had been taught
in my particular spiritual training. I'm not saying this is true of all spiritual training,
but in my particular spiritual training was we were taught that we had been told the absolute
truth, and you should not listen to anything else. And I knew that that couldn't be right. That
wasn't right. So I needed to take a more open mind and say, sure, I need to listen to what
the spiritual side says, but there's no absolute truth here. And so that was the one thing where
I clearly departed from what I've been taught. And I think it was absolutely critical to,
you have to think for yourself and go wherever the evidence, reason, and logic will take you.
And so I did that and did my PhD at MIT on a specific problem. You can't just tackle the big,
big questions. You're not going to get your PhD because you won't get anything done. So I
tackled the question of how do we see in 3D and recognize objects? I tackled one aspect of that,
seeing in three dimensions and recognizing objects, which is, of course, still an interesting
and open problem to get self-driving cars. That's what we need are computers that can see through
cameras and see in 3D and recognize what they're doing so they don't run over people and don't
run into parked cars on the road and so forth. So I was grappling with that problem in my
dissertation. But what I realized was that doing that gave me a real deeper understanding of the
mathematics that underlies perception. Most of us have no idea what's going on under the hood
when you just open your eyes and look around you. It looks like, well, you just take a picture of
what's out there. How hard could it be? It's a camera. It takes a picture. Give me breaks.
There's nothing to it. Well, if that's all there was to it, we would have self-driving cars already
that could see and we wouldn't be having the slow rollout of autonomous vehicles that we're having.
Much, much slower than people expected. It's really, really hard. And then when you realize that you
have billions of neurons and trillions of synapses that are involved just in vision,
again, that's not just a camera. That's pretty expensive piece of hardware that's working there.
So that wakes you up to what's going on, that it's not just a picture-taking process.
In some sense, a construction process. You're getting an image at the eye,
which your eye has maybe 130 million photoreceptors. Same thing, but it's like a 130
million megapixel camera. But if you look at the output of the camera, it's just a
bunch of numbers. You don't see a person riding a bicycle and tables and chairs. You just see
a bunch of numbers. It's this bright at this location. It's this color at this location.
You've got to take all those numbers and turn it into a visual world that you can actually navigate.
So that's the real trick. And so I came to terms with how much is going on there that
is a construction process, not just a mere photographic process. And then that raised the
question, oh, if it's a construction process, how accurate is the construction? Is it a reconstruction
of reality or is it a de novo construction that maybe is unrelated to objective reality?
And the latter seemed unlikely to me, but I just needed to prove it. I just needed to understand.
Okay. So of course, the idea was we reconstruct reality. That was what I was taught. That's what
we believed at MIT, that it's a construction process, but it's a reconstruction of reality.
But then as I started thinking about evolution and other things,
I began to wonder about that. Evolution does things on the cheap, fast and cheap.
You're trying to save calories and save time. So you're going to use heuristics and shortcuts.
You're going to cheat. And so maybe the idea then was, well, maybe we cheat sometimes,
but most of the time on the important stuff, we're reconstructing reality.
So I thought about that. And I went back and forth and I finally came to the conclusion
that it seemed unlikely with what I knew about perception research and from the AI point of
view that any of our constructions were the truth. But in 2008, I decided I need to
settle this with evolution. I need to actually ask a technical question. What is the probability
that evolution by natural selection has shaped any sensory system of any organism
to ever see any aspect of objective reality truly? What's the probability of that?
A clean technical question. And when Darwin formulated his theory
in the 19th century, he didn't formulate it as a mathematical theory. So Darwin couldn't have
answered that question with mathematical precision. But John Maynard Smith and others in the 1970s
took Darwin's ideas and used evolution, what they came up with was evolutionary game theory.
He used game theory and evolution together to create the field of evolutionary game theory.
A very, very powerful mathematical theory. So Darwin's ideas are now mathematically precise.
And so we can now ask the technical question, what's the probability that any sensory system
has been shaped to see the truth, some aspect of the truth at all? And I went into it thinking, well,
probably there'll be problems because getting the truth takes a lot of time and a lot of calories.
So we're probably going to be doing things cheaply and quickly. And so we'll probably be approximating
the truth, but not really getting the truth. That was sort of what I expected going into it. And I
got a couple of wonderful graduate students, Brian Marion and Justin Mark to work with me and some
others. I mean, Chetan Prakash and others worked with me and Manish Singh. So it's not just me.
It was a bunch of group of people with mathematics. And we went at it. And what we discovered
when we actually did the mathematics and the simulations was, sure, there are selection
pressure to do things fast and cheap. And that will compromise reality. But that wasn't the real,
what we discovered was this, the payoff functions. In evolution, you think about it as like a game.
And as you're playing the game, you're competing with others. And the point of this game is to,
as reproductive success, right? You don't get to the next level of the game yourself,
but your offspring, your genes go to the next level of the game if you succeed.
And so the idea was that there are these payoff functions that govern, effectively,
how many points you get in the game of life. And if you get more points than the competition,
then you have a greater probability of having offspring in the next generation.
So it was the payoff functions that are the critical thing. And if you're going to be shaped
to see the truth, then the payoff functions must have information about that truth,
if they're going to shape you. So that became the clean technical question. What's the probability
that a fitness payoff function has information about structures that could be in the world,
like now it gets a little mathematical, like total orders, partial orders, metrics, topologies,
measurable structures, there are all sorts of mathematical structures that you could imagine
that the world has. And in each case, you can ask the technical question, what's the probability
that a randomly chosen payoff function would actually have what we call homomorphism or
contain information about that structure. And the answer is zero, the probability is zero.
In case after case, you look at it, the probability is zero. And in fact,
even for things that are sort of close to homomorphisms, in many cases, the probability
is vanishingly small. So that was a shock to the system. We haven't been shaped to see the truth.
And that shock then has reverberations for the problem of consciousness.
Because what it means is what we're perceiving when we perceive a spatial temporal world,
a 3D of space, one dimension of time, and we're seeing physical objects in space
and time and so forth, we're not seeing reality as it is. With probability one,
we're not seeing reality as it is. That is if you buy Darwin's theory.
And that means that space time isn't fundamental. Space time is just a form of our perceptions.
And physical objects inside space time aren't fundamental. The way I think about it now is
it's like a virtual reality headset that evolution gave us to play the game of life. If you're
trying to play a game like VR, Grand Theft Auto or something like that with your friends,
what you're really doing in this metaphor is you're toggling millions of voltages in some
supercomputer. But if you had to do that, if you had to toggle the voltages in the precise sequence,
you couldn't win the game. You would lose the game. Someone who just has a virtual reality headset
with a steering wheel and dashboard and gas pedal and so forth is going to win over someone who sees
the truth and is toggling voltages. And so I think what evolution is teaching us is
what we evolved was not an insight into truth, but a VR headset. Space time is our headset.
So instead of consciousness and its physical substrate, which is what most
conscious researchers are thinking about, is consciousness and its physical substrate,
I think about it as consciousness and its physical headset. And that's a complete change
because if the brain is the physical substrate of consciousness, that means the brain is
fundamental. Something not conscious is fundamental and consciousness is arising out of it.
But if we take evolution of a natural selection seriously, then the brain is merely an icon
in our headset. It's not the truth and it has no causal powers. So I'm a cognitive neuroscientist.
I love neuroscience. I study neuroscience and I've done a joint work on fMRI and EEG studies
of the brain and then lots of computational modeling and so forth. I'm very much into the
brain and I love cognitive neuroscience and I think it needs more funding because it's far
more complicated than we thought. We thought when we look in brains, we see neurons and synapses and
there's 86 billion neurons and roughly the same number of glial cells and trillions of synapses.
That's complicated, but it turns out that's trivial compared to what's beyond it. That's just a
VR headset to something deeper. The neurons are just the headset version of a deeper reality that
we as scientists need to understand. So we need more money for neuroscience, not less because
we're just scratching the surface of what's going on when we look inside brains. So that changes
the whole game for consciousness because my friends and colleagues, and I'm friends with most of the
people in this field or colleagues certainly, who are studying consciousness, most of them assume
that physical systems like brains or AIs with the right either functional or functional properties
or causal structure and so forth, that substrate with the right causal structure or functional
properties, somehow the unconscious system gives rise to consciousness. Like the unconscious
system of neurons in the brain and whatever pattern of activity they have, whether it's a
causal thing or a functional thing, that gives rise to consciousness. And what I'm saying is our best
science, evolution of a natural selection, is telling us that space time isn't fundamental
and objects inside space time are simply icons in the VR headset that we're somehow creating.
So that whole approach now, which is the approach that I first thought was the right approach,
I mean, I went into the field thinking, we're going to find the neural basis of consciousness.
I now think that it's not going to work. Now, of course, I think we need to study neuroscience
and we need to study the neural correlates of consciousness. Absolutely, I'm all for that.
But the direction of explanation is going to go the other way. Instead of explaining
consciousness in terms of neurons, we're going to have to have a theory of consciousness itself
that explains why we see things that we call neurons and glial cells when we look inside
what we call brains. So it's going to have to go the other way. So again, I'm a small minority.
I would say 98, 99% of my colleagues and friends who are studying consciousness are physicalists,
functionalists, or like in the case of IIT, they're saying some kind of substrate,
some physical substrate with some kind of causal structural organization
that somehow then is either gives rise to or is identical to explanatorily identical to
consciousness. And I'm saying there is no substrate to consciousness, no physical
substrate to consciousness. What we call the physical world is nothing but a headset inside
consciousness. So to just see how dramatic the change is, most of us, myself included,
have think of ourselves as tiny little objects in the vast space time, billions of light years
across this, you know, the nearest galaxy is 2.4 million light years away. And that's the nearest
galaxy. And they go off. It's like, so I'm just this little tiny, tiny, trivial little
chunk of matter in this vast billions of light years across universe space time.
That's that's the way I've done. And now what I'm realizing is the other way around.
Space time is a tiny little data structure in my consciousness. And I create it on the fly,
as I need. So it's a comp. So, so that's how outrageous what I'm saying is it's not small.
Now, sorry, sorry, I just want to quickly ask there, don't how has that changed perception,
changed how you felt in the world? Because that's a massive flip on understanding who you are.
Well, it's, it's caused a big conflict in me, because
we're all just born knowing that we're little tiny objects in a big space time. That's the
reality that we just know we are. It's, it's, there's no question about it. And in fact,
Piaget talks about object permanence. Little children get, he thought at 18 months, they get
object permanence. Later research showed us more like three or four months. We, we're
born to believe that objects exist, whether or not they're perceived. My teddy bear,
when you put it behind a pillow, still exists. And I believe that it, that, that, that, you know,
there's nothing that disappears in reality when it disappears from my site. And so,
letting go of object permanence is letting go of something I was wired to believe at four months
of age. So, so it's, it's, it's not trivial. The, so what, what I find is really, really,
so what I find is really interesting to see in myself when I'm thinking
clearly about it, and I look at our best theories of evolution, and I'll mention physics in a moment,
because I'm treading on their territory clearly. So I'll talk about what the physicists say, but
when I look at what our best science is saying, it looks to me like,
yeah, space time is not fundamental. And therefore, objects in space time do not create my
consciousness. It must be the other way around. But when I am not thinking, my natural reaction is
to go back and I'm just a little tiny 160 pound body in space time, and I'm, you know, and what I
see is the truth and so forth. So, so it's really, so I do meditate and that's, that's, that's helping
me to let go of my prior assumptions. But I must say, they don't go quietly. So when people look
at what I say and say, that's complete nonsense, I say, I completely agree. It feels like nonsense
to me too. Emotionally, it feels like complete nonsense, what I'm saying. But that's what science
is about. Science is taking our best ideas, making them absolutely precise, and then following
wherever it leads, even if we don't like where it leads. And so that's, that's what we have to do.
And just to emphasize what we're essentially saying here is that if you accept evolution and
mathematics as true, if you accept those two things as true, then you also have to accept,
they're not have to accept, but it's also true that the reality we see is an illusion. We're
not actually seeing what's there. Is that, is that fair to say? Yeah, I would, yes, and I would just
make a slight thing. I don't need to claim that evolution is true. All I need to do is say it's
the best theory we have so far. If you accept evolution, then you have to accept this as well.
Evolution entails this. Now, I should say that there is an issue that's been raised by philosophers
that I should mention here. So a number of philosophers, and I won't mention them by name,
I don't want to impugn anybody, have published papers where they say that what I've just argued
is logically self-contradictory. And the argument they go, they give is this. They say,
LeCoffman is saying that he's used evolutionary game theory to show that space time and its
physical objects are not fundamental, that they're not, you know, what we see is just an illusion
that's not fundamental reality. Now, Darwin's theory assumes that objects in space time like
organisms and resources are fundamental. That's what his theory assumes. So he's assuming that
space time and its physical objects are fundamental. Now, the argument that philosophers give is this.
Either the mathematics of evolutionary game theory faithfully represents Darwin's ideas,
or it does not. Now, if it does not, then Hoffman, of course, wouldn't want to use it to try to prove
anything about what Darwin's theory entails. So, and if evolutionary game theory mathematics does
faithfully represent Darwin's ideas, then it couldn't possibly contradict his assumption
that physical objects like organisms and resources exist and are real. So either way,
Hoffman's shot himself in the foot logically. What they like to say is he's in an unfortunate
dialectical situation, but basically he's so stupid he shot himself in the foot, logically.
So, and this is more than one philosopher has actually published this argument. So this is,
and I think then other philosophers have talked with say, yeah, I buy that argument. So here's why
the argument is false. It misunderstands scientific theories. What is a scientific theory?
Scientific theory says, please grant me these assumptions. And if you grant me these assumptions,
then I can explain all this other wonderful stuff.
Very, very simple. Assumptions and then explanations. What this means is there cannot
possibly be a scientific theory of everything. Because you don't explain your assumptions,
you assume them, you don't explain them. So now you can say, well, I can give you a new deeper
theory that explains the assumptions of your previous theory. Yes, you can. And your new theory
will have its own new assumptions. And this goes on ad infinitum. So this is horrible news for those
who want a theory of everything in science. There is no such thing. It's great news for job security
for scientists. It means that we will never, ever be done. We will always be building new
theories. And what this means about any scientific theory is that it has, if it's a good theory,
it has a certain scope of explanation. But it also means that it will have definite limits.
No scientific theory is a theory of everything. So it will have limits. So a good theory gives
you the mathematical tools to explore its scope. A great theory gives you the mathematical tools
to discover its limits. So Einstein's theory of spacetime, both special and general relativity.
One of the key ideas is that the speed of light is the same for all observers. And the laws of
physics are the same in all reference frames. And so Einstein is using, his assumption is that
spacetime is fundamental, either flat spacetime or curved spacetime. But spacetime is fundamental.
And then he writes down all sorts of interesting equations, the Lorentz transformations on the
one in the flat space and, you know, the equations of general relativity in the curve.
And you might say, okay, well, is Einstein's theory just a good theory or is it a great
theory? Does it have the tools to actually show the limits of the very concept of spacetime itself?
And it turns out to Einstein's dismay, it's a great theory. What we discovered is that
Einstein's theory, together with just another thing that Einstein came up with, you know,
energy is proportional to the frequency of a particle, entails that that spacetime falls
apart at 10 to the minus 33 centimeters and 10 to the minus 43 seconds at the Planck scale.
So Einstein's own mathematics is good. It tells you the scope, the incredible scope of his mathematics
of spacetime. Sorry, Donald, can I just ask you to sort of confirm what you mean by space time
falls apart at that figure? What does that actually mean that that it falls apart at that?
It means that spacetime has no operational meaning. There's no experiment that you can do that would
have any outcome. If you're trying to measure things that's smaller than 10 to the minus 33
centimeters or 10 to the minus 43 seconds. So the problem is this, as you go to smaller and
smaller scales of space, how do you do that? Well, you have to get bigger and bigger microscopes to
look smaller and smaller. But what does that mean? It means that you're effectively using smaller and
smaller wavelengths of light or some kind of radiation. But let's talk about light. You have
to get the wavelengths smaller and smaller and smaller to resolve smaller and smaller things
in spacetime. And that's fine. Quantum mechanics allows you to do that. But Einstein told us that
E equals h nu. As you get the smaller smaller wavelengths, the energy is going up. Then Einstein
also told us the energy equals mass. So the mass is going up. You're getting more and more energy
therefore more and more mass inside a smaller and smaller region of space. And then general
relativity kicks in and gives you a black hole at some point. And so at that, when you get to 10
to the minus 33 centimeters, the very thing you're trying to say measure some tiny, tiny particle,
well, by the time you get to 10 to minus 33 centimeters, you destroy whatever you're trying
to measure. You turn it into a black hole. And if you get frustrated and say, well, I'm going to try
to get a smaller wavelength and put more energy into it, the black hole just gets bigger and
bigger and bigger. So spacetime, there's literally no meaning that you can give to 10 to the minus
36 centimeters. Has no meaning. There's nothing you can do there. It literally has no operational
meaning. So Einstein's own mathematics that Einstein himself wrote down to model his intuitions about
spacetime, come back and tell us the limits of Einstein's very fundamental concept of spacetime
itself. It says that concept is fine as long as you're dealing with stuff bigger than 10 to the
minus 33 centimeters. At 10 to the minus 33 centimeters and smaller, spacetime falls apart.
As by the way, that's pretty shallow. It's 10 to the minus 33 centimeters, not 10 to the minus 33
trillion centimeters, just 10 to the minus 33 centimeters. So spacetime, it turns out an
Einstein's theory is a very, very shallow data structure, really, really shallow data structure.
But this is how science works. You take your intuitions, you turn them into a mathematical
theory. If the theory is a good theory, it allows you to explore the scope of the theory,
like GPS comes out of, you know, the technology, GPS depends on certain features of Einstein's
theory of general relativity. But if it's a great theory, then the theory will actually
give you the tools to find the limits of that theory. So now to come back to the philosophers
arguments against me. They're saying, again, their argument is, you know, Hoffman's using the
mathematics of evolutionary game theory to show that the very fundamental concepts of Darwin
cannot be fundamental. They're going to have to let go of those at some point. They're not
fundamental to the nature of reality. And they're saying, I'm shooting myself in the foot. You
couldn't possibly do that. And what I'm saying is, no, what you're missing is this is the way
science works. The good science takes mathematical theories and uses the mathematics to find the
limits of those theories so that we don't get stuck in a rut with one theory. It allows us
to go beyond. So I'm not shooting myself in the foot. I'm just doing what science has to do.
Now, what the old theory can't do is tell you what you should do next. Once you've found the
limit, and once we know that spacetime isn't fundamental, and you say, okay, so, well, what's
outside of spacetime? And what could that even possibly mean to say that there's something
outside of spacetime? Isn't everything inside spacetime? What could you possibly be meaning?
Well, spacetime itself isn't going to tell you because spacetime has its set of assumptions,
namely that spacetime is fundamental. Well, what you're now questioning is that.
You're saying spacetime isn't fundamental. So I've got to step outside of Einstein's
set of concepts to get a new set of concepts. And the restriction then will be whatever new
theory I come up with, it has to give me back Einstein's theory of spacetime as some special
projection. And by the way, physicists are already doing this. So the European Research Council
in the last few months announced a 10 million euro project called Universe Plus.
And the goal of that is to find the new mathematical framework for physics. And the
framework they're saying beyond spacetime and beyond quantum mechanics. And the reason they're
doing this is that roughly 10 years ago, 11 years ago, they discovered these structures
called positive geometries entirely outside of spacetime, entirely beyond quantum mechanics.
There are no Hilbert spaces in these structures. So there's no quantum mechanics, there's no
Hilbert spaces. But they give rise to the right answers to scattering experiments, like particles
in the Large Hadron collider smashing into each other, gluons smashing in and gluons spraying
out and so forth. You get the right answers. The math becomes much easier when you let go of spacetime.
Math, not to say that it's easy, but much, much easier than when you do it in spacetime. And
you see new symmetries. So they've been discovering just in the last decade, physicists have been,
and I should say, high-energy theoretical physicists. Many physicists who aren't high-energy
theoretical physicists don't even know about this. I've talked with many quantum theorists,
for example, who simply don't know about this. So it's a small branch, but those physicists
who are dealing with the edges of spacetime's abilities, the high-energy theoretical physicists
are the ones who are probing physics where spacetime starts to fall apart. And so they're
the ones that are moving out to these new structures beyond spacetime called positive
geometries and something called decorator permutations. So it's not just some cognitive
scientist saying, we need to do this. The ERC is funding this to the tune of 10 million euros.
They had, in February, their first meeting with over 100 mathematicians and mathematical physicists
on board to launch this new field of positive geometries outside of spacetime. So yes,
we can go outside of spacetime. It seems like ridiculous. What could you even be talking about?
I've mentioned this to people and they have no idea what I'm even talking about. What could
possibly be meant by something outside of spacetime? Spacetime is everything. Nope. That's a conceptual
dead end. Thinking of spacetime as everything is a conceptual dead end. We can, in fact, use
mathematics and go entirely outside of spacetime. And just to emphasize what we're talking about
here, in your last conversation with us with Annal Seth as well, you mentioned that what would
have taken pages and pages and pages of mathematical equations using the framework of quantum physics
or spacetime, you can get the same result or a better result using maybe a few lines of equations.
One page, four or five terms on a page that you can write down by hand and compute by hand.
The other, you couldn't even do it with supercomputers. This you can do by hand.
That's pretty crazy. And the implications then for consciousness are
almost all of my colleagues are assuming that spacetime is fundamental and that objects in
spacetime are fundamental. They're looking for a physical substrate in spacetime that's prior to
consciousness. Now, maybe prior in the sense that it has the right causal structures as an
integrated information theory, or it might be prior in the sense that it has the right functional
properties as most as most physicalist theories are. But in any case, what they're assuming
what they're assuming either an integrated information theory or, you know, global workspace
theory or higher order theories or orchestrated collapse of quantum states of neuromicotubules
like Penrose and Hemeroff, these theories are all assuming that spacetime and certain physical
substrates or objects inside spacetime are fundamental and consciousness emerges. And
that now is simply ignoring what physics has revealed. Spacetime is not fundamental,
and the substrates, namely the physical objects inside spacetime, are not fundamental. And
ERC is, and hundreds of brilliant high energy theoretical physicists are now finding these
new structures beyond spacetime. The field of consciousness studies is now lagging behind.
We are basing all of our research on a outmoded model of reality. It's just, it's gone. So
there's no hope of booting up consciousness from neural activity or from the causal structure
of substrates inside spacetime or the functional properties of substrates inside spacetime. It's
not possible. Why? Because spacetime itself is merely a trivial and shallow data structure and
the objects inside of it. For example, what are particles? When you ask, what is a physical particle
like, you know, a quark, bosons, leptons and quarks, the elementary particles of the standard
model? Physicists will tell you that they're just irreducible representations of the group
of symmetries of spacetime. If you give me a spacetime,
if symmetries dictate the properties of its particles and what the particles are. So the
particles themselves, when spacetime is doomed, so are the particles because they're just
representations of the symmetries of spacetime. So we're trying to boot up consciousness from the
particles, you know, complicated assemblies of particles that are just representations of a
spacetime that is itself a shallow data structure, not the truth. So the whole enterprise of trying
to build consciousness from some physical substrate, either a causal substrate or a functional
substrate, is doomed. And the physicists are the ones who are telling us that. And I'm saying also
that evolution by natural selection, Darwin's theory agrees. When you use evolutionary game
theory, it agrees. So the main pillars of modern science, you know,
high energy theoretical physics, quantum field theory,
together with Einstein's theory of gravity, and then Darwin's theory of evolution of a natural
selection are both, there are greatest theories, because in some sense they have the mathematics
that tells us spacetime was a wonderful framework for centuries, and it's over. It's time to get a
new and deeper framework. And for better or for worse, what I'm trying to do is get a mathematical
model of consciousness while consciousness outside of spacetime. And my goal is to show that so it's
like a social network of interacting consciousnesses. So the mathematics is network theory. Very much
it's all about networks, the mathematics of networks and stochastic processes on networks.
That's the work that we're doing. And what we're trying to do is show mathematically
that the positive geometries and the decorated permutations that the high energy theoretical
physicists have found outside of spacetime actually are projections of the network properties of an
even bigger dynamics of consciousness. So the physicists are going from spacetime outward,
and they're finding when we take off the spacetime headset, what do we see? We see
positive geometries. Well, who ordered that? It's a little green. We take off our headset,
and what do we see? It's like in 2001, a space odyssey, the movie, where there's an obelisk,
and all the apes are hooting and hollering and pounding on. They know it's important. It's really
pregnant with me, but they have no idea what it means. Well, that's where we are. We've taken
off our headset, we look outside of spacetime. What do we see? Obelisks, these geometric objects.
They're static geometry. That's these positive geometries, like the amplitude
hydrant, the associated hydrant, cosmological, like polytopes and so forth. These are like
obelisks outside of spacetime, and they're sitting there sort of staring at us silently.
And what do they mean? The physicists, there's no dynamics, it's just these objects sitting there.
Who ordered that? And then these permutations, the decorated permutations that classify the
objects. So what we're saying is, well, we need a dynamical system outside of all of this.
Yeah, how about a network of conscious agents interacting? We've made the map,
we've made the map into the decorated permutations. We're working on the positive geometries.
A lot of this revolves around your theory of conscious agents as well. What is a conscious
agent in really simple terms? Like, why would you describe that to someone hearing that for the first
time? That's right. So our proposal then is that spacetime is doomed. So spacetime can't
boot up consciousness. Why don't we start with consciousness being fundamental? Let's have a
theory where consciousness is fundamental. No substrates. No substrates whatsoever. Consciousness
just is the point. So if you're thinking about making a theory of consciousness,
you might say, well, there's lots of stuff that that theory has to do. There's
qualia. There's choice. There's learning, memory, problem solving, intelligence, the self.
There's tons and tons of stuff. What are you going to do? How do you build a theory of consciousness
that's not emerging from some substrate, either causally or functionally?
So what we are doing is what you have to do with any science. Pick the minimal,
minimal assumptions because the more you assume, the less you explain. So you want, you know,
this is Occam's razor. Do with as little as possible. So we chose two things. There are
experiences. So we're just saying there are the taste of chocolate, the smell of garlic,
the color red. That's our fundamental furniture of our universe, not a space, not a spacetime
universe, something that a universe outside of space time. There are there are experiences
and experiencers, you know, having those experiences. And there are probabilistic
relationships among experiences. That's it. What if I experience red? What's the probability
there might experience green next? That's it. No notion of self, learning, memory, problem solving,
intelligence. We don't assume any of that. Just so if people want to see the math,
we have a paper called objects of consciousness. You can just Google objects of consciousness.
The math is there. Also fusions of consciousness. They're free online. So you can see what we're
doing. And it turns out that we get a social network of interacting conscious agents. The
I'll just say one sentence of math for those who want a little bit of beef. We
model the spaces of possible experiences with probability spaces,
measurable spaces, and the interactions, you know, the probabilistic interactions among
experiences with Markovian kernels. So and it turns out our network model is computationally
universal. So that means even though we don't assume learning memory, problem solving, and so
forth, we can build models of agents that only have our two little assumptions, experiences,
and probabilistic relationships among experiences, we can build models of learning memory. Anything
you can do with neural nets, you can do with conscious agent nets. They're equally powerful
as content as neural nets. So we have networks of conscious agents. But the key difference is
neural nets are inside space time. They're networks of physical objects inside space time.
Conscious agent networks are networks of consciousnesses that have no physical substrate
and are entirely outside of space time. And that creates space time as one of the more trivial
user interfaces that they use to interact with each other. So what we accountants is that our
space time, three dimensions of space, one dimension of time, is a fairly trivial headset
that, you know, the some conscious agents use to interact, right? Think about it like the
Twitterverse. There are millions of users and billions of tweets. There's no way that anybody
could read all the tweets or interact with all the users. So we have to have something that to,
you know, calm things down to to make it understandable. And so we'll do the look at
trends and so forth. But ultimately, what we'd like to have is some some kind of like headset
that allows us to see what's happening in Wisconsin versus Tokyo or whatever.
And that's what space time is. It's just a little headset, a little data compression scheme and data
understanding scheme that some conscious agents use to understand their interactions with others.
But I don't see any reason that is special. In fact, it seems to me one of the more trivial
headsets. Why not have 50 dimensions of space? Why not have 50 billion? Why be stuck with space at all?
So I think that, you know, once we once we get rid of our blinders in our addiction to space time,
which we're born with. So I understand how hard it is to get rid of it. But once we let go of that,
then our scientific creativity can can go where we want.
Okay, I'm still trying to wrap my head around this. So we're are we almost saying that a conscious
agent exists beyond space time, but uses space time as a way to interact with other conscious
agents in the same way that somebody with a virtual reality headset can interact with somebody in a
game in another part of the world, for example, is this what kind of what we're saying that that's
that's exactly right. So that conscious agents themselves
are the fundamental idea. And there's a whole essentially infinite collection of these conscious
agents that interact. And we're writing a paper right now on a logic that ties them all together.
So, you know, so many spiritual traditions have an idea of one God or one Brahman or whatever
they might want to call it, right? Some some ultimate consciousness. And it turns out when we
when we look at our conscious agents, we're starting off with little trivial ones, like
this conscious agent has only one experience, they can only see red. That's all I can do.
And this this conscious agent, maybe it sees red and green. And this one has 20 experiences,
that one has 50. And, and we can and so any experience that you can imagine, we can write
down a probability, probability structure for it and a Markovian dynamics for it. And we can
have these interact. And when they interact, they can combine, you can take simpler agents,
and they combine in interesting ways to create more complicated agents. And so we get this
combination logic that comes out of it. And we found in studying this, we found a new
mathematical logic on Markov kernels, the Markov chains that we're about to publish it.
It turns out that there's a logic on all possible Markov dynamics that hasn't been
discovered before. It's a trace logic. For those who know about trace chains, the I'll just give
the definition, one kernel is less than another, if it's the trace of the other, that turns out that
one definition gives you a non Boolean logic of all the Markovian kernels, which in our case,
gives us a non Boolean logic of all possible consciousnesses. And what it does is it says,
because it's non Boolean, there's no single top consciousness. So there's not what most people
would think of as God. Instead, it's far more interesting. There are an infinite number of
directions in which you can go infinitely far in more and more complicated consciousnesses. So
there's not one top direction, there's an infinite number of directions. And for me, if anything
sounds closer to what I would think of by the meaning of God, that is much closer to
than just having one little thing at the top, having an infinite number of directions. So and
by the way, I'm not smart enough to think of this, it was, it was the mathematical logic of the trace,
the trace order that forced me to let go of my baby thoughts about bigger and bigger consciousnesses
and it forced me to to think in this new way. So that's, that's the goal of science is to
get us out of our dogmatic slumbers and our old ways of thinking and enforce us kicking
and screaming sometimes to see a bigger picture. And that's what this is doing.
Okay. So just to clarify, so each one of us would potentially then be a conscious agent,
which means that, and if that's the case, does that mean that on some level, we each exist
outside of space time as well? And this, what we're doing right now is a sort of like temporary
illusion of a deeper reality. That's right. So you are a conscious agent, but you're also
two conscious agents. If we, if we cut your corpus callosum in half, you have two hemispheres,
the left hemisphere and right hemisphere, and they're connected by a band of about 220 million
axons called the corpus callosum. And a friend of a friend of mine, Joe Bogan was a surgeon who,
to help people with epilepsy, sometimes had to go in and cut the corpus callosum and separate
the two hemispheres that helped with the sub problems with epilepsy. And, but what they found
when they study these people was that the right hemisphere, you could talk to just the right
hemisphere or the left hemisphere. And in one person, for example, I think the right hemisphere
was an atheist and left hemisphere believed in God. And the right hemisphere wanted to be a
race car driver, the left hemisphere wanted to be a draftsman have a desk job. So in, and the two
hands, the turns out the right hemisphere controls the left hand and the left hemisphere
controls the right hand. And sometimes the two hands fought, they would fight with each other
because they, they, you know, maybe the person was making an omelette and one hemisphere wanted to
have an egg and the other one didn't want to have an egg and would try to ruin the omelette. So it
wouldn't, it wouldn't be able to be cooked. So, so, so you're one conscious agent, but apparently
you're also, we have evidence that you're also two. But I think that you're infinitely many,
but potentially infinitely many conscious agents. There's this whole network of interacting
conscious agents. And at the same time, you are the one with the whole, maybe I shouldn't
call it the one, but maybe the whole consciousness, the, in some sense, you are the whole consciousness
looking at itself through a particular trivial space time headset, and has your body is just a
little avatar in that, in that VR, that you're through what you're looking. So, so this changes
the whole thing around instead of you are your body and your brain is the source of your consciousness,
it's the other way around. Your consciousness is fundamental. And what you call, what you call
your body in your brain is merely an avatar that you render when you need it. Is, you know, like
an avatar in a virtual reality game is, you know, it's not you. And it only, the hands that you
see only exist when you look, if you don't look at the hands, those pixels are gone. And then
there are no hands, there's no hands in the computer. So, so to be very, very explicit, and,
and maybe to shock people, I'm a cognitive neuroscientist, but I'll say this. Neurons do not
exist when they're not perceived. Because nothing inside space time exists when it's not perceived.
Space time itself does not exist when it's not perceived. It is only a data structure that
exists when you created in your consciousness. That's what the, that's the shocking, and that's
what I've been having a difficult time emotionally wrapping myself around. Intellectually, I'm there.
The math has completely convinced me, our best science can, this is true.
We'll see when my emotions come along for the ride.
I have no idea how you get anything done, knowing this, like just, you must be just sitting all
day just, I can't believe this is actually, this is actually true, you know. But before,
before we wrap up here, Donald, I just want to ask a question that I think is important to ask.
If this is the case,
why would consciousness exist? What might, or maybe the better question is, what do you see as
the purpose of human existence then? Why would consciousness be having this experience through
our eyes in other words? Like what, what might be going on there? That's the fundamental excellent
question in this area. I started off by talking about how science, there's no theory of everything,
no set of concepts, no set of theories, can ever explain anything, everything.
And that, that's true of my own theory about consciousness, right? That's my, my theory of
consciousness is a first trivial baby step. Consciousness is whatever it is. My theory is just
a trivial theory. And it's the first of hopefully billions of successor theories.
What this means about consciousness itself is, consciousness transcends any description.
What science does is build descriptions from certain perspectives. That's what we do as scientists.
We take a perspective and we build a description.
And so what this suggests is, there's a deep answer to your question and it comes
there's a theorem that no system can ever fully understand itself. If I have a computer,
for example, and I want the computer to, to understand itself completely, what would I do?
Well, I'd have it build a model of itself, right? Some software model of itself. Well,
in the process, the computer itself has become more complicated because now it's the computer
with a model. So now I'd have to model a computer with the model of it. And you can see this goes
on ad infinitum. So it's pretty straightforward to see, maybe not to prove, but to see that,
that no system can fully model itself. So tie that together with the fact that
no theory of consciousness can ever get anywhere close to the complete explanation of consciousness.
Consciousness, you are consciousness and you transcend. So, so it'll be very personal. You
transcend any scientific theory, your consciousness transcends any scientific theory. So what,
so what is consciousness doing and why? What if, first answer, I don't know. Here's,
I guess, maybe it's educated, maybe it's uneducated, but it's a guess. Maybe what consciousness is up to
is knowing itself. And the way it knows itself is to say, let me choose to project myself
from this direction and look at myself from this direction. And when I do that, I look,
it looks like I'm this little thing called Don Hoffman that weighs 165 pounds, lives in Irvine
and so forth. That's what I look like. But this, this, I'm just the universal consciousness looking
at myself from this, or I'm Neil, or I'm, you know, I'm whoever I might be. That's what, and
and then I give myself 70, 80, 90 years, whatever it might be, to, you know, to look at myself from
that. And maybe to make it so that I really take that perspective seriously, maybe what I do is I
let myself completely forget who I really am. Let me, let me forget who I really am. Let me really
believe that I'm 165 pounds of, of flesh in space and time and really believe that and really be
worried about stuff. And so I really take this thing, and then let me slowly wake up and, and
reap all the benefits that I got from that perspective. And that the entire life of Hoffman
is one trivial, trivial perspective on who I really am. And each one of the billions of human
beings is an important, but compared to the whole, trivial perspective on what the consciousness is.
And so that's my best answer to your question is that what consciousness is up to is trying on
different avatars, trillions, quadrillions, uncountable numbers of probably an infinity
of different avatars. And the space time headset that we're using is, as I've said,
probably one of the more trivial ones, we're probably really, really low on the totem pole
of avatars that consciousness is using very, very low right now. You know, we were like amoebas,
you know, really low on that. So, but there are other avatars with other perspectives that are
much more, much more complicated than ours. So, so in this case, in that perspective,
it's no surprise that I'm having a hard time with this, because the whole point was to give
myself a hard time. So I would take this whole thing seriously, and really take this perspective
and wake up from it painfully. And then realize that death isn't the end, it's just taking off the
headset. Wow, okay. Well, that's, that's a great note to end on. Don, where can people find you
online? Where would you recommend them to go after this conversation? Well, for those who are
technically minded, I have the objects of consciousness paper. So just Google objects of
consciousness and fusions of consciousness. And then you can Google scholar me, you can if you do
Google scholar and type in my name, you can see the other papers that we've done on this.
By the way, if you're, if you have a recent PhD in mathematics and in
algebraic geometry, and you know these positive geometries, I have a postdoc, I have two postdoc
positions that I'm advertising right now for, so I want, you know, someone within two years of a
PhD in algebraic geometry to, to, so email me at ddhoff at uci.edu, and I'll point you to the,
to where you can apply for a postdoc, we want someone to, again, a recent PhD in algebraic
geometry, last two years, to work with us on this. And, and for those who are
interested in less technical things, I would just say that I have a Twitter feed. So
you, Don Hoffman, the D-O-N-H-O-F-F-M-A-N, I think I forget what it's called, my Twitter,
my Twitter handle, I can send it to you, my Twitter handle. So I do post stuff that I'm thinking
about, and, and, and I post videos, like this one I'll post when it comes out, if you allow me,
and YouTube videos and so forth. So, so yeah, I guess yeah, my, my online YouTube stuff.
Oh, and I have a book, The Case Against Reality, for those who want to look at the evolution
argument in more detail and see more of the guts of that. And I talk a little bit about
consciousness in that as well. Fantastic, fantastic. Well, another thing I mentioned to you before
recording, before we started recording, was that I think what you're essentially doing,
I know you're not, this isn't your intention, and it's sort of just happening as a byproduct,
but you are opening the possibility of mystery in the world and a sense of spirituality in the
world to people that otherwise might not be able to access it, you know, and I think that's super,
super important. People that are very sort of intellectual and interested in mathematics and
physics and everything else as well. Spirituality is not accessible to them, but through someone
like yourself, then they can get in touch with this very, very important thing in life. So I think
it's super important what you're doing and obviously just keep going and best luck with
everything going forward too. Thank you very much. And I agree that ultimately, I think there'll be
a very profitable interaction between science and spirituality, because mystery
is at the heart. Science tells us that there is no theory of everything. It's very,
very clear. There's no theory of everything. That means that the core is a deep, deep mystery.
And you are that mystery. You are not separate from the mystery. You are that mystery.
So I agree with you that science and spirituality, it will be difficult.
There's a lot of bad history between them, but I think eventually it will be a very,
very profitable interaction. Thank you, Donald. Thank you very much, Neil.
Thank you for listening, and I hope you enjoyed the show. If you'd like to hear the full version,
you can do so with the Weekend University Premium Membership. This gets you access
to your master's library of over five years of psychology conferences, including over 230 talks
and interviews with the word-leading psychologists, professors, and authors, unlimited CPD certification,
transcripts, quizzes, premium passes for our annual conference, online courses with Richard
Schwartz and Deb Dana, and more. The cost is 97 for one year, which breaks down at around 27p
per day. The best bit is you can try it out for 30 days completely risk-free, as all orders come
with a 100% money-back guarantee. If you're interested, please go to twmembers.com for more information.
