I want to tell you a story about my own experience as a negotiator. A few years ago I was teaching
weekend courses on negotiation at Beijing University and during the middle of the week
I had a couple of days off so I decided to visit the Great Wall of China. I was about
300 meters from the wall when I realized I didn't have a camera. What would have been
perfect was one of those 27 shot one use disposable cameras but I hadn't thought to bring one.
But then a few paces ahead of me. I noticed a woman selling that very camera on top of
a card table so I went over and asked her how much she wanted and she took out a calculator
and tapped $30 US. Now even I know that was too much for a camera but what was I going
to say? I hadn't been expecting this conversation so I thought for a moment, took the calculator
and tapped $10. She acted like I was threatening to steal everything she owned and run off toward
the wall with it, very upset. We go back and forth for a moment and we finally agreed
to $12 which I pay, I thank her, I take the camera and as I walk away I actually hear
me say to myself, well I got her way down from $30 and I walked toward the wall and
soon I discovered four other women selling the same exact camera for $5. And you get
the irony I was there to teach them how to negotiate? In this session I want to look
with you at a simple question. If you and the other negotiator don't agree what will
you do instead and what will she do instead? At the Great Wall I had no idea what I would
do instead and I suffered for it. Not a lot but you get the idea. The lady with the cameras
knew I didn't know about the other sellers and that for all I knew she was my only chance.
I lacked leverage, she had it. Leverage is simply the ability to influence things in
your favor through relative advantage. It's a bit like being on one end of a seesaw, the
higher your end is the lower the others is, the higher your leverage is the lower the
others is. While it's not the same thing as power which is a broader term, it's an
important part of the power to get what you want. If I'd been able to shop around or
even if I knew that was possible I would have had more leverage and things might have gone
quite differently. Understanding and comparing what each side
can do if there's no deal is central to gauging how much leverage you have in the negotiation
as well as key to knowing when to walk away, when to give in and when to negotiate. So
it's important to know how to learn each side's relative position and how to develop
yours. Very important, if you are a hostage almost by definition you have no leverage
at all and so you'll have virtually no ability to negotiate. So much of what a negotiator
does hinges on the challenge of developing leverage.
In 1963, while in prison for his work protesting racial discrimination, Martin Luther King
Jr. read an open letter in the local newspaper from a number of clergymen questioning his
tactics and asking why he did not negotiate. In reply, Dr. King wrote what is now known
as his Letter from Birmingham Jail, in which he said this, you may well ask why direct
action, why sit-ins, marches and so forth, isn't negotiation a better path? You are
exactly right in your call for negotiation. Indeed, this is the purpose of direct action.
The purpose of nonviolent direct action is to create a situation so crisis packed that
it will inevitably open the door to negotiation. Too long has our beloved Southland been bogged
down in the tragic attempt to live in monologue rather than in dialogue.
In other words, Dr. King was highlighting the point that nonviolence is a crucial way that
previously powerless African Americans could peacefully acquire leverage. In that sense,
nonviolent action championed by King, Gandhi and others is very much about improving the
success of the oppressed at the bargaining table by building leverage.
In their outstanding book, Getting to Yes, Roger Fisher, William Urie and Bruce Patton
introduced an idea that can help us better understand leverage, the best alternative
to a negotiated agreement, or BATNA for short. An alternative to agreement is what you might
do on your own if you cannot reach agreement with the other side. The best of these choices
is your BATNA. So, for example, imagine you're negotiating for a new job with company X. If
those talks don't work out, what will you do instead on your own? Imagine you have another
job offer elsewhere that you've been thinking about going back to school and that sometimes
you wonder if it might be fun to quit work and go write a great American novel. Each
of these three choices is an alternative you could pursue instead of reaching an agreement
with company X, and the best one for you, by definition, would be your BATNA.
Now, some will tell you that BATNA, leverage and power are the same thing. The reason a
hostage has no leverage is because he has no BATNA. He either does what the gunman tells
him or he dies. Still, I think it's an oversimplification to say BATNA, power and leverage are the same
exact thing, in part because there are ways to acquire power even if you don't have a
BATNA. For example, experts on hostage negotiation advise that if you ever are a hostage, God
forbid, it's wise to do whatever the gunman says, but it's also wise to let him get to
know you as a real person. That's because the more he sees you as a human being, the
harder he may find it to hurt you. That illustrates the power of rapport building. It also illustrates
there may be other sources of influence besides the ability to walk away. In a sense, much
of our course is about the wise acquisition and use of different kinds of power.
That said, I agree that BATNA is usually a good first approximation of your leverage
in a negotiation. If you're desperate and the other negotiator isn't, you'll probably
get the lesser of the bargain. So our focus in this session will be on the simple but
critical idea of BATNA because it's so closely connected to leverage.
But precisely because these and other negotiation terms are so powerful, here I want to make
sure I'm being clear about my use of language. Earlier in the course, I introduced the idea
of an option. Here we're talking about something different, alternatives to agreement. At first
blush, they may sound similar, but they're not. So let me take a moment and explain that
important distinction. An option is a possible deal term, a tradable, something that you
can offer to the other side or that the other side can offer you. It's anything that you
and the other side might agree to. In contrast, an alternative to agreement is something that
you will do by yourself if you cannot agree with the other side.
So for example, imagine a landlord and a tenant are negotiating a lease renewal. They might
have several options to discuss, including a 5% increase for one year, a 3% increase
each year for two, or an agreement to keep the rent the same and waive the annual paint
job. But meanwhile, each negotiator has several alternatives to agreement. Among other things,
the landlord could rent the place to another tenant instead, sell the building, or find
a reason to evict the tenant. The tenant could, among other things, find another place to
rent, could buy a house, or sue the landlord for wrongful eviction. You get the difference?
If you and I are negotiating, our suggestions are options. What I might do without you are
my alternatives to agreement. Throughout our course, I will use the terms
options and alternatives to agreement as separate and distinct concepts, in part because most
negotiation experts and books draw the same important distinction, and in part because
understanding that difference can make you more effective.
Indeed, Battenham may be one of the most effective and important ideas in the field. As I mentioned
in an earlier session, a couple of years ago, I surveyed over 150 of my former students,
who had graduated three to ten years before. They reported that they valued most of our
negotiation concepts, but tied for number one to my surprise was Batna. Why? I was frankly
surprised myself because, in a sense, Batna is an extremely simple idea you've known
since you were a child. My mama told me you'd better shop around. And if you've had economics
training, as many of my students have, you've encountered the idea in another form, opportunity
costs. Most of my students could write an essay describing and discussing that important
economics concept, so why did they say that Batna has been so important to them?
I think because Batna makes an important idea much more operational and accessible. The
better my students understand their Batna, the better they know when to walk away and
how to approach the negotiation, and the better they know when they're weak and need to take
action to build strength. In short, Batna reveals leverage and perspective, and they
don't really realize that they need to think about it in conflicts and negotiations until
they learn that term. In fact, Batna is so important that sometimes it can produce an
agreement without a party even negotiating. If you've ever had a telephone company or
a credit card company unilaterally offer you better terms and conditions than your existing
contract offers, it's probably because they're facing increased competition, that is, they
know you have more choice and can walk away. Your Batna has improved without you even realizing
it and you got a better offer as a result. I've had this experience. A few years ago
I was sitting in my apartment when my landlord called and said, I just wanted to let you
know that I'll be raising your monthly rent when the lease ends from $1,000 to $1,100 a
month. I thanked him for letting me know and then went out and began looking for another
apartment. A few weeks later I found one I liked, $700 a month, right next door, smaller
but perfectly adequate. So I called him back and I told him, you know, I just wanted to
let you know that I'll be moving out at the end of the lease term. Now, this was in the
middle of the recession, of a recession and to my amazement, I heard a New York City landlord
speak words I never thought I would hear him say, would you consider staying if I canceled
the rent increase? I was stunned but I said, no, thanks anyway, I think I'll move. Then
he said, what if I lowered the rent? Now I was completely flummoxed. I didn't know much
about negotiating then, but fortunately I had the presence to say, well, how much did
you have in mind? And he said, how about $900? Now what do I do? So I asked him if I could
call him back and he said, yes. And so I thought about it and I finally called him back and
I said, thank you for your offer but I think I'm going to move anyway. So he said, what
if I lowered it to $800? Now what do I say? So again, I asked him if I could call him
back and he said, sure. So I went back and forth and finally I called back and I declined
the offer and I moved out. So several years later, I was beginning to teach negotiation
for the first time I asked myself, was there ever a time in my life where having a strong
batna made a difference for me? And finally and suddenly the little light bulb went on
over my head and I realized for the first time, oh my goodness, that time with a landlord,
I was negotiating and I didn't even realize it. Now, how can you get a New York City landlord
to lower his rent 20% or more and not even realize that you're negotiating? Simple.
I had a strong batna and he didn't. If we didn't agree, I was set. I was moving to
another apartment and hadn't even considered negotiating but he was in trouble. He faced
the prospect of an empty apartment for months in a recession that cost a renovating an apartment
finding another tenant who might be less reliable and then going through all the paperwork,
his batna was weak. Unwittingly, I had been doing what skilled negotiators normally do
as they gear up for an important negotiation. They develop their batna. Skilled negotiators
do this intentionally with creativity and research. Often, your best alternative to
a negotiated agreement, your batna, is not the most obvious alternative to agreement
that you have. For example, when you're faced with a conflict, it can seem like the best
or only solution is litigation. But a skilled negotiator realizes that litigation is just
one choice. It's just one possible alternative to agreement and she would be very wise to
explore other possibilities. In a dispute with a car manufacturer, for example, that might
include seeking a government agency or some other champion who can fight for her, developing
some self-help measures such as withholding car payments, seeking allies like other disgruntled
car buyers, considering alternatives to litigation such as mediation or arbitration, and researching
and brainstorming still more non-obvious choices. Earlier we were talking about Martin Luther
King and nonviolent action. One scholar has identified 198 different ways to practice nonviolence
and in a sense it's a list of possible alternatives to agreement. Boycotting, sitting in, lobby
in Congress, staging demonstrations, and building coalitions. They're value lies and
giving activists more choices that can improve their leverage and so improve the chances
to eventually negotiate with powerful counterparts.
Looking beyond the obvious to discover an effective batna is also crucial for entrepreneurs.
Many students in my entrepreneurship classes first think that an entrepreneur is doing well
if she quickly negotiates deals to raise lots of money from investors. But studies and experienced
entrepreneurs emphasize that this may be the biggest mistake you can make as an entrepreneur.
A much better bet may be to do something called bootstrapping, where the entrepreneur starts
up inexpensively, experiments, makes mistakes at low cost, and shapes the venture until
it's ready to put investment money to good use. In effect, bootstrapping is a very attractive
batna for an entrepreneur in her early talks with early investors.
Developing your batna can make a difference even at the highest levels of diplomacy. Indeed,
we might argue that war itself often seems like a nation's batna. The Swiss military
theorist Klaus Fitts famously said, war is the continuation of politics by other methods,
that is, an alternative to agreement. Currently, the world spends over a trillion dollars, a
12th of its gross national products, on militaries. In large measure, nations do this so that
during a conflict, a leader can stand up and say, while we hope we can resolve this matter
peacefully, we reserve the right to use all possible alternatives. This is not to say
that military force is the best alternative to agreement, just that nations often suggest
that it is.
It's not enough, though, for a nation's leader, an entrepreneur, or any negotiator
to think about her batna. She also has to think about the other side's batna. Under
estimating the other side's strength is a good way to be ruined at the bargaining table.
In an early episode of the hit TV sitcom Seinfeld, Jerry and George get an offer from NBC to
produce a pilot sitcom. NBC offers $13,000. Jerry is happy. George is unhappy. Very unhappy.
He figures if a TV star like Ted Danson gets $800,000 for a sitcom episode, so should
they. Everyone around him warns him that NBC hardly thinks of him as Ted Danson, and that
NBC can choose from dozens of other writers' screenplays. George insists. Speaking for
both of them, George tells NBC they are declining the offer because it is too low. NBC lets
them go. Surprise. Now George is desperate. He crawls back to NBC, eventually begging
them to agree to $8,000, which they reluctantly do.
I was in the impression, Jerry says, that the point of negotiation is to get more, not less.
You know, this is the way they negotiate in the bizarro world.
George illustrates the danger of underestimating the other side's batna, but there's a converse
problem. It's very easy to overestimate the other side's too. There's a famous counterculture
cartoon called Bambi Meets Godzilla that opens with Bambi peacefully grazing to the sound
of pastoral music when suddenly an enormous foot crashes down on him, leaving only the
feet sticking out. Credits roll. Often we feel like Bambi, and the other side seems
ginormous and intimidating, a virtual Godzilla with overwhelming alternatives to agreement,
who is therefore totally unwilling to negotiate. But do not fear. We'll actually devote a
full session later to developing ways to negotiate when you feel you're negotiating with Godzilla.
And here too, we can begin to think about how to cope.
Skilled negotiators strive to avoid being like George on the one hand and Bambi on the
other. How? By carefully preparing. Not just by developing several alternatives, but also
by learning as much as they can about the other sides, including their best and worst
alternatives to agreement. Bambi was oblivious. George was winging it. But diplomats, sports
agents, lawyers, and other skilled negotiators devote time to understanding the choices each
side has. To capture that ability, I recommend that you intentionally list out at least
five alternatives to agreement that you have, and separately at least five that the other
side might have. And do some research to better know which they're likely to rely on. For
example, during a billing dispute with a big supplier, you might want to learn if it has
a reputation for litigation, if it refers disputes to credit agencies, cuts off buyers,
or tends to do something else. A sobering question, isn't it?
And here's one more. What's the worst thing that could happen if you don't agree? That
is, what is your worst alternative to a negotiated agreement? Or what not? Just as a skilled negotiator
thinks about the best choices she has, she also thinks about the worst. In part, this
helps by sobering you. It's easy to overestimate your strength by thinking about this long list
of alternatives to agreement, and it means that you're more powerful, you think, than
you really are, because you usually can't use all those alternatives. Further, it's
easy to overlook the fact that you may have worries of your own, especially in your bat,
if your batman doesn't work out. For example, if you're negotiating for a new job, your
batman may seem like an exciting alternative job prospect elsewhere, but if it doesn't
come through soon, your batman may be continued unemployment.
But before you throw in the towel and get very discouraged, consider that the other side
probably has a worrisome bat, a worrisome Latina, too. That's important in part because
it's often the fear of what will happen if they don't reach a deal that may motivate
them to reach a deal, as the saying goes, doubts drive deals. The Northern Island Peace Accord
may have been achieved in large part because the parties and their constituents knew they
didn't want to go back to the troubles, that is the violent warfare they'd faced for decades.
Even seemingly overwhelming negotiation counterparts have worries, too. You may be negotiating
for a job with a company that has 600 other applicants, but once a company makes an offer,
they often have their own worries. They may not want to restart the job search, bringing
in more candidates, wasting more time filling the slot, getting another consensus among the
decision makers. Understanding the specific situation you face isn't always easy, and
it's easy to overplay or underplay one's hand, but keep in mind that we have a natural
tendency to project our anxieties and think the other side is strong and that we're weak.
So skilled negotiators strive to learn as much as they can and bring a measure of equanimity
to the talks, a reasonable confidence grounded in understanding. They also realize that they
must be ready to cope with threats and intimidation, attempts by the other side to exaggerate its
own batna and thus its leverage. As we will see, one way to cope with that threat is to
actually role play. During the civil rights era, nonviolent activists prepared marchers
for intimidating tactics by role playing with them so that they wouldn't be intimidated
during the actual marches. Savvy work, to be sure. And while we're on
the subject of Savvy, let's hear note a couple of easy mistakes to avoid when you're tempted
to talk a lot about your batna. Imagine you're trying to sell your gas station to a corporate
buyer, and you tell her we have an offer for $175,000 from another buyer. What will the
corporate buyer say? Hmm, okay, we can offer you $175,000 and 5 cents. Okay, she probably
won't try to beat the other offer by a nickel, but you see the point, you've now invited
her to offer you a barely better deal. For this reason, while it can be wise to allude
to your batna, it's usually unwise to reveal it in detail. Better? Well, I do have another
offer. I can't say how much, but I can say it's significantly better than your offering.
I'd love to work with you if I can. Can you do better?
And this raises a larger point. While sharing information can be wise, sharing too much of
the wrong kind can destroy your batna altogether. Shortly before the Civil War, a young geologist
named Theodore Judah discovered the past in the California Sierras that would finally
allow industrialists to build a transcontinental railroad. He quickly headed for San Francisco
and met there with a group of business leaders. At the meeting, he opened up his maps and
showed them the exact spot where the past was. Make me a partner, he said, and I'll
help you build it. They did and let him successfully lobby Congress for support, but to Judah's
surprise, they soon treated him indifferently, kept him uninformed about their decisions,
and effectively squeezed him out of the company with little to show for his efforts. The rest
of the industrialists got rich. One of them was named Leland Stanford, the founder of
Stanford University. I called Judah's mistake the Leland Stanford problem.
By giving away all the valuable information he had during the talks and retaining little
reason to keep him on board, he essentially made the industrialist batna strong in his
week. If they broke up, they were set, and he had nothing unique to contribute anymore.
Judah might have been wise to say, this will give you a rough idea of where the past is,
but I can't reveal the exact location or what the special geological problems are with
it at this stage. I'm sure, though, we can work out a fair arrangement that serves us
all well, and then work to make sure that the deal didn't leave him vulnerable to a
squeeze out. Similarly, some suggest that a whistleblower might be wise not to give
all her information to the press and prosecutors immediately. As the accused start to fight
back, they may try to fire or ruin the whistleblower, lying about what she shared so far and insisting
that there's nothing to the allegations. They may win unless she has an ace in the
hole. More information she can share with the prosecutors later on that further proves
her case or disproves their claims. But what if you do everything I'm suggesting
and find you simply have a very weak or non-existent batna and little hope of developing one? We've
all found ourselves in that situation sooner or later, so what can you do? In a nutshell,
the best thing to do is to work harder on those parts of the negotiation that you can
change. Drawing on our first sessions, that partly means thinking more deeply about the
interests, doing more factual and financial research, developing more creative options,
and spending more time on rapport building, each of which can be sources of hope and power.
It also means using more fully the many other tools and ideas we'll explore in future
sessions. As we'll see, there are lots of examples of people who first thought they
had no hope, then used their negotiation skills and turned things around beautifully even
without much leverage. But now let me show you how spending time thinking about batna
can help you transform negotiations even with an intimidating counterpart. During the 1970s,
the British government sought to negotiate with the governor of the small island nation
of Malta for much lower rent for the navy base they kept there. Malta relied heavily
on British lease payments but seemed like the proverbial bambi to the British Godzilla.
And then, the governor of Malta began talks with the Soviet Union about the possibility
of keeping a navy base there instead of the Britons. Now, the United States and the British
government leaned heavily on the dismayed British diplomats, insisting that they re-sign
the British lease at all costs. Instead of lowering the 7 million pound annual rent,
the two sides eventually tripled it. By developing Malta's batna, and Britain's
batna, the governor of Malta got the best of the British negotiators.
And this brings us full circle to the story of Martin Luther King Jr. and the Civil Rights
Movement. In 1957, two years after the modern movement began, Congress passed an anemic
Civil Rights Act that did little, if anything, to help African Americans. But by 1965, the
U.S. Congress had passed sweeping legislation, the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and the Voting
Rights Act of 1965, that began a revolution in the legal status of African Americans.
Rather than accept a trivial concession by a seemingly implacable counterpart, the U.S.
government, King and his followers pressed the struggle, galvanizing the conscience of
the nation with creative nonviolence and massive demonstrations that, as King said, helped
them write the legislation in the streets. And this story illuminates an important final
point. Negotiation and peace itself sometimes require the ability to fight. When we speak
of batna, we are sometimes speaking of developing one's ability to fight. As King demonstrated,
it is possible, and indeed eminently wise, to fight an implacable counterpart without
bearing any animosity, to once again be hard on the problem, soft on the person. Which
means that even when we develop leverage, we want to use it in ways that permit us to
show respect for the other side whenever possible, and allow them to change their approach without
losing face. Or, as the authors of Getting Yes put it, bring them to their senses, not
their knees, much of which, much of what we've explored in the course so far, can help you
do just that. Here then is a challenge, the Alternatives to Agreement Challenge. The next
time you face a difficult negotiation or conflict, see what happens if you step back, do some
research, brainstorm, and intentionally develop five separate alternatives to agreement. Then
identify a batna and a wattna. If you like, see if you can also identify the other side's
batna and wattna in the same way. See what a difference your enriched understanding of
the situation makes for your efforts. After several sessions, we've developed a
set of ideas that will be valuable in any negotiation and that can help you be more
creative, tactful, and effective in your talks with others. We said earlier that there are
two basic kinds of negotiation, creative and competitive, and while we've hinted at the
second kind, the time has come to explore it directly. We'll do that beginning in our
next session.
