In 1910, the richest man in the world was Andrew Carnegie, the industrialist who founded
what today we remember as US Steel.
But he was also thinking of retiring and word spread that he was considering selling
his holdings.
J.P. Morgan sent word asking Carnegie what he wanted for his holdings.
So on the golf course, Carnegie thought about the value of them and a bit later jotted down
his number, $480 million, which today would equal about $12 billion.
Morgan accepted the offer and after they had signed the papers, the two men had a last
meeting at Morgan's offices.
Carnegie was there to say goodbye as he was about to head off to his retirement in Scotland.
Congratulations, Mr. Carnegie, said Morgan.
You are now the richest man in the world.
I wonder, said Carnegie, if I could have gotten $100 million more.
I probably should have asked you for that.
If you had, Morgan said, you would have gotten it.
Now I often picture Morgan saying that with a snifter of brandy in his hand punctuating
the thought with a triumphant sip as Carnegie slapped his forehead and did a slow burn.
How could Carnegie, one of the most renowned business titans of his day, make a mistake
like that missing out on an extra two and a half billion dollars in today's money?
In our last session, we began looking at the task of distributive negotiation, asking how
do you negotiate how much of the pie each negotiator will get?
Carnegie Story brings us to one of the biggest questions people ask about distributive negotiation.
Should you make the first offer?
That's one of the questions we'll look at in this session.
We'll also look at, when do you walk away?
What should you do in special cases like litigation settlements, auctions, and talks with agents?
And what if you really can't tell what your best target should be despite good research?
So what happened with Carnegie?
Carnegie fell victim to one of the most basic mistakes many negotiators make.
He made the first offer without information.
As a result, he lobald himself.
He asked for worse than his counterpart was prepared to offer initially.
We've all been there.
Ever had this?
You're selling, say, a used car and the buyer asks you, how much do you want for it?
And you say a number and the buyer goes, sold.
And you think, uh-oh, what did I just do?
Not knowing is a sign that we've missed something.
The danger with lobaling out of ignorance is the basis for what may be the most common
negotiating advice there is.
Never make the first offer.
You've probably heard that advice.
And Carnegie's experience suggests that that is often wise.
If he'd waited for Morgan, he might have been a lot richer still.
The risk of lobaling yourself out of ignorance often prompts negotiators to do a kind of
an after-you-all font snow after you guessed on routine where each tries to get the other
to go first.
I've been in that situation and let me tell you, it gets awkward real fast.
Many years ago, a company that specialized in negotiation training wanted to hire me.
How much did I want?
Now, I promise you, I tried hard to research what an appropriate rate would be, but there
really was nothing I could find.
The best I could do was guesstimate that I should get X dollars per training.
So when I spoke to the head of the program, he asked me how much I wanted.
And I said, well, with respect, since you were kind enough to invite me to join, let
me see what you think would be appropriate.
And he replied, well, I wouldn't want to presume.
Why don't you just give me a sense of what you think is reasonable?
And I replied, well, that's very kind of you, but I really think I should defer to you.
So let me just listen and get your thoughts about it.
Now while this was going on, I was withering with embarrassment.
How much longer could I keep this up?
I was this close to relenting when, to my surprise, he said, OK, OK, just to get the
ball rolling, what if we paid you, and then he quoted me a number that was 50% higher
than X, the number I had guesstimated that I was about to utter.
I was so surprised that I almost blurted out, oh my gosh, I've been teaching this stuff
for years, and what do you know?
It actually works.
Of course, I didn't say that.
But I came this close to pulling an Andrew Carnegie.
I'd witnessed firsthand why it's wise not to make the first offer when you don't know
much.
So it seems pretty clear that the conventional wisdom is correct.
Never make the first offer, but there's a problem.
Picture a young couple in a car dealership.
They see a car they like, smile and walk over to see what the sticker price is, but the
moment they see the sticker price, the smile disappears from their faces and they're about
to leave.
But then the car dealer comes over and says, let's see what we can do about that price.
Then he quotes a lower number that sounds great.
But the couple doesn't realize is that they've been unwittingly influenced by a phenomenon
called anchoring.
Anchoring is a psychological phenomenon where the first number you hear biases your expectations
subconsciously.
You don't even realize it's happening.
The car industry harnesses a version of anchoring known as sticker shock.
The manufacturer's suggested retail price that appears on the car sticker is, by design,
a very high price, indeed that one that no one expects the buyers to pay.
But by planting that number in buyers' minds, the manufacturer and the dealer hope to shift
the conversation toward the high end of the range.
If you think about it in any negotiation, the one who makes the first offer in effect
biases the conversation and so may have an advantage.
A memorable experiment illustrates the power of anchoring.
A researcher took a car around to a number of randomly chosen expert German mechanics
and said this, I think the car is worth 2,800 Deutsche Marks.
What do you think it's worth?
The average answer, 3,200 Deutsche Marks.
Separately, the researcher took the car around to a number of randomly chosen expert German
mechanics and said I think the car is worth 5,000 Deutsche Marks.
What do you think it's worth?
Their average answer, 4,200.
Now these are all experts looking at the same car.
The only variable is the first number they heard.
Yet they produced answers with a 33% difference of range on average.
That should scare us.
Because it means that our native familiarity with an industry or market may not be enough
to protect us from the psychological effects of anchoring.
So what do you do?
If you go first, like Andrew Carnegie, you run the risk of low balling yourself.
But if you go second, like the new car buyers, you run the risk of being anchored.
And the answer turns on one word, information.
If you're negotiating with very little or no information, first have to ask you what
are you doing in the negotiating room, get out of there, go do your homework.
But if you have to negotiate with little information, and let's face it, sometimes we have to.
Then to avoid low balling yourself, go second.
Some experts suggest that it may be wise to counteroffer quickly to offset the anchoring
effect of the first offer.
Alternatively, you may want to adjourn quickly and then go do some research.
But conversely, if you're negotiating and you do know a lot, then in order to avoid
being anchored, you may want to make the first offer.
What about simultaneous offers?
Perhaps you've seen movies where two negotiators write down numbers and slide them to each
other simultaneously.
It looks cool, and I've always wondered about it.
I gather some negotiators use it as a way to negate the anchoring effect and perhaps
the low balling problem.
And I must confess, I almost never see it in real life talks.
There are also websites that facilitate something similar, but again, I haven't seen them widely
used.
The challenge of anchoring and low balling raises two questions I get quite a lot from
students.
What do you do in an early job interview when the interviewer asks you, how much do you
currently make, and what are your salary expectations?
As you probably can see, this is a dangerous question.
First, because it asks you, in effect, to anchor yourself by mentioning a number at
the start of the discussion.
Worse, it asks you to infect low ball yourself since that number is often low.
Often you're looking in part because you hope to make considerably more in a new job.
And let's face it, it's also irrelevant.
What difference does it make, how much you currently make?
What really matters is what are the market rates for the work you will need to do in
the new job.
For all of these reasons, the question is an example of a killer question, a question
which you answer at your peril.
If you answer a killer question, you can seriously cripple or even ruin your ability to negotiate
a fair and favorable agreement.
So what do you do?
Following most experts' advice, my basic suggestion is this, don't answer.
That is, find a gracious and polite way to deflect the question.
In the job interview case, you might say something like this.
With respect, I find it's best to defer a conversation about compensation until I know
more about the duties and what's fair.
But I'm confident that when the time comes, we'll have an excellent conversation and
work at something that's satisfying for everyone.
But what if the interviewer insists?
That's an increasingly likely possibility.
So here's a fallback approach I would recommend.
You might say something like this.
OK, since I understand that the question matters a lot to you, then to show good faith, I will
of course answer it.
I just ask respectfully that we agree not to use that information as a benchmark later
on but that we will rely on market data and the like.
This way, you can later remind them politely that you won't let them use your current
salary to anchor the conversation.
But what should you do about the question, what are your salary expectations?
If you can avoid it by simply saying you're negotiable and that you'll consider any
offer, any reasonable offer, then please do.
If they press and demand numbers, try to offer a broad range, adding that you'll know better
what's appropriate as you learn more about the job and the market.
Now let's turn to the second decision question I listed at the start of the session.
When do you make, when do you walk away?
That is, what should be your worst acceptable price?
We can answer that question briefly because we've already dealt with it in the course.
Walk away when your best alternative to a negotiated agreement is better than their final offer.
So for example, imagine you're negotiating the terms of a new job with ACME Corporation
and really the only negotiable issue is salary.
They offer you $70,000.
You have three other offers, the best of which is for $83,000.
When should you walk away from ACME?
Assuming again that money is the only issue, a big assumption, you should walk away if
they can't do better than $83,000.
You might say something like this.
Well, we've been negotiating for a while and while I'm not discouraged, I must tell
you that I do have another offer for considerably more.
I do make it a rule not to divulge different offers to firms I'm interviewing with, but
I can say that the terms you and I are discussing are not very close to it.
I would love to love it if you and I can work this out, so I wonder if we can do better.
Why not tell ACME the walk away number, $83,000, and simply ask them to beat it?
As we've said, if you do invite ACME to beat it, they might try to do it by a small amount.
OK, they might say we'll give you $83,000 and 10 cents.
If you're seeking an ambitious outcome, that ain't it.
If you've satisfied instead, doing barely better.
That's OK if you've truly decided you're comfortable satisficing, but it's not OK
if you've decided you need to be ambitious.
Studies find that skilled negotiators and average negotiators are quite different in
the way they approach distributive negotiations.
Average negotiators go in with one number in mind, if any, a goal price.
A goal price.
Skilled negotiators go in with a range.
They know their best target and their worst acceptable price.
Now, wouldn't you think the reverse is true?
Isn't it better to go in focusing on your dreams, not your fears?
Absolutely.
And skilled negotiators do focus on their best targets, but they also know something mediocre
negotiators don't.
They know when to say no.
Faced with resistance and pushback, skilled negotiators may concede, if necessary, to
a point.
But because they know their walkaway price clearly, they don't get sucked in and settle
for any price.
In contrast, mediocre negotiators never know when to quit and can rationalize almost any
outcome as a compromise move.
One other thing on walking away.
People sometimes advise you that the key to negotiation is to feign indifference, to
act like you're happy to walk away, even if you're desperate.
Is that true?
It's certainly not a good idea to advertise desperation, and true, some people do profit
in the short run by bluffing indifference, but it can easily backfire.
What if the other person calls your bluff, lets you walk out of the store?
I've literally been in that situation, found myself on the street, realized I had no good
alternative, and sheepishly had to go back to the store and pay their price.
You don't want to be in that situation.
Bluffing indifference, like bluffing generally, is a high risk, high return, short run gambit.
The high return tempts us, but the high risk is real and easy to overlook.
Once they know you're kidding, they're going to be more aggressive and less trusting.
In the long run, a bluffing habit may have a corrosive effect on your credibility as
a negotiator, and most importantly, it's not necessary.
Skill negotiators do very well indeed without these kinds of risks.
Usually, inexperienced negotiators rely on bluffing as a substitute for homework.
Skill negotiators work to be smart and honest.
Now that we have the basics of distributive bargaining in place, let's see to what extent
things change in some special situations.
An auction is a place where special negotiation principles apply.
That's because by design, an auction's purpose is to help the one who's conducting
it, typically the seller, get the maximum amount for the thing he's selling.
He does this by in effect gathering a room full of different people and asking them to
compete with each other.
Each person is in effect a prospective negotiation counterparty, and each person is therefore
in effect the seller's potential batna, his best alternative to a negotiated agreement.
While it's possible to get a bargain at an auction, it's also quite easy to pay top
dollar.
Rarely do you get the chance to cushion your first offer at an auction.
The seller sets the opening.
Because you're in competition, you may feel pressure to bid up all the way up to your
walkaway price, and that's the seller's goal to in effect find out whose walkaway
price is highest.
In fact, it can get worse for you if you're a bidder.
In many auctions, you'll find yourself getting caught up in the competitive psychology of
the event, a phenomenon that can produce something known as the winner's curse, where you end
up paying far more than you were prepared to, or than is it all wise.
Some merger and acquisition experts believe that one of the largest auctions in history,
the RJR Nabisco acquisition in 1987, produced a winner's curse.
There, winning bidders, Colbert, Cravis and Roberts, wound up paying an astonishing $25
billion that crippled the company for years to come.
One basic principle of an auction is to be very clear with yourself going in about what
your worst acceptable offer is and, if necessary, to do things that will prevent you from going
beyond that, almost like Ulysses tied to the mast as he passes by the sirens.
For example, you might bring only a certain amount of cash to the auction, or you might
set a limit on an eBay auction and stick to it.
One auction strategy that may help you avoid paying top dollar calls for making a bold
first bid far above the opening price, but significantly below your walk away, in hopes
of scaring away the other bidders, something known as a preemptive bid.
Sometimes that strategy works, sometimes it doesn't.
The main point about auctions is that they are designed to give the seller the advantage
so approach them with caution.
But now let me tell you about a very strange auction that I routinely do with my own students
that produces truly bizarre results.
I take out a $20 bill and make this announcement.
I'm about to auction off this $20 bill.
If you were the highest bidder, you'll pay me your last bid and you'll get the $20.
If you are outbid, you'll pay me your last bid and get nothing.
So for example, if Bob's highest bid is $7 and Sheila's highest bid is $6, Bob will
pay me $7 and get the $20, Sheila will pay me $6 and get nothing.
I'll accept bids in $1 increments beginning at $1.
No talking please during the auction.
Who will give me $1 for this $20 bill?
Inevitably I get a flurry of bids from students and very quickly the price reaches $18.
Do I hear $19?
Thank you.
Thank you ma'am.
Do I hear $20?
Thank you sir.
Do I hear $21?
Inevitably there's a pause and then the student who last bid $19 says $21.
Then the student who last bid $20 bids $22 and so on and so on until the bidding rises
to $25, $27, maybe even $30 sold.
When we tally up the final bids of all the students we find that collectively they've
paid $80 or more, sometimes well over $100.
What's going on here?
How could top business students, law students and executives pay so much more than the thing
is obviously worth $20?
Is it just the winner's curse or is something else going on here?
The $20 auction dramatizes something called escalation psychology.
Escalation psychology is based on the thought I've put in so much already that I can't
quit now.
It's a dangerous thought.
It's the reason why we wait on hold for one minute and then decide, jeez if I hang up
now I can't afford to so I'll wait another minute.
That only strengthens the desire to not hang up and after a while you realize I've spent
two minutes and maybe if I just wait a little longer maybe they'll pick up and there are
cases of people literally waiting hours on hold on radio call-in shows until they actually
forgot the purpose of their call.
More seriously escalation psychology can drive generals to pour more and more soldiers into
a lost battle and managers to pour more and more money into a losing project and most
importantly for our purposes now you can drive one of the most intensely distributive matters
we ever deal with, litigation.
How do you negotiate a litigation settlement?
These sorts of talks are often highly contentious and distributive.
One of the things that makes these distributive negotiations particularly difficult is the
fact that escalation psychology may be driving the thinking of one or both sides.
In one case, reported in the Wall Street Journal, a landlord and tenant got into a dispute over
a $909 window guard and ended up collectively spending over $100,000 in legal fees before
they finally settled the matter.
One way to avoid escalation psychology is to set limits going in.
I'll only wait 90 seconds on hold.
We will stop the project if we've spent $10,000 on it and we will not spend a dollar more
unless we have good reason to believe that we'll get that dollar back and more.
Similarly, with litigation, secretly setting limits of how much you will spend on lawyers
and how much you'll roughly settle for may keep you out of the kind of crazy waste that
we saw in the $20 auction.
By the way, another way to avoid traps that litigation psychology can drive you into is
to ask your lawyer to explore something called Alternative Dispute Resolution, or ADR.
We'll look at ADR in more detail in a later session, but briefly, ADR is a variety of
ways to resolve disputes without litigation.
That includes mediation, arbitration and other processes.
Often, ADR can help you resolve conflicts more inexpensively, privately, creatively, quickly
and satisfyingly than traditional litigation can.
Still another special aspect of distributed bargaining arises in negotiations through agents.
Studies find that when you introduce an agent, the bargaining range tends to be much narrower,
and so the room to negotiate competitively tends to be more limited.
That's because someone has to pay the agent's fee, and that's money that won't go to the
other party.
For example, picture two job candidates, Abel and Baker.
Each gets a job offer from Acme.
Abel got the job through a headhunter, Baker, by answering an ad.
Imagine Acme wants to pay each candidate about $100,000.
Each wants $120,000, but Abel's headhunter charges 15% of the first year's salary.
That means Acme may wind up paying at least $115,000 for Abel's services, but Abel will
only get $100,000 of it.
In contrast, because Baker doesn't come through a headhunter, Acme could give Baker's
significantly more money, say $114,000, and still bear a lower overall cost.
So the headhunter has limited Abel's ability to get more.
There's also evidence from the real estate industry that agents may favor quick deals
to high price deals.
According to the authors of Freakonomics, real estate agents tend to close house sales
for clients relatively quickly, and tend to close house sales for themselves relatively
slowly.
This difference may be due to the fact that $10,000 more on the price of the house doesn't
give the agent much more commission.
She'll do better when she brokers the sale of lots of houses than when she brokers the
sale of one or two for slightly higher prices.
Let's quickly add that real estate brokers dispute this finding, and there's much more
to be said about agents.
They often add a great deal of value in other ways.
That said, these points suggest that when you're working with an agent, you may find
the distributive negotiations more limited and more urgent than if you work without one,
at least in some markets.
So if you're trying to negotiate salary through a headhunter or house price through
a broker, you may find some of the basic distributive bargaining principles we've explored these
sessions somewhat muted.
Lastly, much of what we've said about distributive bargaining presumes that you'll be able
to do reasonably good research, but what if you can't?
That's an important question because let's face it, we're all going to be in that situation
from time to time.
To shed light on that question, let me tell you the story of Elm Tree House, courtesy of
Harvard Negotiation Professor Howard Rafe.
In his book The Art and Science of Negotiation, Rafe tells the story of a non-profit halfway
house for mentally challenged people near Cambridge, Massachusetts.
It's called Elm Tree House.
One day, the executive director received an unsolicited call from a local Boston developer.
Would they be interested in selling the house?
To handle the matter, the director and the board appointed a negotiation professor and
fellow board member whom I will call Vinay.
Vinay spent 10 hours trying to learn as much as he could about the developer, its likely
plans and the real estate market, among other things.
But on the eve of his meeting with an executive from the developers, Vinay realized that he
really had no idea what targets to set.
If all the developer wanted to do was change the draperies and resell the house, it probably
was worth about $110,000.
If the developer wanted to tear it down and build a fancy new tower, the house might be
worth as much as $600,000.
The strongest chance was that the developer had more moderate plans that might justify
a purchase price of $350,000.
But that was a little more than a guess.
What would you do?
Would you base your best target on the highest number?
Even though it's a long shot?
The lowest?
Even though it's very conservative?
What should your first offer be?
And would you make the first offer or wait to hear what the developer said?
The last question is the easiest to answer.
As we've seen and Vinay realized, if you have to negotiate with little information,
it's best to go second and avoid the risk of lowballing yourself.
So Vinay resolved to resist making the first offer as long as he could.
What should his best target be?
Well, Vinay's instructions were clear enough, the board wanted him to get an ambitious result.
But the 5% rule of thumb for setting a best target won't help us much here because the
high end of the range is so uncertain and speculative.
So Vinay decided that there was no good, clear best target.
He concluded that a somewhat realistic yet ambitious goal would be 325,000.
No reasonable minds could very well differ on this point, but at least it wasn't crazy
high or a crazy low goal.
What should his walkaway be?
Well, since the house would probably sell in the open market for 110,000, that's the
number he used here.
What should Vinay's first offer be?
Vinay decided he would set it reactively, like a kid on the end of a seesaw.
If the developer offered 100,000, Vinay would ask for 650, in the hopes of settling at the
midpoint, 325.
By the same logic, if the developer offered 200, Vinay would ask for 550, and so on.
When Vinay and the developer finally met for drinks in the lobby of a downtown Boston
hotel, they spent half an hour on personal matters and pleasantries until finally the
developer asked him how much he wanted for Elmtree House.
As he planned, Vinay politely demurred and asked the developer to start.
This after you, Alphonse, know after you guessed on routine went on for what felt like many
minutes until finally the developer relented and said, okay, we're thinking of a price
of about $100,000.
So Vinay countered, saying, well, we were thinking of a price between $600,000 and $700,000.
At which point, the developer politely but quite quickly ended the conversation, thanked
Vinay, and left.
And that's the end of the story.
Not every negotiation ends with an agreement.
Vinay did everything right.
He followed proper negotiation strategy as well as he could, given the uncertainties.
He was polite.
He didn't low ball himself, and it all blew up anyway.
That will happen to all of us.
It's part of what makes negotiation exciting and not leisure.
There's just one other thing to add.
A couple of weeks later, the developer called back and reopened the talks, offering $230,000.
Vinay was caught off guard but recovered, countered with $475,500, and eventually they
settled for a price of about $350,000.
And that's another thing about negotiation.
It can seem over, but then it's not over.
There's a drama to this work.
You can't be sure if Vinay did well, given the lack of information here.
It's possible Vinay sold a valuable property for a song, but if Vinay had to negotiate,
he probably did fairly well, given these handicaps.
So here's a challenge.
The next time you find yourself negotiating price, ask yourself how well you know the
market and the facts.
If you feel unsure but you must negotiate, get ready to politely defer to the other negotiator
several times if needed, and get ready to get out of the room and do more homework when
you can.
Only negotiate as Vinay did if you absolutely have to, and you have every reason to believe
there's not much more to learn.
So now we've explored the creative and distributive sides of negotiation, and we've just seen
a skilled negotiator doing the best he could while he was in effect flying blind.
But 95% of the time, skilled negotiators don't make decisions that way, and neither should
you.
So how do you know when you've actually negotiated a good deal, and for that matter,
how do you really know when it's wise to accept an offer?
Now we can answer that pivotal question, and we will in our next session.
