Life in academia is wonderful, but it has a problem.
It can put us academic types into silos.
We each can find ourselves focusing on one idea, one question, one topic so much that
we see the other fields peripherally, if at all.
That's a shame, because we have lots to learn and lots to share with each other on
subjects that concern us all, like how human beings can live together in peace, how to
cope with scarcity, pollution, and poverty, and other enormous problems we face together.
Connections have a related challenge.
True, they can cross academic fields and take courses on lots of subjects, but fascinating
as they are, they can often seem only loosely connected, if at all.
That's a shame too, because it's in the connections that so much of the real excitement,
power, and hope emerges.
But what if there was a single question, the answers to which could bring us together and
shed uniquely important light on how peace emerges, civilizations rise, economies operate,
governments function, and businesses thrive?
What if that same question was more central to understanding our shared lives together,
that the core questions most specific academic fields ask, and so deserve to be placed nearer
to the center of intellectual and personal life?
In this, the second to last session of our course, I want to take a big risk.
I want to tie together much of what we've explored about negotiation, and I want to
go way beyond it.
I want to see if a single idea can illuminate not only our subject, but also many of the
other subjects in the teaching company's great courses catalog.
I'll speak with well-deserved humility, knowing that so many others have forgotten
more than I'll ever know about their specific fields of expertise, but I'll take that
risk all the same.
A look at an idea we began to consider practically in an earlier session and that we've been
implicitly grappling with throughout.
In my folly, I'm even going to respectfully challenge the subject I first trained in, economics.
But much more importantly, I'm going to suggest that this most important question can make
a profound difference in our thinking about our shared lives together.
I want to make the case that the most important question is the one we began to consider seriously
in session 7.
How do I know it's safe to deal with you and that your assurances are reliable?
I want to explore how the trust problem stands at the very heart of negotiation, the social
sciences, the humanities, the natural sciences, and far more.
More on that in a moment, but let's add something else first.
In the last part of this session, I'll begin to conclude our course by trying to sum up
most of it in just five words.
My hope is to help you keep most of our work together in a ready-to-use form.
I'll also offer you five specific ways you can maintain and develop your negotiation
skills in months and years ahead, and then I'll prepare us for our last session.
But now, let's turn to the first challenge.
Harvard archaeologist Stephen LeBlanc makes a troubling point in his book, Constant Battles,
The Myth of the Peaceful Noble Savage.
Our ancestors' lives, he finds, were tribal, violent, nasty, brutish, and short.
After decades of experience visiting archaeological digs all around the world, LeBlanc reluctantly
admitted that every sight he'd ever seen showed unmistakable evidence of massacre.
He notes that much of the architecture of early human life is surprisingly inaccessible,
situated on tops of ledges, rocks, and other extreme places.
Why?
Because they feared other men more than they feared hunger and thirst itself.
Imagine how hard it was to negotiate in that world.
So it's remarkable that today we live in a very different world.
You can hear my voice because hundreds of strangers all over the world collaborated
on the device you're using.
We may be part of organizations with hundreds or thousands of employees, we're each part
of a nation with millions of citizens.
We can travel freely around the globe and we enjoy a violent death rate far lower than
ever in human history.
And we don't find it odd that strangers who are worlds apart can negotiate.
And yet, the trust problem is with us every day, as the headlines testify.
One peace treaties, failed environmental treaties, defaults, litigation, financial crises, crime,
war, bankruptcy, corruption.
Many of our most profound failures and successes are stories of our response to the trust problem.
Indeed, our inability or ability to solve the trust problem is the story of our shared
lives together, the mystery that most calls for understanding and mastery.
Because of the trust problem's importance, lots of academic disciplines grapple with
it.
They may talk about it using different terms of art, but they study the same problem.
For example, in foreign and military affairs, experts talk about security risk.
In banking and finance, they talk about credit risk.
In business, performance risk.
In social sciences, social dilemmas.
In literature, betrayal.
In law, performance issues and contract breach.
Each of these terms is deeply connected to the trust problem and matters a great deal
to each field, and that has implications.
We'll see more on that shortly.
But first, I need to make sure I'm being clear about a critical point.
Notice I am talking here about the trust problem and not trust as such.
That's crucial because so, so often, you'll hear people tell you trust is essential.
Whole books talk about it, dozens of sayings attest to it, but in talking about trust,
we often get very confused.
As we saw in a previous session, it simply is not true that without trust we cannot collaborate.
Trust is one possible response to the trust problem, but there are many other constructive
ones too, and that's good news.
When trust alone is low or uncertain, there may still be wise ways to collaborate, which
is why our mastery of the trust problem is so important, and why it's important to
go beyond mere discussions of trust.
Think about it.
Important as trust is, it can't be the whole story.
Being citizens of a corrupt society to be more trusting would do little to help them
win justice.
Such trust would be misplaced.
Conversely, telling a poor, honest woman in the developing world who has no access to
credit that she should be more trustworthy would do nothing to help her.
Often the problem isn't that people lack integrity, but that other people can't recognize
it.
Trust problems Often the trust problems we face are hard
and require us to be savvy as a serpent, harmless as a dove.
The key lies in seeing the challenge plainly, not necessarily as a call to trust, though
trusting others can be wise, nor to be trustworthy, though being trustworthy is always wise, but
to solve the trust problem.
We've been building that ability all along.
We've had to, because the very heart of negotiation is a tension between each negotiator's
desire to collaborate and the desire to compete.
That's why in much of our work as negotiators we're trying to allay the other negotiator's
fears that we're out to get them, and cope with our own fear that the other negotiator
is out to get us.
In short, the trust problem is always there.
Since we've been grappling with it all along, we're now in a position to see the
problem more fully, and hopefully, and to see its importance in many different fields.
To do that, let's start with business.
I'll make the case that solving the trust problem is central to every business's existence
and success.
That's because a business's central task is to create and fulfill valuable promises,
and because a business itself is little more than a collection of promises and an ongoing
effort to manage them, and where there are promises, there are trust problems.
To see the point, consider a business's balance sheet.
That snapshot description of all the business consists of at any given moment.
Every asset, cash, accounts receivable, inventory, and so on, is little more than a promise,
and if one of those promises proves false, the business suffers, or dies.
For example, consider cash itself.
It's not lying around the office usually, it's on deposit in a bank, but of course
the bank lends most of that cash out, so what is cash, really?
It's mainly the amount the bank promises to repay the business.
Accounts receivable is the amount that customers and others promise to pay.
Inventory is the value of goods that the warehouse promises to deliver, and the producers
promise are in the box, the can, and the sack, and so forth.
Not every asset is a promise, for example some assets are completely homemade, but most
assets are promises.
And liabilities of course are little more than promises to lenders, suppliers, and so on.
Businesses and the trust problem are so interwoven in the life of business that economists theorize
that a firm is little more than a, quote, nexus of contracts, a web of promises between
different stakeholders.
How the business makes sure those promises are worth something is the central task of
business life.
But business is just one example of a field that the trust problem profoundly shapes.
Most fields, the social sciences, the humanities, the natural sciences too, and more deeply
grapple with the trust problem and its implications.
Literature is filled with the trust problem.
Most of Shakespeare's tragedies turn on the problem of betrayal, so too do many other
great plays, myths, and novels.
Oedipus Rex, The Iliad, Anna Carinina, Lord of the Flies, 1984, The Great Gatsby, and
Madame Bovary to name just a few.
History is filled with the tension between the desire for peace and the temptation for
war.
Sociology, anthropology, and social psychology grapple with how we come to live and work
together in groups and the many dangers of doing so, of how insiders and outsiders deal
with each other or fail to, how they find ways to rely on each other or they don't.
Social science grapples with how we can balance the desire for freedom, trusting others, distrusting
government, with the desire for order, distrusting others, trusting government, and of course
the need for transparency.
And science itself continually grapples with the question, how do I know I can rely on
your assurances about the world?
It uses an array of answers that together make up the scientific method.
In short, though we may encounter it from many different angles, the trust problem is
central to understanding our shared lives together.
The idea that the trust problem is central is a challenge to my first field of study,
economics.
That's because economics is held center stage among the social sciences, claiming
much of the attention we devote to questions about how we live together.
And economics generally takes a very different approach to the challenge of human cooperation.
Now economists have studied the trust problem in many profound ways, including extensive
work on transactions, cost economics, and social capital.
But the main way economics thinks about how people cooperate is with the idea of rationality,
that people are and should be self-seeking material wealth maximizers.
And here I want to suggest that that emphasis is somewhat misplaced, that we miss as much
as we see by focusing on it rather than on the many different responses to the trust problem.
I know I sound like I'm out on a limb here, but I may not be the first to say this.
The idea may have been first proposed by economics' putative founder, Adam Smith.
Get this famous today for his book, The Wealth of Nations.
Much of economics is founded on Smith's ideas there, and we're very familiar with
them.
Smith suggests there that people can be self-seeking, that the free market can channel their self-seeking
toward wealth-creating cooperation, and it does this by giving them incentives to serve
others well and penalties for failing to.
Yet economics' focus on these ideas may be missing the larger problem that Smith devoted
his life to.
It's quite possible Smith was first and foremost concerned with this question.
How is it that people so often tend to cooperate with each other?
The Wealth of Nations offers a partial answer, but his earlier work, The Theory of Moral
Sentiments, offers another.
There, Smith argues that people have a native universal tendency to commiserate with each
other, to identify with the pains of others, and to reach out to help them when possible.
Huh?
Adam Smith said that?
For many years, scholars have called the apparent conflict between these two books the Adam
Smith problem, and they've tried lots of different ways to solve it.
But it's plausible to argue that there is no Adam Smith problem if we read the two works
with the trust problem in mind.
We can see the two books as complementary explanations of how we collaborate in the face
of that problem.
As one scholar recently argued, the two books present different mechanisms through which
self-interest is restrained.
Much of the time Smith argues in The Theory of Moral Sentiments, basic human empathy accounts
for our collaboration.
And since it's also true that people can be self-seeking, an institutional answer
marked incentives, is also important, giving people further reasons to cooperate.
So let's test Smith's two approaches out in the real world.
When you put a plate of bagels in a conference room and ask strangers to pay for them on
the honor system, will they act in trustworthy ways?
What would you predict?
The Theory of Moral Sentiments would suggest that often they will, because of their capacity
to empathize with the seller.
The wealth of nations would warn that a good amount of the time they will not, because
of their capacity to act in self-interested ways.
What do we actually observe?
As Steve Levitt and Stephen Dubner reported in their book Freakonomics, a man named Paul
Feldman ran that natural experiment for several years in Washington D.C. office buildings.
There he ran a simple honor-based bagel business.
He found that roughly 90% of the time people did pay for their bagels, 10% of the time they
did not.
At first glance the results would seem to be a validation of human decency and a repudiation
of self-interested behavior.
Except for one thing, Feldman's 10% shrinkage rate, that is his inventory loss rate, is
alarmingly high.
Major retailers like Macy's and J.C. Penny report shrinkage rates of only about 1.7% and
would be out of business if their shrinkage rates rivaled Paul Feldman's.
My guess is he copes by adding a premium to the bagel price.
So the fairly high levels of trustworthy behavior support a view of human nature Smith emphasized
in theory of moral sentiments.
The fairly high level of untrustworthy behavior supports a view of human nature he emphasized
in The Wealth of Nations.
As Smith suggests, often soft reliance on human compassion overcomes the trust problem.
And as he also suggests, often it doesn't and we need other arrangements to deal with
it.
We've seen before that there is a vast array of answers to the trust problem, a huge menu
of trust mechanisms and reasons people trust.
Smith explores some of the many important ones.
In contrast, economics emphasizes one kind of solution, those that rely on self-interest.
But that focus can conceal as much as it reveals.
My colleague and former professor Robert Frank has found evidence that the more economics
training you have, the more selfishly you tend to behave in trust games.
And as the Wall Street Journal reports, corporate recruiters most prize candidates who can collaborate
well.
They try to avoid self-seekers, that's a problem for economics.
Leading economists themselves have begun to warn about economics inability to accurately
capture the human condition on its own, including Nobel laureates such as Ronald Coase and Joseph
Stiglitz, which means Adam Smith may have been centuries ahead of modern economics.
So what if instead of the normal economics project, we put the trust problem closer to
the center of things, cultivating our understanding not merely of self-seeking, but of the many
traps and possibilities for collaboration in the face of it, an approach that integrates
the different insights of the many fields that grapple with the trust problem.
Focusing on the trust problem, rather than rational wealth maximization, may give us
a more practical, ethical, and profound understanding of the human project, and incidentally of
wealth itself.
So for example, how do you solve a widespread human problem, the challenge of sharing something
valuable like fish in a lake, grazing land for sheep, or clean air?
Each is known in economics as a common pool resource problem.
The issue, people take too much, why?
Because they fear that if they don't use it, they'll lose it to others.
No one trusts that others will conserve the precious thing.
One solution is to create private property rights, but is that the only way?
Eleanor Ostrom, a highly interdisciplinary political scientist, studied many different
peoples around the world to see how they actually solved the problem.
Surprisingly, they were able to manage well their common pool resource problems without
using private property.
Their solutions differed, but they generally shared the precious thing among themselves,
now first they relied on a mix of simple, easy to understand, customized rules that
became traditions and norms.
Also they relied on a customized set of trust mechanisms that kept outsiders out, and that
let the group fairly manage the thing together.
Her work crossed a variety of fields, anthropology, economics, political science, natural resource
management, and sociology.
And for it, she won a Nobel Prize, ironically, in economics.
But her work goes beyond simple economic prescriptions and illustrates the value of humble inquiry
into the trust problem that transcends a single discipline.
For all these reasons, imagine for a moment what would happen if we brought the best of
these different insights together into ongoing conversation and collaboration.
One way to do that, and to recognize the trust problem's importance, would be to create
a new field of study devoted to it.
One possible name for such a field might be Epistemomics, the study of the trust problem
and its solutions.
That name comes in part from Aristotle's work on rhetoric.
That book grapples with the question of how a speaker can cultivate pistice, a word meaning
both trust and that which creates trust.
Epistemomics also comes from the Greek word epistasis, meaning knowledge, which is where
we get the word epistemology from.
That word has strong connections with the trust problem, which ultimately is a knowledge
problem.
How do I know it's safe to be with you and that I can rely on your assurances?
Fortunately, we can look in many places for wisdom and insight into the trust problem,
in part because it's so universally and intrinsically central to the human experience.
In session seven, we saw examples ranging from the Ethiopian commodity exchange to credit
cards, from dance steps to lengthy legal contracts.
But not every solution of the trust problem needs to be sophisticated.
Austram's work demonstrates that simple arrangements among villagers and tribal people
can be quite effective too.
The need is great.
How do warring nations overcome trust problems and negotiate reliable ceasefire agreements?
How do international joint venture partners collaborate reliably?
How do internet startups convince stakeholders and customers to believe in them?
How do we collaborate to solve problems of pollution, global warming, and global hunger?
How do cities and nations overcome crime and corruption?
All of these problems and many more are trust problems.
Think of a serious human problem or an important human achievement and you're likely looking
at the trust problem.
We lose none of other subjects value and gain much if we integrate their wisdom into a shared
search for understanding of this most central of questions.
And in our work together in the subject of negotiation, we've made a bold leap toward
doing just that.
The time has come to start to put it all together to give you a handy way to carry the whole
course in a nutshell that you can draw on any time you need it and to develop specific
ways to practice and grow your skills in the coming months.
We can sum up most of the ideas we've explored in the course in five words.
You already know the first three, I foresaw it.
In our first session, we saw the power of interest-based bargaining to help you discover
hidden mutually satisfying agreements.
The key is to think about interests and options, two of the first three letters of the mnemonic.
We've also seen from the beginning that knowledge is power and that factual and financial
research, the second letter, stands for that point.
Throughout we've seen the deeply understanding the other negotiator matters and several of
the letters stand for that idea, I, which includes the other's interest, E, which includes empathy,
and R, which includes reactions and responses.
We've seen that the goal of negotiation is wise yes and wise no, and that specific measures
of success can help us tell the difference.
Most of these measures are present in the I foresaw it.
Does it satisfy interests now and later?
Does it do it better than your best alternative to a negotiated agreement and compare well
to your best target, T, and is it fair compared to independent criteria?
The only missing test is the more intuitive question about the negotiations effect on
relationships, which we'll discuss in the final lecture.
We've also explored how to handle distributed bargaining, which starts with using factual
research and BATNA to set targets, and then developing well-cushioned offers.
We found ways to harmonize the creative and competitive side of negotiation by developing
a topics, targets, and trade-offs grid, and using it to craft wise packages.
We've seen the power of hidden aspects like setting and scheduling, and other people
away from the table who are influential.
We've seen the power of coping with Godzilla's in several ways, in part by scheduling moves
away from the table to develop your options and alternatives to agreement.
And we've seen the ethical traps you face in negotiation and ways to cope with sharp
bargaining tactics, in part by treating the I foresaw it as a first line of defense.
In addition, we've seen that we can cope with the trust problem better by developing
soft and firm sources of trust, in part by developing rapport and doing other things
to build connection, and in part by developing trust mechanisms as options and alternatives
to agreement.
But powerful and far-reaching as the I foresaw it is, let's face it, there's something
not entirely satisfying about such a cognitive approach to negotiation, since after all,
negotiation is such an emotional and social process.
So here are two other words that can help us capture much of what the words I foresaw
at lack, humble inquiry.
In his book by that title, former MIT business professor Edgar Schein defines humble inquiry
as drawing someone out, asking questions, and building a relationship based on curiosity
and interest in the other person.
And we've seen that what a skilled negotiator does is much more about doing that than what
we typically imagine savvy negotiation looks like.
Like the fast-talking, risk-taking, dominating figure we see on TV and in the movies, a truly
excellent negotiator much more often relies on an approach that's slow, respectful, engaged,
inquiring, and attentive.
The skilled negotiator neither avoids conflict and discussion, nor does she try to totally
control it.
Instead, she humbly inquires, and brings a rather remarkable quality that says winsome
and credible as it is rare, humbleness.
Google Books reports that since 1800, usage of the word humble in published books has
fallen over 80 percent.
We don't think about humbleness much anymore, but you and I have seen that skilled negotiators
rely on the power of it a lot.
They use dumb and active listening.
They ask dumb questions.
They seek to persuade by bringing the other person to his senses, not his needs.
They're open to learning, and invite the other negotiator to do the same, sharing
credible information.
They strongly cultivate the reputation for being smart and honest, avoiding a reputation
for greediness.
They're thoughtful about their goals.
Yes, they certainly know how to be ambitious, and are quite good at producing ambitious
results when necessary, but they also know how to do something else.
To work out an even compromise when it makes sense to do so.
To choose times to satisfy, and so avoid the hedonic treadmill.
To choose in many cases to be generous.
They look intentionally for ways to reframe the conversation so that it's face-saving
and respectful, shifting it from you against me confrontations to you and me against the
problem approach.
And they can do all these things better because they're ready.
And counter-intuitively, their preparation helps them be more humble because they no
longer feel they need to mask their unpreparedness with bluster.
Their effectiveness demonstrates that humbleness is not about groveling or having low self-esteem.
It's an intentional and surprisingly powerful frame of mind.
Let me tell you a story from one of my students that can illustrate the power of these ideas.
The student wrote that it was the end of a long week, and he wanted to take his new bride
out for dinner and a movie.
But when he called her that afternoon to make plans, he found that she wasn't interested.
I don't want to do that, she said.
I want to stay home.
And he figured, great.
Two months married and already, she's lost her love for me.
And he began to get really mad.
But then he remembered our course and the importance of focusing on interests, not positions,
asking simple questions, and listening.
So he said, why do you want to stay home tonight?
How do you see tonight being a good night for you?
He said he couldn't believe what she said.
She said, I want to stay home because I've missed you all week and want to be romantic.
She said they could go out and get some takeout food, bring it home, and just be together.
If I hadn't asked those simple questions and listened to her interests, we'd still
be arguing.
But instead, we held hands and walked down the street.
We got a bottle of wine, some takeout food, and rented a movie.
We came home and we never watched the movie.
You can do all that and more for yourself and others with your negotiating skills, and
I hope you have a lifetime of happiness doing just that.
To help you do that, let's ask this question, how can you practice and develop your negotiating
skills in the future?
Here are five ideas.
Practice by doing one of several negotiation challenges.
But don't stop there.
To really hone your skills, practice too by doing a planned negotiation once a week for
the next eight weeks.
It's a great way to turn ideas into habits.
Teach someone else to negotiate using the eye for sought mnemonic.
I find my student students, or grand students as I call them, do very well with that kind
of coaching, and one of the best ways to learn something is to teach it.
So invite an interested friend to sit down with you and walk her through the eye for
sought as you get her ready for an important upcoming negotiation that she is facing.
Third, watch for course concepts in the news and in other courses.
Fourth, skim a good book about negotiation from time to time.
Fifth, watch excellent negotiators and see how they do their thing.
Ask them about it.
Usually, they'll love to share with you what they know.
And here's one more.
Review completed negotiations with a friend or colleague.
To do that, talk over and assess the terms you agreed to, or walked away from, using
our measures of success.
Then chat about what helped, what didn't, what surprised you, and what course concepts
you might want to use more fully next time.
In our last session, we'll ask two questions.
One very practical, one very searching and odd.
The practical question is this.
How do you confront someone without destroying the relationship?
There are times when you have to ask someone to change unilaterally, and the better you
know how to do that, the better you'll know when to not negotiate.
That will leave us one last question, and it may put everything else we've worked
on in the course, and in this session, into perspective, is there any connection between
negotiation and love?
Conventional wisdom says they're irrelevant at best in conflict at worst, but we'll see
that that's not true, that actually the two are deeply connected, and we'll conclude
the course by seeing how you can use your training to create more love and justice.
