Daniel Pink, the author of the book A Whole New Mind, has a sobering warning.
In a world where more and more average work can be done by computers, robots, and talented
people overseas, faster, cheaper, and just as well, serving vanilla doesn't do it anymore.
It's all about serving chocolate sauce, whipped cream, and a cherry on top.
So what does it take to find and keep a job in such a demanding world?
Surprisingly, one powerful answer is this, negotiate it.
In this session, we'll look at this question.
How can you use your negotiating skills to be more creative, informed, and effective
as a job seeker and employee?
While many of the ideas we've explored can help you a lot in the work world, there are
special negotiation ideas that are particularly well-tailored for it.
We'll discover ways to apply and add to your skills to create opportunities in the workplace
and to make you more successful there.
Let's start by looking at some ways to find work.
Traditional wisdom touts traditional methods, answering ads, sending out lots of resumes,
interviewing on campus, and searching the Internet.
But studies find that these methods are actually pretty ineffective, especially in tough economic
times.
But if you take an interest-based negotiator's approach to that task, you may discover and
even create opportunities that others never find.
To introduce you to one of the most powerful ways, let me tell you a story about a student
of mine I'll call Kim.
A couple of years ago, Kim came to my office and said, Professor, you know that five-minute
talk you give about job seeking?
Well, I took it seriously, and I wanted to tell you what happened.
You see, I have a pretty so-so resume.
I went to a small regional school where I majored in Spanish literature and dance, and
I've worked as a secretary at a large brokerage firm while I've been getting my MBA here
at New York University.
My dream has been to get an excellent job with a top investment bank, but my friend
said I didn't have a chance.
But this week, I got an offer from a top investment bank for a highly coveted job.
In fact, they flew candidates from as far away as London for it, but I got it.
And earlier this week, I got two additional offers from another top financial service
company.
I was so proud of Kim.
Now, how did she do it?
She used an approach that maps closely onto the task of negotiation itself.
It's a method that can help you deeply understand your future employer's needs and discover
how your key interests mesh with theirs.
And it's also a method that relies on three of the keys to effective negotiating, a method
that helps you strongly develop and apply your credibility, preparation, and listening
as a skilled negotiator does.
And just as it draws on negotiation insights, it can also enhance your work as a negotiator.
It's a method that I introduced briefly in lecture four in the context of research,
and it's known as information interviewing.
Now, you may have heard that term elsewhere before our course, but I find that most people
aren't clear on what it means exactly.
By information interviewing, I don't mean handing out business cards at a party, though
sometimes that can help.
I don't mean putting your name and resume on a social media site, though that can sometimes
help too.
I don't even mean calling your uncle and asking him to get you a job at his firm, though
that can be a good idea.
Here's what I do mean.
Information interviewing is a way to find meaningful work by having a series of conversations
in which you ask people for information, not a job.
That's right, this is an indirect, counter-intuitive approach where you humbly seek answers from
lots of people to certain powerful questions, rather than asking them for a job.
This isn't subterfuge, you really mean it when you say, I'm not asking for a job,
I just really want to learn from you.
Surprisingly, that process can open hidden doors in ways conventional job seeking never
does.
Here's why.
Studies find that about 75% of all jobs in the United States are filled through connection,
referral, and internal promotion.
Now that may seem like bad news at first, if you feel you don't have a big old boys
network, but it's actually good news, because if you connect it to the strategy we're discussing
now, information interviewing, you can discover hidden paths to excellent work through your
contacts and referrals.
As you talk with them, they'll in effect coach you and direct you toward your ideal
work and eventually connect you with someone there who can seriously consider you.
Even better, information interviewing can help you discover right livelihood.
That is, it can help you discover what work you'd love to do.
And let me tell you, there are few happinesses in life better than right livelihood.
As I often say, I used to practice corporate law, now I enjoy my life.
I just love what I do now, and to the extent that I had control over finding it, information
interviewing was a key.
Even more thick.
As we'll see, information interviewing can be a valuable tool for any negotiator.
Here's the basic task.
You write down a list of 30 to 100 people who might know something useful about your
interest in a specific type of work.
You do some basic reading about the work so you're conversant with it.
Then you contact the person on your list who you feel most comfortable speaking with, and
politely ask her if you can chat for around 15 minutes at her convenience about your interest
in that work.
Face to face is best, phone is fine, email, probably not.
When you meet, you start by asking broad questions like this, tell me about the field, tell me
about your work in it, what do you like and dislike about it?
Here's one of my favorites.
I understand it usually takes this credential or qualification to do that work.
Are there any exceptions to that rule?
Do you know anyone who's doing it well without those requirements?
That can reveal hidden shortcuts.
Other good questions.
Let me tell you a little bit about myself.
Do you think I'd enjoy this work, and would I be good at it?
Is there a specific niche you think that I should particularly consider?
What problems are firms in the field dealing with now?
What special challenges do specific firms in the field face?
Whom would you recommend I speak with to learn more about it?
And finally, may I speak with you again if I have further questions?
You jot down your notes, send a thank you note within 24 hours, and follow up on any
suggestion she had, especially speaking with anyone she referred you to.
If you run out of referrals, you just contact the next person on your original list and
so on.
Over a few weeks or months, you'll find your notes give you a rich nuanced map of where
the best work is, key trends and needs there, whom to contact there, what to talk about,
and how you'd be an excellent fit for them.
Information interviewing is deeply connected to negotiation in lots of ways.
It's a way to uncover your interests and those of others.
It's a rich form of factual research as we've seen.
It's a way to learn about hidden options and alternatives to agreement.
It's a rich way to in effect role play with people who are your like your future interviewer.
It's a way to help you deeply understand or empathize with your future job interviewer
and her firm.
It's a way to build credibility from contacts and referrals who can refer you and help you.
In short, it taps most of the eye foresaw it.
But information interviewing can help you do more than apply negotiation principles to
the task of finding a job.
It can also help you get far more yeses at work in the negotiations you do with colleagues
and prospective clients.
A few months ago, a student of mine named Matt called me to tell me that information
interviewing had saved his career, letting him leave his old firm before layoffs began
and find a better job doing the work he loved.
But here was the surprise.
After he got the job, he kept right on information interviewing, not to find a job, but to enable
him to do his job more effectively.
Matt found and helped him build relationships with colleagues, learn from them, win their
trust, honor them for their insight, and discover traps, needs, and challenges he would have
otherwise missed.
He said, you know, professor, I think you may be underselling this method.
Information interviewing is so helpful to my work with colleagues that really it should
be a basic daily career task for everyone.
Matt's right.
A good friend of mine survived five rounds of layoffs and eventually became the head
of his company's world-renowned research lab.
Over the years, I've watched with amazement as he did this, Ben and I said, how did you
survive and prosper when so many other good people were losing their jobs?
In essence, Ben said, he continually information interviewed at work.
Doing that gave him early warnings about upcoming layoffs, revealed changing needs within the
company, pointed him toward people who could help him, meet those new needs, and prepared
him for conversations with key decision makers.
It also built his relationship with colleagues who came to trust and respect him for his
sincere and humble approach.
Throughout our course, we've worked on the assumption that a negotiation is a set process
that happens in a few minutes or days, as if it was an escalator up the mountain.
But we've seen over and over that skilled negotiators go slow to go fast, and that in
many cultures, a slow relationship building process normally precedes formal negotiation.
So it's quite reasonable to take a different approach and treat negotiation as a gentle
walk up switched back roads along the mountainside, a walk that may take longer, but that may
lead to richer, fuller, better outcomes in the long run.
And how effective Ben, Matt and Kim can be if they need to agree with a colleague, they
need an agreement with a colleague at work whom they've previously information interviewed.
That early relationship building, together with some eye for sore preparation and some
other simple tasks, can dramatically improve their odds for success, and yours.
But there's another way to combine the power of information interviewing with other negotiation
principles.
It's a way to create paying work for yourself when none exists, working for someone who
doesn't even know she needs you right now.
First, you think about things you love to do, the subject matter you love, the special
abilities you'd like to use, and the geographic places you'd like to use them, that is,
your interests.
Then, during your information interviewing, you pay particular attention to the specific
needs of employers in the field you're interested in, their interests.
Then, as you learn things, you can develop some not so obvious jobs or projects that
you could do that could really help someone you'd like to work for, in effect, some creative
options.
For example, imagine you're fluent in Spanish and English, and you're looking for a job
in social media marketing.
Imagine you hear that several smaller regional sports teams just don't understand social
media.
Also, you hear they don't appreciate Latin American fans growing interest in regional
teams.
Imagine you learn that many old time front office management people don't speak Spanish,
don't even use the web much, and don't seem to be looking for help.
That suggests a not so obvious job or project, international social media sports marketing
designer.
Now you do some further factual research and brainstorm more options to develop the idea.
As part of your research, you find out if anyone does work like this somewhere in the
industry.
If so, his work may strengthen your case that, one, this unfamiliar work is valuable, and
two, other firms pay to have someone do it.
If no one is doing this work, you may have discovered a hidden opportunity that could
give a wise employer an advantage over other firms.
You can test your best idea with further information interviewing to find out what people think
of it and use their insights to refine the idea.
With this groundwork, you can develop proposals that you can pitch to someone in authority
at the firm you'd like to work for, and with some referrals from your interviewees,
you can reach them.
When you do, you speak to the first person's interests like a skilled negotiator would.
You might say, for example, at your convenience, I'd like to speak with you for about ten
minutes about your team's growing need to connect with Spanish-speaking fans through
social media.
I have an idea that can especially help a smaller franchise in that several of your
peer franchises already use quite profitably.
You can propose a full-time job, a part-time job, a consulting arrangement, or a 60-day
trial, among other things.
Just be careful not to let them treat you as a disposable temp worker.
If you do take on a trial assignment, negotiate when it will end, what full-time position
they'll consider you for, and what it will take for you to have a successful trial.
In this way, you can actually create for yourself a job, or a project, or a service, or even
a business line that your future employer didn't even realize it needed, but really
does need.
Here again, notice how powerful it is to find others' hidden interests that you can satisfy,
develop creative options, and then show how you can meet their interests.
Notice two, that we're really taking an interest-based approach to work itself.
Because let's face it, your interest is not necessarily to find a job, but to find
something you can gladly do that others will pay you to do.
One option that serves that interest is a full-time job, but that's just one of many.
Millions of people have had wonderful work lives and never held a job, novelists, entrepreneurs,
professionals, tennis players, and independent contractors, among others.
Getting that distinction can open up possibilities.
For example, an American woman was working for a bank in Beijing just as China was opening
to the West.
One day, another bank called her and asked her if she'd consider working for them instead.
Now, normally she might think she only had two choices, stay put, or negotiate a new job
with the new bank, but she saw another choice.
She called each bank and said, I'm planning to start my own consulting firm to serve American
companies who want to do business in China.
Would you like to be one of my clients?
Within a few years, Ginny Kamsky's firm, Kamsky Associates, had become one of the leading
firms of its kind in the United States.
She wasn't thinking a job was the only choice.
She was thinking about work she could gladly do that others would gladly pay her to do.
Now let's turn to a way to use your negotiation skills to help you help others to help your
organization find better clients, more clients, more customers, and donors using an approach
I call negotiation marketing.
To see how this one works, let me tell you a story.
I knew a group of executives who were doing volunteer work for a charity that focused
on microfinance for the poor.
The charity would raise money and lend it in small amounts, sometimes just $50, to poor
people in developing countries to help them grow their small businesses.
For example, a borrower might get money to buy a potter's wheel to make more jars.
The charity had a proven track record of creating thousands of jobs and lifting lots of poor
people out of poverty this way.
But despite its efforts, it had little or no success in New York City convincing corporations
located there to donate.
And that was strange because New York is an international and financial capital with dozens
of huge corporations that give millions of dollars to charity each year.
The volunteers thought they could help the charity do much better, so they started by
thinking about their goals.
They decided they wanted to raise at least $10,000 from each of several corporations in
New York and ideally get them to donate annually.
And they decided to focus first on companies that could establish their credibility in the
corporate sphere and so open other corporate doors.
Next, they did serious factual research in a special library devoted to fundraising.
There, they found a list of thousands of major corporations that gave money to charity
each year.
Their question?
Who on this list would serve as ideal prospects?
Who here would most likely see our charity's work, that is, what it's offering to do,
as attractive?
To answer that question, they considered what donors' interests their charity best addressed.
The reason that companies doing business in developing countries would be more interested.
The reason that companies in the banking and finance industry would be particularly interested
since they understand the power of lending.
Because their charity had a particularly strong track record lending to poor women, they also
looked for companies who were trying to market to women or give to charities that serve them.
Lastly, they looked to see which companies had not already donated to other micro lending
charities doing similar work overseas.
Out of thousands of corporations, they identified 20 that best fit the profile of the perfect
donor, the ones who would be most attracted.
Then, they reached out to the board of directors of their own charity asking the members if
they knew anyone in a senior position at these corporations whom they might contact.
That narrowed the list down to 10.
Finally, the volunteers selected the company they thought had they had the best chance
with and whose donation would be most likely to open doors to other corporate donors.
A top financial firm, I'll call Metropolitan Bank.
Their board member got them a 30 minute interview with a senior executive and the vice president
of philanthropy at that bank.
Two volunteers went to present the case.
Twelve minutes into the presentation, the senior vice president interrupted and said,
we're sold.
How about if we donate $20,000 for the first year?
How did the team do it?
And why do I call their work negotiation marketing?
In most negotiations, you start with a specific counterpart and your task is to craft an offer
that will satisfy you and him.
But with negotiation marketing, you seek the ideal counterpart, the one who will most likely
feel that what you have to offer meets her needs.
And then your chance of getting a yes is much higher.
It's a bit like a lawyer who chooses jurors who are likely to sympathize with his arguments.
Like a target marketer, you're trying to identify and reach those who are most likely
to be attracted to your offer and buy it.
In a sense, this is exactly what skilled salespeople do before a sales call.
They qualify a prospect by determining in advance whether she's likely going to be
interested in what the seller has to sell.
Unlike a door-to-door salesman who knocks on any door, the goal here is to target your
prospects.
But we can use negotiation skills to help you do that with your firm's prospective clients,
customers and donors more effectively and use each success to help you win others.
The key to negotiation marketing is to identify first the interests of your ideal prospect.
You use factual research to identify them more precisely and hone in on the prospects
who most likely fit that bill.
You also improve the odds by anticipating your prospect's likely reactions, culling
out prospects whose reactions are likely going to be bad, developing good responses to reasonable
questions and deciding the schedule of whom to contact first.
Doing that improves your odds of getting a yes and so-building credibility with your
next prospect.
And you further improve your credibility by drawing on contacts who can introduce you
and independent criteria that can help you make your case.
Sound familiar?
These are most of the letters that the eye foresaw it.
With that versatile tool, you're in effect combining sales, marketing and negotiation
skills to create a winning strategy.
Then you go to meet with your first best prospect and, if you've done your preparation well,
the conversation should be a very happy one.
So far we've been talking about ways to use negotiation insights to do better at work,
but now I want to look at how you can use negotiation skills to manage, lead and achieve
there.
To do that, consider a story from Harvard professor, professor David Lax and James Sabineus's
valuable book, The Manager as Negotiator, a story about a man named Bob Fertz.
Bob Fertz was an executive for a British air conditioning manufacturing firm with factories
in several South American countries.
Each factory manufactured its own version of the firm's air conditioners and Bob sensed
this was wasteful and unprofitable.
So appealing to the board's interests and to his detailed research, Bob won a limited
mandate from the board to more efficiently manufacture just a few updated models of the
air conditioners in one Central South American factory.
But he had planned the unlimited authority at those plants and engineers, salespeople
and managers there resented his plan and dragged their heels.
What to do?
To make his vision work, Bob made a series of sequential deals with different players.
First, he convinced one country's plant to expand and cut prices.
This produced higher sales, which pleased its sales force and attracted the interests
of other salespeople in the firm.
Next, he convinced a couple of key plants to accept central production if they could
add special finishing features.
That idea appealed to the key plants engineers.
It also allowed salespeople to increase sales and offer more attractive products.
Now it wasn't all smooth sailing.
The lower prices started to hurt profits, which upset the board.
But Bob convinced them to hang on.
If they did, he pointed out, savings, profits and greater market share were likely.
If they didn't, the company would have difficulty regrouping.
Then he continued to negotiate with plants until their changes began to produce real
cost savings.
All these moves made the firm much more competitive than other air conditioning manufacturers and
as the plan began to work, the firm enjoyed great success.
Bob star rose with the board until eventually they named him Chief Executive Officer.
As lacks on subvenous note, Bob's success illustrates that a manager often needs to
negotiate continually.
Here Bob applied several principles we've seen before, making moves away from the table
through a sequence of deals that satisfied different players' interests and that gave
him assets he could use in the next negotiation.
But you might hear all this and say, Professor Freeman, you don't understand.
My workplace would never allow me to be that creative.
It's very bureaucratic and administrators there live by the policy manual saying it's
my way or the highway.
What can I do in that situation?
Good question.
Often our workplaces are rule driven and rigid and we seem to be in no position to do creative
bargaining and let's admit freely the creative negotiating often won't work in strict bureaucratic
situations.
While we've started to consider that problem, it's time now to take it on fully.
So here's my suggestion, so let me suggest an approach to dealing with bureaucracy that
I call negotiating by thinking inside the boxes.
One spring after my business school in New York had given me my summer teaching schedule,
I got an invitation to teach for a week in China.
I was thrilled but there was a problem, the dates conflicted with my New York summer teaching
schedule.
Now, in past years, my New York school had let professors take outside summer assignments
and reschedule a class or two.
But this year, the school had a new head administrator who announced a new rule, no rescheduling classes
under any circumstances.
My wife and I wondered what to do.
We worked through the eye for so it, but frankly, nothing good was coming up.
But then as we brainstormed options, my wife said this, wait, your administrator said she
can't reschedule a class for you, but I noticed that you have an exam session you don't use
because you give take home exams.
Okay, I said, so what?
Well my wife said, you could say to your administrator, I don't want to reschedule a class, I just
noticed we have one too many sessions, so I'd like to cancel one.
I was very skeptical, wait, you think rescheduling won't work but canceling will?
Yes, said my wife, because you're not breaking her rule, you're just making a necessary
adjustment.
So I asked my administrator if I could cancel one of the sessions and she said sure, no
problem.
And I got to go to China.
What happened?
Here's what happened.
We learned her rules and the fact so well that we were able to offer an option that fit
within her rules, that she could rightly say was fully consistent with her rules.
We didn't think outside the boxes, we thought inside them.
Some of the key interests anyone in a bureaucracy has to honor, has or to honor the rules, consistently
apply the policy, and so demonstrate fairness and firmness.
That's often an administrator's job, so if you ask her to vary the rules to think
outside the boxes, you may be asking her to do something very risky and dangerous.
There are legendary examples of this outlook.
During the bombing of Pearl Harbor, a soldier ran into the armory and frantically asked the
officer on duty for guns and ammunition.
The officer didn't even look up, he pointed to a sign that read, no guns or ammunition
will be issued without a signed requisition order.
Students often report they get the same problem when they try to negotiate salary at a large
company.
You're in the B3 box, the HR executive will say, so you get X dollars.
But what if the student said this, you're right, normally I would be in the B3 box
if I were based here in Boston.
My future boss in London asked me to mention that I'll be based out of the London office,
and I understand that the B3 box doesn't apply here.
Do I understand correctly that I belong in the L4 box?
To think inside the boxes, you need to think like the administrator.
That means learning the rules, the mission statement, the facts and the policies, and
studying the language and asking questions like this.
What exactly does that term mean?
What words or categories can I legitimately fit in?
Is there an overarching policy that can justify my request, even if the specific rule doesn't?
You can also ask, if the rule doesn't let me do X, Y or Z, is it silent on W, and can
we talk about W?
For example, a company may have fixed compensation rules for new hires covering salary, bonuses
and benefits, but it may be silent about moving expenses, start date and vacation.
As we've seen, a 2009 nationwide survey of HR executives found that most were holding
very firm on salary offers to candidates, much to the candidate's frustration, but
the survey found that most HR executives were prepared to negotiate moving expenses, start
date and vacation, but most candidates weren't thinking to ask about these things.
So what happens if you look at a bureaucratic constraint the way a bureaucrat sees it and
looks for face saving legitimate ways to help you?
Do it by understanding her constraints so well that you can show her that your request
doesn't make her violate a rule that she's sworn to uphold.
See what happens, and it may be remarkable.
And as we conclude, here are some more challenges.
Use information interviewing to enrich your work search, your work and your ability to
negotiate with colleagues.
To find new clients or customers for your firm, try negotiation marketing, using the
eye for sight to help you gear up for the task.
You may want to enroll a colleague in the process.
Do research to understand what a competitor, an administrator or a prospective employer
needs and does, and use the insights to develop attractive offers for your own firm and the
firm you hope to serve.
Throughout our work, we've seen lots of examples of great negotiating that led to
excellent agreements.
But not every agreement turns out as well as you hope.
In fact, lots are mediocre, sick or dangerous, like the Versailles Treaty ending World War
I. Several observers, including John Maynard Keynes and Francis Marichel Foch, presciently
warned that the new treaty could lead to economic crisis and renewed war.
How do you make sure serious flaws aren't lurking in your own agreements, like your
summer beach rental, your new job agreement, your deal with a key supplier, and how can
you save the day if there are traps there?
We'll look at ways to heal the deal in our next session.
