A
few years ago, a student of mine was working as a volunteer fundraiser for a major charity
in New York City. She was working to raise money for its upcoming annual fundraising
bash on the USS Intrepid, so she called a corporate sponsor who had donated $2,000
the previous year and asked them to renew their support. Her contact there had bad news.
They wouldn't be able to contribute anything that year.
Oh, I'm sorry to hear it, she said. Can you help me understand why? Her contact told her
that sales were way down due to the recession. They were having particular trouble reaching
yuppies, their key customers, and so money was just tighter now. I understand, my student
said, and she politely ended the call.
Then she did some creative thinking. The next day, she called her contact back and said this,
I thought you might be interested to learn that the annual fundraising event will have
over a thousand young professionals who I understand are your target market. It'll
be an outstanding way to build awareness and good feeling for your brand, so I wonder
if you'd be interested in sponsoring the event. That way we can feature your corporate
name prominently in all our literature and signage, you can have a booth at the event,
and you can offer participants promotions and literature if you like.
That would be great, her contact said. How would it be if we gave you $10,000?
Most negotiators believe that the answer, no, is the end of the negotiation. But in this
lecture, we want to look at how skill negotiators turn no into wise yes by drawing on the remarkable
power of creative options. Now in our first session, we saw the power of interest-based
bargaining, and why we began to see, and with it we began to see, how options can help you
satisfy interests, and so reveal hidden, mutually satisfying agreements. But that's
just the start of the story. There are specific ways to develop and use good creative options
in negotiations that are well worth mastering. So in this session, we'll look at how creative
options work, how skill negotiators identify them, and harness them, how that ability can
revolutionize entire industries, and how it can make you a lot more confident and flexible.
We'll also look at special types of creative options that are particularly handy for solving
common problems with others, and ways to present creative options that build trust and credibility.
An option is a creative deal term that one side can offer another in the negotiation.
It's any tradable or any arrangement that you might include in the deal that might satisfy
at least one party's interest. For example, imagine you want a higher salary, but your
future employer says, I'm sorry, but I can't give you more money right now.
Well, there are several creative options you might offer, including a performance bonus
at the end of the year, a guaranteed raise in six months, better medical benefits, future
tuition reimbursements, a company car, and so on. One reason why options are powerful is because
differences imply deals. Things I care very little about may be valuable to you, and vice
versa. So finding something that one of us really wants that the other can easily give
is at the heart of the task of creative bargaining. The implications of this idea can often be
remarkable and surprising. In a landmark study of mediocre and excellent negotiators, Neil
Rackham, an expert on the sales profession, found that one of the distinguishing characteristics
of excellent negotiators is that they identify a larger number of options than average negotiators
do. Typically, an excellent negotiator considers over five options per negotiable issue. Did
you hear that? Over five options per negotiable issue. Well, I don't want you to be an excellent
negotiator. I want you to be an outstanding negotiator. And so I'll encourage you to
develop not just five options per issue, but at least six. Now, that suggestion probably
sounds like overkill, busy work, a waste of time. Which is why my students are often so
surprised when they discover that after an important negotiation, they look back and
wish they'd had more options. As one student put it, they're like weapons in your arsenal
or, if you like, tools in your tool kit. Why do they say this? One reason is it helps
to have lots of creative options because they allow you to be powerfully, pleasantly persistent.
When the other negotiator says no to your first suggestion, you won't be daunted if
you have a healthy list of other ideas. You can reply, no problem. What if we did this
instead? Oh, that doesn't work for you? Oh, well, I'd be glad to hear your suggestions.
Any other ideas that you think might work here? Oh, you don't have any? No trouble.
What if we did this? No? OK. How about if we tried that? And so on.
Students of mine have seen the power of having several options when they've gone to book
a hotel room. As Consumer Reports notes, when you call most hotels, they will initially
quote you a high price or what is known in the industry as the rack rate. But there are
many ways to do better. Sometimes simply asking is enough. I wonder if there is a way that
you can help me save some money. Can we do any better on the rate? But regardless, it
can also help to say, I wonder, do you have an American automobile association discount?
Typically, American hotels offer a 10% discount for members of the AAA. Regardless, you might
also ask for weekend rates, lower rates for rooms on a lower floor, or a less desirable
room, like run-of-the-house rooms near the elevator or the ice machine. You might inquire
about discounts for parking, airport transfers, meals, and the like. Sometimes there are tie-ins
with frequent flyer programs. If you're planning to stay several times in the same city or
be willing to stay in the same chain's hotels in other cities, you might be able to sign
up for membership in their frequent visitors club and get special treatment immediately,
and so on and so on and so on. My students have identified over 20 creative options for
hotel bookings. I don't recommend that you bother reservation clerks by asking for endless
ways to save, but usually it's perfectly appropriate to make some suggestions and invite
others as well. Consumer report readers note that using this approach allows them to save
between 10 and 35% off the rack rate price of the room.
One implication of my students' experience, and of the research, is that it's often a
good idea to brainstorm creative options before the negotiation. Here are a few tips for doing
that better. First, watch for good ideas as you research the matter. Often, others have
had good experience and good success with non-obvious options, and you can discover
them without having to reinvent the wheel. For example, as you research new cars you're
interested in buying, you may also find creative ways to get a better deal from the car dealer.
Those ideas can also act as seeds that can help you brainstorm other ideas yourself.
After you finish your research, generate as many options as you can in a fixed amount
of time, and to encourage creativity, make sure that at least a couple of them are crazy
wacky ideas. For example, in our hotel case, how about a free helicopter ride from the
airport to the hotel, or a special room set up like a bat cave? Wacky ideas can lead
to surprising and sometimes valuable ideas like, say, a taxi or a limo to the airport,
or a room close to the most attractive part of the hotel.
It can also help to brainstorm with a friend once you've explained the situation and
the needs that you have and that the other side have. It's probably a good idea to
set a ground rule, though, that no one can criticize during the initial brainstorming
phase, since at this stage of the game you're just exploring the territory of possibilities
and don't want a short circuit the chance for finding something surprisingly useful.
Later, you can cherry pick the best ideas and then choose which one to offer first.
Now, there are other ways to develop compelling options besides brainstorming. Indeed, some
recent studies suggest that you can come up with more compelling ideas if you build into
the meeting a period for criticism and discussion. That's noteworthy. Many experts, including
the authors of the classic negotiating book Getting to Yes, champion rightly the idea
of setting a no-criticism rule. But be careful. Recent studies suggest that debate and criticism,
if well managed, can stimulate further thought. I think what that means is that it's both
wise to brainstorm uncritically and then hash and criticize looking for new ideas as
well as refinements. So far in the course, then, we've identified several preparation
tasks that are good to do before a negotiation, including these. Think about your interests
and the other negotiator's interests. Do some factual and financial research and brainstorm
creative options. Let's pause here and do a reality test
by looking far afield from negotiation and seeing if we can discover encouraging support
for our approach. Out in Silicon Valley, one of the top design firms is called Ideo. Ideo
is responsible for thousands of projects, including Apple's first mouse, one of the
first personal digital assistants, items that went up in the space shuttle, and others that
have helped make Ideo win more awards than any other design firm. Their founder, Stanford
professor David Kelly, is so well regarded that he also founded with Steve Jobs Support
a new school of design at Stanford, a school that draws on insights designers have developed
at Ideo. What are the keys to Ideo's success? How
do they create a virtual factory of desirable, viable products? Their secret lies in something
they call human-centered design. Human-centered design begins by having a small team of Ideo
designers examine the needs of the people they want to serve with their solution. To
find out what people desire, their teams collect stories, read about their future end users,
and go out to observe them actually using existing products. Then the team uses group
brainstorming techniques that they call a deep dive to develop dozens or even hundreds
of possible design features to meet end users needs. In other words, the Ideo human-centered
design approach calls for three initial focuses on interests, factual research, and options.
That shouldn't surprise us. Design and negotiation are similar in several ways. Each is a decision
process where we try to solve a problem that requires us to address different seemingly
conflicting needs simultaneously. So it's not surprising that this top design firm's
method should be similar to the tasks an excellent negotiator uses. Ideo's success should
encourage us that we're on the right track as we look for ways to elegantly and satisfying
the resolve conflicts and create excellent agreements.
The power of creative options in negotiation goes far beyond the simple examples we've
been using so far. You can literally change entire industries with them. I once invited
a class to consider creative options that a plastics manufacturer could develop for talks
with a demanding customer who wants a price cut. Within 20 minutes or so, we've generated
dozens of possible tradeables, including just-in-time delivery, quality control measures, marketing
support, training fees for consulting, and help with hidden costs, such as storage and
currency conversion.
Afterwards, a student raised his hand and said this, you know, I've been in the plastics
industry for a long time and the last several years, we've all struggled with the fact
that plastics have become a commodity business and we're continually under pressure to cut
the price. It's taken us five years to discover what you'd identified in 20 minutes that
we need to move away from merely negotiating on price and develop a slew of ways to create
and realize additional value with our customers.
The student is not alone. In their book, Passion for Excellence, Tom Peters and Nancy Austin
write that there is no such thing as a commodity. For example, chicken used to be a commodity
business. Everyone knew that the price was the same for chicken regardless of who produced
it. But then in the 1970s, one producer realized that customers care more about more than just
price and so he began offering a variety of creative options, choices of white meat only
or dark meat only, drumsticks, chickens with more flavor, freshness dates, even recipe
tags. These and other innovations helped Frank Perdue create the first name brand chicken
and so become one of the world's largest producers of poultry. Many other industries
have similar stories. In each, the key is the same, finding creative options to let
them offer a more attractive deal and so create more value.
I actually encountered an industry changing story first hand when I did some training
work for Stu Lenards. Stu Lenards is the world's largest dairy store and one of the most profitable
supermarkets in the nation. The company began as a small milk store in Southern Connecticut
but its founder, Stu Lenard, began to experiment with more creative approaches to the seemingly
dull business of running a grocery store. Why? Well, one day one of his customers came
to him and said, I'll never shop in this store again. Why not, said Stu, because the
shrimp isn't fresh and she stalked out. That night at dinner, Stu told the story to his
wife and said, can you believe that woman? His wife put down her fork, looked at him
in the eyes and said, are you going to be like all those other store owners I deal with
as a shopper who treat my complaints dismissively?
A few days later, Stu found the disgruntled customer and asked her, what do you mean when
you say the shrimp isn't fresh? I actually put the shrimp out on the line myself. I know
they're fresh caught. The customer said, but you pack them in styrofoam with clear plastic
wrap so I can only see one side and when I get home with them, some of them are brown
on the other side. Why can't I pick and choose individual shrimp from a big bowl?
Stu thought about it and tried an experiment. He put out both plastic wrap shrimp and next
to them a big bowl of fresh shrimp and on ice with tongs and a plastic baggie. Sales
doubled. The new creative option met an additional need some customers had and also stimulated
customer appetite for shrimp. That discovery became a way of doing business for Stu ever
after he listened carefully to customers' ideas and experimented with creative options
to meet their needs. That seemingly simple approach revolutionized Stu's business and
made it legendary. I believe this ability to spot creative options
is a critical skill we'll increasingly need in our professional lives. Experts have observed
that the difference between people who survive a tough work world and those who don't often
comes down to one thing, the ability to find new creative non-obvious ways to serve clients
or cut costs and so create value. It's also the difference between firms that survive
and firms that don't. If you Google the term innovate or perish, you'll find over
a million search hits and most of these are about the pressures businesses face to create
new products and services. Now it's true that you often get hype in business journalism
but studies find that very few companies survive for more than a few decades, which suggests
that the pressure to adapt is quite real, which means developing creative options and
may not be an option, it may be essential. Neil Rackham makes a similar point about the
sales people of tomorrow. Increasingly, his research finds customers are not interested
in well-worn sales pitches about the virtues of the sales person's product. After all,
customers can learn that stuff quickly on the internet. What customers want most Rackham
finds are sales people who can be creative, who can solve customers problems, almost like
consultants do, tailoring services, support and product offerings to the customer's
specific situation. That takes a different approach than trying to persuade the customer
that your product is better than the competition's. It takes attention to her needs and the kind
of creative responsiveness that Stu Leonard and Idao all emphasize. That's further
evidence that your ability to develop good options may be crucial to your success.
One powerful way to generate more creative options is to picture each interest in turn
as a deep well filled with water. Every time you drop your bucket down into that well,
you can draw up new creative options that might satisfy that particular interest. As
you review your lists of interest, you may discover dozens of new creative ideas that
way. So, for example, imagine you are a prospective investor and you want a company to pay a high
interest rate because you're worried about the risk of repayment at a time when the company
can't afford high interest payments. What could you do? You might brainstorm a variety
of other ways to reduce your risk. These might include getting a personal guarantee by a
wealthy third party, collateral, fuller disclosure, membership on the board of directors and an
accountants letter by an independent auditor. A related way to find creative options is to
take one interest you have and another interest the other side has and ask if there are specific
options that might serve both of them. For example, you may have an interest in career
advancement with your future employer and they may have an interest in your developing
your new skills. One creative option that serves both these needs is a training program
and that idea can give rise to more ideas, tuition reimbursement, a rotation at different
departments, attendance at industry conferences and so on. You can even suggest unorthodox
ideas. During talks about a new job, one student of mine faced with a similar situation successfully
suggested that he get to go on golf outings with his firm's partners. The arrangement
cost the firm little or nothing, let the partners informally mentor him and helped him build
a close relationship with his bosses. But can creative options actually work in really
complex negotiations? Yes, I've witnessed it first hand. Once when I was a young corporate
lawyer working on an aircraft financing deal, the talks nearly broke down over this question.
Can the airline self-insure? That is, could the airline cover the losses from a plane
crash out of its own pocket? Or do they have to buy an insurance policy beforehand from
an insurance company? Our client, a large lender, insisted that the airline had to buy
insurance but the airline, a major carrier, insisted on self-insuring. And there the talks
stalemated. Now, it just so happened that the previous month in an unrelated deal, I'd
come across something truly odd sounding, 100% deductible insurance. If you held 100% deductible
insurance policy, the insurance company required you to pay it back completely for any claim
it paid out. So if you held this bizarre insurance on your dad's car and then totaled
his car, the insurance company would pay your dad and then would demand that you pay the
insurance company back in full. At the time, I thought the idea was so bizarre it was laughable.
Who in his right mind would buy 100% deductible insurance? But suddenly, as I listened to
the two sides arguing, it dawned on me that maybe this obscure product might help.
Why do you want to self-insure, I asked the airline? Because we don't feel that we should
have to pay the huge premiums to buy insurance when we're more financially secure than most
insurance companies. Okay. I said, why do you want the, I said to my client, the lender,
why do you want the airline to buy insurance? Because we don't feel it's safe to rely on
a borrower. After all, the airline's financial situation could change. So we want a reliable
third party to make us whole just in case the airline can't.
Okay, I said, what if we use 100% deductible insurance? If there is a crash, the insurer
pays the lender, the insurer pays the lender and then gets repaid by the airline. It's
far less expensive than regular insurance, so it should work for the airline and it protects
the lender like regular insurance, so it should work for the lender.
Who would have thought that something so odd could bridge the gap? But that's the power
of creative options. When you're developing options, you're not just coming up with things
that may, may, may just benefit you like a child writing a Christmas list, it's just
as valuable to come up with things that may benefit the other side. So for example, if
you're buying a house, you may want to develop options such as paying more of, more of the
deposit up front, guaranteeing an early closing date, waiving the right to a second walkthrough,
and buying some of the seller's old furniture in return for other concessions.
The authors of Getting to Yes offer several other useful ideas to develop creative options.
To enrich your repertoire, let's look at a few of them briefly. First, you can also
generate good options by, you can also generate good options by looking through the eyes of
different experts. In a dispute over factory pollution, you might look at the problem through
the eyes of government officials, earth scientists, economists, and anthropologists, among others.
That might produce a host of new ideas, including an agreement to jointly sponsor clear government
regulations, new environmental testing arrangements, a market system for controlling smog, novel
solutions from ancient tribesmen, and so on. It can also help to watch for specific types
of complementary interests that suggest classic creative solutions. And let me give you a
few examples. For example, negotiators often value time differently. As a small seller,
I may want the money immediately. As an established buyer, you may wish, you may be cash rich.
I could give you a discount if you pay me immediately. That's the way a lot of normal
commercial transacting works. On the other hand, if I'm a big seller with lots of cash
and you're a customer who wants to extend payments, I could offer you a store credit
card that lets you buy for me over time. Often, negotiators also have different risk
preferences. Imagine you and I are partners in a growing firm and we're fighting over
compensation. I need a safe guaranteed income to help me fund my upcoming retirement. You
are much more comfortable with risk. One classic solution is to give me a bond with
fixed payments that are safe, secure, and reliable, and to give you stock, and with
it, the chance for realizing a lot more future profits. Another is to give me a larger percentage
of the coming years very likely profits and you a larger percentage of future years more
speculative but potentially higher profits. It may also be useful to brainstorm options
during the negotiation itself with the other side. Now, you have to be careful here. You
don't want to throw out a wacky, costly idea and hear the other negotiators say, great,
you had a deal. You also want to be careful not to inadvertently reveal confidential information.
Well, we could postpone our recent undisclosed decision to close down the division. Whoops.
Still, brainstorming can foster a feeling of joint problem solving. To make the process
safer, you'll need to make it clear at the start that your brainstorming that no one
is necessarily committed to any of these ideas. Besides making that an explicit ground rule,
you may also want to include during the brainstorming some clearly crazy ideas. Wacky suggestions
can signal that these are just possibilities, not proposals, and it can also foster more
creativity.
One of my favorite types of creative options is a class of ideas called contingent agreements,
that can help you resolve conflicts over future predictions, a very common problem. Imagine
you represent an opera singer and I want her to sing in my opera house. You demand $10,000
per performance saying, we know she'll sell out the whole house. But I'm skeptical.
Look, since she's past her prime, we probably won't sell more than half the seats I say,
I can only pay her $5,000. A simple solution that may also be elegant is a contingent agreement.
If we sell half the seats, I'll pay her $5,000. If we sell out the whole theater, I'll pay
you $10,000.
Contingent agreements appear in many different forms. Performance bonuses, commissions, preferred
stock dividends, and the like are just a few examples. Others include options, insurance,
performance guarantees, and more. Just be careful. If the other side has control over
the future event, the deal may give them a perverse incentive to make the future go badly.
In the movie The Natural, the greedy part owner of the New York Nights baseball team
bribes the players to throw the games all season because of a contingent agreement. His partner
can buy him out if the Nights win the pennant.
That dark story brings us to another kind of option that can help you address one of the
most profound challenges you face in negotiation, the trust problem.
As we'll explore more in depth in later sessions, there are several creative ways
you can solve or reduce that problem when you're dealing with someone you're not entirely
sure of. One class of options is something we'll call a trust mechanism, an arrangement
that helps you know that the other side will keep its promises. We saw some earlier in
this session when we imagined that you were an investor looking for ways to make your
investment safer. Here's another example. Imagine that you're negotiating the purchase
of a complicated photocopier from a little-known manufacturer. The salesman tells you, don't
worry, this copier will make $100,000, 100,000 copies without needing servicing. You have
your doubts and you press them about it. He replies, look, I'm absolutely certain it's
reliable, it can easily do 100,000 copies without a breakdown. You can reply, OK, if
you're sure, then you won't mind allowing us to put a small portion of the purchase
price in escrow so that if it breaks down early, we can apply the money there to help
us rent a replacement when you're fixing it. The escrow option is just one of many
trust mechanisms that you could propose. So let me give you a challenge. In our first
session, I gave you the Interests and Options Challenge, inviting you on the eve of your
next negotiation to identify interests and develop some options that met them. Now let's
go further with the challenge. See what happens if you brainstorm at least six options per
issue using research and a teammate to enrich your work and asking yourself about ways to
meet different preferences about time, risk, trust problems, and the like. I dare you to
give it a try this week. We've now seen some of the most important things a negotiator
can do to overcome an impasse through understanding and creativity. But imagine you do all these
things in the negotiation, yet for some reason the other negotiator thinks you're greedy,
dishonest, and obnoxious. You might still be able to reach an agreement, but it will
be a lot harder to get an agreement at all, and studies find you'll probably have a lot
of trouble producing a creative, satisfying deal. Which is one reason why we want to develop
your ability to build credibility and set the right tone from the very start of the
talks. It's to that important diplomatic task that we turn to next.
