A
couple of years before she took my course, a student of mine, whom I'll call Stella,
received a promotion from her company in Westchester.
We think you're excellent, they said.
The new position will give you higher status and recognition.
There'll be some travel involved.
Since we're in the middle of a recession, we won't be able to give you much money,
but we think we can find 5,000 for you.
Will you take the position?
Stella thought about it for a day or two and said, yes.
Four months later, Stella found that she was a road warrior.
Her health and social life were suffering and she was nearly exhausted.
One day, back at the office, several of her peers were chatting with her and they said,
you know, we were surprised when you accepted the offer.
Really?
Why ask Stella?
Well, they said, everyone knows that you're much better than the guy you replaced and
we're not sure you realize this, but both he and we are making $60,000 more than you
are.
Stella's story bugs me.
It's unjust for a firm to take such advantage of one of its employees and I don't want
anyone I care about to be so badly mistreated and that means we need to think about the
task of claiming value in a negotiation, that is dividing the pie, or as we call it, distributed
bargaining.
Now, you may love distributed bargaining, you may feel that this part of the course
is the one you've been waiting for and I hope you get a great deal out of this session.
But I have a confession to make.
Distributed bargaining is very much an acquired skill for me.
Frankly, like many people, I often wonder, can't you live without distributed negotiation?
Understandably, we often feel anxious about it.
But Stella's story illustrates that we often need to know how to handle it better and I've
learned that I and anyone can learn to do it well without needless anxiety and without
creating ill will.
That said, we'll see that there are times when it's best not to do it at all.
To do distributed bargaining better, we need to answer four questions.
First, what should you strive for?
Second, what should your first offer be?
Third, should you make the first offer?
And four, when do you walk away?
In this session, we'll answer the first two questions.
We'll also answer the last two questions in the next session.
So, what should you strive for?
The answer depends in part on whether it's an arm's length transaction, a one-time
transaction that's arm's length, an ongoing relationship, or a close relationship.
Let's start by looking at arm's length transactions.
Several years ago, Inc. magazine published an interview with sports agent Bob Wolfe,
whom I mentioned in lecture four.
Wolfe was one of the founders of modern sports agency, a seasoned lawyer and a highly successful
representative of top figures like Boston Celtics basketball, great Larry Bird, the Boston Red
Sox Hall of Famer, Karya Stremsky, and many famous singers and actors.
Wolfe shocked his interviewer by saying this, I've never done a deal that I couldn't
have gotten more money on.
I always leave money on the table.
Why ask the interviewer?
Because it's possible to push the price so hard, create such antagonism that the last
10% really isn't worth it.
If someone feels you held them up, he's going to take it out on you or someone you know.
Your good reputation is incredibly important.
You've got to let the other guy have a profit margin and let him live.
You're going to be going back to him again or someone he deals with.
You can't play tricks.
The interviewer persisted and said, but isn't getting everything the very definition of
success?
But Wolfe was firm.
Look he said, if it really was a one time transaction I might press for more, but I still wouldn't
hold out for the last dollar.
Now this is one of the best sports agents of his day and you know the reputation of sports
agents.
So what is Bob Wolfe talking about?
Is it just a private preference, a false claim, an eccentricity?
No.
It's wisdom.
What Wolfe is talking about is the idea that a skilled negotiator often intentionally
moderates ambition slightly.
Each of those words is important intentionally moderates ambition slightly.
Let's look at that first word first intentionally.
At least 22 studies have found that it's effective to intentionally explicitly set
your goal before you negotiate.
Picture two negotiators, two different ones, each getting ready for negotiation.
One says to himself, I'm going to try to do as well as I can.
The other negotiator says to herself, based on my research, I'm setting an ambitious
but realistic goal for myself and I'm going to write it down and tell it to someone I'm
accountable to.
Guess which one does better?
Overwhelmingly, the research demonstrates that the second negotiator, the one who identified
a specific goal, does markedly better than the negotiator who just hopes to do well.
There's something about writing down a goal number and even being accountable to another
person that tends to improve your performance in the negotiating room.
So there's the first lesson, to do better in distributive bargaining, write down your
goal and tell someone about it beforehand.
But why moderate ambition?
Because studies find a reputation for greediness tends to backfire.
In one study, some negotiators were assigned extremely greedy goals, others were assigned
more moderate goals.
In some cases, the greedy negotiators got more, but in almost every case they faced
serious blowback afterwards.
In follow-up interviews, the greedy negotiators' counterparts said they didn't like the
greedy negotiators, didn't trust them, wouldn't share a gift with them if they had the chance.
When counterparts had the chance to negotiate again with their greedy former counterparts,
they exacted revenge, driving hard bargains, being much more defensive, and sometimes reaching
no deal at all.
But it gets worse.
As one study found, if you get a reputation for being greedy, it can negate your effectiveness
altogether even if you're an expert negotiator.
In one study, over 200 negotiators were brought together for simulated talks.
Half were novices, half were expert negotiators.
Researchers told some of the novices that their expert counterparts were greedy sharks.
It wasn't true.
Most of the expert negotiators, like Bob Wolfe, know it's unwise to act like that.
But it didn't matter.
In the talks, expert negotiators who were falsely tarred with this bad reputation did
poorly.
Their talks with novice counterparts frequently broke down the deals they did agree to, frequently
were very uncreative, and at best, only somewhat satisfying.
That should scare us.
It means you could faithfully study this entire course, practice regularly, read the accompanying
book, and several others until you become an expert negotiator.
But if you acquire a reputation for greediness along the way, you'll have completely wasted
your time.
You'll be no more effective than the novice.
No wonder Bob Wolfe warned his interviewer about the danger of being greedy.
So far, I haven't helped you very much, because we still have a huge question.
How much, then, should you strive for specifically?
How do you draw the line?
How much is greedy?
As we'll see, setting an ambitious goal is not the only way.
There are other goals we can seek instead.
But for now, let's consider this.
In arms-length transactions, Bob Wolfe and other skilled negotiators recommend slight
moderation, that is, ambition, not greediness.
Let's see how to make that advice operational.
You want to begin by setting a best target.
A best target is the number you actually hope to get.
It's the outcome you're hoping for when the talks are over.
When you're striving for an ambitious result, your best target is a specific, realistic,
but ambitious outcome.
This is a confidential number.
We're not talking now about your first offer.
For reasons we'll see in a moment, in most negotiations, we usually need to add a cushion
to your best target in order to set a first offer.
If the other negotiator's demand is way to the right, your best target is pretty far
to the left, and your first offer will be even further away from the other negotiator,
way out to the left, beyond your best target.
We'll very definitely figure out ways to determine the first offer, but that depends
largely on what your best target is, and I want to make it easy for you to get the
idea that when we're talking about a best target, we're talking about something else,
your heart-of-heart secret aspiration.
Let's imagine that you're selling a boat, and that you need to negotiate a price.
You do some research, and you learn that the most that anyone in a similar situation is
getting for such a boat is $100,000.
What should your best target be?
Now, you might think it's obvious $100,000, but remember Bob Wolfe's advice about not
holding out for the last dollar?
Remember the research that recommends against being greedy?
$100,000 is too much.
What we need is a way to intentionally, operationally moderate ambitions slightly.
To do that, let's use the 5% rule of thumb.
Find out what's the best you can do, and then, as the best target, set a number that's
5% worse.
That's right, a negotiation professor who teaches in business school in New York City
is advising you to seek worse.
How much worse?
5% worse than the best you can do.
So let's see what that looks like.
We've said that you imagine that your best price that you can hope for best on research
is $100,000.
5% of that is $5,000, so $100,000 minus $5,000 would give us a best target of $95,000.
Now later, we'll figure out what cushion we'll need in order to determine our first
offer, but that's for later.
Now you might hear this discussion about the 5% rule of thumb and say, wait a minute
Professor Freeman, I have some objections here, and you're probably right.
The 5% rule is just a rule of thumb, it doesn't always work.
So when it doesn't, lose the rule, but keep the principle, and the principle is simple,
moderate ambitions slightly.
So let's try a quick check to make sure I'm being clear.
Imagine you want to buy a used motorcycle, and the Blue Book Guide reports that the bike
you want with the same make, model, mileage, and condition sells for between $20,000 and
$25,000.
What should your best target be if you want to be ambitious according to what we've said
so far?
Our answer would be $21,000.
Why?
Because the best you can do according to our research is $20,000 and 5% worse than that
number.
For you, the buyer is $1,000 more or $21,000.
There's no law that says you have to follow the 5% rule, and I don't expect you to fully
accept it at this point.
Here then is my suggestion.
Make sure you have the idea down, and then try a few distributive negotiations as practice.
For some of them, intentionally apply the 5% rule of thumb and more generally, the idea
of moderating ambitions slightly.
See which approach works best for you.
But now, let me see if I can rock your world by proposing a radically different goal altogether
besides an ambitious outcome.
It's an idea called satisficing.
Satisficing is a word coined by Nobel Prize winning economist Herb Simon that means basically
a basically acceptable outcome, that is, settling for a good enough result.
While there's room to debate what exactly that means in a negotiation, one way to understand
it is this, something a bit better than your best alternative.
In his book, The Paradox of Choice, Barry Schwartz makes the case that one of our biggest
problems is afloenza, the overwhelming and often paralyzing array of choices we face
in consumer society.
Walk into a pharmacy or a supermarket, and you'll be presented with dozens of different
choices of toothpaste, hair coloring, sodas, stockings, and so on.
Studies find that the more choices we have, the less satisfied we become.
Offer a few investment choices to employees, and many will enroll in the pension plan.
But as you add more choices, employee participation tends to fall.
If you have six ice cream flavors to choose from, you tend to buy more often than if you
have sixty.
That's the paradox of choice.
Schwartz is alluding to a philosophical dilemma we face especially in the West, the problem
of the hedonic treadmill.
The more we strive for perfect happiness, the more exhausted, dissipated, and unhappy
we become.
Many religions teach the idea that it's best not to strive for so much.
It's also the concluding idea in F. Scott Fitzgerald's great novel, The Great Gatsby.
We believed in the green light, in the orgastic future that year by year recedes before us.
It eluded us then, but that's no matter.
Tomorrow we will run faster, stretch our arms farther, and one fine morning, and so we beat
on, boats against the current, born back ceaselessly, into the past.
Gatsby is a tragic figure, a man who lived a fraudulent and superficial life of endless
aspiration and who died in its pursuit.
Schwartz, echoing ancient and modern wisdom, advises that we get off the hedonic treadmill
by satisfying, by accepting good enough, by not trying to get the absolute best video
tonight or endlessly striving for the best possible salary, but by being content with
what is sufficient.
You will not hear me criticize or negate that wisdom.
I think many times he's quite right.
Let's add this to it though.
As we saw in an earlier session in 1957, after almost a century of inaction on civil rights,
the U.S. Congress finally passed an almost trivial civil rights act that barely did anything
to better the lives of African Americans who had long suffered widespread discrimination.
Martin Luther King had been a civil rights leader for about two years and now came under
great pressure.
Why keep fighting?
Here was almost unprecedented.
Federal legislation, sure it wasn't perfect, but wasn't it enough to end all this confrontation
and demonstration in the streets?
King would have none of it.
As he later put it, quoting from the Bible, we shall not be satisfied until justice rolls
down like water and righteousness like a mighty stream.
And after several more years of nonviolent protest, King helped win passage of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 to landmark acts that revolutionized
the legal status of African Americans.
As an advocate for millions of oppressed minority members, King could not, in good conscience,
satisfy.
And in my student's Stella case, if Stella had rationalized her tiny raise by saying
that she had chosen the wiser path of satisficing, chances are she would have been kidding herself
and accepting an unjust, below-market outcome that treated her with disrespect.
If she had special needs for tuition or for health care or for support of a loved one,
satisfying would have been that much harder to justify.
There's another distributive choice besides greediness, ambition, and satisfying, and that
is compromise.
In many situations, such as partnerships, joint ventures, and other ongoing arms-length
arrangements, an equitable or equal split may make sense.
We saw the power of our need for fairness in an earlier session when we looked at the
ultimatum game.
There, we saw that people will often turn down huge sums of money if they feel they're
getting a very unfair deal.
So we may want to take this choice seriously.
A roughly even split often communicates the desire to be fair.
It also builds trust and simplifies matters.
People often find that a settlement in the middle of the bargaining range creates good
will and trust.
Here too, though, there can be traps and dangers.
In compensation talks, for example, if one employee compromises and the other achieves
an ambitious result, they may find over time that the ambitious negotiator's gains accumulate,
especially if each gets a percentage raise.
Also, founders of joint ventures sometimes agree too hastily to split profits evenly
and live to regret it.
That's especially true when they later discover that one founder is putting far more energy
and time into the business than the other negotiator is.
Still, fair division can be a wise choice in many cases.
Now let me rock your world even more and suggest that there are some situations, perhaps many,
where the wise course is not to be ambitious, not to compromise, and not even to satisfy,
but to be generous.
In his book, Give and Take, Wharton Professor Adam Grant asks whether nice guys finish last.
He looks at social science research that compares three kinds of people in business life.
Nice guys are givers who tend to be generous in their dealings with others, reciprocators
or matchers who work on the premise, you scratch my back, I'll scratch yours.
And aggressive people, or takers, who strive to get as much as they can.
Who succeeds by various measures?
Not surprisingly, research shows that nice guys do finish last.
Givers tend to be promoted less, prosper less, and build weaker businesses.
Givers and takers tend to do better.
But there is one group that tends to do significantly better than any of them.
Givers.
Wait, what?
I thought givers did worst.
As Grant shows, the research is clear that while some givers do worse than others in
business life, many givers do best of all.
Naive, gullible givers can get burned.
These are folks who never consider the possibility that they're being taken advantage of and
who never set wise boundaries.
But other givers tend to flourish.
These are folks who build a reputation for being generous and who know how to watch for
bad behavior and how to set good boundaries.
They do what Bob Wolfe advises, you've got to develop the reputation for being smart
and honest.
To put it another way, the research suggests that the generous do best when they have the
ability to be savvy as a serpent, harmless as a dove.
And if you think about it, skills and principles we've explored already, such as interest-based
bargaining and being hard on the problem soft on the person, can help you combine those
powerful qualities.
You don't have to use them sacrificially.
If you want, they can enable you to be generous and successful.
But now, let's turn back to where we started and consider again an ambitious approach.
In practice, I find that many negotiators say they want to be ambitious, they want to
do very well for themselves, but they often do rationalize lesser results.
I do not believe that any one choice, generosity, satisfying, compromise or ambition is always
right.
But I do want you to know how to be ambitious so that you can choose to do it intentionally
whenever justice or service or legitimate need require it.
We've already learned how to set an ambitious best target.
So let's ask the second question, what should your first offer be?
This brings us to the idea of the dance of concessions.
Picture a typical negotiation that goes like this.
One side says, we'll give you $70,000.
The other replies, I was thinking more like $100,000.
The first replies, no, that's impossible.
We might consider $76,000 and the second says, well, we're still far apart, but I might
be able to accept $95,000 and back and forth they go, $83,000, $90,000 and so on until
they finally agree to $85,000.
Look familiar?
It's almost as if the two negotiators are in a cha-cha dancing toward each other, so
choreographed as the exchange of offers.
We call this the dance of concessions.
Not every negotiation has it.
When I go to the supermarket and they tell me ahead of lettuce sells for, say, $0.50,
I don't reply, I'll give you $25.
At Tiffany's, this dance is frowned on, typically.
In some cultures, it's considered bad form.
But in many negotiations, perhaps even most, it's expected and indeed almost required.
The United States labor law now says that the refusal to engage in the dance of concessions
in collective bargaining is bad faith and illegal in most cases.
Similarly, U.S. car dealers found in the 1990s when they stopped haggling with customers
and went to one price to a no negotiation approach that so many car buyers resented it and walked
away that they had a return to the old-fashioned methods.
Why?
Because in most negotiations, negotiators feel that a concession gives them a psychological
sense of satisfaction, respect, and fairness, and helps them feel that the other negotiator
is more trustworthy.
That's in part because winning a concession creates a feeling of control and autonomy.
Deny another negotiator a concession and he may well feel that you're unfairly dictating
terms.
Now as we begun to see, a concession is not the same thing as a bargain.
At the Great Wall of China, I thought I got a great deal when I got a seller to cut her
price from $30 to $12, only to discover later that I could have bought the same camera elsewhere
for $5.
Not a good deal.
Still, refusing to make concessions can quickly alienate your counterparty.
That has implications.
If you go into a negotiation and simply state your best target, the other negotiator will
often treat it as a first offer and then will counter offer.
If you refuse to dance and insist on getting your best target, the other negotiator will
probably resent it and refuse.
In other words, if you open with your best target, you almost certainly are not going
to get it.
Now I want you to get your best target as long as it's well researched and well thought
out, so we need to know how to wisely build a cushion into your first offer so you can
make concessions and still get your best target.
I'm going to give you three different strategies.
The first is called the midpoint strategy.
It's based on this observation.
The point midway between two opening offers is not a bad predictor of where the final
negotiating settlement will fall.
That's what we saw in our example a moment ago.
Often, I find students wind up about 5% away from the average of their first offers.
We can harness the midpoint phenomenon as a strategy where you simply set a first offer
that lets you dance toward a midpoint that you really want.
So going back to our boat example, if the best price you can hope for based on research
is $100,000, and again we take 5% that's $5,000 and deduct it, to derive our best target
of $95,000 and we assume the buyer is going to offer $70,000, well what should our first
offer be using this midpoint strategy?
Well, we're looking for a number which together with $70,000 and divided by 2 will get us
to $95,000.
That number would be $120,000.
So our best target is $95,000, you'll add a $25,000 cushion and a first offer will
be $120,000.
You hear this and you may well want to say, wait a minute, you're saying that I should
ask for $40,000 more than the $70,000 that they open with?
That's going to sound greedy, they'll throw me out, I know, I know, midpoint strategy
can sometimes suggest a scary sounding first offer, and yes there are some situations like
most sour negotiations where it's usually not a good idea, but here's the thing, in
a number of situations it can work.
Let's not cherish it, we have other choices, but let's not reject it altogether either,
there may be ways for us to get more comfortable with it.
Before we leave midpoint strategy, let's see why there might be method to the seeming
madness of it.
Studies have found that when negotiators start at very high and quickly make big concessions,
their counterparts tend to be more satisfied with the final agreement than when negotiators
start more conservatively and make grudging concessions.
I've had this experience when I went shopping to buy an apartment last year with my wife,
I would get very excited when I saw a listing marked down $75,000, even though I know that
the seller probably was starting with a very high cushioned first offer, the concession
attracted my excitement, I teach this stuff and I still felt that way, but again we don't
have to use midpoint strategy, and there are times when it is inappropriate, that includes
when you're negotiating for a new job, especially an entry level job, in other settings where
the norm would prompt the other negotiator to strongly object, we also might want to
avoid it.
And research will help you discover these situations.
One other thing, what if you can't really guess what the other first offer will likely
be?
A variation that partly addresses that problem is to take your best target and add the biggest
cushion you feel you can give some plausible reason for, for example, the price is $115,000
because we bought the boat for a similar amount and maintained it very well.
In fact, it may be a good idea to offer a plausible reason generally.
A second strategy for setting a first offer is the independent criteria strategy.
As you may recall, an independent criterion is a benchmark or standard that both sides
trust is fair.
We can use an independent criterion as the basis for setting our first offer.
Once again, let's consider our graphic boat negotiation.
The best price you can hope for based on research is $100,000.
Again, we'll take 5% off for $5,000 for a best target of $95,000.
Now our cushion now will be based on, will be much smaller because we're going to determine
that the Blue Book Boat Owners Monthly Guide tells us that $100,000 is fair.
So we're going to set that number as $100,000 as our opening offer and just use $5,000 as
a cushion.
Now imagine that the other side offers $70,000.
We respond by asking for $100,000.
We'll offer that independent criterion, say the Blue Book Owners Guide to boat prices.
Imagine they counter with $76,000.
They may expect us to match them dollar for dollar.
I come up a dollar, you come down a dollar, but we don't need to do that.
Instead we can say, well, I want to be fair and I know you do too.
To show good faith, I'm willing to make a concession, but since my first offer is based
on a respected independent source, I can't match a dollar for dollar since I'm demonstrating
fairness another way.
So now you can propose, say, $97,000 and still have a reasonable chance to reach your best
target of $95,000.
There's a third strategy which you can use with the other two, a soft offer strategy.
Ever seen offers like this?
Asking $110,000, $120,000 or best offer, $120,000 negotiable, price $100,000 to $120,000.
What's going on here?
My favorite is that last one.
Who in his right mind would read an ad like that and say, I think I'll pay $120,000.
Here's the method to that madness.
Each of these is a soft offer, a first offer that signals a strong willingness to negotiate
and concede.
In each case, the seller is saying, I'm going to make the first offer, but I'm afraid
if I do, I may ask for too little.
So I'm going to ask for a lot, but I don't want a signal that I'm trying to be greedy
because I'm really not.
So I'm going to invite buyers to dance and the way I'll do it is by using one of these
soft offers.
I'm not demanding $110,000, I'm just asking, $120,000 is just one offer.
Tell me yours.
I'm negotiable.
Look, I'll even make the first concession in advance from $120,000 to $100,000.
So if you're not comfortable with a pure form of the midpoint strategy, you don't have
to use it.
In the boat negotiation, for example, you can soften it by saying something like this.
The price I have in mind is something in the area of $100,000 to $120,000, but I'm negotiable.
You can use a similar process with the independent criteria strategy.
So now you have several ways to craft a workable first offer.
Let's acknowledge that as Harvard Negotiation Professor Howard Rafe put it, negotiation is
an art as much as a science.
You may not get your best target, but as we've seen, an intentional approach very much improves
your chances.
So let me here give you the best targets and first offer challenge.
The next time you want to ambitiously negotiate a single issue like price, do some research,
use the 5% rule of thumb to set a best target, write it down, and then strategically cushion
using midpoint or independent criteria strategy, perhaps with a soft offer, then negotiate.
Good negotiation is rich and nuanced enough that we have more to consider about it.
What if you can't tell what your best target is?
Regardless, should you make the first offer?
What should you do in special distributive cases like litigation settlements, auctions,
and price talks involving agents?
What are some of the common traps and challenges we face dividing the pie and what non-obvious
solutions can help us?
We'll explore specific answers to these questions in our next session.
