On January 2, 1999, Northwestern Airlines Flight 1829 found itself sitting on the tarmac
at Detroit Metro Airport, trapped at its destination for nearly seven hours in the
middle of a blizzard. As the Wall Street Journal reported, the 757's toilets overflowed,
an hysterical passenger threatened to blow open the emergency door and jump into the freezing
darkness, and a grown man wept begging to be freed. But nothing seemed to do any good.
No matter what the passengers did, the flight attendants could only ask them to sit and
wait patiently until ground controllers permitted the plane to dock and disembark. It had been
a miserable trip from the start. After a delayed, diverted, and dispiriting flight from St.
Martin lasting over 23 hours, the plane had arrived only to find that the airport was
all but shut down by inclement weather. Ironically, the passengers and crew could actually see
the gates about 400 yards away, but not enough airport employees had made it to work that
day to allow the plane to dock.
When you were sitting in that plane, watching the passengers slowly going crazy hour after
hour, what could you do? Nothing, apparently. But then an ophthalmologist in Row 14 named
Dr. William Goldstein did something unorthodox, and within 40 minutes ground controllers authorized
the plane to dock, permitting dozens of exhausted passengers to finally exit the plane.
The negotiation can seem like a simple one-on-one matter best done at the table. There are several
non-obvious influences, such as setting, scheduling, and the influential people away from the table
that can strongly shape your results. That may sound like an additional burden at first,
oh no, more things to think about. But actually, these things can be sources of hope, opportunity,
influence, and insight that can help greatly when other things aren't working. As we
saw in our first session, no one idea we encounter in the course always works, so it's important
to have a rich toolkit of negotiation and conflict management techniques that can help
if one approach isn't working. On the Northwestern plane, Dr. Goldstein's
breakthrough didn't come about because he applied interest-based bargaining principles
or distributive bargaining principles, he did something else that made the difference,
as we'll see. Here, we want to explore that and a number of other things that can enrich
your negotiation and improve your chances of discovering satisfying outcomes. Often,
there are hidden things and hidden people you can turn to that can help you at the bargaining
table. But there's more. When the initial talks are not going well, it's often a good
idea to change something, and changing things while exploring this session can be particularly
effective. Let's start by looking at the role of setting
in negotiations. To do that, let's first imagine that you've been dating someone once
or twice and you've decided you don't want to see that person again. How would you like
to communicate that fact to the other person? When I ask students that question, I first
invite them to raise their hands if they would prefer communicating it face to face. Whether
I'm working with students in New York, France, or China, the reaction is the same. Almost
no one raises their hand. Okay, how about by phone? Maybe a few hands go up. Okay, how
about by email or text message? Considerably more hands go up. Actually, the most popular
answer is just never contact the person again, but that doesn't count for our purposes.
Why do so few people want to have this conversation face to face? Well, in one sense it's obvious
if I don't want to see the person again, I don't want to see that person again. But
clearly it's more than that. For most people it's clear that it will be much harder to
say no to someone if you have to see them face to face. The more remote the method of communication,
the easier it is to say no. Intuitively, we all know that the setting matters, that
some settings make it easier to say no than others do. And so with negotiation, studies
find that if you negotiate face to face, you have a much better chance of reaching agreement
than if you negotiate exclusively via email. And yet we often find ourselves negotiating
in a setting that may work against our purposes. We negotiate when we're jet lagged, when
we're drunk, when we're rushed, when we're tired, when the cell phone connection is terrible,
when the formal setting is killing candor. It often seems like we're powerless to change
the setting of the negotiation, but that one factor may have a remarkable effect on the
talks and may well be one of the first things worth negotiating. Indeed, in diplomatic talks
it often is. As we saw earlier, diplomats often engage in something we can now call
pre-negotiation negotiation. No kidding, they actually call it that. One thing they look
at closely there is the setting of the talks themselves.
Ralph Bunch took setting seriously when he mediated peace talks between Israel and Arab
negotiators in January 1948. Bunch shrewdly convinced the combatants that they needed to
attend a peace conference and held a conference in a hotel on the island of Rhodes. And there
they were, stuck on a cold, isolated island in an unheeded hotel with terrible food. The
awful setting gave the negotiators no incentive to delay matters a moment longer than necessary.
The pressure it created probably helped Bunch broker an agreement to end the war. For his
work mediating a peace deal, Bunch won the 1950 Nobel Peace Prize, the first African-American
to do so. Bunch is not alone in using an uncomfortable setting to effectively foster agreement.
Labor mediators, for example, have been known to lock the doors during 11th hour collective
bargaining on the eve of a strike and refused to let anyone go to the bathroom until they
reach a settlement. Much more commonly, however, negotiators strive
for a more comfortable setting. Why is so much business conducted at the golf course,
the club, the pool, the bar, the after party, the after after party, and other places far
beyond the confines of the office or the conference room? One reason is because negotiation
is, as we have seen, literally not leisure. It is stressful with built-in tensions and
conflicts, so finding a setting that fosters relaxation, intimacy and rapport and privacy
can help a lot. Privacy is another aspect of setting worth
thinking about. There is a reason why people usually don't settle arguments on the Jerry
Springer show and why street fights usually escalate out of control. The more people who
are witness to a negotiation or conflict, the harder it is for one or both parties to
back down without losing face. The role of privacy in negotiation has actually
taken historical proportions at times. In 1917, Woodrow Wilson gave a speech to Congress
outlining the United States' goal for entering World War I, the famous 14 Points Address.
One of the most noteworthy and controversial points was the first one. Wilson's insistence
on open covenants of peace openly arrived at with a ban on private international understandings
of any kind. Diplomacy insisted must proceed always frankly in the public view. Wilson
was taking direct aim at the secret alliances that different nations had formed on the eve
of the war, alliances that accelerated the West's rush into the abyss.
To prevent future madness, Wilson believed a new kind of diplomacy was necessary. Wilson's
approach came to be part of what is known today as Wilsonian diplomacy, an idealistic
approach that ultimately formed the basis for the modern United Nations. Critics then
and now have questioned the wisdom and the plausibility of expecting nations to work
out their differences publicly. We don't need to resolve the dispute here. In practice,
of course, public and private diplomacy are regular parts of modern statecraft. The point
is that setting itself can be so important that entire wars can be shaped by it.
But while we're on the subject, what about that whole business of backroom deals? In
her book, Lyndon Johnson and the American Dream, Doris Kearns Goodwin writes that Lyndon
Johnson deeply believed in the power of negotiation in almost a caricature of the American belief
in negotiation. Johnson fervently believed that if he could get anyone into a room, even
north Vietnamese leader Ho Chi Minh, he could convince him to reach an agreement. Johnson,
of course, was a master of the backroom deal, and he was not above extraordinarily questionable
dealings, but Goodwin makes a more profound point.
The legitimacy of negotiation depends very much on who is permitted to be at the bargaining
table. Throughout much of the history of the United States Senate, minorities were essentially
excluded when the time came to cut deals. As we've seen, the 1957 Civil Rights Act,
which Johnson spearheaded, was a triumph of form over substance that did little to truly
better the plight of African Americans. They were not at the bargaining table, and in that
sense the act itself was a backroom deal, which means there's a double danger to selecting
a setting for its privacy. Not only does it foster the perception that something dirty
is going on unseen, but it also raises the specter that important voices have gone unheard.
All that said, however, privacy may be essential to wise agreement. In 1787, delegates to the
Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia imposed a news blackout, and went so far as to keep
the windows sealed throughout the hot summer to prevent news leaks.
Similarly, some of the great breakthroughs in diplomatic talks have occurred during
the retreat-like conferences such as the Oslo Peace Accords and the Camp David Peace Accords.
So, which setting should you use when you're getting ready for important negotiation? Choices
are almost innumerable these days. Beyond face-to-face talks, you can negotiate by fax,
letter, Skype, webinar, Google documents, courier pigeon, and of course email, among
other things. The pace of change is so great that this list will surely become dated quickly.
As we shoot this video, we should at least note that increasingly on the horizon are
even more exotic negotiation media, including online facilitative negotiation using software
and robotic negotiation in which the actual talks are conducted by artificial intelligence.
Let's leave these more advanced technologies for another day, but given the wide array of
choices we're presently familiar with, which is best?
In general, the warmer the medium and the more it lets you communicate with each other
immediately in real time, the more likely you'll be to reach a creative and mutually
satisfying agreement. That is, the more the setting allows you to make visual, audible,
and tactile contact, the more it lets you exchange messages immediately or synchronously. The
more it invites the kind of connection, comprehension, and cohesion that fosters creativity.
You've probably heard it said that most communication is non-verbal. I've never
been able to determine how you measure that precisely, but judging from various negotiation
studies and my own observations of students, I see that negotiators are usually more creative
and satisfied when they're negotiating face to face.
As the emotional distance and delay increase, the chance for misunderstanding seems to grow.
I've actually seen knock-down drag-out arguments surrounding negotiations that played out by
email. Studies find that email can sometimes be an effective way to negotiate, but that
can be rather dangerous if you don't know some basic rules, because email permits so
few cues that can convey tone, nuance, and subtlety, and importantly because it fosters
casual and quick reading. And for all those reasons, email can backfire. Often, people
simply don't read it as closely as the writer intended. Conversely, often people construe
an email in harsher terms than the writer intended. I've had this experience myself.
A student sends me an email that reads, Where is my paper? In email, the message sounds
crude, rude, and confrontational. Where is my paper? The student probably had no idea
it would be read that way. He was simply texting a quick follow-up message. But for both of
these reasons, it's not surprising that email can lead to a breakdown. It can also hurt
because of something social scientists refer to as asynchronous communication. First, you
tend to expect the reader will reply instantly, and when he doesn't, you tend to infer, wrongly,
that the delay means something more than it often does. Why doesn't he reply? Is he ignoring
me, disrespecting me? Second, when time counts, the delay can actually
lead to serious problems. There are reports that this dynamic contributed to the U.S. government's
poor response to Hurricane Katrina, the storm that destroyed much of New Orleans. Apparently,
workers' widespread use of email and voicemail contributed to significant delays getting help
to the victims. For all these reasons, studies suggest that
email negotiation can produce higher levels of aggression, hostility, and positional bargaining
unless it's carefully managed. All that said, it's quite possible to negotiate
successfully with email. One of the best ways to avoid problems is to first meet and speak
by phone or face-to-face for a few minutes to build rapport. Studies suggest that with
that rapport in place, follow-up email correspondence can be quite productive. Studies also find
that you can foster rapport with one another by in-email negotiations by mentioning something
personal early in your message. For example, you might write, Dear Jim, warm greetings.
We're all excited about the big game here next week, between your city's team and ours.
My daughter is actually a fan of your team, and so we're rooting for both sides in our
house. Thanks too for your recent proposal, and so on.
You may also have success with email. If the other negotiator is uncomfortable with English
and needs time to digest what you're saying, then it may be wise to use email, especially
if you want to put her at ease and foster collaboration with her. Further, there are
times when it may make sense to avoid being in the same room. If you find you get freaked
out in face-to-face negotiations, it may make sense to negotiate by phone or in writing.
That's because people often have different manners communicating at a distance than they
have face-to-face. That was even true of the Apostle Paul. In a second letter to the Corinthians,
Paul writes of himself, for they say, his letters are weighty and forceful, but in person
he is unimpressive and his speaking amounts to nothing. If, like Paul, you find you're
more confident away from the meeting room, you may want to plan to negotiate at a distance.
We can add too that in several business cultures, written electronic negotiation is becoming
the rule, not the exception, for better or worse. You may not have a choice, but you
can improve your effectiveness with it. Beyond the rapport-building tips I just suggested,
you may also want to suggest early on some simple communication ground rules. One good
one is to agree to reply within, say, 48 hours. Another is to limit the length of emails,
say, to 600 words, and to start a new paragraph for each sentence. In fact, some experts suggest
that for most email communication, it's often wise to write just three sentences,
and I found I can respond more quickly, clearly, and politely when I follow that rule.
One last rule to follow yourself is to intentionally seek to warm your emails with positive, polite,
encouraging language. Be yourself, of course, but doing this intentionally can help you
avoid the easy trap of sounding harsher in email than you mean to be. Messages also
sound warmer if they rely more on the pronouns I and we, and less on the pronoun you, which
can make a message sound more aggressive than you may intend.
While there's no one right answer to which setting is best for a given negotiation, the
critical question is this, have you intentionally thought about the setting?
A student of mine once called me for guidance about an important compensation negotiation
for a new job. He was nervous. He wanted favorable terms, but he was quite worried he would give
the misimpression that he was greedy and uncommitted. We reviewed many different ideas from the course,
but frankly, nothing was helping him. But then we started talking about the setting.
He'd assumed that he had to have the conversation with his future boss in her office. Is there
any better setting than that, I asked him. And you could actually feel the weight lift
off his shoulders.
Lunch, he said, I could ask her to join me for lunch. That way, we can spend most of
the conversation talking pleasantly as we share a meal together and in the process build
rapport. I can also convey my genuine enthusiasm for the position and my desire to be there
for a long time. Then, as dessert arrives, I can turn the conversation to the subject
of compensation. That approach isn't the right one for everyone, of course, but for
the student, it changed the dynamic wonderfully.
Setting also refers to how many people are at the table and who will do what there. Research
has found that if two negotiators meet with one negotiator, the two some may get as much
as 33% more than if only one negotiator had represented them. It's hard for one negotiator
to negotiate against several people at once, so if you know you're going to be speaking
with a team, it may be wise to bring a team with you.
In the movie, Aaron Brockovich, Julia Roberts' boss, a gruff solo attorney played by Albert
Finney, gets a visit from three serious looking attorneys. They look like the Secret Service
is one character. They represent the huge, venal corporate polluter he's suing on behalf
of a poor local set of clients, and though the attorneys are there to offer a settlement,
together they look very intimidating. Finney grabs three staff workers, including Julia
Roberts, dresses them like lawyers, walks them into the meeting, and introduces them
as co-counsel. Now, matched in strength, the two sides square off opposite each other at
a large conference table. The meeting quickly ends after Julia tongue lashes and cows or
counterparts. I don't recommend you posture like they did, but Albert Finney's character
was probably wise to bring a posse with him to avoid being steamrolled.
That said, there are pros and cons to having several people at the table. If your team
is undisciplined and unruly, or if your team consists of people you're representing, you
may find it hard to bring it a detached and creative approach to the talks. Too many interruptions
and too many temptations to look tough in front of your team. If your team is disciplined
and professional, however, you may be able to strengthen your effectiveness. One of the
best ways to improve the odds is to assign roles to each teammate beforehand. A note-taker,
a listener, timekeeper, number cruncher, technical expert, caucus caller. A whale oil team like
that can be truly powerful at the table.
One other implication about setting is this. If the talks aren't going well, try changing
the setting. Adjourn the formal talks and have the two of the key negotiators take a walk.
Stop the meeting and try going for dinner. Add technical people and hold a larger meeting.
Finish something. Doing that can change the vibe, the dynamic, the intimacy, the feel.
At Camp David, talks quickly broke down. The first day when Bagan and Sadat were in the
same room, they really couldn't stand to be in the same room together. So for the remaining
12 days, Carter shuttled between the two men's cabins. Though they eventually agreed to a
lasting peace accord, the two men never saw each other during the conference after that
first day until they shook hands at the White House.
The scheduling of the negotiation is also powerfully important. When will you negotiate?
When you're drunk? Tired? When the other negotiator is happy and relaxed? Here again,
there's no perfect answer, but timing may be vital.
Part of scheduling is deciding whether to negotiate before you have another offer in
hand. Imagine you have a job offer from Acme Inc. Imagine they've given you until Friday
to decide. Now imagine you're waiting to hear from Beta Corporation, but they said
they won't get back to you until Monday. You've got a tough bargaining situation.
You can negotiate, but if you can negotiate so that Acme is willing to wait or Beta is
willing to decide sooner, you may find you have two offers in hand and you'll be in
a much better bargaining position with both of them. That's why it can be very wise to
negotiate when to negotiate. In fact, ceasefire talks often turn on this question. The parties
often press for talks or delay them depending on how they feel they're doing on the battlefield.
Scheduling also raises the question of deadlines. Studies find a deadline can help both the
regulators if they know about it early on. That's because it tends to help them manage
their time better and fosters more deliberate discussion. In contrast, keeping a secret
deadline without divulging it to the other side can needlessly cause a breakdown and
deny the other side the chance to marshal its best offer.
One of the most insidious aspects of scheduling is the fact that one party may try to use
high-pressure tactics to rush a decision. A Wall Street Journal article once profiled
a car dealership in Mobile, Alabama called Landmark Chevrolet, which was widely known
in the region as Landshark Chevrolet. Landshark was something of an embarrassment to General
Motors because its dealers practice classic blow-and-glow high-pressure sales tactics
and because they were one of the highest grossing GM dealerships in North America. One of Landshark's
signature practices was to create for prospective customers an intense feeling of buying urgency.
They wanted their customers to feel they had to agree right then and there. Balloons, pennants,
zippy music, bands, and high-energy salespeople were all there to foster a sense that time
is running out, that now is the time to buy. If you wanted to ruin a Landshark dealer's
day, all you have to do was say, thanks, we'll shop around and may come back later.
A negotiator who does not exercise control over the schedule can fall victim to practices
like Landsharks and she may find herself negotiating when she's simply not ready, which means
that it's important to understand that you can negotiate the scheduling of a negotiation
and that that question may be worth addressing early on. So you might say, I don't think
I'm going to be ready to have this conversation with you tomorrow. To show respect and make
sure that my requests are reasonable, I want to do some homework. I wonder if we might
speak early next week. Sometimes the key to a negotiation, to a successful
negotiation lies not in when, where, or how you negotiate, but in figuring out who has
the power to resolve the dispute. To explore that, let's now turn to Dr. Goldstein's
secret weapon, the aspect of negotiating that enabled him to free the passengers of the
Northwestern flight. On the plane, Dr. Goldstein managed to identify
the name of Northwest's CEO, John Dasberg. Goldstein figured Dasberg probably lived in
one of the nice suburbs of Minneapolis, near Northwest's headquarters. So using a cell
phone, he called directory assistants and, to his amazement, got the telephone number.
He immediately called and reached Dasberg's wife, Mary Lou Dasberg. Goldstein told her
about the terrible conditions they were facing and demanded immediate action. Then the pilot
learned about the call and immediately made his own call to her to strongly amplify the
point. Mrs. Dasberg promised to call flight operations herself to find out what was going
on and within minutes the passengers were in the airport.
Goldstein changed the situation by changing who he was dealing with. That is, he identified
someone who might be influential away from the immediate situation. That one call changed
everything. It illustrates the critical importance of understanding who might be influential in
negotiations, including those who were not at the bargaining table.
When we negotiate, we typically think it's an isolated one-on-one conversation. But actually,
no negotiation is an island. Every negotiation is deeply connected to a larger political
and social world. And so there are many people away from the talks who can influence them
for better or worse. Negotiators who miss this point often suffer for it. Negotiators
who identify this point often find surprising solutions to their problems.
Imagine I get an invitation to do a training. After a brief phone call, I strike a deal
and I call my wife excitedly. Great news, my love. I say, I just got this amazing new
offer to do six months worth of training. It pays incredibly well. The work is very
meaningful. The children will get first-class schooling and will get a beautiful apartment.
We need to be on the plane to Kabul, Afghanistan, in 12 hours. And she hangs up. And eventually
I reach her and she tells me that I can go, but that she and the kids are staying. And
suddenly it dawns on me that even though I'd reached agreement, I'd overlooked somebody
who was highly influential, whose opinion I completely forgot about.
That story may sound far-fetched, but something a little like it actually happened to one
of the authors of the classic negotiating book, Getting to Yes, Roger Fisher, a man
I deeply esteemed and who forgot more than I will ever know about negotiation. Roger
Fisher once negotiated a treaty on behalf of the United States with 160 other nations.
But when they completed work on the treaty in 1982, Fisher found that the president
who sent him, Jimmy Carter, had left office. Fisher had little or no relationship with
the new president, Ronald Reagan, or with Reagan's senior advisors. When they reviewed
the treaty, they in effect put it on the shelf. It wasn't until 1994 that the U.S. signed
a revised version of the treaty, and decades later the U.S. has yet to ratify it. Fisher
negotiated well at the table, but because others away from the table so profoundly
influenced matters, it profoundly altered the effect of his negotiating.
But as I said, an awareness of who may influence the talks away from the table may transform
your effectiveness at the table. On November 22, 1963, John F. Kennedy was assassinated,
and Lyndon Johnson suddenly found himself precedent. He soon learned a critical vote to ratify
a treaty was scheduled in the Senate for November 26. Johnson realized the vote would
be a test of his power. If he lost that vote, the Senate would see him as weak and ineffectual,
and his presidency would be dead before it began. He also realized that he didn't have
the votes, and precious little time to identify and lobby persuadable senators. What to do?
At the very funeral of John Kennedy on November 24, Johnson looked up and had an epiphany.
Every governor was there at the gravesite, and Johnson had learned that senators listened
to their governors. And the governors Johnson knew would be much more persuadable if he
could reach them in time. So he summoned as many of them as he could to his office that
evening. There, he gave them an impassioned speech, urging them for the good of the country
to contact their senators, and asked them to support the treaty as a show of unity and
honor of President Kennedy's memory. When the vote was held 48 hours later, Johnson
won his first victory. That victory set the stage for the future passage of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, one of the greatest legislative achievements of the era. By reaching out to
others who were influential beyond the negotiations themselves, Johnson changed things in his favor.
This is practical implications for you and me. As you and I get ready for an important
negotiation, it can pay to think about each side's constituents, principals, families,
and governments. It can also pay to think about powerful third parties, including watchdog
agencies, enforcement agencies, prominent publications, and next door neighbors. Doing
that can reveal new interests you and your counterpart may have, new research questions
to answer, new creative options, new potential alternatives to agreement, and other aspects
of the talks. In short, it adds another dimension to your thinking, enriching your planning
and revealing a lot about the talks ahead. So I recommend that you consider listening
at least five influential players away from the talks as you prepare for negotiation of
consequence. See if it doesn't reveal new possibilities and ideas.
As I said at the start of the course, that one of the most important things a negotiator
can do is prepare. Now that we have explored basic and subtle aspects of negotiation, the
time has come to draw together almost everything we've considered so far into a convenient
powerful framework. That framework can help us efficiently get set for any negotiation.
The critical and powerful skill of preparation awaits us, and we'll turn to it in our next
session.
