Several years ago, New York Police Department hostage negotiators were involved in intense
and fruitless talks with a gunman.
By chance, a rookie off-duty hostage negotiator happened to be passing by the scene and looked
into the command center to see if he could be of help.
Sure, the commander said, no one else has had any success, so why don't you take a crack
at it?
Gunman's name is Ed.
So the rookie picks up the phone and says, hello Ed?
And immediately heard the gunman shout, who the blank is this?
Rookie replies, hey Ed, easy man, I'm Mike, don't worry, I'm not even part of this whole
thing.
I was just passing by on my way to the Yankees game.
Immediately something very strange happened.
Ed totally shifted tone and said, you got tickets man?
Oh man, you are so lucky, I've been trying to get tickets for weeks to that game.
How'd you do that?
Oh you know how it goes, says Mike, friend of a friend?
Yes, says Ed, I know that drill.
They both laugh.
But I gotta tell you, says Ed, I'm really worried about their pitching.
I know, says Mike, but I got a good feeling about this new guy.
This goes on for about 15 minutes.
Then Mike says, so, one Yankee fan to another.
How about coming out peacefully?
Ed says, one Yankee fan to another.
I'm coming out peacefully.
He comes out peacefully, crisis over.
Mike's story illustrates something about the power of rapport, the ability to build
a connection with the other negotiator, and the ability to convince him to take seriously
what you say.
Ed had been hostile and unimpressed by the other police negotiators, but something about
the way Mike connected with Ed made Mike's request carry much more weight.
I don't know about these other guys, Ed might rightly have said, but Mike's the real
deal.
Why are rapport, relationship, and connection so important in negotiation?
As we've begun to sense, and we'll explore more fully in later sessions, there's a
natural tension in negotiation.
You're trying to collaborate, but you're also often trying to compete too.
That tension understandably raises questions about how safe it is to deal with you.
That question, which we'll call the trust problem, is an essential feature of negotiation,
a feature we neglect at our peril.
So it's crucial to be thoughtful about ways to deal with it, and one of the most important
ways is by being thoughtful about how you approach your counterpart.
That means helping the other person see that you're not a villain, that you're someone
she can identify with, relate to, and deal with, with reasonable safety.
We're not talking here about superficial charm, that's a recipe for breeding cynicism
and skepticism, the exact opposite of what you want to do.
And let's face it, insincere charm might work once, but over time it tends to damage
someone's reputation.
Now, what we're talking about is finding ways to show the other person your respect
in different ways and make it clear that you really are ready, willing, and able to collaborate.
You can do these things, even though you intend to do well in the negotiation, because
as we've seen, you have the ability to be hard on the problem, soft on the person.
Of equal importance to overcoming the other negotiator's wariness, demonstrating respect,
and fostering a collaborative spirit, is the high and difficult task of learning to use
words wisely.
That is, of finding ways to say things without needlessly provoking the other, of finding
ways to speak truthfully without hurting the other person, of not putting our feet in
our mouths.
When I was younger, it seemed as if I was constantly putting my foot in my mouth.
After conversations like that, I'd say to myself, the less I say the better, convinced
I was doomed to regularly shoot my mouth off, which is one of the reasons negotiation fascinates
me.
I want to learn how to do better, how to let words improve the relationship and the dealings,
not torpedo them.
Poor choices of words have led to breakups, lost elections, and have provoked wars.
There's some evidence that a diplomat's imprecise assurances to Saddam Hussein encouraged
him to believe he could fully invade Kuwait without the West stopping him.
Speaking for Washington, she said, we have no opinion on the Arab-Arab conflicts like
your border disagreement with Kuwait.
Eight days later, Hussein's army invaded Kuwait.
When the ambassador was later asked by British journalists why she'd said that, her response
was, I didn't think, and nobody else did, the Iraqis were going to take all of Kuwait.
Bad word choice is the stuff of so many breakups that we sing great songs about it.
As the Beatles put it in one of their greatest songs yesterday, why she had to go, I don't
know, she wouldn't say, I said something wrong, now I long for yesterday.
So in this session, we'll look at the high and important task of building rapport, setting
tone, and using words wisely in negotiations.
We can sum up much of the key to these important tasks in two words, intentional respect, that
is, thoughtfully seeing the other person and acting accordingly.
When the other person senses that you genuinely respect her values, beliefs, opinions, and
feelings, she'll forgive you much.
When she doesn't, she may be deaf, dumb, and blind to anything you have to communicate.
We teachers have a saying about this, I don't care what you know until I know that you care,
and caring starts with respect.
Counterintuitively perhaps, you can show respect for someone even if you emphatically disagree
with her, because respect is not about substantive agreement, it's about recognizing the other
person's humanity.
You may utterly disagree with the other person, but you can do it without insulting her, trivializing
her, or making her feel stupid or belittled.
You can disagree emphatically with her values, opinions, beliefs, and feelings, but you can
truthfully say that, say that you see them, know they matter to her, and won't tread
on them recklessly.
You can certainly talk about points of disagreement, but you don't need to do it in a way that
disparages the other person needlessly, that's what we mean by respect.
That's how hostage negotiators can respect hostage takers, how diplomats can respect
tyrants, and legislators can respect colleagues with wildly different views from the other
party.
It's not about agreeing, it's about separating the person from the problem.
Abraham Lincoln famously battled his chief political adversary, Stephen A. Douglas, for
years over the issue of slavery, but as Carl Sandberg put it, in political fights they
hit each other with everything they had, but they actually held a genuine regard and
respect for one another.
Lincoln took the same approach toward the Confederacy, he was able to conquer the South
without disparaging it, even though he believed deeply that slavery was wrong.
And let's face it, people so care about respect that we have a long painful history of violence
caused by perceived slights.
Street violence often explodes because someone feels dissed by someone else, dueling happened
for centuries because one man felt publicly humiliated by another.
Many wars have been fought in the name of protecting national honor.
It turns out too that showing respect in Billing or Poor is one of the most persuasive things
you can do.
We often think of Nazi interrogators as cruel, brutal men who would preface horrific torture
sessions by saying, we have ways of making you talk, and many of them did do that.
But surprisingly, one of the greatest interrogators in modern wars was a German Lance Corporal
in World War II who took a different approach, an interrogator named Hans Scharf.
Now, I share his story with real hesitation because I have absolutely no desire to endorse
his purposes or to foster a spirit of cynicism quite the opposite, but stay with me on this
because as we'll see, US intelligence officers and others have learned a lot from his approach.
Scharf rose to prominence by avoiding all direct use of violence when interrogating
captured very important American and British prisoners.
Instead, he focused on showing respect and building relationship.
Speaking fluent English during his interviews with a prisoner, he would share jokes and
talk about American and British customs.
One might take a prisoner for a conversational walk in the woods, or allow him to visit an
airfield.
Once, he let a prisoner fly a German airplane.
In each of these outings, he asked them for their word of honor not to escape, none ever
did.
Often, prisoners would volunteer information without being asked.
Now let's quickly add that Scharf wasn't all sweetness and light.
He used a number of sharp tactics, warning prisoners that they might have to face the
Gestapo if they didn't cooperate and acting as if his hands were tied even though he was
their friend.
But his emphasis on rapport, respect and gentleness was so unusual and so effective that after
the war, US Air Force officers asked him to give lectures on his techniques and his approach
has become standard practice for prisoner interrogations throughout much of the West.
In fact, a similar approach enabled a US interrogator to get a great deal of useful
intelligence from Saddam Hussein during his captivity.
Now as I said, I share these interrogation stories with you with real hesitation because
I fear you may think I'm suggesting that respect and rapport building are just cynical
games.
They needn't be that at all.
I share these stories to suggest a simple idea.
If respect and rapport are so important that they can open up conversation between adversaries
and war, then how much more are they likely to help when we're trying to simply work
out problems, solve conflicts, or negotiate?
Put it another way, respect and rapport needn't be cunning tricks on the one hand or wimpy
touchy feely acts on the other, they're powerful.
Our task is to use them with integrity, which is why we've emphasized the importance of
being hard on the problem, soft on the person.
So what specifically can you do to demonstrate respect?
First, slow down.
Speed kills in negotiation, even though we've previously explored the power of using creative
options to solve negotiation problems, don't get the impression that you should launch
right into the task as early as possible, actually the opposite is true.
Build negotiators often say, go slow to go fast, and a big part of that means taking
time to get acquainted before you turn to the task of finding solutions.
Hostage negotiators know this principle extremely well.
One of their first objectives is to slow the process down and build a relationship with
a hostage taker.
Once a sense of human connection develops, hostage negotiators find they have a much
better chance of resolving the crisis successfully.
That skill isn't innate, it's something they train intentionally to acquire.
A study of FBI hostage negotiators noted that rushing too quickly into problem solving can
cripple sensitive talks with hostage takers.
Troublingly, many law enforcement officers have a hard time giving up their natural tendency
to be problem solvers and taking time to slow down, listen, and build rapport.
But by learning to slow down, the trainees were able to substantially improve their ability
to build relationships and trust with hostage takers before they turned to problem solving.
That's good news, because even if, like the FBI agents, we tend to want to get our man
as quickly as possible, we may be able to learn a new approach.
One especially valuable tool is small talk.
And it's not just useful at the outset of negotiations, it's valuable generally.
One study found that professional negotiators frequently speak personally about themselves
and the other negotiator throughout the negotiation.
In contrast, inexperienced negotiators speak personally, if at all, only at the start and
the end of the negotiation.
Did you get that?
Skill negotiators chat personally during the talks too, not just at the start and the close.
That is, they repeatedly build rapport and signal warmth.
Here are two implications then.
First, spend time on personal matters at the beginning of the talks and occasionally return
to personal matters throughout the talks.
I find a cordial greeting is a good place to start, followed by a simple conversation
opener.
A pretty foolproof conversational topic to start with is, no kidding, the weather.
Another is the person's travel to the meeting, but really any subject that's likely to
be inoffensive and not business related can help.
Second, to foster later collaboration, seek in most negotiations to set a constructive,
positive tone.
That is, greet the other negotiator and seek to signal early on that you're hopeful you'll
be able to collaborate well together.
Here's one example of how you might start to do these things.
I'm glad to see you today.
I've been looking forward to our conversation.
I'm hopeful that we'll come up with something very good together.
How did you and your family enjoy the trip?
Now that's not a script, please don't commit it to memory, but there's a lot going on there.
It's positive and welcoming, it's optimistic and collaborative, it focuses first on the
other person as a human being, here, his family and his travel experience, and it ends inquisitively
in the form of a question.
Wharton Professor Stuart Diamond says his favorite opening in a negotiation is simply,
what's going on?
Why?
Because it's personable, informal, inviting, inquisitive, and starts with a simple broad
question.
I like that too.
There's no one right way to start a conversation with another negotiator, and let's face
it, what you should say in the first moments of a conversation with Tony Soprano or some
other gangster is probably different from what you'd say with a head of state, say
to a head of state, a person from France, a person from China, or your boss.
But notice that whether you're dealing with a mafia leader, a state's person, a person
from another culture, or your supervisor, it's customary to start with warm greetings,
positive gestures, and the personal touch.
Work task is to intentionally do it by slowing down.
A second important way of building rapport is to listen.
We've seen previously the remarkable power of skilled listening, of inviting the other
person to talk, paying close attention, asking questions, and paraphrasing.
One study found that skilled negotiators ask questions, test for understanding, and summarize
more than twice as often as average negotiators do.
In addition to all the other benefits, listening has the odd ability to strengthen rapport,
connection, and trust.
You know how it feels when somebody really listens, you feel you can open up to that person.
So for example, early in the negotiation you might say something like this, let me start
by getting your perspective, what's important for me to know.
Let me listen, help me better understand why you feel that way.
Then later, am I hearing correctly that notice how Professor Diamond's favorite opening
line, What's Going On, nicely invites the other negotiator to talk and signals strong
willingness to listen.
Here's the third approach to building rapport, send collaborative signals.
Because you face a trust problem in most negotiations, it can be particularly valuable to signal your
sincere desire to be hard on the problem, soft on the person.
And if it's true, it can also help to signal your early, signal early on your desire to
work together in the future.
Doing these things rightly reduces the other person's wariness, because it signals that
you're not in it for a quick buck, and that while you're willing to fight hard for your
concerns, you genuinely believe that you can do it without hurting the other person.
So for example, you might say something like this, I must make sure the deal is strong given
the market rates.
Also security is a concern for us, but I'm flexible about how we do that, and my firm
and I see this as the start of a lasting relationship.
What if here you're being explicit about your concerns, which, intuitively, signals
trustworthiness in its own right.
Because you're being forthright and strong, you're not concealing your motivations in
a way that a con artist might.
That's worth lingering on for a moment.
Studies have found that to build trust, it helps greatly to demonstrate the three C's
concern, competence, and candor, as we've seen in an interest-based approach.
When you use that approach, it lets you show real concern for the other person.
As we've also begun to see preparation is vital to a negotiator, a task that can help
you strongly signal competence.
Candor, notice that candor is actually another welcome sign of integrity.
It's a sign of openness, and it's a sign you can give constructively by talking about
your interests as you also talk about wanting to collaborate.
A fourth way of building rapport is this, signal what kind of message you're about
to give.
Now here's a finding that really surprised me.
As Rackham's study reported, skilled negotiators give five times as many advanced indications
of the kind of behavior they're about to use as average negotiators do.
That is, they preface a statement with a label, as if to say, here comes something.
Let me give you a few examples.
Instead of saying how many units are there, a skilled negotiator might say, let me ask
you a question, how many units are there?
Instead of saying, let's do this, a skilled negotiator might say, let me make a suggestion,
let's.
Instead of saying we can't, the skilled negotiator might say, this may be hard to hear at the
moment, but we really can't.
Why do skilled negotiators do this?
As Rackham noted, it draws the attention of the listener and exerts mild social pressure
to listen more closely.
It also slows the negotiation down, giving time for the negotiator who's speaking to
gather her thoughts and for the listening party to clear his mind of the previous statements.
Also, it introduces a formality that takes away a little of the cut and thrust and so
keeps the negotiation on a more rational level, and it reduces ambiguity and leads to clearer
communication.
In short, it relaxes and focuses the conversation at the same time, like a strong cup of tea,
it simultaneously makes the conversation more gentle and more engaged.
Fifth, don't use irritants, do use, do reframe.
Rackham also found that unwisely, average negotiators like to use irritant, irritants.
What's that?
An irritant is an assertion that doesn't persuade and often bugs the other side.
For example, I'm making you a fair offer.
When was the last time someone said that to you and you replied, you know, you're right,
I never thought of it that way before, you've got a deal.
Chances are, you said, easy for you to say, because let's face it, fair people don't
insist that they're being fair.
In fact, Rackham found that average negotiators use irritants five times as often as skilled
negotiators do during negotiations.
Here are a couple of other examples of irritants.
I'm being very generous.
You're being ridiculous.
You can see the danger here, these statements are self-serving and very insulting.
Not much respect going on here.
Skilled negotiators avoid irritants like the plague, instead they reframe, they rephrase
an idea using more attractive, constructive and respectful language.
Let's see how a skilled negotiator might translate these kinds of irritants, instead
of saying, I'm making you a fair offer.
She might say, let's see what's fair.
Notice the difference, the reframe statement is inviting, collaborative and signals a desire
to jointly learn.
If the speaker has done good research and knows what she's likely to find and what
they're likely to find, she can give that invitation without fear.
Instead of saying, that's ridiculous, I'll walk first.
A skilled negotiator might say, while I have other offers, I would love to find a way to
work with you.
In both, the speaker is alluding to her alternative to agreement, but in the second, she's saying
in a face-saving inviting way that she can work with them if possible, even as she's
willing to walk if necessary.
The power of reframing is that it can help anyone win warmly, that is, do well in the
negotiation in a way that doesn't damage the relationship and that may very well strengthen
it.
But is it really necessary to take such care in how we talk to others?
Right now, new technologies are developing that may increasingly permit the rise of robotic
negotiation between two computers acting as agents for human beings.
Frankly, I have no idea what to make of that development.
At first blush, it would seem like a very efficient approach.
The interplay of two figures like Spock from Star Trek with no need to deal with all that
messy, emotion-laden stuff of negotiation that human beings have to grapple with.
And many of us find that all those social niceties, protocols, rituals, and gestures of social
life in general, and negotiation in particular, are little more than flummary, a grand, silly
waste of time and energy.
Indeed, in many cultures, certainly including American culture, there's a strong resistance
to anything that smacks of diplomatic or subtle speech.
Our iconic heroes, Gary Cooper, John Wayne, Harry Truman, are people who spoke plainly,
leconically, using few words, simply meaning what they say and saying what they mean.
Doesn't all this talk about reframing, signaling, schmoozing, and the like, mean that we have
to be something that we're not?
Here, we might well borrow from George Orwell's concluding advice in his brilliant essay,
Politics and the English Language.
There, Orwell takes on a somewhat similar point about the way we can artfully use language
to make cruel, villainous opinions sound reasonable.
He offers a set of rules for avoiding such terrible uses of speech and finishes by adding
this, break any of these rules sooner than, say, something outright barbarous.
Similarly, a negotiator would be wise to break any of the suggestions I've just made
sooner than saying anything outright insincere or cynical, because the goal is to show respect
and build a collaborative relationship, and these suggestions can help us do that.
But if you find that they're getting your way of being sincere in the culture in which
you're working, or if you feel they simply don't work that way for you, then by all
means drop them, or adapt them.
But before you do, let me invite you to give these ideas a fair shot.
Often, I have students come back to me and say that when they've tried these and other
negotiation ideas, their friends, their roommates, their colleagues, and others have said, wow,
this is the first time I feel I can really talk to you.
But now I want to turn to one of the most powerful ideas in the field of negotiation,
an idea that can profoundly improve your credibility, rapport, and relationship with your counterpart.
A couple of years ago, I surveyed 150 of my former students, asking them this question,
which of 25 key course concepts that we've worked on have made a difference for you in
your professional and personal life?
While they liked and used almost every idea, one of the ideas that earned the highest ratings
was the one I want to look at with you now, the power of common interests.
Consider the first political cartoon ever published in what would become the United States of
America, a picture of a snake cut into several pieces, each symbolizing a section of the 13
restless British colonies.
Benjamin Franklin drew it, and its caption delivers a powerful blunt message, join or
die.
If the colonies didn't unify against Britain, Britain would destroy them.
Franklin here is using an appeal to a common interest.
What is a common interest?
It's a shared goal, a mutual desire we can achieve together.
In a sense, everybody picture you've ever seen is a story of common interests.
For example, Dorothy makes quick friends with the Scarecrow, the Tin Man, and the Cowley
Lion because, in large part, they share a desire to get to Oz to meet the Wizard.
Here are a couple of real-life examples of common interests at work.
The United States and the Soviet Union were adversaries in the 1930s, but in 1941 they
became allies to fight a common enemy, Adolf Hitler.
New League baseball players and owners have long distrusted each other, but they can collaborate
because of their common interest in increasing fan attendance, increasing television revenues,
and increasing the value of licensing deals.
Crips and Bloods are murderous street gangs, but they might conceivably form an alliance
to keep a rival third gang, the Latin Kings, out of the area.
Indeed, since at least the time of the Peloponnesian Wars, people have recognized that the enemy
of my enemy is my friend.
Common interests are powerful because they turn wariness into trust, adversaries into
partners and competitors into collaborators.
They strongly help create credibility and connection, and they're different from other
interests we've discussed previously.
In our first session, we looked at the parable of the orange and saw that hidden complementary
interests can lead to mutually satisfying trades.
Complimentary interests are interests that are different, but not in conflict.
Here we're not talking about that.
Both sides share the same goal, but they can both achieve it if they work together.
Competing interests are also very different from common interests.
When our interests compete, they're in pure conflict.
A car buyer and a car seller may both want to get the best price, but only one can at
the other's expense.
Neil Rackham found that skilled negotiators discuss common interests more than three times
as much as mediocre negotiators do, and my own students find that when they appeal to
common interests, it can dramatically change the vibe in the room.
As one student put it, a meeting she attended was going terribly until she finally said,
Look, we're not enemies here, we're on the same side.
If we work together, we can create a budget that will help the whole department win funding
from the CEO, and we'll all be much better off.
Those two sentences were so effective, she said, that it was like watching the lights
go on back in the room.
The static cleared, and the group began to work together for the first time that afternoon.
To craft an effective appeal to common interests, make sure it has three qualities.
Make sure it's specific, compelling, and not self-serving.
Saying, Look, we both want to reach an agreement is not a particularly specific or compelling
appeal, so it's not likely to change much.
Here's something that might.
Look, I know we've had our differences in this divorce, but we both love the children,
and neither of us wants them to be hurt by it, and we both want our money to go to more
to them and less to the lawyers.
It's specific, compelling, and not self-serving, and so it has a pretty good chance of improving
the situation.
Here are two ways to help identify and articulate common interests.
One, as we just saw, is to complete the sentence, Look, we're not enemies here, we're on the
same side.
If we work together, we can, what?
If you can finish that sentence with an interest that's specific, compelling, and not self-serving,
you may have found something very persuasive.
Another way is to look for a common enemy, like the competition or criminals.
So compelling are common interests that statesmen use them continually, so much so that many
of the famous speeches of recent history are appeals to them.
John Kennedy, Winston Churchill, Barack Obama, Charles de Gaulle, and others, most remembered
speeches rely on them, and if you think about it, a synonym for government itself is the
common wealth.
On common interests and thoughtful word choice, other ideas we've already explored can foster
credibility and good tone, specifically interest-based bargaining, the idea that we began the course
with.
And as we'll see in a later session, it can also be very useful to role play, rehearsing
for the negotiation and trying out different words, different approaches, and different
responses to hard reactions.
But first, here are two challenges.
The first is the common interest challenge.
The next time you're in a conflict or difficult negotiation, see what happens if you start
a sentence with this phrase, look, we're not enemies here, we're on the same side.
If we work together, we can then give a common interest.
See what a difference it can make in your conversation.
Also, take the rapport and reframing challenge.
The next time you have to talk business with someone, see what happens if you intentionally
take time to talk informally for a while longer than you usually do, and different points
in the conversation, and see what happens if you intentionally reframe tough messages
to be intentionally respectful.
We've just explored the gentle art of building trust and trustworthiness, but let's face
it, in a tough world, we can always rely on soft sources of trust alone to allay all doubts
we have about each other.
In fact, those doubts are a critical reason why negotiation is literally not leisure.
Are there other ways to solve the trust problem?
When we're not sure about rapport and relationship building alone?
How do we cope with this universal and often profound challenge?
One way, of course, is to only deal with people we're 100% sure about.
But in a complex world, that's much easier to say than to do.
We need other answers, and we'll discover a universe of them and more in our next session.
