Many years ago, my Aunt Monica's husband died, and in her grief, she decided to buy
a new car from a local car dealer.
In a few hours, she'd brought back a bottom-of-the-line two-door Nissan sedan.
When her adult son came home from work that evening, he saw the car in the dry wing and
said, Mom, you bought a new car.
Yeah, she said, I thought it would just lift my spirits a bit.
So how much did you pay for it?
Her son asked.
$45,000.
And her son nearly fell over backwards.
Mom, how could you pay so much for a car like that?
Well, said his mother, the salesman seemed nice, and I just felt like I was getting
a good deal.
Most car buyers will tell you that they got a good deal on a new car, but what's the
likelihood that that's true if most car buyers only buy a car once every few years and most
car dealers are selling cars several times a month?
Somebody is probably getting fooled here, and that means that gut feeling alone can't
help us know whether we're negotiating well.
So in this session, we want to ask, what does it mean to succeed in negotiation?
What are the measures of success?
What is the purpose of negotiation, and when do you walk away?
These questions are so central that our ability to answer them, or our inability, shapes the
course of nations and people and companies and entire economies for better or worse.
By the end of our session, we'll have developed a specific practical set of ways to answer
these questions that can guide you in any important negotiation you face.
Let me ask you to imagine that you are thinking of selling your family business, and in a
moment, you'll meet with a buyer, played by me.
Acting in character, I'll present an offer to you.
Your task is to decide whether to accept that offer, as is, or with one change, or reject
it.
Before my character arrives, let me tell you a little bit about your situation.
To get the most out of this exercise, you might want to jot down the main points.
The following case study is adapted from Tex Oil by Stephen B. Goldberg, published by the
Dispute Resolution Research Center and Kellogg team, and Group Research Center at the Kellogg
School of Management, Northwestern University.
You and your spouse own and operate a small gas station that sells gas from a large oil
company called Star Oil.
You've worked hard for several years, which has made you one of the most successful gas
stations in the region, but you're tired.
The doctor says your spouse needs full, immediate rest within the next two months, and a year-long
vacation, or your spouse will be in serious medical trouble.
So you've decided to sell.
Buy a mobile home and travel the country.
A survey and a major trade publication tells you that lesser stations in the region recently
sold for between $150,000 and $200,000.
You've decided you want a minimum of $225,000.
Here's what you need the money for.
You'll need $100,000 for the mobile home, $50,000 for travel expenses, and $75,000 for
a nest egg to live on when you return in the year.
You'll need that nest egg while you look for work.
You've only one other offer.
Adbrol Oil Company has offered you $175,000, so you're quite interested to see what Star
Oil will offer you.
You're about to meet with an executive from Star who'll likely give you a specific proposal.
You don't know much about Star Oil, but you're very connected and respected by fellow gas
station owners who tell you that Star Oil is in the middle of an acquisition program
and is looking to buy several good gas stations in the region.
So now let's imagine that I am an executive from Star Oil.
Well, it's a pleasure to meet you.
We know your reputation and we've been impressed with your performance running the station.
We've looked at our budget carefully, and based on that and what we know about you and
the market, we would like to make an offer to purchase your station.
We can offer you a package worth a total of $240,000.
The package would include $180,000 upfront plus a small oil truck worth $60,000.
Because of federal regulation, the truck can only be sold once every seven years, but the
truck is a classic and very good condition.
In return, we would purchase the station itself and ask for your commitment to work together
to keep it running during a four-month transition period.
Also, we would simply ask as a show of good faith that you guarantee the station's performance
for the first year after the sale, so that if sales fall below our previous results,
your previous results, we would simply ask for a $25,000 repayment.
So to sum up then, our basic offer is for a total of $240,000 in cash and equipment
for the station plus a bit of support in the transition.
Seen.
So, it's me, Professor Freeman again.
The seller has left the building.
So, would you accept the seller's offer?
If you could make one plausible change to the seller's offer other than price, what
would that be and would you accept that deal?
If you decided to walk away, you may feel as my students usually do, disappointed and
uneasy.
If you decided to accept the deal as is or with one change, you may feel as my students
usually do, relieved and excited.
When we discuss a transaction like this in class, those who reach an agreement typically
make a strong case that they have done very well.
Regardless, everyone says they made the right choice, both those who take the deal and those
who don't.
And to say, after even 45 minutes of discussion, we usually are no closer to knowing which
students reached a wise outcome and which didn't.
They debated, but continue to feel that their decision was right.
So what was the right choice?
Well, let me send you 9 months into the future.
Imagine you accepted the offer from Star Oil.
Here's what happened next.
You spent a grueling four months working at the station, watching your spouse grow more
and more sick from overwork, until a doctor said he or she will no longer be able to travel
and might have a complete health collapse imminently.
Meanwhile, you took delivery on the truck and found you had no use for it and had to
spend $300 a month to park it on a nearby lot.
After you transferred the station to Star Oil, you were dismayed to see that they hired
incompetent station managers to run the place and immediately started to lose money.
You realized that they would demand that $25,000 guaranteed money from you in a few months,
even though you had no control over their operations.
So there it is.
It turns out the buyer was making an offer that you would have been very wise to avoid.
Even with one or two changes, the offer was still pretty bad.
The creative option the buyer included to sweeten the deal, the truck, was all but worthless
to you and actually cost you money to maintain.
Worse, the offer did not meet your most important interest.
Your spouse's health was further damaged by it and you lost the chance to take the
trip.
And there was a lurking problem, a time bomb if you will, the guarantee.
It gave the buyer an incentive to be casual about managing the station, knowing you would
subsidize its mistakes even though you have no control over that.
The other offer you had from Admiral Oil may not have been ideal, but it avoided many of
these problems.
True, you could have waited and looked for another offer, but since time was short and
you're exhausted, the Admiral offer was probably your best choice.
I find between a quarter and three quarters of my students, often some of the best in
the world, routinely accept offers like Star Oils.
Even more surprisingly, every student who accepts the offer initially says they're
happy and confident they made a wise choice.
And if you think about it, they're in good company.
There are many, many cases where negotiators reached bad deals unaware of how bad they
are.
In 2006, a major financing company gave a $700,000 mortgage to a migrant worker in Southern
California who made $12,000 a year.
That mortgage is an example of what came to be known as a Nino Loan, loans to people with
no income and no assets or little income and few assets.
Lenders and borrowers struck tens of thousands of disastrous Nino Loans in the years leading
up to the financial crisis of 2008.
Meanwhile, Wall Street firms created exotic mortgage-backed securities based on false assumptions
about the underlying risks of borrowers of borrower default.
Worse, they borrowed heavily to invest in these securities, putting their firms and the entire
financial system at risk.
This convergence of bad deals on Main Street and Wall Street led to the financial crisis
of 2008, a disaster which we've seen caused losses of $50 trillion worldwide.
Meanwhile, during the same period, the European Union admitted Greece as a member nation following
talks between representatives of Greece and the EU.
As we've seen, years later, it emerged that Greece had falsely told the EU its economy
was soaring when in fact it was barely treading water and actually struggling with ongoing
economic problems.
In an interview, when the lead negotiator for the EU was asked why the EU representatives
believed Greece, he replied that they were somewhat skeptical, but they felt it would
have been impolite to ask for further assurances.
Greece gained admission, spent heavily on credit-backed EU guarantees, later found it
couldn't pay back its loans, and so forced the EU to bail it out, a challenge so politically
and economically difficult that it nearly brought the European Union to political and
financial collapse.
Beyond all this, it is a sad fact that most entrepreneurial ventures fail, in that very
often the founders borrow, invest, hire, and produce based on false assumptions, overly
optimistic projections, and too hasty expansion.
The risks and dangers of bad entrepreneurial agreements are so serious that they prompt
Yale professor of management Barry Nalboff to offer rather surprising advice.
Nalboff spent ten years trying in vain to found one company, then founded another, Honest
T, which made him a multi-millionaire.
His advice to young entrepreneurs?
Don't.
Don't what?
Don't be an entrepreneur.
Don't start a new business.
Why?
Because he says it's possible to get 99 things right, one thing wrong in a business deal,
and find you're ruined.
As negotiation expert Gavin Kennedy puts it, as many businesses go under because they
strike bad deals, as those that fail to strike enough deals, and failed business deals are
not unique to entrepreneurs, studies routinely find that at least 60% of all mergers fail
by various measures.
A bad deal can change the course of people's entire lives.
Let me illustrate with a story of a man named Sam.
In the 1910s and 20s, Sam was a state legislator in Texas, and by all accounts, a man of integrity,
idealism, and compassion, who fought honorably for the poor people of his district.
He was a persuasive and honorable negotiator who could reach legislators and citizens alike.
He also cared deeply for the ranch land his father had owned, and his parents died.
It looked like the several heirs would have to impractically divide up the property among
themselves or sell it off.
Sam wouldn't hear of it.
He was determined to buy it back.
When someone bid for it, Sam bid higher.
They went back and forth, and Sam finally won the ranch for just under $20,000, the equivalent
of about half a million dollars today.
Sam was confident.
After all, many people felt cotton prices would soon soar, and Sam had dreams of eventually
creating a much larger ranch.
But there was a problem.
Over the previous few years, soil erosion had sapped the land of its fertility.
Sam apparently had never had the land tested before he bought it.
And what about the cost of fixing up the ranch so that his family could live there?
Or the cost of sharecroppers, tractors, and other equipment?
Sam assumed cotton prices would soar and cover all these expenses.
By 1920, he'd spent a total of $40,000 today, about a million.
He sold just about everything else he had to try to cover the costs.
But soon, the ranch had proved to be a trap.
Arable soil was just a few inches thick and couldn't raise the crop unless Sam and his
family worked it to extremes, grueling work for a 42-year-old.
Bad rains washed lots of soil and seeds away over and over again, and plowing the land
made it wash away faster whenever rains came.
Then droughts came, just as cotton prices collapsed.
Now he was badly in debt.
Within a few years, Sam had to sell the ranch for half the price he'd paid, all of which
went to the bank.
By now, Sam owed everyone in town, and his family felt disgraced.
To feed themselves, his teen sons found themselves working on road gangs doing extremely hard
work in hot weather.
The loss profoundly shaped one of his sons in particular.
As he worked like a dog one day in the hot Texas sun, the boy said to his brother, there
has got to be a better way to make a living than this.
Around this time, that son began to rebel against the father he'd once lionized.
Ever after, he saw his father's integrity, idealism, and naivety as a negative example,
the opposite of how he would live his life.
So the son went into politics, stole several elections, used his political power to make
himself personally rich, and eventually became President of the United States, Lyndon Johnson.
In short, while it's very easy to get to yes, often yes is the wrong answer.
You may have thought this is a course about how to get to yes, it is not.
Sometimes the worst thing you can do is say yes.
Yet if you ask business people, diplomats, consumers, and others, they will routinely
tell you that they got a good deal, often no matter what the terms are.
Why?
One answer is a phenomenon I've witnessed many times among my students that I call
deal euphoria.
Deal euphoria is the irrational tendency to defend and celebrate any deal, no matter
how bad.
My suspicion is that one driver of deal euphoria is escalation psychology, the tendency to
become ever more invested emotionally in seeing something through to the end, no matter what
the cost.
Another reason why people get to unwise yes so often is because of the fear of deadlock.
In a success culture such as ours, we tend to associate agreement with success and disagreement
with failure.
For example, consider this headline, Martha Stewart fails to reach agreement to renew
partnership with Kmart.
This 2009 Bloomberg News article went on to report that Kmart had been hurting Martha Stewart's
sales and reputation and that Martha Stewart was about to enter a new agreement with Home
Depot.
Did Martha Stewart fail?
The headline makes it sound like she did, but the story itself strongly suggests that
she made a wise decision.
Rarely do we ever see someone report negotiators fail to disagree.
I've experienced first hand the fear of deadlock and the pain of walking away.
Two years ago, my wife and I were considering buying a particular co-op apartment.
We so fell in love with it that we started to call it the White House.
The price was good and for special reasons there was no need to go through the usual
pain of seeking approval from the building's co-op board.
But there were problems.
The building had almost gone bankrupt a couple of years earlier and the financials were not
pretty.
Still, we bid.
The sellers accepted our offer and we now had two weeks to work out the contract.
Even though I have a law degree, practiced corporate law for several years and teach
negotiation to lawyers, executives and diplomats, I felt like I was learning to fly a plane
at 30,000 feet, huge time pressure, lots of details to master, no books to guide me,
an ever-changing picture of the financial situation.
My wife and I were up every night struggling with spreadsheets and legal documents.
We went back and forth, back and forth.
Eventually, accepting the advice of our financial advisors, we walked away.
But the experience felt like losing an arm.
It was so painful.
It was striking how hard it was to say no.
Yet another reason why negotiators often enter bad agreements is because of the myth
that a concession is a bargain.
A major New York department store used to send me a glossy ad touting its 50% off jewelry
sale.
A $600 pair of earrings was selling now for just $300.
But then NBC Dateline reported that that store ran this 50% off jewelry sale 26 days
a month, which means that some poor store clerk there had to go around raising prices
ludicrously and then switch the prices back four days later to the regular retail price
so that the store could say with a straight face, we offer a 50% off discount.
Now imagine you could go buy the same earrings at your neighborhood jewelry shop for $150.
How does the store's offer look now?
This week a friend of yours will tell you that she went shopping and got a great deal.
How do you know you might ask?
Oh, she'll tell you, I got 50% off.
Now don't ruin her day, but quietly grieve for her that she may have fallen for the oldest
trick in retail, the very trick I fell victim to when I bought a camera for twice the right
price near the Great Wall of China.
It's a classic mistake when we confuse a concession for a bargain.
Each of these traps can mislead you into thinking that you're getting a good deal, yet ironically
it's easy to miss a good deal too.
Behavioral economists have discovered something called the endowment effect, which can drive
negotiators to overvalue their assets simply because they hold them.
Tell someone he owns a coffee cup and ask him to assess its value and he will confidently
say it's worth $7.
When the same person he is about to buy the same coffee cup and ask him to assess its
value and he'll confidently tell you it's worth $4.
The endowment effect may cause homeowners to turn down reasonable offers for their houses
and wind up holding their houses much longer than they'd intended.
It may also help explain why litigants often misjudge the strength of their cases and wind
up doing much worse in court than they could have settled for.
So how can we know when it's wise to say yes to an offer?
What we need are measures of success, clear guideposts we can refer to when our gut feeling
alone isn't enough to help us.
The better a pilot is, the more she knows she can't rely on gut sense alone to help
her navigate.
She has to rely on her instruments to get her safely to her destination.
The same is true for negotiators.
My aunt Monica relied on her gut to help her decide whether to buy the car and suffered
for it.
Our feelings matter, but she and we need instruments, we need guidance from something much more
reliable than we'll get from flying by the seat of our pants.
So let's identify here three measures of success, each builds on ideas we've explored
previously.
We should say yes when an agreement is wise, first collaboratively, second distributively,
and third relationally.
Let's unpack each of these tests one at a time.
First is the offer good collaboratively?
Let's phrase that test more specifically by asking this question, does the offer satisfy
my interests and the other negotiator's interests now and later on?
When you're overwhelmed, when you can't see the forest for the trees, when an offer
makes you feel confused and you don't know what to do, one of the most important things
you can do is simply to compare it to your interests.
If the offer doesn't satisfy your key interests, you must seriously consider walking away.
Just because negotiation is a means to your end, not an end of itself, and your ends are
your interests.
In the gas station problem I gave you earlier in this session, this was a critical question,
did star oils offer meet your key interests?
Clearly it didn't.
It didn't help you care for your spouse, it didn't actually hurt your spouse, it
didn't let you take the trip you needed, it actually made that trip impossible.
This test also asks if the offer serves your interests later on.
This brings us to the idea of a time bomb.
A time bomb is any feature of an agreement that will cause serious foreseeable problems
later on.
Here are some of the most common.
Overlooked likely events, like low sales, bad weather, poor attendance, or unexpectedly
high costs.
The dot-com crisis of 2000, for example, was driven by the fact that many firms grossly
exaggerated their sales projections.
In the star oil exercise, the offer assumed the station's profits would not go down, even
though that was likely with a change of management.
Sam Johnston based all his hopes on the chance that cotton prices would soar and that the
soil would hold, but farm prices can be volatile, and the soil's problems were no secret.
Perverse incentives is another classic type of time bomb.
For example, rewarding salespeople on the total value of their sales, regardless of
whether the sales are profitable, that gives salespeople an incentive to sell at a loss
just to rack up big sales figures.
In the star oil case, the offer gave the buyer a perverse incentive to be casual about managing
the station, because the seller would guarantee the profits.
Another time bomb is foreseeable bad fit.
For example, a visionary entrepreneur may partner with an investor who just wants to
make money as quickly as possible.
We can expect trouble ahead when their visions conflict.
An extremely one-sided deal is another classic time bomb.
If one negotiator feels cheated or held up, she is much less likely to perform fully,
and may look for a chance to get revenge.
This last point helps explain why it's wise to consider whether the agreement meets the
other negotiator's interests.
Fortunately, if you are using interest-based bargaining principles, you already know the
importance of seeking an agreement that's hard on the problem, soft on the person.
You know how to find a deal that's mutually satisfying, and you know that seeking one
builds credibility, trust, mutual respect, and improves your chances for finding a deal
that works well for you, too.
One way to test the offer is by comparing it against the other negotiator's interests
as you understand them.
In the case of star oil, its offer fails to satisfy one of its own key interests, assuring
the success of the acquisition program.
Star oil will need ongoing help.
It could use your talent in several ways, and its acquisition program will be hurt if it
gets the reputation that it hurt a respected owner like yourself.
Sure, a star may have made out in the short run at your expense, but look closer and you
find the offer was actually bad for both sides.
The second measure of success is this.
Is the offer distributively wise?
Let's phrase that test more specifically by asking this question.
How does the offer compare to your best target on the one hand and your best alternative to
a negotiated agreement on the other?
As you may recall from our first session on distributive bargaining, your best target
is your ideal outcome on a given issue.
It's the number you actually hope to get.
If you're striving to be ambitious, it's an ambitious but realistic amount.
The closer you get to it, the better you've done distributively.
Now as we've seen, you don't have to be ambitious.
There are many cases where you may choose to split, satisfy, or sacrifice, but if you
want to be ambitious, it pays to intentionally set that goal explicitly in advance and to
compare the offer to that goal to make sure you're not selling yourself short.
Since the Star Oil case, your research suggested that you might get a price significantly over
$200,000.
Star's offer as a practical matter was worth $180,000 plus a worthless truck or less, given
the guarantee.
Not very good.
Meanwhile, you want to compare your offer to your best alternative to a negotiated agreement,
that is your BATNA.
As we've seen, your BATNA is your walk away price, the worst acceptable outcome you'll
consider.
The more clearly you understand, develop, and research your BATNA, the stronger you are,
and the more clearly you can test the offer to see if it meets your minimum out and minimum
requirements.
In the case of Star Oil, your BATNA was $175,000, not ideal, but it met your key interests considerably
better than Star's did.
You could leave immediately, care for your spouse, pay for most of your trip, with no
hidden costs or time bombs.
By the way, the BATNA portion of this test can also quickly help you spot when a concession
is no bargain.
In the New York department store example I shared a moment ago, your BATNA was to skip
the 50% off sale and buy for hundreds less at your local jewelry store.
A much better deal.
The last measure of success is this, is the offer relationally wise?
Let's phrase that test more specifically.
By asking this question, is the offer fair compared to independent criteria, and has
the relationship suffered or improved through these talks?
Testing an offer against an independent standard, as we've seen, is an excellent way to tell
if an offer is reasonable.
Imagine you've been in an auto accident and the insurance company offers you $5,000
to repair the damage.
You're tempted to agree, but wisely decide to test it.
So you do some research and discover the insurance policy promises to quote, fully restore to
previous condition, the car.
And two local certified independent mechanics tell you it'll cost $7,500 to do that.
Without that reality test, you might have been so excited by the offer that you would
have accepted it, unaware it was far below what was reasonable.
The last facet, how does this negotiation affect the relationship, may seem irrelevant
in a one-time transaction say, for a used car, but here's what I mean.
Has each side conducted itself in a way that fosters trust and buy-in?
Has each side acted ethically and legally?
Has each side built rapport and connection?
Has either side damaged or enhanced its reputation?
Especially negotiations with people we may well see again, these questions may be of
first importance.
As we've seen, if you acquire reputation for greediness or dishonesty, it can neutralize
your ability to negotiate.
No wonder skilled negotiators and experienced executives highlight these qualities.
But even when you think you'll never see your counterpart again, watch out.
Human tactics have an odd way of becoming habits, and we may tend to use sharp tactics
more frequently until we acquire reputation we prefer to avoid.
Of course it's your choice, and one-time transactions are different from ongoing relationships,
but maybe less different than you might think.
In the case of Star Oil, Star's negotiator may have seen the transaction as a one-time
deal.
But he'll probably pay for it.
He lost the chance to get excellent talent, and you'll probably badmouth him to your
friends in the business, which may seriously compromise his future work.
Thus, the test for success is threefold.
Is this offer wise, collaboratively, distributively, and relationally?
To sum up then, your goal in negotiation is to get a wise yes or a wise no.
I therefore give you emotional permission to do a little mental rewriting of that classic
negotiation book Getting to Yes, because although I think the world of it, the title is dreadful,
so picture being the editor and revising the title to Getting to Wise Yes or Wise No.
Here then is my Measures of Success Challenge for you.
Next time you're reading the news about an important agreement or you're thinking about
a major offer for your family or your firm, intentionally compare it to your three Measures
of Success.
Is it wise by those standards?
Now that we've tested for assessing any offer, the question remains, how do we actually do
well distributively and creatively?
Can it be done?
How do you actually win warmly, so that both parties are content and you're very content,
if that's what you want?
We'll explore ways to put these two seemingly conflicting goals together in our next session.
