When you enter into a negotiation, no one tells you this will be a predominantly distributive
negotiation or this will be a predominantly creative negotiation.
So how do you know which method to apply?
Will that conversation with your family, your supplier or someone else require skillful
competitive negotiating or will it require skilled interest-based negotiating?
Which approach should you plan to use?
In this session, we'll bring the two approaches together.
That's because most arms-length negotiations and even some others have both competitive
and creative dimensions.
Fortunately, it's possible to handle both aspects effectively, enabling you to both
do something I call winning warmly.
So that both parties are content and you are very content.
As we'll also see in other negotiations, it's best not to worry about the distributive
side at all.
In our first session, we began to consider the power of interest-based negotiating and
we've seen since developed that idea in several ways.
In later sessions, we explored distributive negotiating and saw how negotiators could
claim different portions of the pie.
But each of these approaches in isolation can be somewhat dangerous.
A naive negotiator who focuses solely on the distributive side can wind up producing a
weak deal for both sides that misses big chances to create wealth.
But a naively creative negotiator who focuses solely on the creative side can get in the
trouble too.
He can wind up creating a big pie and winding up with crumbs.
Imagine you're negotiating to purchase a business for your company.
There were several issues to work out and your boss has told you to fight hard so that
the company does well.
So you negotiate one issue at a time with your counterparty, making strong requests
each time and conceiving slowly, typically meeting in the middle on each issue.
With railroad-like efficiency, you work down the list of agenda items until you finally
complete the talks, shake hands with a seller, and return to your headquarter offices.
There, you report with a smile, well, I gave, I got, we didn't get everything we might
have wanted, but I bargained hard, feel good about the results.
An audit later shows that the value of the deal to you and your company is $2.4 million
and you feel great.
Interestingly, the audit also shows the deal is worth $2.4 million to the seller.
But now imagine that a peer of yours has an almost identical negotiation at the same time
with another seller for a similar company.
She took a different approach and as a result, an audit reveals that the two sides together
created $12 million in value through their negotiation.
Now you don't feel so good.
Turns out that you claimed half of a very small pie, but in the other talks, the negotiator
has created a humongous pie.
Now you feel terrible.
But a closer look at your peer's deal reveals another surprise.
Of the $12 million in value, she brought back only $1 million.
The other side gained $11 million.
Your peer remains confident.
The main thing is that we created so much wealth together, she says.
But what will your boss say as she reviews her deal and yours?
Chances are your boss will be unhappy with both of you.
She wanted you to do well for the company.
Creating little wealth was costly.
Claiming little wealth was costly too.
There must be some ways as your boss to do better, to create and claim a good portion
of a big pie, and she'll be right there is.
As we've seen before, research finds that skilled negotiators can create 11% more wealth
for their side than mediocre negotiators do, and 6% more wealth for their counterparts
than mediocre negotiators do.
Did you get that?
When they need it, skilled negotiators create and claim better.
They find a way for both sides to do well, and for their side to do very well.
Let's quickly add, as we've said throughout, that there are many situations where it's
best not to worry about the distributive side so much, and to strive for a fair and even
generous outcome.
As useful as it can be to think about being creative and dividing up wealth, that's a
two-dimensional approach that ignores the critical third dimension of relationship.
And we don't recommend that you think solely about expanding and cutting the pie.
There's an old joke about a teenage son who asks his father for $100, the father says
$50, what do you need $25 for?
I don't recommend you do that with your family members, or anyone else for that matter.
In fact, even in arms-length transactions, we want to be thoughtful about our approach
so we don't damage the relationship.
That said, let's see how we can balance creating and claiming in arms-length transactions.
Researchers have found that the key is something we've been moving toward throughout the course,
systematic preparation.
That means being ready for both the creative side and the competitive side.
As we will see, it also means being ready to talk about these things in respectful,
honest, rapport-building ways.
One of the first surprises is the discovery that it can actually be unwise to negotiate
one issue at a time.
In our imaginary story in which you bought a new business, we imagine that you and the
other negotiator worked with railroad-like efficiency as you struggled over one agenda
item at a time, concluding it and then moving on to the next topic and then the next.
That's the way most negotiators and most meetings operate.
It's also dangerous.
That's because it fosters a naively competitive approach that conceals the potential for making
creative trades between topics.
In our example, imagine that you're very concerned that the seller doesn't compete
with you after you buy her company.
She doesn't care so much about that one way or the other, but she's badly in need
of cash and wants you to pay for the business upfront without any financing.
Just imagine you have plenty of cash, so you don't care very much about how and when
you pay, but now imagine that you first struggle over the issue of non-competition with you
demanding a 10-year non-compete clause and the seller insisting on a two-year non-compete
clause and you finally agree to a compromise of six years.
Then you turn to the question of financing and again you struggle.
You demand that you pay no money upfront and instead pay the money in installments over
several years.
She demands full payment upfront.
Finally you compromise at 50%.
No wonder you both got so little satisfaction or value from the deal.
You would have both preferred it if you'd agreed to a 10-year non-compete agreement,
which is your top priority, not hers, and full cash payment upfront, which is her top priority,
not yours.
That is, if you traded the cheap for the dear, you'd given more on the issue you care less
about for more of the issue that you care more about, you would have been much happier
and so would she.
But how could you discover that much more satisfying deal?
You were discussing one issue at a time and there was no chance to trade one topic for
the other.
When negotiators discuss one issue at a time, we call that linear bargaining.
It's dangerous, even though it's very common and seems to be efficient.
It's dangerous precisely because it kills the chance for creative trades between topics.
For this reason, skilled negotiators prepare in different ways to discuss more than one
issue at a time, that is to practice non-linear bargaining.
One way to do that is to plan to say something like this early in the negotiation.
I think we may find it helps us both if we agree that nothing is agreed until everything
is agreed so that we can explore creative trades.
Of course, you can tentatively reach agreements on single issues if you wish, on a single
issue if you wish, but by suggesting that ground rule early on, it allows you to go
back and make changes, that is, trades.
If you later discover, it would be mutually beneficial to do it.
If you suggest that rule, nothing is agreed until everything is agreed, in your talks
to buy the company, you and the seller might have together discovered a valuable trade.
Similarly, a skilled negotiator may refuse to simply concede unilaterally on a single
issue and instead suggest a trade, respectfully, no, I can't just give more on the issue
of non-competition, but I'd be willing to consider it if we might be able to do better
on the issue of financing.
A simple way to remember this point is to remember the phrase, no, but, no, I can't
just concede, but I can consider a trade.
It's a particularly useful phrase to have in mind when you encounter a negotiator who
uses a classic sharp bargaining tactic called yes, but, there, just as it looks like you
have an agreement, the other negotiator nibbles you, asking for still more, saying yes, we
have a deal, but we need to get just one more thing.
We'll see more about this tactic in a later session, but for now, let's note that if
you don't know how to respond to this tactic, you invite the other negotiator to just keep
nibbling you, asking for more and more and more without end.
No but signals that you won't put up with nibbling, but that you will consider an exchange.
Skilled negotiators further prepare for non-linear bargaining by identifying their priorities
in advance, by knowing which topics are most important to them and which topics are least
important.
So, for example, the skilled negotiator is ready to suggest a trade that are non-compete
terms for his side in return for more favorable financing terms for the seller.
That's because he knows which topic is more important to him and which is less.
As we've seen also, a skilled negotiator strives also to understand the other negotiator's
priorities before and during the talks, so that he has the best chance to propose an
attractive trade.
To do that, as we've seen, the skilled negotiator does research beforehand, empathizes, listens,
and asks questions before proposing a deal.
One of the best ways to practice non-linear bargaining effectively and to propose wise
creative trades is to offer a package deal, that is, to be ready to suggest at the right
moment a proposal on several topics.
So for example, acting as the buyer, a skilled negotiator might say, what if we gave you
more of the money up front and we agreed to a longer non-compete clause?
In fact, skilled negotiators go further and often plan to present a written proposal covering
several topics.
Now, I don't recommend that you do this the first moment that you meet someone.
Hello, I have a ten point term sheet to present to you.
It's just way too aggressive, it's self-defeating too.
There's no rapport building, no listening, no learning, no respect, just an unsettling
and impersonal offer.
In many cases, the other negotiator will be quite put off, and probably rightly so.
But at some point, a skilled negotiator may want to say something like this, OK, now that
we've gotten better acquainted and I have a better understanding of your concerns, let's
take a break so I can think it over and make some suggestions.
What if we met tomorrow at this time?
Then at the next meeting, the skilled negotiator might say, I'm glad to see you again.
I thought carefully about our conversation yesterday.
As I promised, here's a proposal of several of the topics that we touched on, several
of the topics that we touched on.
I'm flexible about the specific terms, as long as it serves my firm's interests, let
me invite you to look it over and tell me what you think.
For informal matters, you may want to simply jot down the proposal on the back of a napkin.
For more important matters, you may want to present them as a letter, a memo, a draft
contract, or a term sheet.
Each of these items is extremely common in negotiations, and rightly so, we call them
single negotiating texts.
A single negotiating text is a single document where you put down all the terms of the proposed
agreement.
It has lots of advantages.
First, it signal it naturally fosters non-linear bargaining, inviting each side to jump around
and make trades between topics.
If linear bargaining is like a railroad schedule, a single negotiating text is like a map of
the region.
It gives you the lay of the land, it clearly spells out what the topics are, and it allows
the negotiators to manage the conversation more easily.
Everything we're discussing is laid out before us in a fairly organized format.
When you're dealing with many parties or many issues, a single negotiating text is actually
virtually essential.
Whether you're dealing with a multi-million dollar aircraft deal, drafting major legislation,
discussing a treaty, or buying a cell phone plan, a single negotiating text makes life
and negotiation a lot easier.
One particularly common business example of a single negotiating text is a term sheet.
With a term sheet, you list each of the topics on one side of the page and a summary of the
proposal for that topic on the other side of the page.
It's a sketch, if you will, of the proposed deal.
In my several years practicing corporate law, I saw that term sheets were just a bread and
butter part of the task of business negotiation.
Once we understand the idea of a package offer, we can build on it by introducing a more advanced
idea called MISOs.
Promise, I'll tell you what it stands for in a moment, but let's get the basic concept
first.
In MISOs, you propose a couple of package offers simultaneously, offers you'd be equally
content with.
Studies find that when you offer MISOs, the other negotiator tends to trust you more and
be more satisfied with the results.
And you can see why.
We all like to have a choice, and having a choice gives us a greater sense of control
and a better chance of finding something that suits our needs.
That's what shopping is all about.
Even if the other negotiator rejects both offers, offering them can still help you.
You can say, OK, I get that neither works for you.
Which of the two offers is closer to meeting your needs?
Whatever she tells you will shed light on her preferences and priorities and allow you
to craft new offers that may work better.
For example, imagine I'm trying to get my little daughter Hannah to brush her teeth.
I offer her two toothbrushes, a blue one and a Dora the Explorer one.
And frankly, I don't care which toothbrush she picks as long as she brushes her teeth.
If she says, I don't like either of them, I can reply, OK, sweet pea, which one is less
yucky?
If she says the Dora brush is less yucky, now I know she may prefer brushes with cartoon
characters and so I may offer her a Winnie the Pooh brush or a Diego brush.
Now I promise you, I don't overindulge my daughter like this most of the time, but you
get the idea.
By giving her choices, I can hone in on her preferences better and give her and me more
satisfaction.
Now you can see how they came up with the name Meizos.
It's an acronym that means multiple equivalent simultaneous offers.
The basic idea is to give two separate deal proposals, but there are other ways to use
Meizos too.
I find that you can also usefully build Meizos into a term sheet by saying, on this issue,
let me give you a choice.
I'll agree to either this approach or that approach, whichever you prefer.
I trust your judgment.
That choice also seems to build trust and satisfaction.
Now so far, everything we've said in this session fosters creative negotiation, but
how do you negotiate distributively at the same time if you need to?
Here again, systematic preparation matters.
Skilled distributive negotiation starts as we've previously seen by doing two key things.
First, setting explicit best targets and also by setting clear walk away targets, that is
by setting a range.
You want to do that for each of the topics.
That way, you know what you're striving for on each issue and what you'll settle for,
if you must, without getting away the store.
And while you don't have to set an ambitious best target, let's assume here that you do
have a mandate to be ambitious.
So for example, in our negotiations to buy a new business, you might decide that your
best target for your top priority, non-competition, is 10 years, and your least acceptable target
is two years.
You might also decide that your best target for your second priority, financing, is to
pay 50% cash now, the rest later, and that the least acceptable target is all cash upfront.
Your next step is to craft a package that is well-cushioned, especially one that cushions
your favorite topics.
Doing that allows you to make concessions and still come out strongly on the issues
that are most valuable to you.
So for example, you might prepare to make this offer.
What if we offered you 12 years non-compete and payments of 50% cash now, 50% later?
Here you're cushioning your favorite topic, so you can make concessions and still wind
up getting your best target of 10 years.
You're ready to make faster and greater concessions on your lower priority topic, financing,
which you have not cushioned.
Now you have the chance to do well for yourself and still make trades.
But wait, isn't this draft offer too aggressive?
What happened to the creative side?
Good question.
Unless you do something more, you may wind up getting into a distributed struggle that
hurts you both.
So you want to signal in a couple of ways that you're flexible and genuinely want to
find a way that works for both sides.
One way to do that is to plan to preface the offer with language that clearly signals a
desire to be creative.
That's why we suggested language like this.
Now that we've gotten better acquainted and I have a better understanding of your concerns,
let me suggest a proposal.
I'm flexible about the specific terms as long as they serve my firm's interests.
Let me invite you to look at it and tell me what you think.
But wait, is this just puffery?
Isn't the actual proposal we've drafted very one-sided?
Good question.
To clearly signal that we're sincerely open to creative negotiating, we can temper our
draft proposal before we propose it.
One way is to soften it by planning to say something like this.
We propose something like a 12-year non-compete and payments of 50% cash now, 50% later.
Another way is to clearly signal your priorities and your flexibility by adding something like
this.
While each term is important to us, we might be more flexible on the payment terms.
Now again, you don't have to be ambitious.
You can choose to compromise, satisfy, or even sacrifice generally.
The key is being ready and making your choices intentionally.
To help manage all these tasks more efficiently and wisely, let me share with you now a simple
but powerful tool I've created called the Topics, Targets, and Tradeoffs grid.
The Topics, Targets, and Tradeoffs grid is a planning device that lets you get ready for
creative and competitive negotiating.
Because it's so short and simple, it has another advantage too.
It's something you can refer to in the thick of the negotiation itself.
American football coaches have something similar, a laminated play card that sums up the plays
they've worked on for days before the game.
In the heat of the game, they can't open up their laptops, but they can easily call
a play by glancing at the card.
The Topics, Targets, and Tradeoffs grid gives you something similar.
It's a handy reference tool that lets you make offers and trades in real time with
just a quick glance.
To create a Topics, Targets, and Tradeoffs grid, take a piece of paper and write four
column headings at the top.
Topics, Targets, Tradeoffs between topics, and Tradeoffs within topics.
We'll develop it in a moment.
But first, notice something about the grid we're creating.
The Targets section will give you the key information you need to plan for the distributive
side of the talks.
The two Tradeoffs sections will give you the key information you need to plan for the collaborative
side of the talks.
And the first column is the Topics column, that is, the agenda.
The issues we'll want or need to discuss during the negotiation.
Let's create a list of topics for our company acquisition talks by listing under that heading
two topics, payment terms, and non-compete.
Of course, for a real-life acquisition deal, we might have several dozen topics, but let's
keep it simple for the sake of learning.
So congratulations, you've just created a draft agenda for the upcoming talks.
Why is an agenda so important?
Several reasons.
First, as we've seen, it's much easier to make trades between topics if you know what
the topics are.
Second, it's also much easier to prioritize your topics if you know what the topics are.
Third, by thinking early about an agenda, you're equipping yourself to begin to shape
your talks with the other side.
You've probably seen on the news some diplomats say something like this, the status of the
capital of our beloved homeland is non-negotiable in the upcoming peace talks.
There, the diplomat is trying to shape the agenda by refusing to make concessions on
a particular issue, by taking it out of the conversation altogether.
If she succeeds, she's won an important victory for her side before the talks even begin.
You can also do this directly by suggesting an agenda to the other side.
Doing that, at an appropriate moment, can help both sides gear up to the talks and so
have a more constructive and efficient discussion.
So for example, you might email the other negotiator something like this, I enjoyed
our first conversation last week and look forward to our next meeting Friday.
To make good use of the time, I thought it would be helpful to hear list things we'll
probably want to cover.
Let me know what you think.
The next part of the topics, targets and trade-offs grid is the target section.
And notice that it's a plural, targets.
Here, you're going to note your ranges for each topic, that is, your best target and
your walk away.
As we've seen, that helps you manage the distributive side effectively and later, you
can use it to help you cushion your first offer.
The third part of the grid is the trade-offs between topics section, that is, your priorities.
We've said that knowing your priorities lets you trade the cheap for the dear.
Here, you would simply note that non-compete is your number one priority and payment terms
number two.
That lets you trade some of one for more of the other.
The last column of the grid is the trade-offs section.
The last column of the grid is the trade-offs within topic section, that is, your best creative
options.
Here, you can put your creative bargaining skills to best use by listing for each issue
the most promising creative ways you've thought of satisfying the interests there.
So, for example, what if you're at an impasse on the non-compete issue?
Drawing from your earlier brainstorming list of, say, six different creative options, you
cherry-pick the two or three best and put them here.
One promising idea might be an exclusive consulting contract for the seller that pays you to stay
loyal to you.
Another might be an employment contract.
Once you've completed the grid, you can play with it by using it to craft several package
deals.
As we've seen, you can craft an opening offer using the principles we've discussed.
You can also go further and develop some creative proposals where you mix and trade different
terms in creative and favorable ways.
That's good to have handy.
When you're not sure what to do during the talks, you can suggest one of these deals,
or some variation of them.
It's also very wise to use the grid to identify the worst acceptable offer.
That can act as a bright line test, a learning you when the other's offer is just terrible.
So there it is, the topics, targets, and trade-offs grid.
I find that it can be very helpful getting me focused, creative, competitive, and ready
for negotiations.
If I could only bring one piece of paper to a negotiation, that's the sheet I'd bring.
And I'm not alone.
Students, colleagues, and I have done some informal experiments with such tools and found
that they can dramatically improve performance in simulated negotiations.
So I challenge you to try it out by taking 20 minutes to create one before your next
serious negotiation.
But now I want to go beyond the grid and look a bit further at the human dynamics of the
challenge we're exploring.
To negotiate wisely and warmly without damaging trustworthiness calls on us to do more than
just plan well.
It calls on us to take care to use the techniques we've discussed previously to show real respect
and consideration.
That ability to wisely convey a respectful tone and win warmly may be especially important
to women.
We've all heard about the pay gap that women face.
Partly that gap is due to sexism.
As Linda Babcock and Sarah Lashiver found in research leading to their book Women Don't
Ask, it's also due to the fact that women rightly sense they pay a high social cost when
they ask for more, one that men don't often have to pay.
When a man asks for more, studies find his superiors find him as assertive, confident
and reasonable.
When a woman uses the same language to ask for more salary, her superiors view her as
pushy, aggressive and worse.
So it's not enough to simply tell women to overcome their hesitation and assertively
ask for more because doing so plays into that social cost, but it's possible for women
to win warmly in their professional negotiations for themselves by applying our negotiation
principles to the gender gap.
Later research by Babcock and by Harvard's Hannah Reilly Bowles suggests that reframing
can help women in compensation talks and beyond.
The study was led by Bowles and found that women are more likely to be successful if
they explain why their request is appropriate, but in terms that also communicate that they
care about maintaining good relationships at work.
For example, instead of saying, it's not fair I'm getting paid less, it might be
more effective to say, Alan suggested I check with you about salary.
Since I know the company rightly prides itself on being fair, I thought it might be useful
if we check some benchmarks and see what's reasonable these days.
What do you think?
Again, that's not a script, it's just an example.
By the way, don't let anyone tell you that women are worse negotiators than men.
A remarkable study of women in legislatures around the world found that in truth, women
are probably better by a number of key benchmarks, but when advocating for themselves, women
often face a social penalty, men don't face, which is why while reframing is useful for
everyone, it may be especially useful for women when they're advocating for themselves.
That matters to me for several reasons, but none more than this, I'm a father raising
two future women and I want them and all my women students to get fair outcomes.
Now that we've developed the ability to dance and box, to manage the tension between the
creative and the distributive sides, we can go beyond these foundational aspects and wreck
it, recognize that there are hidden features to a negotiation that can profoundly shape
the outcome. Some of these things hide in plain sight at the table and some are in the
air around it. Miss these hidden aspects and you may be unhappily surprised by the results.
See them and you may have much better outcomes. Specifically, we're first talking about the
timing and the setting for the negotiations, an increasingly complex question in the age
of advanced communications. We're also talking about the influential players away from the
table and the political help and challenges they bring with them. It's to that rich and
nuanced side of the work that we turn next.
