One reason why negotiation is literally not leisure is because of the way it seems to
invite manipulative tricks and the way it dangerously tempts negotiators to cut corners
and compromise their own standards of conduct.
A classic example of these dangers arises when you're buying a new car.
Most people say they don't enjoy buying a new car, in part because they fear having
to deal with the car dealer's sharp bargaining tactics.
Many car dealers, perhaps most, are quite reasonable, but their reputation has long
been questionable.
In the following clip, watch and see if there are signs the car buyer's fears may be justified.
That allowance on your old car is pretty steep, but if you're OK with this...
Hold on there, you haven't agreed to my terms.
Well, these are your terms, Mr. Armstrong, but I'll do my best to get the bus to go for
them.
No, he'd better.
Everything all right?
The boss wants to know if I'm out of my head talking about $150 over market value.
The deal's off?
Oh, dear.
No, he'll play along with us.
He'll give you $100 over market value on this car with overdrive.
On that basis, he might consider it.
Might?
Well, that's what he said.
I think I can swing it with him.
As this remarkable Ford training film suggests, decades ago car manufacturers were actually
training their salespeople to use a version of the old My Boss Says I Need More Money
gambit to get more out of the deal.
As we will see, there are names for these gambits, and many others you may encounter
in a negotiation.
What should we make of these sorts of tactics?
Do they work?
Should we try them ourselves?
Are there ways to diffuse them?
And more generally, what ethical traps do we face in negotiations?
And what should we say or do about them?
Does anything go beyond the moral case for ethical integrity?
Are there any practical reasons to focus on ethical dilemmas that we or the other side
may face?
In this session, we'll take a close look at these problems.
We'll look at the very practical ways to anticipate very specific traps and temptations,
see why they are dangerous, look at very specific ways to defeat them, and in the process,
strongly reduce your anxiety and increase your confidence.
Before we get to specifics, let me share a more general observation.
Hopefully, you've noticed throughout the course that integrity, credibility, and honesty
are running keys to negotiating success.
Conversely, you may have noticed that a reputation for greediness can backfire.
In that sense, everything about negotiation affects ethics and vice versa, and so the
last thing we want to do is ghettoize ethical questions in some isolated standalone matter
like a required half-credit course you have to pass to graduate, quite the opposite.
We have to be careful here.
The old bromide, good ethics is good business, gets us into trouble when we have to choose
between the two.
Sometimes, good ethics is bad business, and we'll have to grapple with that fact.
But if you think negotiation excellence requires moral compromise, notice we have a lot of evidence
accumulating in our course that quite the opposite is true.
Let's start by looking at the subject of sharp bargaining tactics, those ethically
questionable high-pressure manipulative gambits that many negotiators try to use.
The good news is that you already know how to cope with and defeat sharp bargaining tactics.
That's because from our previous session, you learned about systematic preparation when
you learned about the eye foresaw preparation mnemonic.
The eye foresaw is like a first aid kit, the first line of defense you can turn to whenever
you may face sharp bargaining tactics.
When it doesn't overcome every gambit you'll face, it very often can give you real guidance.
We will complement its power with some other basic ideas we will explore and see how it
can further enhance your effectiveness in the face of questionable tactics.
Here then are some of the most common sharp bargaining tactics, nibbling, limited authority,
commitment tactics, threats, lies and intimidation, time tactics, delay and rushing, double talk.
No doubt there are others that come to mind that you may be eager to learn about as well.
Don't worry, while we can never cover every tactic, our goal is to see how to apply our
principles and tools so that when we are faced with other tactics, we'll have a strategy
to respond well.
First, let's look at nibbling.
Let me ask you to imagine that you are buying a pair of new glasses from my optician shop
here in Brooklyn.
Ok, let's see how these fit on you.
Ok, is that comfortable?
Bling please?
Ok, while I make some adjustments, let me tell you a little bit about these glasses.
The frames are $150, plus the nose pieces which are $10 each, plus the ear pieces which
are $15 each, and that's for the basic frame in 10, and if you want the aluminum that's
an additional $50, blink again please.
The lenses are $75 each, and if you want them scratch resistant, it's an additional
$25 per lens, and we can have this for you in two weeks, or if you want them sooner that
there's a $50 rush fee, plus shipping and handling which is $15 seen.
Now this is known as the Brooklyn Opticians routine, presumably named after some optician
in Brooklyn who rose to fame pulling this stunt.
As you probably realized, my character was adding on cost after cost, world without end,
and was prepared to continue until you finally said, wait a minute, that's too much.
It's an extreme example of a nibble.
As we briefly saw in an earlier session, nibbling is a sharp bargaining tactic where the other
negotiator keeps asking for more and more, implying that we're very close to an agreement
and that there's just one more thing left to add.
In fact, as I mentioned in that previous lecture, some refer to this gambit as yes, but tactics.
You've seen this one many times.
When you buy many products by mail, shipping and handling is often a profit center for
the seller.
When you buy a prefix meal and the waiter asks you casually if you'd like coffee, you
belatedly discover that the coffee costs $5 a cup.
My beautiful little daughter Rachel, three years old, like almost every child, often
practices nibbling tactics at bedtime, asking for one more minute in the bathtub and then
a minute later asking for five more minutes.
Card dealers, of course, are legendary for this gambit.
The opening video is a classic example.
There, the card dealer used nibbling to get a second bite at the apple after the couple
had thought they had a deal.
What can you do about nibbling tactics?
Several things.
Let's start by remembering the eye for salt mnemonic and asking if any of the letters
there can remind us of a concept that may protect us.
The first and most compelling answer is the letter A, which stands for alternatives to
agreement.
One of the best ways that you can diffuse and defeat nibbling tactics is to find an
excellent best alternative to negotiate an agreement.
Want a ruin of Brooklyn Opticians' day?
Early on, as he starts to run his routine on you, say something like this, well, before
we go any further, let me share with you with respect that I do have another quote for a
similar pair of glasses from Acme.
Here, I brought the ad.
As you can see, they have a special this week.
I wonder if you can do better.
I've actually had that very conversation with an optician, and after excusing herself,
she returned a few minutes later and offered a better deal than Acme was offering.
As a dealer at the infamous Landshark Chevrolet in Mobile, Alabama put it, the last thing
you want for the customer to do is leave or he'll comparison shop you.
But there are other ways to diffuse and defeat nibbling tactics.
On factual research, an independent criteria can help a lot.
The letters F and I in the I foresaw it, mnemonic.
Sharing your research, ongoing rates, blue book values, expert valuations, catalog listings
and the like can tacitly shift the conversation to reasonable standards.
To be sure I was being fair, I researched the invoice price for the car on Consumer
Reports website and learned their recommendation is that customers pay 3% above invoice price
that you paid for the car.
As we've seen, when things are not going well, it's often a very good idea to change
something, to change who you are negotiating with, the W. I wonder if I might chat with
the manager, the setting and scheduling for negotiation.
I think we'll come back after we've had a chance to learn more about prices and values
and you're less busy.
Or the options, the O in the mnemonic.
This last point brings us to an additional powerful way to deal with nibbling tactics.
Rather than letting someone simply say to you, yes, but I must have more, you can refuse
to concede and instead insist on trading.
We've seen this idea briefly before and we can say no, I can't just give you more,
but if you can make me happier on other fronts, I might be willing to consider a different
price.
Indeed, in our car dealer training film, the buying couple would have been wise to say
something like this, well, we're disappointed that your boss has changed the price from
what we were first discussing, or at least has signaled after encouraging us to think
that this was going to be the price telling us no, we need more from you.
We understand that the discussion is back to square one, so let's start over and let's
agree that nothing is agreed until everything is agreed.
We'll look at other sharp tactics in a moment, but first, I want to give you a word of warning.
If you spend too much time thinking about sharp tactics, you can start to think that
everyone, even your own mother, is pulling one of these stunts on you.
Don't believe it.
Most of the time, most people are not playing these kinds of games with you, so be alert,
but don't be crazy.
And tempting as these tactics may be to use yourself, keep in mind that they can easily
backfire, kill the deal, damage your reputation, and cripple or kill the relationship.
It turns out they're usually not necessary.
Skilled negotiators get high returns without having to take these kinds of high risks.
Now, back to our list.
A second sharp bargaining tactic is limited authority.
Here, the negotiator says, I'm sorry, but I don't have any permission to give you the
things the thing that you're asking for.
There's nothing intrinsically wrong with limiting a negotiator's latitude to agree,
but in practice, organizations and negotiators can use it in a manipulative way.
The rent-a-car agency lets you reserve the Cadillac, but when you arrive to pick it up,
the clerk tells you, I can only give you a subcompact, the manager isn't here, and
I have no authority to give you another car.
The diplomat tells you during peace talks, thank you for these concessions, unfortunately
I have no authority to reciprocate.
And as we saw, the car dealer may encourage you to think you have a deal, so you get emotionally
committed to buying the car, then claim as manager won't let you do the deal and must
get more from you.
Limited authority relies on the counterintuitive truth that often in negotiation, weakness is
a form of strength.
For example, imagine this statement, Mr. President, you are the most powerful man in
the world, but I am a weak leader of a poor country with no authority here, I cannot give
you very much at all, but surely you can give me anything you want.
The strange reality that a powerful figure may be vulnerable at the bargaining table
may explain why CEOs and presidents often stay away from the bargaining table.
That's because they may wind up giving away the store.
The strange power of limited authority may also explain why many companies ask a human
resource executive to negotiate the terms of a new job, and then give him little bargaining
room to make concessions.
What can you do about limited authority?
First, notice the importance of determining early on in the conversation how much authority
the other negotiator has.
Are you empowered to commit your organization?
If the answer is no, the negotiator may be virtually acting as a mail carrier, that is,
she may have no authority beyond just conveying a message, if so, there's little point in
trying to negotiate with her.
Here one solution is to change who you are negotiating with, if possible, the W of the
eye foresaw it.
One way to do that in a face-saving way is to first build a relationship, discuss authority,
and then invite the negotiator to include a more senior person.
This may take some negotiation in its own right.
Why should the other negotiator concede on that point?
There's no one answer, but some possibilities might include industry norms, and your peers
always include the senior manager, interests, I know you want to resolve this quickly, she
can help us do that, and alternatives to agreement.
I really don't want to have to take this matter to the Department of Consumer Affairs.
But there may be other ways to win even if you can't reach a more senior figure.
Imagine the other negotiator says, I don't have authority to give you more money this
fiscal year.
Did you hear that?
Her words might suggest an important response.
I understand you might say, so let's talk about what you do have authority to do.
I wonder what creative options you might have latitude to give me that would help us solve
this.
For example, one possibility might be to look at deferred compensation you might continue.
In 2009, a national survey of human resource executives found that most had instructions
not to agree to hire salary offers, much to their job candidates' frustration.
But the survey also found that many HR executives did have authority to make other concessions,
such as on moving expenses, vacation, and start date.
Yet most candidates weren't asking about these options, so HR executives were generally
not offering them.
You get that?
Asking about what the other negotiator does have authority to discuss can open up real
opportunity for better agreement.
Commitment tactics are a related sharp bargaining tactic.
Here the negotiator constrains herself, saying she is promised not to make the concession
you request and that if she does make it, she'll suffer some clear penalty.
For example, I promised my wife I would sleep on the couch for months if I sold this cradle
for less than $100.
To be successful, a commitment tactic has to be credible and clear.
Once a negotiator has made one like that, it's hard for her to back down without losing
face.
So, the basic role for dealing with commitment tactics is to help the other negotiator find
a face-saving way to get out of it.
One way to do that is to simply ignore it.
Sometimes the other negotiator will quietly drop the commitment and start making concessions.
But that doesn't always work.
Business agent Bob Wolfe expected to get top dollar for his marquee client, basketball
player Larry Bird, in talks with the Boston Celtics.
But the KG General Manager, Red Arbach, went on city-wide television and announced, I will
never pay a penny more than $600,000 for Larry Bird's contract and I will quit before I
do.
Now, to Wolfe's surprise, the bargaining power shifted to the Celtics, thanks to Arbach's
commitment tactic.
What would you do?
Wolfe solved the problem with another letter of the I for Sought, the W. He changed who
he was negotiating with.
To do that, he reached out to the owners of the club.
They eventually agreed to a million-dollar contract.
At the press conference, Arbach said, I said I would never pay a penny more than $600,000
and I never did.
The owners did.
That's face-saving.
And here, as in many other situations, developing your alternatives to agreement, the A and
the I for Sought, can help.
I'm sorry to hear you've made that promise to your wife.
It looks like we may not be able to buy the crib and I'll have to buy one from the family
across the street.
But don't end there.
By adding a face-saving way out of the impasse, you can get the talk started again and help
both sides.
One way to do that is to suggest a creative option that might allow the negotiator to
say, okay, I can agree to that because it doesn't break my commitment.
So you might offer a deal that lets the other negotiator say, well, I promised my wife I
wouldn't take less than $100, but I didn't say about what form of payment I would accept
or when I would accept it, and I guess I could accept $50 plus that toy car you brought
with you.
Or you might share some new factual research or a specific independent criterion that the
other negotiator can cite as a reason for change.
Well, I wasn't aware that cribs like this one are about to become obsolete.
I don't think my wife would expect me to charge top dollar under those circumstances.
What about threats, lies, and intimidation?
Life and bluster can make any negotiation miserable, so much so that it has actually shaped the
course of history.
Much of the run-up to World War I and World War II, for example, was filled with it, and
in one case, we'll explore later, it may have nearly led to nuclear holocaust.
But because statesmen, students, and everyone else have to grapple at times with these emotionally
fraught and psychologically difficult tactics, we'll explore them more in detail in our
session on emotions and psychology.
But here, as a taste of coming attractions, we can briefly note that one of your best
protections is role playing out, the worst case scenario, having someone on your team
play at the other side using lots of threats, bluffs, and aggressive language to get you
emotionally ready.
Better preparation for that kind of attack has helped many negotiators, and we'll see
how it can help you in a later session.
What about delay and rushing?
These are sharp tactics that use the clock in manipulative ways.
Sometimes a negotiator will try to slow down the talks until you become desperate.
Sometimes conversely, he'll try to rush you to say yes without knowing enough to tell
that you're making a wise decision.
What can you do?
Here, the key point is that scheduling the talks and the deadline is negotiable.
That's the S in the eye for sought.
One way you can speed things up is by offering a creative way to satisfy the supposed interest
behind the other side's delay.
If you can't make the meeting because you can't find a good flight, don't worry,
we have a crack travel team, and I know we can get you a number of choices, and if that
doesn't work, we can meet by video conference.
We can also change their incentives for delay by developing your critical options and alternatives
to agreement.
If we agree soon, we may be able to make the deal attractive for you in several ways.
We hope we won't have to go elsewhere with our good ideas.
If they want to rush you before you have time to think, you can negotiate for more time
as we've seen.
Often, it's simply enough to ask for it.
We're interested in the car, but we'll need more time to do some comparison shopping.
In other situations, you may need to trade for it.
What if we pushed the deadline back two weeks and adjusted the signing bonus so that if
I sign in seven days, it's 9,000, and if I sign in 14 days, it's 8,000?
Or you might simply ask politely, drawing on the good faith you developed through your
poor building.
And of course, several of the other letters of the IFA sought may offer additional clues
and suggestions.
You can negotiate with someone else who can influence the deadline, for example.
Now let me share with you a sharp tactic I nearly fell victim to myself.
An insurance salesman once tried to sell me medical insurance.
I asked him if it covered a specific claim I knew I would have in the future.
He said yes, it did.
When I asked him to show me where in the policy it said so, he showed me the language which
I read over, but it was confusing and didn't seem to say what he was saying.
So I asked him, and he looked puzzled and that I could read the provision that way,
and then he tried to explain it again a bit more slowly.
I'm sorry, maybe I'm tired of missing something, I said, but I'm just not understanding what
you're saying.
He doesn't seem to say that, what am I missing?
So he sighed a bit, and he walked me through it as if I were a sixth grader.
Still no luck.
After the fourth try, he finally gave up and said, well, maybe my manager can help you
see that it does cover you.
So we called his manager in Dallas.
Five minutes into the conversation, the manager finally told me, frankly, you wouldn't be
covered.
The salesman was using a sharp tactic called double talk.
He was hoping I'd be too cowed to admit that I didn't understand.
Like him, others will try to get over on our fear of looking dumb, on our fear of admitting
that we don't understand, on our fear of buying time to do our homework, and that brings
us full circle.
The eye for soreth by its nature summons us to do these things, but it's critical to
appreciate that nothing can help us if we're afraid to admit that we don't understand
what the other person is talking about.
Fortunately, this whole course is designed to reassure you that negotiation is not about
thinking quickly on your feet and being smart, but about being humble, eager to learn, but
unwilling to fake it.
Want to ruin a double talkers day?
Simply say, I'm sorry, I don't understand.
Then ask for clarification, or time to review on your own.
The smarter you are, the more comfortable you are doing that.
Nobel laureate Richard Feynman was famous for his ability to do just that.
When he served on the commission investigating the causes of the space shuttle Challenger's
explosion, he overcame the technocratic double talk of the rocket manufacturer.
How?
By admitting he didn't understand, doing a simple experiment, and so demonstrating that
the rocket was fatally flawed.
Now that we've reviewed some of the most common sharp tactics, let's focus on the
ethical traps.
Dilemmas and temptations you face in negotiation.
Let's start by taking a quick test.
I would like you to answer yes or no to each of these three questions.
First, is it appropriate in a business negotiation to ask for more than you expect to wind up
with?
Just write yes or no if you would.
Two, is it appropriate in business negotiation to conceal your worst acceptable outcome?
Third, is it appropriate in a business negotiation to misrepresent material facts to your benefit?
If you're like most of my students, you probably said yes to the first two questions.
Those are appropriate.
What about the third?
What about misrepresentation?
Sometimes my younger students split on this one, but I've noticed a curious trend.
The older the student, the more they say no, it is inappropriate to misrepresent material
facts.
They're not alone.
In anonymous surveys of 700 executives, researchers from Harvard and Ohio State universities found
respondents overwhelmingly disapprove of misrepresentation, that is, bluffing and lying.
Now notice, I am not taking a position on this question at the moment, I'm just observing
what people say.
Now of course survey data doesn't tell us what people actually do, it's possible
executives answered hypocritically, but a curious fact is that they were answering anonymously
and so were free to be candid.
These data suggest that bluffing and lying are real temptations, especially for inexperienced
negotiators, but that as we get older and more experienced, we see their risks and costs
more plainly.
And that's a starting point for our look at ethical dilemmas.
We're going to face negotiators with different approaches and different ideals.
We typically assume that negotiation is all about being tough, savvy and cunning, so it's
worth pausing and observing that not everyone holds that view.
And indeed, while some negotiators prosper using dirty tricks and manipulation, others
do as well or better without it.
In his excellent book, Bargaining for Advantage, Wharton Professor Negotiations Richard Shell
notes that negotiators tend to fall within one of three categories.
One type are poker players.
Those who say negotiation is a game of poker.
Another is the idealists.
Those who say do the right thing even if it hurts.
A third are the pragmatists.
Those who say what goes around comes around.
If you take a poker player's view, there's no such thing as unethical bluffing since
it's all part of the game.
But the Harvard, Ohio State studies suggest that that outlook may not cut as much ice
as you might first think.
As Shell points out, one problem with the poker school is that it assumes that everyone
treats bargaining as a game, but they don't.
Poker players may not care, but they may wind up suffering if others dislike their attitude.
Also, poker players assume everyone knows the rules, but of course they don't.
Lastly, a poker player may face legal problems in some cases if he bluffs too much in a negotiation,
but let's acknowledge that bluffing is a real practice, and sometimes it does pay
off, at least in the short run.
The big problem with the idealists approach is that it can leave you vulnerable to exploitation.
That raises special problems when an idealist represents someone else.
Like Professor Shell, I strongly lean toward the idealist approach, and I believe we can
strengthen it by striving to be savvy as a serpent, harmless as a dove.
Bob Wolfe's advice to be smart and honest resonates here.
An idealist need not be naive, unprepared, or incapable of advocating for her own needs.
Much of our work in the course is designed to help you do these things well.
The pragmatist is more cautious about ethically questionable conduct, like bluffing, but
only to the extent it costs more in the long run than she gains in the short run.
So a pragmatist might sometimes choose to bluff and use other iffy tactics.
Let's acknowledge here that even Abraham Lincoln could be quite pragmatic.
Asked by Congress if it was true, confederate peace negotiators were in Washington, D.C.
Lincoln replied that to his knowledge no such agents were in the capital.
But Lincoln knew there were some agents a few miles away.
Let's acknowledge too that the Bible sometimes commends characters such as Rahab, who lied
to her enemies to protect Hebrew agents.
Beyond the techniques we've explored for responding to sharp bargaining tactics, what
can you do to cope with unethical tactics by the other side?
As Shell notes, assuring that you'll deal with each other again and avoiding one-time
transactions when possible can help build relationships and trust and reduce the temptation
for short run cheating.
More generally, relying on recommendations, referrals, and introductions through your
relational network can reduce the likelihood that you'll find yourself dealing with others
who are unscrupulous.
As we saw previously in the course, it can also help to be ready to ask for trust mechanisms
when lying or unethical behavior seems possible.
A trust mechanism is any arrangement that strengthens one side's confidence that the
other side is acting appropriately.
So for example, if the other side promises you that the car is in good condition, you
might reply, excellent, then I'm sure you will be comfortable guaranteeing it and putting
some money in escrow for the next couple of months to support the guarantee.
We'll explore in more detail later the universe of ways to manage and overcome the
trust problem in negotiations in this form.
So here are some challenges to put this session to use.
To diffuse sharp tactics before a serious negotiation, have a friend role play with you
and throw some tough ones at you, then think about the eye for so it to help you spot wise
ways to respond.
Separately, to make sure ethical problems don't catch you unaware, think now about
which ethical school you feel most comfortable with before a serious negotiation, and before
any specific negotiation jot down likely ethical traps you or the other negotiator may face.
Most of the time, the problem we face in the negotiation is not so much the other person
is acting sharply toward us, but simply that he's not persuaded to agree with us.
Though we've already found a host of ways to get to wise yes, there are lots of other
ideas that can help us persuade reluctant counterparts, win their agreement, and even
get their enthusiastic commitment.
We'll turn to those ideas next.
