In
the remarkable documentary The Fog of War, former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara tells
a shocking story about the trip he took to Vietnam in 1995. McNamara was one of the architects
of the Vietnam War. He went to find out if the terrible loss of life that both sides suffered
there could have been avoided. McNamara met with former North Vietnamese
foreign minister Tru. The first day the two men almost came to blows. McNamara told the
former foreign minister that American intentions were good. But Tru wasn't having any of
it. You're totally wrong, the foreign minister said. We were fighting for our independence.
You were fighting to enslave us. McNamara insisted that nothing could be further from
the truth. The U.S. had been fighting to keep Vietnam from falling under the control
of communist China and Russia. Mr. McNamara, you must have never read a history book, said
the former foreign minister. If you had, you would have known we were in pawns of the Chinese
or the Russians. McNamara, didn't you know that? Didn't you know we've been fighting
the Chinese for a thousand years? We were fighting for our independence.
Can it be that one of the most tragic wars of the twentieth century was fought in part
over a cultural misunderstanding? It's almost unbelievable to imagine such a thing. Yet
McNamara's story suggests it may be so. Cultural differences add another layer of difficulty
to conflicts and negotiations. It may seem as if cultural differences are just the stuff
of high diplomacy and international business, but we all face them and often much more frequently
than we realize. As a lawyer, I routinely encountered cultural
disconnections with my own clients, who often shook their heads and marveled at us lawyer
types, our strange ways of thinking, talking, working, different departments within the
same company, different professions working on the same project, colleagues and neighbors
from different regions are all examples of cultural differences. And so are differences
within extended families. The comedy hit movie Meet the Parents riffs on the insane feelings
of alienation, distrust and misunderstanding that can arise among in-laws.
The best definition of culture I've ever heard is simply the way we do things around
here. And if you think about it, the moment you leave your office, your home, your street
corner, you're moving to a place where people do things differently. Small wonder we often
feel like people we're dealing with are from Neptune. Who are these people?
The cultural differences can also create surprising and hidden opportunities. For many years, American
chicken producers routinely threw away chicken feet, since as everyone knew, they were inedible
and no one in his right mind would want them. Then, someone pointed out that over a billion
people in Asia considered chicken feet to be a delicacy, and they were increasingly acquiring
the money to buy it. Today, many American chicken producers report that chicken feet
export, chicken feet exports are one of their most profitable businesses. How many millions
of dollars did they lose during the years that they threw their chicken feet away?
So in this session, we'll look at specific traps, principles and tools that can help
us negotiate well in the face of cross-cultural confusion.
Let me start with a brief disclaimer. I once read an article about cross-cultural negotiation
that was so at pains to avoid anything that even slightly hinted at stereotyping that the
article did little more than reassure the reader about that very point, I'm not going
to stereotype. But let's face it, the very act of discussing a group of people collectively
and identifying common behaviors they might share by its nature implies a measure of stereotyping.
You and I will probably never meet someone who solely and completely embodies the qualities
of a typical American, a typical Muslim, a typical lawyer, a typical African American,
because no such person actually exists. In talking about culture, we're talking about
tendencies and generalities that sometimes are helpful, just as any abstraction is sometimes
helpful, sometimes extremely imprecise. So I will count on you to filter our discussion
through that premise and to trust that I approach the subject with humility and a desire
to keep the subtleties very much in mind. So let me start by sharing a story about my
own education in international and cross-cultural negotiation. Years ago, when I was a junior
corporate attorney, I attended a 12-person meeting in my New York law firm's conference
room to discuss the key contract in a $30 million aircraft deal. Seated around the table were
executives and lawyers from Japan, Norway, Netherlands, France, and the United States.
Here's how one of these meetings goes. Everyone has a draft copy of the contract, which they've
read before the meeting. The chairperson starts the meeting by inviting comments on the first
line of the first page, then the second line, then the third, and so on, page after page,
hour after hour, until the group has reviewed the whole contract.
This draft contract went for 50 pages of single-space type. Chairperson began the meeting punctually
at 9 that morning, asking if anyone had comments on the first line. So he did. Until the French
banker raised his hand emphatically and said, no, no, no, no, no. There is language in this
line that is totally unacceptable, intolerable. And then for five minutes, like a lawyer giving
a closing argument to a jury, he explained why the language had to change. When it was
done, there was a brief silence, and then this question, does anyone object to making
a change, the chairperson asked? No. Okay, so the chairperson, let's note it and then
move on to the second line. Any comments? Again, no one had any. Until the French banker
once again threw up his hand. No, no, no, he said, I am very, very, very sorry, but here
too the current language is totally unacceptable. And this time, for four minutes, he gave another
impassioned argument for a different language. Again, there was a pause. Does anyone object
to making that change, asked the chairperson? No one did. Okay, so the chairperson, let's
note that down and move on to the third line. And sure enough, yet again, the French banker
strenuously objected. Things went on like this on almost every line until an hour in
the chairperson called a break. We were still on the first paragraph. Now, during the break,
I badly wanted to complain to my boss, an experienced senior associate who was also
at the meeting. You've got to do something. I badly wanted to say the French banker is
nuts. He's killing us. We'll all be at this all week at this rate. What's wrong with
that guy? But if I had, my boss would have been right to say this to me. No, Freeman,
you're completely wrong. There is a problem here, but it's not with the French banker.
It's you. You're the junior-most person in the room, and you've obviously never
seen an international deal before, so you think everyone should behave exactly the way
you do, but they don't. There's a lot of ways to negotiate, and most of the people
around the table understand that. So I suggest you pay attention, listen, learn, and don't
complain about things you don't understand, and it would have been right.
Social scientists have learned that there are three particularly typical problems that
arise with cross-cultural negotiations, and I was suffering from all of them. Self-selection,
attribution, and ethnocentrism. Self-selection is the belief that you mean what I understand.
I understood little of what the French banker was saying because his manner was so mystified
me that I assumed he was just fussing and didn't really mean anything at all, but he did. Attribution
is the belief that it's obvious why you do that. I thought it was obvious that the French
banker was crazily trying to waste our time and run his mouth just to hear himself talk.
He wasn't. Ethnocentrism is the belief that my way is the right way. That's why I wanted
my boss to intervene. I thought the French banker should straighten up and fly right,
as if the only way to function at a meeting is the way some young New York lawyer does.
I'm not the only one who has suffered from these problems. In 1969, President Richard
Nixon asked visiting Japanese Prime Minister Sato if he would do an important economic favor
for the United States. Mr. President, the Prime Minister replied, I will try my best.
Sato later declined to do the favor, and Nixon was furious, convinced that the Prime Minister
had lied to his face. There is some speculation that that misunderstanding soured the Nixon
administration toward Japan for years to come. What happened there? Nixon assumed Sato
meant what Nixon understood, and so Nixon couldn't understand why Sato was now refusing. Normal
people don't act like that, he assumed. But in fact, Japanese communication tends to be
much more indirect than American communication. Social scientists call it a high-context culture
that relies on subtle, context-specific face-saving cues Americans often miss. To a Japanese,
the comment, I will do my best, is a clear but very polite indication that the answer
is probably no.
Similarly, in 1970, Chinese Communist Party chairman Mao Zedong tried to signal that he
was open to diplomatic talks with the United States. He did it by allowing himself to be
photographed with an American journalist on the reviewing stand at Tiananmen Square.
To Mao, such an unusual appearance by the Chinese leader with a Westerner in such a
prominent place clearly signaled a change in Chinese attitudes toward the West. But
as Henry Kissinger put it, the signal was so oblique that our crude, Occidental minds
completely missed the point.
What's going on with incidents like these? Why did Mao, Nixon, and I get things so mixed
up in our dealings with people from other cultures? Let's use my misadventure with
the French banker as a test case, and let's take as a hypothesis the idea that in a sense
culture is an iceberg.
When we deal with someone from a different culture, we notice their behavior. That's
the tip of the iceberg. But hidden below the surface, our values and history were usually
oblivious to, things that shape and direct much of that behavior. With that model in
mind, let's ask me and the French banker three questions. How should we deal with conflict?
Is disagreement bad or good? And how long should we take to deal with the conflict?
Like a stereotypical American, this was my answer to the first question. How should we
deal with conflict? Solve it. Be nice. But like a stereotypical Frenchman, this was the
French banker's answer. Debate the issues.
How about the second question? Is disagreement good or bad? My stereotypically American answer
was that it's impolite. Like a stereotypical Frenchman, the French banker's answer was
that the disagreements is natural and interesting.
And to the third question, how long should we take to deal with conflict? This was my
stereotypical American answer. Cut to the chase. Handle it quickly. But like a stereotypical
Frenchman, the French banker's answer was that we should spend some time on it.
Why are we taking such diametrically different approaches to such basic questions? The answers
start to emerge as we compare our hidden values and history.
American culture is shaped by the fact that many of its founders came from a Protestant
tradition. Pilgrims, early English settlers, and other Northern European settlers brought
a predominantly Protestant outlook with them. One of the key features of Protestantism is
its belief on the individual believer, its emphasis on the individual believer, and the
importance of simplicity in matters of faith. Protestantism emphasizes the believer's ability
to access God directly, without intermediaries such as priests and saints, and it takes
an egalitarian outlook in its emphasis on the priesthood of all believers. You can see
its focus on simplicity in many places. The great Protestant hymn begins, tis a gift to
be simple, tis a gift to be free. Most early American churches were small, simple plain
structures. These values may contribute to a quintessential American belief in the value
of clear, direct, plain speech as a hallmark of honesty. In 2008, John McCain, the public
and presidential nominee, toured the country on his Straight Talk Express bus. Earlier,
President Harry Truman gained new popularity in his best-selling 1973 book, Plain Speaking.
In practice, these values mean Americans tend to prefer clear, direct, succinct, explicit
communication between equals. As we've seen, many of our movie stars cultivate this quality.
Matt and the Idols like Gary Cooper, Harrison Ford, John Wayne, and almost every cowboy and
western movie star cultivate the ability to be laconic, a man of few words. So imagine
my amazement when the French banker spoke for more than five minutes to make a single
edit. In contrast, France has a history of Catholicism. Now, Catholicism and Protestantism
are part of the same religious family, both worship Jesus Christ, and they're similar
in many, many ways. But Catholicism traditionally emphasizes community, hierarchy, intercession,
and rich artistry. Catholic cathedrals are often quite extraordinary structures and can
accommodate thousands of worshipers at mass. The liturgy can be quite formal. Such a background
may lead to less emphasis on simplicity and directness.
The second difference between me and the French banker was that my country's culture
had an Anglo-Germanic heritage. These cultures tend to be more emotionally reserved. Queen
Elizabeth, for example, may be a wonderful woman, but you wouldn't expect her to be
emotionally effusive. Similarly, even though the United States is famous for Elvis, rock
and roll, and Las Vegas, and even though Americans can be infamous for being loud, American culture
contend toward emotional reserve. Here again, a negotiator like me might expect
other negotiators to be similarly reserved or, as we sometimes say, professional. As
one regional American business magazine put it, a professional must maintain his poise
even when facing a difficult situation. If a colleague treats you in a belligerent manner,
you should not resort to the same type of behavior. As another put it, it is imperative
that we learn self-discipline and keep our tongues in check.
In contrast, the French banker came from a Latin culture which is somewhat more comfortable
with emotional expressiveness. This may be where the stereotype of the Latin lover comes in,
comes from. It also may help explain French driving habits. In France, I was routinely
shocked by French driver's aggressiveness. As Richard Bernstein notes in his book Fragile
Glory, French driving habits have a lot to do with this French preference for personal expression.
So there was a French banker passionately arguing his point in a way that made perfect
sense to him, but little to me. The third difference comes from differences in the political
origins of the two modern countries. The United States is the first country that was literally
negotiated into existence through the U.S. Constitution and other founding documents.
Our veneration for that history has a lot to do with our fondness for political consensus.
Quintessential American Lyndon Johnson fervently believed that you could negotiate a deal with
anyone if you just got them into the room. In contrast, French history is punctuated by
revolution, political violence, and more in 1789, 1830, 1848, the Paris Commune of 1871,
and so on. Only in 1986 did France experience its first divided government with two political
parties sharing power. In contrast to the American tradition of negotiation,
the French have a tradition of confrontation. Let's quickly add that the French invented
modern diplomacy and much of the language of diplomacy to this day is French,
entente, détente, accord, chargé d'affaires, and so forth. Still, there's a reason why
France is famous for the saying, « Vive la différence ». This fondness for disagreement
may also stem from the fact that all French children are trained in Cartesian reasoning,
after the ideas of French philosopher René Descartes. It's an intellectual outlook much like
that of an attorney. In a sense, French children are raised to be lawyerly from an early age,
which may foster a love of argument unfamiliar to Americans.
Lastly, America's tradition of immigration and its understanding of the Enlightenment
may lead to a common belief in problem-solving and improvement. Americans love to talk about
reinventing themselves and have a strong fondness for hard work, practicality, and efficiency.
As Benjamin Franklin put it, time is money, and much of Franklin's life was devoted to
practical invention. So like many Americans, I saw negotiations the place to quickly fix problems
and get on with it. Time is money. In contrast, France never understood the Enlightenment in
such practical terms, and it is little or no tradition of immigration and the striving that
goes with it. And while French technology and business are among the best in the world,
French culture is closer to the idea that one works to live and doesn't live to work, that
urgency and dining or conversation or serious discussion is often very unappealing. Let's linger.
Years later, as I read about France's history and values, the French banker's approach at
the meeting made much more sense. When I later had the privilege of working in France,
moments of puzzlement or confusion didn't turn as often into irritation because I could begin
to connect with my colleague's behavior, connect my colleague's behavior with what I'd begun to
learn about their values. But without that understanding, I thought the French banker
seemed to be from Neptune. So one of the first principles of dealing with cultural difference
is that it can be very valuable to take time to learn about the other side's values and history.
It's just another important part of your preparation for negotiation with them. The idea
isn't to make yourself a master of the culture, but simply to be a little less surprised or confused
when you witness seemingly bizarre violations of rules that you hold dear. Simply reading a few
chapters of a book about her culture's history and values and talking with a native or two,
maybe watching a movie from that place, can give you a very good start in that direction.
But now let's go further and look at some of the most common culturally driven behavioral
differences and consider how the different rules cultures live by can shape and distort
how negotiators act and misunderstand each other. One of the most common points of cultural confusion
stems from different approaches to time. The rule in some cultures like my own in New York is
be punctual. Under this rule, more relaxed cultures can seem lazy at best. At worst,
they may be guilty of delaying tactics. Other cultures live by the rule people before punctuality.
Many Latin cultures and African cultures take this approach. Under this rule, a punctual
culture may be uptight at best. At worst, its members may be guilty of trying to rush them
and pressure them into a hurried and personal deal. A second common difference, which we saw in the
story of President Nixon's exchange with Japan's Japanese Prime Minister, turns on communication
styles. Some cultures like my New York culture live by the rule be direct. To someone like me,
from a low context direct culture, someone from a high context subtle culture can seem evasive,
inscrutable and dishonest. Why can't they just let their no be no and their yes be yes?
To a high context subtle culture, such as that in many Asian countries, a direct culture can seem
blunt, rude, arrogant and greedy. Also, they can understand someone from the direct culture to
be saying things he doesn't actually mean. Once while I was teaching in China, I casually asked
my host, I was just curious why was I placed in a different hotel than the one I usually stayed in
in previous visits. Within hours, they had moved me to that first hotel. I had no intention of asking
for such a change, but in a subtle culture, it sounded as if I had.
A third common cultural difference involves different attitudes toward the negotiation
relationship itself. Some business cultures, such as in the United States,
emphasize a transactional approach and see negotiation as an engineering task that should
anticipate and solve most of the likely problems that will arise, reducing everything to a detailed
agreement that the parties will closely follow. Other cultures take a much more relational approach
to negotiation and see agreement more as something like a marriage or a serious relationship that
must and will change as circumstances change without strong reliance on detailed terms and
conditions. The first time I taught in China, my host showed me the meeting hall on campus
where I would teach the following morning. The next morning, without explanation,
they asked me to get into a car and drove me 20 miles away from campus to an ornate conference
center. Why this change, I asked. Oh, they said, the students felt they wanted a fancier site for
the class, so we changed it overnight. In 20 years of teaching, I have never witnessed such a big
last-minute change at a Western program. If you come from a transactional culture,
you may think that a relational culture changes too quickly without regard to prior agreement.
Wait a minute. I thought we had a deal. I thought we had a plan. Because of the emphasis on relationship
building, a relationship culture can also seem way too slow. Can we please get down to business now?
If you come from a more relational culture, a transactional culture can seem
overweening and foolish, too locked into details to accept the inevitability of change.
When someone from a transactional culture insists on holding to the language of the contract,
his resentment can seem baffling and misplaced. Conversely, the transactional culture's eagerness
to get down to business can seem greedy, impersonal, and short-sighted.
But perhaps the most important cultural differences for us lie in our different attitudes toward
conflict itself. As we've seen, some cultures like the Americans tend to favor a problem-solving
approach. Others, like the French, tend to favor a more confrontational approach. Other cultures,
like China's, tend to favor a more face-saving approach. Again, these are large generalizations,
but they can serve as a starting point for deeper understanding. To each culture,
the others can seem problematic. They can seem argumentative, evasive, shallow, rude.
Are there wise ways to cope with different approaches to conflict?
Here, I'll argue that an interest-based bargaining approach may help bridge such
cultural gaps. As you recall, interest-based bargaining means focusing on underlying needs,
not positions, and satisfying the needs with creative options. Let me confess right here
my own cultural bias. Some have argued that interest-based bargaining itself reflects a Western
and perhaps an American approach to conflict. There may be some truth to that. But not much.
I've had the pleasure of teaching Americans, French, and Chinese in their home countries,
and in my experience, none of them are particularly familiar initially with interest-based bargaining.
But it is an approach that each can warmly embrace, and perhaps for good reason. True,
interest-based bargaining is a problem-solving approach, so it does appeal to Americans once
they learn it. But as we've seen, interest-based bargaining strongly welcomes argument,
disagreement, and criticism. Precisely because the more the other person does these things,
the more it tends to reveal her interests. So counterintuitively, an interest-based
bargaining approach can work well in a confrontational culture, as long as you leave room for good
natured argument. In a face-saving culture, interest-based bargaining can also work very well,
because it strongly emphasizes a face-saving approach that's hard on the problem, soft on the
person. So imagine that you're having problems getting printed materials from a supplier from
America, a supplier from France, and a supplier from China. To the American, you might say,
I wonder if there are some creative ways we can satisfy our need to get the printing started
soon. To the French, you might say, here's one suggestion. Do tell me why that solution may not
work so we can find one that does. To the Chinese, you might say, I'm sorry to hear about this
weather-related delay. I thoroughly respect that circumstances changed. I wonder if there's a way
to work around these changed circumstances that can serve you and us well. Everything we've said
so far in this session brings us to a simple but powerful concluding principle. Anytime you face
cultural differences, you face a meta-conflict. You feel pressure to act according to the other
strange values, and so violate your own, or you feel pressure to act according to your own values,
and so offend and violate the other's values. But consider the underlying interest. You want to
cooperate and retain your integrity. A culturally alert negotiator's approach bridges that seemingly
unbridgeable gap. She does that by intentionally striving to understand the other's intentions,
history, and values, and so pay her counterpart real respect, and yet she responds creatively
in ways that do little violence to her own principles.
Beyond basic cultural misunderstandings, negotiators who cross borders have some other things to think
about as well. Entering a new country also entails working with a different legal system,
political regime, and business culture. Get these wrong, and bad things can happen. In the 1990s,
Enron International committed to building a nuclear power plant in Debal, India. Led by an
executive named Rebecca Mark, that division favored a very fast deal-making culture that
Mark touted in a Harvard Business School case study. But as the authors of the book The Smartest
Guy in the Room noted, Mark and her team increasingly failed to test their own numbers,
play out worst case scenarios, or make an effort to understand the political complexities of doing
business in India. They had little understanding for India's historic wariness of western
capitalism, and banked everything on the government's ability to sell the deal to a
skeptical public. As things began to go wrong with the project, it fueled public skepticism
that led to the government's ouster in the next election. The new government took a hard line
against Enron, demanding concessions, and changes that Enron was ill-prepared to make.
The project founded, and today, the plant at Debal, India into which Enron poured over 900
million dollars stands silent. It never generated a single watt of electricity and serves today as
a monument of terrible waste and failure. Poor basic preparation accounts for part of that failure,
poor preparation for dealing with the cultural differences accounts for much of the rest.
But let's add that while cultural differences can be frustrating, they certainly needn't be
decisive. In 2010, World Trade amounted to over 18 trillion dollars, according to the World Trade
Organization, which is more than the gross national product of the United States. And each year,
more and more people fall in love with someone from another culture. In the United States,
in 1980, about 3% of all marriages were between people from different races and ethnic groups,
by 2010, they were up to over 8%. And if you think about it, every marriage is, in a sense,
a cross-cultural negotiation. With these in mind, these ideas in mind,
let's draw together some implications for dealing with cultural differences. First, try to understand
the other person's cultural rules, history, and values. You don't have to become an immigrant
to his culture to do that. A bit of research and some conversation with people from the same
culture, and maybe a movie or two, can give you a big head start. Make that work part of your
preparation generally. Second, if you have no time to prepare, strongly consider bringing with you
a go-between or expert in the other culture who can translate the behavior and not just the language.
You may want to go further and find a local liaison, someone who knows the culture well,
and who can represent you in ways that help you build trust.
Third, look for ways to be hard on the problem, soft on the person, and ways to practice mindful
intentional respect. It's fine to learn what gestures are insulting and what terms of address
to use, but a posture of humility and openness to learn probably counts for more. Fourth,
don't try to ape the other person or assume that she is totally different. Instead, slow
down, build a relationship, share some information, and listen carefully.
And lastly, expect misunderstanding. Treat frustration as a dashboard light that signals
a possible cultural confusion rather than necessarily a personal insult.
As challenging as cross-cultural negotiation is, it can be at least as hard to deal with children.
Dear and beautiful as they are, they too can seem like they're from another planet.
Every parent, every teacher, every relative, and every caregiver ask themselves,
how do I deal with this child? Can you negotiate with a child? Should you?
And even if you never deal with children, are there insights about negotiating with children
that can shed light on how to negotiate generally? As we'll see, not only can you negotiate with
children, they can teach you how to deal with anyone better. And you can also use your negotiating
skills to teach kids to be more mature, creative, kind, and powerful. It's to that remarkable
topic that we turn next.
