Data analysis is not just about large organizations and large data sets.
Data analytics is also about individual people, just like you.
Your financial details can be monitored and analyzed as never before.
Your medical data in history can be organized to give you, as well as your professional
caregivers, unprecedented insight.
It is now much easier to track, adjust, and understand any aspect of everyday life, including
eating, sleep, activity levels, moods, movement, habits, communications, and on and on.
These are exciting changes.
They make possible new fields, such as personalized medicine, life logging, and personal analytics
of all kinds.
And they are coming together for some of the same reasons that data analytics as a whole
is taking off.
First, the wide range of technologies and methods available to large organizations are
also increasingly available to individuals.
Virtually all the tools we learn in this course, like grouping data into clusters or finding
correlations with regression or displaying data with infographics, can also be used on
our own data.
They can use the ideas and techniques of data analytics to live healthier lives, save money,
be a better coach to others in many areas of life, and so on.
Second, large organizations are already accumulating more and more data about you and your world.
So they are, in effect, doing a lot of heavy lifting on your behalf if you choose to access
and make use of the data thereby accumulated.
That said, there is plenty of personal data analysis you can do even without needing access
to large data sets or sophisticated tools at all.
Let's start there.
I'll start with something I do for both enjoyment and exercise, swimming.
I swim in the pool at Davidson College, where I teach.
It's also used for competition, so it has a huge clock next to the pool, making it easy
for me to keep track of my time.
With time comes data.
Now, this is where you might get tripped up, right at the start.
There is a lot of data that could be kept on swimming or whatever you're looking at,
but the possibilities and the realities of having a lot of data can also be overwhelming.
Keep in mind, even simple analysis without extensive data can give insight.
For example, by just watching my times on the clock and later counting my strokes, I
learned the following.
My overall times to swim a mile had increased by two minutes.
Simple Division helped me see that over the 36 laps it takes to swim a mile, I was slower
by three seconds per lap, or 1.5 seconds, swimming from end to end.
From there came my key insight.
One stroke took about two seconds.
That's why when I counted my strokes and found that I was taking about one more stroke when
I swam from one end of the pool to the other, I mentioned it to a friend who was a swimmer.
He commented that I might not be pulling as hard as I could.
I didn't make any change at first.
It was a busy time in the semester, and I realized that I was much more tired than usual.
But later I did adjust and my time stabilized to their previous times by simply paying attention
periodically to how hard I was pulling in a stroke.
And here lie lessons and data analysis.
Most my times, which are a form of data, gave me insight, in this case that I was slowing
down.
I used an analytic to gain more insight.
I did this by analyzing the overall activity of swimming down to its smallest meaningful
unit, the single stroke.
Then I turned to an expert, in this case a swimmer with far more experience, who helped
me understand this new unit of analysis.
Then I was able to make a change or correction, and then look for any change in the data.
This simple example is a data analysis cycle.
It isn't the only cycle one would follow in data analysis, but it does show the kind
of footholds that often help one climb a mountain of data to gain insight, collecting,
analyzing, questioning, making a change, then back to the data.
I looked carefully at the data and used it to understand what was happening.
This outlook on data will be in all these lectures and you can start with your own life.
Today, there are many digital devices to aid with collecting exercise data.
The devices may keep track of how far you ran, biked, or swam.
They can break down your exercise by the mile or minute, or some also give you some analysis.
A device may log your steps or how many calories you've burned, the amount of time you've
been idle during the day, or sometimes your location, whether you are climbing, heart
rate, and so on.
Then they can connect to applications on your computer or smartphone and give you feedback.
Why bother with all that data?
Again, it can offer insight.
If you like to walk, does it make a difference where you walk?
If you walk on a trail versus pavement, or if you walk one scenic route versus another,
do these make differences?
It isn't always that you need to change something.
Sometimes it is simply a matter of having the knowledge to be informed about your choice.
I didn't always swim faster, but I had a sense of why I wasn't, and then could decide if
I wanted to adjust.
But while gathering data is worthwhile, be careful not to assume that data automatically
means insight.
In particular, just buying a device and collecting data does not mean you'll gain insight.
Many companies have made that mistake, collecting ever more data to try to take advantage of
data analytics.
They have more data, but again, that doesn't necessarily mean they'll gain insight, even
if they attempt an analysis.
In 2013, the Wall Street Journal reported that 44 percent of information technology
professionals said they had worked on big data initiatives that got scrapped.
A major reason for so many false starts is that data is being collected merely in the
hope it turns out to be useful once analyzed.
This could be like working in a laboratory and doing random experiments without a scientific
question you're exploring.
You can perform a lot of steps in a chemistry lab and collect a lot of data, but it's unlikely
that you'll produce a crystal of any value without the goal being reflected in how you
work.
In that same Wall Street Journal article, Darian Shirazi, founder of Radius Intelligence
Incorporated, describes the problem as haystacks without needles.
He notes that companies, quote, don't know what they're looking for because they think
big data will solve the problem.
On the other hand, once you have a goal or a question you want to answer, you'll have
much more success, both immediately and over the long term.
In fact, once you know what you're trying to learn, you can often think quite creatively
about how to collect the data.
I teach a math modeling course that teaches data analytics.
Sometimes my students cannot gather data on problems of interest.
Every winter they participate in an international math modeling competition called the Mathematical
Contest in Modeling.
Thousands of teams from all over the world participate.
The problem is posted on Thursday evening on the East Coast.
The students must model, come up with conclusions and recommendations, and write a 20-25 page
paper.
One year, they were modeling toll booths on a busy highway.
How many booths should be open at rush hour versus off rush hour?
Should the number vary even during rush hour?
How many of those lanes should be for cars with an easy pass?
The students decided to write a program that would simulate a toll booth.
To trick is, they needed to know how long it took to pay cash versus driver with easy
pass.
They didn't know.
They had to know quickly in order to move forward.
They combed the internet and didn't find much information.
So they went to the college union and timed the difference between paying automatically
with a campus ID versus paying cash.
This data wouldn't be exactly the same as a toll plaza, but it gave them an estimate
of what they needed.
Then they folded this into their simulation and they were awarded meritorious distinction
for their efforts.
Another year, the problem was more fanciful and involved a daredevil jumping over an
elephant in landing on cardboard boxes.
That time, a team at the University of Washington realized they needed data on landing on boxes.
They couldn't find any, but they could find boxes.
So they placed them in a room and they ran across the room, leaped and landed on the
boxes.
They kept careful data on their experiments.
That team won highest distinction for their work, among all the teams worldwide.
So having a clear goal makes a huge difference.
Instead of just piling up data in the hope's insight will just pop out.
Having a clear goal guide you into gathering data that can produce insight.
And with a bit of creativity, gathering the data may be much less onerous than you think.
In fact, sometimes you already have data, but you may not realize that you do.
Here's a personal example from my work teaching two different classes at Davidson College.
A calculus course and a general education course.
I've often felt that in the calculus course, how students do on the first exam set a
lot about how they would do in the rest of the course.
It doesn't mean everyone's final grade is determined, not by a long shot, but I had
the impression that the first exam tended to correlate much more to final grades than
the first exam in my general education course.
Here I already had the data.
I had a grade book.
I just needed to put the grades together in Excel where I could calculate a correlation.
We'll talk more in a later lecture about how this works, but all I needed to do was
highlight my data for each class, use the Corel function in Excel, and I had my result.
A perfect correlation would have given the number one.
If you got an 84 on the first test, your final grade in the class would be an 84.
That's perfect correlation.
For calculus, the correlation was about 0.75.
For the general education course, the correlation was about 0.55.
My intuition was confirmed, backed up by data and data analytics.
Note, it doesn't tell me why this was happening.
That would take more analysis and study.
Now, you don't need to teach or keep grades to be able to do a comparison like this.
You could compare two projects at work, two schools, two recipes, two vehicles, or two
vacations, really anything that interests you.
Or you can compare just one case to typical values for that one case.
This is what a student learning analytics did at Mercer College.
She was taking a class from Dr. Julie Byer.
She asked her students to track personal data.
The student was concerned about his aunt, who used the free clinic in town and had diabetes.
The student felt her medication was incorrectly calibrated, so he kept track of her glucose
levels, which she was already measuring.
So the student gathered this data and compared it with acceptable values, and it looked high.
You could easily stop there.
In fact, in data analytics, that's often where we do stop.
But he even used a statistical test to see how likely it was that the readings would
be that high, just by chance.
That's called hypothesis testing, and it's sort of a statistical inference traditionally
called in when your sample is only a tiny part of a large population.
But in data analytics these days, we are often studying a whole population, or zooming in
on a specific case.
And so the main point from the perspective of data analytics is that he collected the
data and compared to see what it meant.
With his new found information, the student and his aunt walked into the doctor's office
with the data and conclusions.
The result was a change in the aunt's medication.
In each case, from my grades to the glucose levels, what is needed is data aimed at answering
a question.
Let's see an example of what can be done if you are persistent gathering your data.
For this, we will turn to Stephen Wolfram, CEO of Wolfram Research, and the author of
A New Kind of Science.
He started collecting data about himself in the 1980s, that he's been keeping ever since,
so he has a lot of data.
For example, he archived every email since 1989, which is a third of a million emails.
Here is a plot he created of all those emails he's sent since 1989.
This visualization makes several things evident.
First, the gaps are from when he sleeps.
From 2002 to 2012, he pretty consistently went to sleep around 3 a.m. Eastern time and got
up around 10 a.m.
In early years, there was a trend toward staying up later and later, and getting up later and
later.
Then, there is that narrow vertical strip in 2009.
He says that was a summer trip to Europe, and thus, a different sleeping pattern.
Now, look at the place in 2002, where there is a sudden change.
That's when Wolfram finished his large book entitled A New Kind of Science.
His life changed, and we see it easily from a visualization of his email.
Keep in mind that data can often be analyzed in more than one way.
Wolfram himself did this.
Here is another visualization of the email data.
Here he plots the total number of emails he sent as a function of time.
We see a slow decrease in the early 1990s, when he was less involved in the day-to-day
management of his company.
Then, we saw that shift in 2002, and again, see it here, and Wolfram's jump back into
the company.
Telephone data is another possibility.
I've had a few friends in data analysis do this type of analysis on their cell phone
data.
If you have a cell phone, the cell phone company typically offers this type of information
with your online bill.
There is generally a button that says Download Data.
Be a data analyst and download your data.
Download several months of data.
If you text or talk on the phone a lot, you might be able to see similar patterns.
One friend could see a break for exercise, just like Wolfram saw in his sleeping patterns.
Now, let's see one more of Wolfram's graphs.
He keeps track of when he is on the phone, and then took those proportions and converted
them to probabilities.
Here we see the probability that Stephen Wolfram is on the phone during the day.
High probability of 60% or more on weekdays from noon through 5 p.m. with about a 40% probability
on weekdays and weekends from 9 p.m. to 11 p.m.
Again, even without the data of Stephen Wolfram, similar ideas can be explored with the data
that you do have available to you.
You could calculate similar probabilities with times from email or texting.
You can also perform data analysis with the tools of Wolfram research.
For instance, you can look at the connections of your friends on Facebook.
I used a tool from Mathematica available at www.WolframAlpha.com.
The social site linked in already offers this kind of graphing automatically, so Facebook
may have added it by the time you see this.
Anyway, here's what it might look like if you generate a graph of friends.
Each circle is a friend.
They are color-coded, such that a similarly colored group has a lot of connections among
its members.
Two circles are connected if they are friends with each other on Facebook.
You see several groups in this graph.
Can you imagine doing this on your own set of friends?
Do questions arise?
They did for me.
I quickly looked at the groups in those all on their own.
I began to think about what the data was telling me.
What did I see, and more importantly, what could I learn?
The green patch to the left, those are my friends from my high school days.
Why don't they connect anywhere else?
That's because a week after graduating from high school, I moved to the Midwest.
In another patch, there are my friends who are also college professors.
The large purple patch shows friends at Davidson College, where I teach.
The green patch towards the top has friends from graduate school.
What I find interesting is the patch of dark blue-purple toward the bottom right.
Those are some of my closest friends.
However, unlike the other groups, they aren't from one part of my life.
Some are from my days in Michigan during college, some from Colorado, some from my days growing
up in Pennsylvania.
Yet, they are grouped together and colored similarly.
I see from the set of 500 friends on Facebook using their connections, my social network
as an image.
And what about those four lone dots at the bottom?
In actuality, they all know someone in other groups, but Facebook doesn't know that.
One is a colleague who had been off Facebook for almost two years.
In a later lecture, we'll learn that grouping like this is part of clustering and looking
at social groups is part of social network analysis.
What about my friends who aren't on Facebook?
Some colleagues in my department aren't there.
I have a good friend from high school who isn't there.
I can easily spot where they'd fall and even know some of their friends.
So the data set I have from Facebook is not complete, but I could make adjustments and
try to fix the omissions.
Exactly, that's the nature of data analysis.
We don't have everything, but we can work with the data we do have to learn and gain
insight.
Imagine seeing your social network in an image.
Imagine a timeline of your life or your family or a group at work.
Here's an example where students learn to do analytics for Davidson College.
In 2013, I began working with students to perform sports analytics for Davidson College
coaches.
We started with Men's Basketball since two of the students working with me were managers
on the team.
Using various data, we kept track of where every shot was taken and whether it was made
or missed.
This enabled us to look at where players were making and missing shots.
To jump ahead to the result, here's the graphic two of the students made.
We gathered this data by marking every place a shot was made and whether it led to a score.
You could do this by hand, but I programmed a computer to visualize half the court.
Then we simply clicked a spot on that visualized court and selected who took the shot.
And the program records the shot as well as who took it and whether it was successful.
The way we visualized the data helped the coaching staff.
Making out a lot of XY coordinates of a basketball court would have been much more confusing.
Red means the team was shooting well or was hot.
Blue means the team was colder and not shooting as well.
We quickly see trends in the graph.
Should the team go to the left to shoot?
That's where the coaching comes in, maybe.
Yet, maybe there is some other trend coming in.
How big should each circle be?
We found that any smaller circles didn't give much more detail on whether players did or didn't make their shots.
On the other hand, notice how the chosen size does show areas that are largely one color with little variation.
So this is an ideal resolution, detailed enough to show exactly what we are interested in, but not more.
One of the coaches noted that the data analysis gives them a jump start in their coaching and saves them time.
The data, again, is an opinion.
As we saw with Wolfram's email data, there are several ways to visualize data.
It could be some other visualization would bring out more information.
But it could also be that the coaching staff, with their knowledge of the team and through watching film, are able to pick up what is happening.
Or maybe the team should shoot from those hot regions.
What I found the most interesting in working in sports analytics was how we'd often share information with the coaches and then what happened next.
They'd ask another question.
Sometimes this involved looking at the data we already had in a new way.
Other times, it involved tracking new data.
Either way, this process of questioning was important.
Data analytics offers new insight, but not all at once.
With insight comes knowledge, but also the potential to learn more.
So be prepared.
Once data helps you answer one question, you are likely to have another and go back for more data.
But like sports, like our sports analytics group at Davidson College, you can keep digging, learning and improving your decisions along the way.
So this is what it's like to begin as a data analyst.
Collect data associated with a question that interests you.
Keep your own interest in mind.
Stephen Wolfram is a computer guy and a business owner, so he keeps data on keystrokes and phone calls.
The singer Beyonce is a performer who has collected video from every one of her performances.
Back in 2005, one of my colleagues refereed soccer games.
And he'd wear a GPS device that kept track of where he was on the field throughout the match.
Then he'd look at the data after the game to see how well he covered the field.
Did he tend to get stuck in certain places?
For each game, he could look for patterns in his refereeing simply on the map of his running.
And that helped him in officiating.
That was over 10 years ago.
These days, you also have more ways to share your data, giving you and others more opportunities to learn from whatever you gather.
My colleague back on the soccer field had to download his GPS data from refereeing onto his computer by hand before he could see it at all.
Today, many devices can directly display and share the data, not only with your computer, but in social media.
For example, I have another colleague who has his running routes posted straight to Facebook along with his times.
We were at a national meeting together in San Diego and hadn't even seen each other yet.
One morning, he posted on the Facebook that he had a lovely run along the water.
I'd been wanting to walk along the water, so I looked at his route and followed his lead when I left the hotel that day.
Now, if you've never experienced this kind of digital data sharing yourself, you might imagine that we could just wait and talk to each other in person.
Yes, but that's like saying that everyone could do without GPS and just write directions by hand all the time.
Sharing the actual data online was easier, both faster and more detailed.
The volume and velocity of shared data can both be much greater.
And best of all, when we did talk, it was even more interesting.
What do you care about?
If you see a connection to your life, jot it down so you can look at it and then think about how to gather the necessary data.
If you have it great, if not, think about gathering it.
Remember, it doesn't have to be a lot of data. Start somewhere.
Also, look for opportunities to share, which is fun and helps you learn more from your data.
Next, as we learn the tools of data analytics, think about which tools you might apply to the data and address questions that you have.
Keep in mind that you may want to try a few methods so you get different insights on the data.
And remember that visualizing data often helps a lot.
Whether the data is big or small, visualization can help you see when your sleeping patterns changed, for example, or what is happening during a sport or other physical activity.
In very broad strokes, there are three stages of data analysis.
Collect the data, analyze the data, and, if possible, visualize the data.
Become a data collector, not of everything, but in a purposeful way.
After all, no one has the time to gather and analyze all data of potential interest, just as no one has time to read every worthwhile book.
In fact, these days, you have a better chance of being able to analyze every book that interests you than of being able to analyze the quantity and variety of all types of data available today.
In the next lecture, we'll get a much better sense of how to handle the flood of data that's now available.
In the meantime, think about what interests you and some data you'd like to have, and then start collecting.
