We definitely live in a connected world.
Email, mobile phones, social media, and video chatting all enable unprecedented connections.
But how connected are we?
How do we analyze that?
This is the area of networks, what are often called social networks, even when there is
nothing obviously social about the network.
We'll begin with one of the most famous ideas of social networks, degrees of separation.
Part of the popularity of this idea comes from a 1993 movie and 1990 play called Six
Degrees of Separation.
As the end of the play, a Fifth Avenue socialite in a climactic moment of reflection delivers
the following monologue.
I read somewhere that everyone on this planet is separated by only six other people, six
degrees of separation.
Between us and everybody else on this planet, the President of the United States, a gondolier
in Venice, fill in the names.
I find that extremely comforting that we're so close.
But I also find it like Chinese water torture that we're so close because you have to find
the right six people to make the connection.
It's not just big names, it's anyone.
Now wait, there are over seven billion people on this planet.
This statement would mean you can pick anyone on the planet and there exists a path of equating
acquaintances from that person to you or to me.
In particular, that path only consists of six people.
Hard to believe?
Our fictional socialite is saying that she read this somewhere.
Where might she have read this?
That is, where did the concept of Six Degrees of Separation begin?
In Europe, it started in 1929 with Hungarian author Frigues Carinthi, who used it in a
short story translated as Chains.
In the United States, this concept dates back to at least 1967, when Stanley Milgram, an
American social psychologist, conducted what became known as his Small World Experiment.
In it, he sent several packages to 160 random people living in Omaha, Nebraska, asking them
to forward the package to a friend or acquaintance who they thought would bring the package closer
to a final individual.
A stockbroker from Boston, Massachusetts, each starter received instructions to mail a folder
via the U.S. Postal Service to a recipient.
But with some rules, starters could only mail the folders to someone they actually knew
personally on a first name basis.
When doing so, each starter instructed their recipient to mail the folder again to someone
that person knew on a first name basis with the same instructions.
Each mailing was to get the package closer to the target recipient.
Think about it.
Unless you knew that target recipient, all you had to go on was name and address.
That was almost impossible, almost silly.
Milgram monitored the progress of the mail with postcards.
Amazingly, the very first folder reached the target in just four days and took only two
intermediate acquaintances.
Overall, Milgram reported that the chains varied in length from two to ten intermediate
acquaintances with a median of five intermediate acquaintances between the original sender
and the destination recipient.
This became Six Degrees of Separation.
It was popularized even more by John Stewart's Daily Show in the mid-1990s when he referenced
a game created by three Albright College students called Six Degrees of Kevin Bacon.
The challenge there was to connect every film actor to Bacon in six cast lists or fewer.
For example, how about Daniel Day-Lewis, the 2012 Academy Award winner for Best Actor?
Daniel Day-Lewis was in the Crucible with Will Lyman.
Will Lyman was in Mystic River with Kevin Bacon.
So it takes two steps.
Daniel Day-Lewis is said to have a Kevin Bacon number of two.
This isn't the only path, but that doesn't change the Kevin Bacon number.
If I wanted to keep track of the number of ways to get a given Kevin Bacon number, we
might add some sort of weight to whichever Kevin Bacon number we come up with.
But let's just stick with checking Degrees of Separation from Kevin Bacon.
Let's try Buster Keaton, the silent film actor.
He appeared in the 1943 film Forever in a Day with June Lockhart.
When she appeared in the 1989 film The Big Picture, and yes, so did Kevin Bacon.
So even Buster Keaton, born 65 years before Kevin Bacon, also has a Kevin Bacon number
of two.
Kevin Bacon himself gave insight on why he's a good person to use.
In a 1994 interview about the film The River Wild with Premier Magazine, Bacon commented
that he had worked with everybody in Hollywood or someone who's worked with them.
While it isn't quite true, we see that there is much truth to his statement.
I've been using feature films to connect people to Kevin Bacon, but you could also use a broader
definition.
If you type Bacon number on Google together with an actor's name, you can see a Kevin
Bacon number that includes other kinds of productions too.
For instance, Google allows for appearing in documentaries.
Under the feature film definition, President Obama isn't connected to Bacon.
So we say he has a Kevin Bacon number of infinity.
But under this expanded definition, Obama is connected to Kevin Bacon through Tom Hanks
since Obama and Hanks appeared together in the documentary The Road We've Traveled.
By broadening the definition, more people are connected within two steps, and it can
be more difficult to find connections of three, four, or five.
Now, the internet movie database has over 2.6 million movies and 5.3 million names.
That is a huge data set.
But even though all these people make movies together, it's still surprising how few steps
it takes to get from one actor to another.
In finding these connections, we are working through a mathematical structure called a graph.
In such a graph, each vertex is an actor.
A link or edge is drawn between two vertices when both people appear in a film.
Let's learn a few more terms.
First, rather than degrees of separation, we talk about the distance between two vertices
as the minimum number of edges that connect those vertices.
There are two edges between Kevin Bacon and Daniel Day-Lewis, for example.
Then the eccentricity of a vertex is the maximum graph distance between that vertex and any
other in the graph.
The eccentricity of Kevin Bacon is claimed to be six or less.
Finally, the center of a graph consists of all vertices that have the smallest eccentricity
possible.
So, is Kevin Bacon only six degrees of separation away from everyone else?
As of April 28, 2013, we find the following breakdown of actors and their Kevin Bacon
numbers.
First, we see that indeed there are some actors with degrees of separation greater than six.
But this is just over .01% of actors, so we are pretty close to that statement being true.
On average, it looks like most actors are much closer than six degrees of separation
away.
Now, there is only one person with a Kevin Bacon number of zero, and that's Kevin Bacon
himself.
There are 2,769 actors who have appeared in a film with Kevin Bacon, and 305,215 actors
who have appeared with those 2,769 actors who have appeared with Kevin Bacon.
So what is the average Bacon number?
We take zero times one and add that to one times 2,769 and so forth and find the average
Bacon number to be 2.994.
So this is the eccentricity of Kevin Bacon.
Now that's a lot of numbers.
Here is a visualization of the Hollywood graph and all those connected to Kevin Bacon.
It is created by Suck He at the University of Sydney.
In the very middle is Kevin Bacon.
It's called a polyplane.
Here, each blue dot represents a single actor or actress.
There are so many and so close together that they look like blue rings.
Kevin Bacon is the dot at the center, which is not quite visible in the given orientation.
Then you see several rings linked to the center.
These are the Bacon number one actors and actresses, and then you'll see the rings
at distance two and three and so forth.
It looks like there are some blue dots at distance six from the center, but not many.
The red lines are simply links in the graph.
They bunch so closely together that they look like a solid region in places.
With the graph, you can visually go six degrees of separation from Kevin Bacon, but the farther
you go out, the fewer you find.
So is Kevin Bacon the center of the graph of Hollywood actors or is there someone better?
Let's compute this average Bacon number with the average Connery number for Sean Connery.
The breakdown is as follows as of April 28, 2013.
So the average Connery number is about 2.937.
This makes Sean Connery a better center than the 2.994 of Bacon.
Kevin Bacon shouldn't feel bad.
If we run all the actors in the database, he's still the 370th best center out of 2.6
million people.
So he's a better center than 99% of the people who have ever appeared in a feature film.
At the other extreme, the least connected single actor in the entire movie database
at one point had an eccentricity of 10.105.
All the numbers change slightly every time a new movie comes out.
Anyway, most actors are much more connected.
In fact, Sean Connery is only the 136th best, who at least in April 2013 was best.
Harvey Keitel with a Keitel number of 2.8486.
So that was the lowest eccentricity for the internet movie database.
After him came Dennis Hopper and then Robert De Niro.
Karen Black and Susan Sarandon were among the women better connected than Kevin Bacon.
Now let's consider connections we all have, not just actors and movies.
Let's return to that claim that a gondolier in Venice could connect to you or me in six
steps.
So are you only six introductions away from any person on the planet?
In 2008, Microsoft, after studying billions of electronic messages, computed that any
two strangers are on average 6.6 degrees of separation.
How they do that?
Numbers at Microsoft mined through 30 billion electronic conversations among 180 million
people in various countries.
The Washington Post observed that this was the first time a planetary scale social network
had been available.
The database covered the entire Microsoft Messenger instant messaging network in June
2006.
That was roughly half the world's instant messaging traffic at the time.
Two people were acquaintances if they had sent one another a message.
The average distance between people was 6.6.
Some were separated by as many as 29 steps.
To get a sense of why this might be true, here's a rough calculation for this.
There are 7 billion people in the world and each person knows X number of people.
Let's assume there are six links among them.
Here is the basic equation for six degrees of separation.
Seven billion equals X to the sixth.
When the equation is solved, X is about 44.
This means that one way for the theory of six degrees of separation to be accurate would
be for everyone in the world to have about 44 distinct acquaintances.
For a more recent example, we could look to Twitter.
To investigate the connectivity of the Twitter network, social media analytics company, Sysimos
Incorporated, examined more than 5.2 billion Twitter friendships, the number of friend
and follower relationships.
So a graph of that would have 5.2 billion edges.
After an impressive amount of careful computing, they reported in April 2010 that there is
an average of 4.67 steps between people on Twitter.
How about Facebook?
In November 2011, Facebook announced that there are on average just 3.74 intermediate
friends separating one user from another.
There were 721 million vertices in that graph.
Interestingly, for a while, the average eccentricity got smaller as Facebook got bigger.
Back in 2008, a much smaller Facebook had an average of 4.28 intermediate friends.
The types of graphs we've been looking at with edges representing connections between
the vertices are called social networks.
They aren't necessarily social in context.
They can be electrical power grids, telephone call graphs, or the spread of computer viruses.
It is important to note that the type of graph needed for an application can differ.
For example, Facebook friendships go both ways.
If I'm your friend, you're mine.
That's a graph with undirected edges.
Twitter's different.
I can follow you, but you may or may not follow me.
This is a directed network where the edges point from one vertex to another.
While similar, these can be quite different in terms of the analysis tools available.
You can easily cluster the Facebook graph with a very powerful technique.
It's not that you can't for the Twitter graph, but the technique for undirected graphs doesn't
necessarily and immediately port over.
Then there are other layers of analysis, just in modeling a system as a graph.
Is the existence of any connections between objects or vertices all you want?
Is it enough to know that we are friends at all?
Sometimes, but maybe you'll want to integrate the number of interactions we've had.
For Facebook, this might be the number of times we've tagged each other in photos or
left comments on each other's pages and such.
In Twitter, interactions would probably be retweeting and mentioning.
The number of interactions can be included as what's called a weight on the edge.
Is there any other information lost?
Can we integrate that into a graph as well?
Each time you switch to a slightly different graph structure, that generally means different
algorithms for analysis.
As such, you can't always answer the same questions on every graph.
So sometimes the issue is not only what graph do you have, but which graphs might reveal
the information you're wondering about.
Is there a way to look at a directed edge as undirected?
Think about what happens if you simply remove the arrows.
Twitter has directed edges, and Facebook doesn't.
If you remove the directed edges from Twitter, you lost the information that I might follow
Bill Gates, but he doesn't follow me.
So does this make sense as a modeling decision?
Maybe, but maybe not.
I deal with this often in my research, which overlaps with the field of graph theory.
The social networks with the degrees of freedom are called small world networks, which is
a very active field of research.
It's also a wonderful field for beginners as it can be quite accessible.
At conferences, I often see undergraduates, even early in their college careers, presenting
new research in graph theory.
So what does a network do for us?
I like the way Mark Newman in his book, Networks, an Introduction, talks about it.
He notes that networks really look for the pattern of connections between components.
That pattern of connections or structure of the network can have a big effect on the behavior
of the system as a whole.
It can affect how quickly news spreads and can influence how we form opinions or even
how often we might see someone that we know.
So let's look at a network.
We'll use the oracle of baseball to look at the connections between baseball players.
For example, how do we get from Babe Ruth to Barry Vons?
A connection exists between two players when they played together on a team.
So here's a path with four intermediate steps.
Babe Ruth played with Waite Hoyt for the 1919 Boston Red Sox.
Waite Hoyt played with Burt Haas on the 1937 Brooklyn Dodgers.
Burt Haas played with Minnie Minoso for the 1951 Chicago White Sox.
Minoso played with Jim Morrison for the 1980 Chicago White Sox.
And Jim Morrison played with Barry Vons for the 1986 Pittsburgh Pirates.
So five degrees of separation.
We get from Babe Ruth to Barry Vons with four intermediate players,
which took us from 1919 to 1986.
Note, as with movie actors, this isn't the only route.
But let's look at the big picture.
So if we go all the way back to include professional teams of the 19th century,
who is the historical center of the baseball universe?
Minnie Minoso, he was also known as the Cuban Comet.
He played left field and third base.
He signed with the Cleveland Indians in 1948 and played his first game on April 19, 1949.
He played for the Indians, White Sox, Senators, and Cardinals.
His final game at age 54 was on October 5, 1980.
His career spanned 32 years.
His average distance is 3.0072.
The least linkable, shortstop and third baseman, Ed Duffy.
His first game was on May 8, 1871 for the White Stockings.
His career spanned only 175 days.
His average distance is 6.8802.
So six degrees of separation holds pretty well inside the history of U.S. professional baseball.
Finally, let's see the most linkable of active players at least at the time of this recording.
Outfielder Manny Ramirez, he was drafted by the Cleveland Indians in the first round of the 1991 amateur draft.
He debuted on September 2, 1993.
The average distance, 3.7970.
But it appears we have five degrees of separation between Manny Ramirez and Babe Ruth.
Babe Ruth with Lou Gehrig in the 1928 New York Yankees.
Lou Gehrig with Joe Gordon, 1939 New York Yankees.
Gordon with Minnie Minoso, 1949 Cleveland Indians.
Minoso with Harold Baines, 1980 Chicago White Sox.
Baines with Manny Ramirez, 1999 Cleveland Indians.
So we need only four other players to get from Babe Ruth to Manny Ramirez.
But there's an old saying that who your friends are says a lot about you.
That's especially true in data analysis.
Your Facebook friends can indicate where you are from.
That's important to Facebook as they can provide ads and services in your area.
But only about 6% of users enter their address.
So how does Facebook know your address by pictures?
Maybe they're working hard on facial recognition.
But what about your posts?
They probably do use that.
But what's interesting is that they can already connect you to locations,
but just by using those 6% of known addresses.
Most people are geographically close to many of their active friends.
So Facebook can look at your connections to people with known addresses.
Then they can weight the importance of the edges by how recently and
how much you and someone have been active.
Address is not all that can be predicted.
Students at MIT demonstrated that sexual orientation in religion
could also be identified by Facebook, even when such preferences weren't mentioned.
How?
Again, by looking at the links to people for whom such details are known.
One surprise from the study of networks is that on average,
your friends have more friends than you do.
Said a bit more technically, the average number of friends of friends
is always greater than the average number of friends of individuals.
This comes from a 1991 paper of Scott Feld of the State University of New York at
Stony Brook.
It offers an interesting insight on friendships.
Ever feel like your friends have more friends than you?
They do.
They should.
The same is generally true for them, too.
How can this be true?
It seems wrong.
Like a paradox.
In fact, it is called the friendship paradox.
While it may seem wrong, it is a case where our intuition can learn from analysis.
Let's take a look at a network of friends.
We'll put me in the middle and see this where my network of friends and
how this would be true.
I've chosen a small group of friends.
The same result would be true with a large number of friends.
But let's see this paradox shed its light here.
I know the most people since this is my group of friends.
I have three friends.
Ann is just friends with me.
Pam and Tom both have two friends.
This adds up to eight.
With four people, this means we have an average of eight divided by four or
two friends per person.
So this is the average number of friends mentioned in the friendship paradox.
This is supposed to be smaller than the average number of friends of friends.
Ann's friend, me, has three friends.
My friends have one, two, and two friends.
Tom's friends have three and two friends.
Pam also has friends with three and two friends.
So now we add this all up and get three plus one plus two plus two plus three
plus two plus three plus two or 18.
That list had eight numbers.
So on average, the list equals 2.25.
That number is the second part of the friendship paradox.
And indeed, 2.25 is greater than two.
What did this, what just happened?
Note in the average that my three friends appear in the list three times.
It's the weighting that pushes that average up.
In fact, this can be written in a different way.
You see only one one since only one person has one friend.
You see three three times due to the three friends.
So we find that the average will equal one times one plus three times three plus two
times two plus two times two.
And that quantity divided by one plus three plus two plus two.
This weighted average is what creates the paradox.
This has implications in social networks like Facebook and Twitter.
On a directed network like Twitter, the people a person follows almost certainly have more
followers than that particular follower has.
But the same is true on a bidirectional network like Facebook.
Either way, the reason for the apparent paradox is there.
People are more likely to be friends with or follow those who are popular than those
who are not.
Let's return to the idea of being a center of a graph.
So pick someone randomly in the graph.
Then friends of that person are likely on average to be a better center of the graph.
Today connections can be found almost everywhere, people, information, events, and places.
This connectivity is all the more evident with the advent of online social media.
In this lecture, we see how we can gain from analyzing such connections.
And there lies a key as you move forward and consider network analysis.
What you need is a connection.
It doesn't need to be between two people, it can, but it isn't necessarily.
This is why network analysis has been applied to such fields as sociology, mathematics, computer
science, economics, and physics.
The World Wide Web is a vast network and how you personally access anything on the internet
travels through a network of routers.
Phone calls take place more efficiently thanks to advances in how networks of landline and
wireless transmitters are understood and managed.
Network analysis is also shedding light on the connections between neurons in the brain.
Predator understanding of this network has led to advances in artificial intelligence.
Biology and ecology have long looked at the networks of living species.
For example, there are predator prey networks that help us understand the food web and that
can help us understand and quantify ecological phenomenon.
Weights for the edges of such networks are moving them from the realm of cartoon drawings
to powerful tools for analysis.
Let me close this discussion of networks by mentioning that there is more than one way
to define the center of a graph.
We already looked at what is called degree centrality.
Who is the smallest number of degrees away from everyone else?
Degree centrality can tell you how quickly you get something, good or bad, such as the
immediate risk that a person will catch whatever is flowing through a network, such as a virus
or possibly some information.
By contrast, betweenness centrality can quantify the control a person has over the communication
between other people in a social network.
How much information flow can I block?
That isn't necessarily the same as how quickly can I get information, which is what we use
for the Kevin Bacon game.
Both can be important.
Networks social or not offer a rich deep dive into the relations among points in your dataset.
Instead of putting data points into clusters for your data, which loses individuality,
use your network metrics to uncover more precise information about each piece of data.
You can and should look at networks social or not whenever you have a relationship between
objects in a system.
That relationship can be information transfer, a route between cities, a relationship between
people or a game between teams in a sport.
Any set of relationships can be modeled as a network.
So look for those connections and begin to think about what questions you might have
that networks can address with the data that you find.
You will need to think whether there is directedness in the data for a successful network analysis.
But what you find looking at concepts such as degrees of separation can give you a much
more complete understanding of your data.
It's both a new way of summarizing the whole dataset and also gives a far richer and more
interesting view of each individual.
Explain six degrees of Kevin Bacon with your dataset.
