All right, I think I'm going to get us started. I want to welcome everyone that's there in the cafe and who's online to the second in our 2024 lecture series.
I'm very pleased to be able to do the introduction for Dr. Mike Levin.
He's a developmental or maybe synthetic biologist who has a distinguished professorship at Tufts University.
He's really began his career as a geneticist, received his doctorate at Harvard, looking at the genetic underpinnings of asymmetries and embryonic developmental trajectories.
And he's really been doing that vein of work for the last two and a half or more decades.
In that time, he's published hundreds of papers and has, by my count, something like 35,000 citations and counting and a number of different honors that you can see on his wiki page.
So I'll point you to if you want to learn more about that.
Mike, you'll have to correct me if I'm wrong about this, but I think you first came into Templeton's orbit.
What I found in the system was that you applied for funding in 2014 for an OFI related to artificial mind and affecting will through quantum effects.
And that was part of the program with Al Mealy at FSU on free will that ultimately didn't lead to an invitation to full proposal.
What else I saw in the system was that it was another five years before you applied and that was to the life sciences when we ran an ideas challenge, which was a program trying to foment new ideas on the science of purpose.
And that was open to anyone in the US and we had offered $51,000 prizes for the best ideas as judged by an independent review panel.
And you could submit as many ideas as you want, but those were judged in a blinded fashion where we didn't know who the, the submitter was, and you ended up winning two of those awards.
And those were $1,000 each paid to the individual, not to the institution. So we got hundreds of submissions.
And that was really the beginning of us funding in this priority. So not only did you get that distinguished award, which may or may not actually feature on the wiki page.
But you did parlay that obviously through conversation into the grant that you're going to be speaking at least in part on today.
Maybe the one thing I want to say to those of you who don't know Mike never interacted with them is that I guess my conversation at this point my introduction has been very quantitative but qualitatively whenever you speak with Mike.
And if you have the privilege, the fun is, is talking to someone who has a very generative creative mind that feels a lot like popcorn popping when you talk to him. And so I'm really excited for the talk this morning.
Thank you for being with us Mike, and I yield the floor to you now.
That's a very kind introduction and yeah thank you for all the support over the years I'll talk more about that at the end. And it is my pleasure to share some ideas with you all.
What, what I would like to do is to cover three main points here.
The first is that I'm going to talk about the fact that we are all made of a kind of a gentle material, we are made of cells and actually sub cellular components that have an important kind of intelligence for the purposes of this talk will boil that down to problem
solving capacity.
I'm going to introduce you to an important concept called bio electricity which functions as a kind of cognitive glue. This is something that binds the tiny little goals of individual cells and components like that together into a larger emergent individual with the goals and
and so on that that none of their parts have. And I'm going to talk about how this actually these these philosophical ideas actually cash out as advances in biomedicine.
And for example I'll mention cancer as literally a dissociative identity disorder of the collective morphogenetic intelligence of your body. And then I want to talk a bit at the end about the implications that novel embodiments have for ethics, and beyond some really
what I think are quite untenable dichotomies that need to be dumped in our journey to to human flourishing into ethical relationships with other other beings, and a large part of this talk and be kind of summed up by saying that the
collection collective intelligence of groups of cells that navigate anatomical space so the space of possible shapes and functions that will lead us to develop a conceptual framework for diverse intelligence.
And I want to show how these deep philosophical ideas can actually become therapeutics they move on to empirical application.
So let's start. Let's start here. This is a very well known painting called Adam naming the animals in the Garden of Eden. And what this painting reflects is a couple of interesting things.
So one thing that I think is very deep and true and one thing that I think is a profound error that we're going to correct.
The thing that's an error is that what you see here is a very clear demarcation between all the different creatures. So there's a discrete set of specific static forms.
In fact, Adam is of course supposed to be different from all of these, and so on and so and so we're going to go beyond this idea of discrete natural kinds for these.
What I think is very, very correct here is that there's an old tradition in which Adam had to be the one to name the animals, not God, not the angels, Adam had to be the one to do it.
And that's for two reasons. One is that he was the one that was going to have to live with these things in perpetuity, and also this idea that by naming things you discover their true nature.
And so we're going to go beyond him to take the effort to discover the true nature of these beings and thus come up with appropriate names for them, because in the course of old traditions, knowing the name of something is very powerful.
And I think this is profoundly true because we are going to have to name in the sense of discover the true nature of a wide variety of novel beings with whom we will have to live well beyond anything that was imagined by the authors of these paintings.
The first thing we know in modern science is that around what's known as a typical modern human, this kind of special thing that has this agential glow that all the philosophy on papers are about, you know, the human mind and so on.
We know that we stand in the middle of a very smooth continuum if you ask well what kind of human you know this one or something back here or what there are properties that go all the way back to single cells on the evolutionary time scale.
We also know from developmental biology that even in our own lifetime, there is a slow, smooth continuous development from a single cell.
So, so we already are starting to see that actually we can't just talk about this we have to understand the continuum of it.
And in fact, it gets much more interesting because not only that but now with with advances in synthetic morphology bioengineering and so on.
But we now know that actually, we are also in the middle of a continuum of all kinds of slow and gradual changes that can and will be made to the standard default organism.
These can be biological changes these can be technological changes because at every level of organization, we can combine engineered substrates with the naturally evolved biological ones.
And biology is extremely interoperable and we'll get to that towards the end.
So, now understanding that that this is that there's a there's a very smooth continuum of highly diverse bodies and minds.
I'm interested in a framework that can help us think about all of these things. It can help us recognize them it can help us create them in Korea and it can help us ethically relate to them.
And we can think about, of course, not just the familiar creatures, such as apes and birds and maybe an octopus and things like that. But really, all kinds of things colonial organisms swarms engineered life forms artificial intelligence
whether software purely software or robotically embodied, and at some point maybe even exobiological agents.
So, how can we how can we begin to think about all of these things on the same continuum. Now, I'm not the first person to try for this of course that you know, far back as 1943 Rosenbluth, Wiener and Bigelow, try to come up with a kind of a ladder of different levels of cognition all the
passive matter, all the way up to the kind of second order complex metacognition that we have. And so, so this is the kind of framework that I that I want to develop.
I, my focus is on ones that move experiment forward. So I'm not just interested in philosophical ideas but actually with something that helps us facilitate new discovery that's essential.
So, equally or even more important, helps us to define better ethical frameworks that are more grounded in the reality of life.
So one of the things that we've been working on is this notion of a, of an axis of persuadability, taking an engineering perspective on the wide spectrum of systems around us we see that as we move up this ladder from simple mechanical systems to kind of cybernetic
to the kind of monogamy of stats to learning agents and all the way up to humans and whatever is beyond that.
What we see is that what happens here is that there is a different set of tools that you need to optimally relate to these things. You know, something down here, you're not going to convince that of anything you're not going to reward and punish it
efficiently all you're going to be able to do is rewire the hardware. But here you can start to think about the goals that it has in the simple set points and maybe rewriting the set point without rewiring the hardware.
Maybe you don't even need to know everything about how the system works because it offers an interface. You can train it. You can communicate with it. And then here you can really communicate in a very profound way.
You can actually share agency with it and be vulnerable to be cognitively open to it and exchange information back and forth.
So across this continuum of different tools, right? So as an engineer, the interesting thing that the engineering perspective gives you is that you can be very specific about asking, well, what tools do I need to bring to each of these systems?
What helps us to understand and to relate to it? We can ask a simple question. Where do cellular collectives fit here? And this is an empirical question.
It is not enough to have philosophical pre-commitments to where things go. So some people assume that while cells, they're just mechanical machines. They have to be back here.
But we can't just have armchair feelings about it. We have to do experiments. And so it's especially important because we were all once, quote unquote, just physics. We all started life as an unfertilized OSI, a little blob of chemistry.
And eventually we become something like this or even something like this, which is going to make statements about not being a machine and so on.
And we now owe a story about how did we get from here to here? What happened during this process? Because developmental biology does not offer any bright line at which point you go from being a blob of chemistry and physics to being an actual real mind.
Okay, so we know we somehow scale up from whatever's going on here to this kind of status. We know we do that slowly, but at least we're a true unified intelligence. We're not a metaphorical collective intelligence like an ant colony.
I mean, we feel like a single unified being. Well, and especially Renee Descartes thought that this was the case. And he was very interested in the pineal gland, which is singular in the brain. And he felt that that matches our experience as unified intelligences and as humans.
But if he had access to good microscopy, what he would have found was that inside that pineal gland are a huge number of cells. And inside of each of those cells, there's a huge number of these little little machines.
There isn't one of anything anywhere. All intelligence is collective intelligence. We are all made of parts. And the research program is to understand how those parts come together to form something more than the sum of its parts.
This is a single cell. This is the kind of, I mean, this is a free living organism, but this is the kind of thing that we are all made of.
It has no brain, it has no nervous system, it is a single cell, but it has incredible competencies at meeting its metabolic, it's anatomical, all the different goals that it has at the level of a single cell.
One of the things that is needed to become a more than the sum of those parts is a kind of cognitive glue. And what I mean by that is that if you train, let's say you train this rat to press a lever and get a reward.
Well, the cells at the bottom of the feet are interacting with the lever the cells in the gut are receiving the sugar of the reward. No individual cell has both of these experiences.
Who owns that associative memory? Who is this rat that now can bind the experience of its different parts into a piece of information that is only known by the collective and not by any of the individuals.
We're used to this from neuroscience that the electrical networks in our brain allow us to somehow cohere out of individual cells. But there are a number of scenarios in biology that show us that we really haven't yet understood what's actually going on here.
This is a caterpillar. So caterpillars live in a two dimensional world. They eat leaves and they have a little brain suitable for driving the sort of pneumatic kind of device.
It's a soft-bodied thing. There's nothing to push on in the caterpillar. You have to control it other ways.
The caterpillar has to become a butterfly. Butterflies fly. They live in a three dimensional world. They drink nectar and they have a completely different brain suitable for driving this kind of body.
During this process, what happens? The brain basically dissolves. All the connections are broken. Most of the cells are killed and you've got this and then you reconstitute a new brain.
Now, one amazing thing is that butterflies and moths remember information that the caterpillars were trained on. And you might think that the key question here is where is the information stored?
How is it possible that this individual, this collective being, is thoroughly refactored and still remembers the original information? Where is it?
But it's actually much more than that. The real question isn't just where is it? The idea here is that you cannot store static information because the information on, let's say you train the caterpillar to find leaves in a particular color disk.
That information in itself is irrelevant to the butterfly. The butterfly doesn't want leaves and it doesn't move around the way caterpillars do.
What happens here is that that information gets generalized and passed on. So when the butterfly has this new higher dimensional, literally a higher dimensional life than the caterpillar,
it's the deep lessons of its prior life, not the specific memories that it brings with it because it will also remember to go where the color disk is, but not because it wants leaves. There it will find nectar.
So we really need to understand the remapping of information across bodies that change. Another kind of drastic example is shown by these planaria.
These are flatworms and they regenerate. We'll talk more about them shortly. So you can train the planaria to look for food where these little bumpy disks are and then you cut off their brain.
In fact, the whole head, the tail sits there doing nothing for eight or nine days. It regenerates. It rebuilds a brand new brain. That information is again imprinted on the new brain and now once again, you can see that remembers where to go.
This sounds like this is some kind of special feature of butterflies and planaria, but actually we are all this to some extent because even just beyond the kind of brain remodeling of puberty and maturation and so on, none of us are molecularly the same at any point in time.
So we're constantly in flux and remapping memories actively onto our new context is critical. You might ask what happens to human patients in a few years that are going to receive stem cell implants into their brain for degenerative brain disease.
What's going to happen to them to that patient, their personality, you know, this is the butterfly caterpillar thing is closer to us than we think.
It also that ability to remap certain competencies and certain kinds of information onto new scenarios is really critical for evolution. We discovered some years ago that if you take a tadpole.
So this is a tadpole of a frog. Here's the mouth here the nostrils. Here's the brain. You'll notice that we prevented the two primary eyes from forming, but we did grow an eye on its tail.
And when you do that you find out that these animals can actually see perfectly well. How do we know because we built a machine to train them on visual cues.
And we show that this animal in a new sensory motor architecture this this eye doesn't even connect to the brain it connects to the spinal cord here you can see the the optic nerve synapses right there on the spinal cord.
To remap all the behavioral repertoires of this of this system with no extra evolutionary generations you don't need cycles of selection to make this work in one generation, you radically change the sensory motor architecture, no problem
to remap vision learning everything works and and that that has huge implications for evolution the fact that evolution does not commit to kind of an over reliance on how things were before and try to persist with the exact same information.
And the reason this works is because we are we as living things we are composed of a multi scale competency architecture. Every layer in the in the body has certain capacities for solving problems in various spaces so all the way up it's not just
brains and behavior that does this, it's all of the different components. And this is, this is what we're going to talk about today. Now, something very I find very interesting Alan Turing, who was of course the forefather of computer science and really thought a lot of thought very deeply about what is intelligence, what are
minds, how can they be implemented and so on. And so he was interested in plot problem solving machines and intelligence through reprogrammability so reprogrammable machines.
He also wrote this paper, which was on the chemical basis of morphogenesis the generation of order out of a well mixed chemical system. Now, why would somebody who's interested in, in intelligence and minds and reprogrammability and so on, be worried about what's happening with the chemicals in early
embryos. I think that Turing saw a very profound symmetry between the problem of where minds come from and the problem of where bodies come from I actually think it's the same problem. And although he didn't write much about it at all as far as I know, I think he understood very
well, the, the, the fact that these are fundamentally the, in a deep sense the same problem. And so, so let's talk about where do bodies come from so so we start life like this.
A collection of cells of embryonic blastomers, and eventually you get this this is a cross section through a human torso. Look at the amazing complexity of all of these different components everything is the right shape the right size next to the right thing.
Where is this pattern stored. Now, a lot of people today would say well it's in the DNA of course it's in the genome, but we can read genomes now we know that this pattern isn't in the genome, any more than the structure of a of an insect colony or the precise shape of a spider web is in their genome genomes
we can talk about shapes genomes to specify proteins, little tiny hardware that every cell gets to have. And so now we need to understand. Okay, so given that hardware how does the, how does the system know what to build, how do they know when to stop.
How do we convince them to repair or recreate when something is missing. And as engineers we can ask one more thing.
How do we push them to do something else cells with exactly the same genome what else would they be willing to build if we convinced them that they should be building something different how might we do that.
Well as we think in towards the future of what what our field of regenerative medicine should look like.
What I'm talking about is something that I call the anatomical compiler. The idea is that someday you will be able to sit in front of a computer.
Draw the animal or plant that you want the shape of it. And what the system will do is compile down to a set of stimuli that need to be given to cells to get them to build exactly that in this case this nice three headed flatware.
We need this first there's a very practical reason is because birth defects traumatic injury cancer aging degenerative disease all of these things would go away.
If we knew how to convince groups of cells to build specific things. So all of the all of these are problems of information processing.
Also more more fundamentally, it would mean that we've solved the really deep questions of morphogenesis of evolution and so on.
The thing to keep in mind then is that this this anatomical compiler is not a 3D printer. It's not about micromanaging the position of cells you're not trying to build this from scratch.
It's a translation device it communicates your anatomical goals to the cellular collective so that it would be motivated to build them that that's the that that's the dream of the technology.
We are extremely far away from having this and you might wonder why, because molecular biology genetics has been going full tilt for decades why are we still so far away from it.
And it's basically the fact that we are very good at molecular information we're very good at moving around molecules and so on.
We really don't understand large scale shape change at all we don't have any of these capabilities yet.
And that's because we and in biology are still basically stuck where computer science was in the 40s and 50s.
All of our most exciting technologies today so CRISPR genomic editing, a pathway engineering, a protein design all of these things are about the hardware this is this is what it looked like to program a computer at that time.
But now, when we want to switch from Microsoft Word to Photoshop, you don't get out your soldering iron and start rewiring your computer.
Why not, because we have understood in computer technology, the incredible benefit of taking advantage of the reprogrammability and the competency of your medium it doesn't have to be all through the hardware.
So what biology is largely missing still and what what we're just scratching the surface of is how to take advantage of and cooperate with the intelligence with the competencies of the medium in which we are trying to engineer.
What do I mean by intelligence. What I don't mean is human level reflexive metacognition where you know how smart you are you know your goals and so on.
I don't mean that I mean a much more basic thing that defines the whole continuum of intelligence.
And I think William James said it best when he said that intelligence is a degree of the ability to reach the same goal by different means.
It's very much. It's a cybernetic definition, it's a teleological definition because it focuses on not what the system is made of or how it got here it focuses on the fact that it has a goal.
And it has some mechanism for achieving that goal and the question is what kinds of novel scenarios what kind of perturbations is that mechanism able to deal with.
So for example, if you have two magnets they're separated by a piece of wood, the magnet is never going to go around to meet its other magnet, because in order to do that it would have to temporarily get further from its goal.
And that delayed gratification is not something that magnets can do they're too simple for that.
Of course, in his example, Romeo and Juliet are separated by all sorts of physical and social barriers they have all kinds of long term planning all kinds. It didn't end well granted but but they have all kinds of other ways to to try to get around these
barriers, and then in between you have all these other things you have cells and autonomous vehicles and various kinds of animals and so on.
Let's talk about this very specifically what kind of collective intelligence do cellular swarms deploy.
Well let's look at development first. So we know development is reliable. So, so, so almost all of the time, human embryos give rise to human human bodies.
It's very reliable that in itself is not much much intelligence that is simply the kind of the working out of kind of emergent complexity, but there's more to it than that it's the fact that you can actually achieve that from different starting states.
So, if you cut embryos in half or into pieces, you don't get half bodies you get perfectly normal mono zygotic twins triplets quadruplets and so on.
This system can navigate to its goal this ensemble of states corresponding to the normal human target morphology in this anatomical space from different starting positions and avoiding various local maxima.
Some creatures can do it throughout their lifespan so here's an axolotl. These guys regenerate their limbs their eyes their jaws their ovaries portions the brain and heart.
And the way it happens is that if you amputate anywhere here, it will rapidly these cells will work very hard to grow and remodel, and then the most amazing thing happens which is that then they stop.
That's really the most incredible part of regeneration is that they know when to stop. So, so when I talk about anatomical goals, I mean this capacity not just that you get a complex limb out of a bunch of biochemical reactions, but the fact that if you try to deviate it from this
production, it will actually do its do its best spend all kinds of energy to get back there and then it stops. That is the basis of goal directed behavior in this anatomical space.
So humans and other mammals can do it a little bit so humans regenerate their liver human children regenerate their fingertips, dear regenerate antlers so the same structure, a centimeter and a half of new bone per day when they're regenerating
So we have this we have this a little bit but we're not we're not great at it, but some creatures are amazing. I want to show you one example of what I mean by a kind of creative problem solving by this by the salamander.
So, so these amphibians. Here's a cross section through a normal kidney to build is about eight to 10 cells that work together to build this build this to build one one trick you can do is
force the cells to have extra numbers of chromosomes. And if they if you do that the cells get bigger. So amazing thing number one is that you still get a normal new even though it has multiple copies of its genome that doesn't seem to bother it.
So, so no problem.
But the cells get bigger and when the cells get bigger than newt stays the same size.
And the only way that's going to happen is, is a fewer cells now participate in this thing. And that's in fact that's what they do.
The most amazing thing happens when you make, I think this is a six and five and poly ploid newts that have way too much genetic material.
These guys actually make make enormous cells and there's only room for one so what does the cell do it bends around itself to give you that same lumen.
So look at what's happening here to two things to notice first that in the service of a large scale anatomical outcome having a tubule, the system calls up different molecular mechanisms in this case cell to cell communication in this case cytoskeletal
bending to achieve its goal. Same goal by different means that is a kind of intelligence. The other thing that's going on here is, just think about this from the perspective of a new embryo you're coming into the world.
You don't have to be able to construct yourself, not knowing how many copies of your genomic constructions you're going to have. You don't know how big your cells are going to be you don't know how many cells you're going to have is a lot you don't know.
And in these novel environments, not only the external environment is novel but your own parts you can't even rely on your own parts. All of that is changing too.
And this remarkable ability not just to make complexity but to make to make specific functional anatomies despite novelty and novel situations is a key aspect of intelligent behavior in anatomical space.
Another another example that that I like a lot this is something we discovered years ago that tadpoles need to become frogs.
So in order to do that they have to rearrange their face so they have to move their eyes their mouth or their nostrils everything has to move around.
And it used to be thought that this was a hardwired process every one of these organs moved in the right direction the right amount and you get your from.
So this is why it's important to do experiments and these things and not just assume what we did was, we created so called Picasso tadpoles where we basically scrambled all the craniofacial organs.
The eyes on top of the head the mouth is off to the side it's totally scrambled. Well these things it turns out remodel into quite normal frogs, because all of the organs will move in new paths in fact sometimes they go too far and actually have to double back until they get to a
correct frog face. And so what the genetic actually genetics actually gives you is a highly competent system that can reduce error it's an error minimization scheme what it's able to do is keep working until it gets to its goal it doesn't blindly
just go the same way and hope everything works out. So that raises a very obvious question how does it know what a correct frog face looks like how does it remember the set point right any any homie aesthetic process like this has to be able to store a set point.
We started studying the one uncontroversial example of cell groups that store goals and that's the brain, and in the brain.
This is all done by by an electrochemical network cells here by using these little ion channels these little proteins that allow ions like sodium potassium and so on to get in and out.
They acquire a voltage state that voltage state propagates to its neighbors and the whole network can now store and process information, for example, it can keep goal states.
This is what physiology looks like in a zebra fish this group made an amazing video. And the commitment of neuroscience is that if you were to be able if you were to measure all this physiology and be able to decode it, then you would know what the animal is thinking about you
would be able to get at the memories the goals the preferences, all of that stuff.
So it turns out that evolution caught on to this the fact that these electrical networks can serve as a kind of cognitive glue they can bind individual cells together into a collective that remembers and executes goal,
implementing behaviors that are much larger than any of the individual cell that that was discovered around the time of bacterial biofilms it's extremely ancient.
So, so every cell in your body has ion channels, most of them have these electrical connections to their neighbors they're called gap junctions. And what we started to ask was, could we could we take the deep lessons of neuroscience.
And it turns out that not only not only can you can you appropriate the lessons of neuroscience but actually all of the tools. So the drugs, the optogenetics all the tools of neuroscience.
And can we ask, what was the body thinking about before it had a brain, both evolutionarily and developmentally, could we read the electrophysiology of the body cells and ask if there was a collective here that's that made decisions and anatomical space, the way that
brains help us make decisions in three dimensional space. So we developed the first tools the first molecular tools to read and write the information into the non neural mind of the body so.
So here is a an early frog embryo you can that we're using a voltage sensitive fluorescent dye so this is real data these are this is not a simulation.
This is a real embryo you can see all the electrical conversations that the cells are having with each other, who's going to be head tail top and bottom and so on.
We do a lot of computational simulation to try and understand how how all of this works. I want to show you an example of what these pattern memories look like the first we call the electric face.
This is an early frog embryo putting its face together it's a time lapse video about probably probably about 12 to 18 hours. And what you're seeing here is here's one frame out of that video.
You see that the voltage patterns what we're tracking here is the voltage of each individual cell is being reported already before long before the genes come on to regionalize that face.
Already you can see here's where the mouth is going to go here's where the animals right eyes going to go here are the placards, the left eye comes in shortly after that.
This is this is what the cells are remembering as what a correct tadpole faces this is what they're going to build. We know this is important for normal face development because if we move any of these or change any of these patterns.
The gene expression will change and the anatomy will change the suit I'm going to show you this in a minute.
So that's the normal pattern and you might want to monitor that for birth defects and so on.
This is a pathological pattern that you get when you inject a human oncogene into this. So eventually it'll make a tumor, but long before that you can already see these cells are electrically disconnecting from their neighbors they're
not interested in what the collective has to say about what they should be building. They're now amoebas at this point the rest of the body is just external environment to them.
And we'll talk about this shifting border between self and world and how the cognitive light cone of these cells shrinks.
So looking at these patterns is great but the more important thing is can we rewrite them can we show that they're functionally important.
And the way we do that is not with there are no applied fields there are no magnets there's no electromagnetic radiation there are no waves no frequencies.
What we're doing is we're hacking the interface that the cells normally use to hack each other. This is how cells normally control each other they could through through the ion channels and the gap junctions that are on their surface.
So we developed some some tools to read and write electrical states into these tissues.
Now, I'll show you some examples of what happens when you do that the by the way when we first proposed this quite quite some time ago, everybody thought that membrane voltage was a housekeeping parameter and that basically if you mess with it what you get is
uninterpretable death toxicity and death. And I'm going to show you that that in fact is not what happens.
This is one one one of the early examples where what we can do is I showed you that electric face and there was a little voltage pattern that is the deter that was where the eye was going to form.
And what happens if you move that pattern somewhere else and you can do that by taking an early frog embryo, injecting some cells that are going to be this posterior part of the animal, inject them with some RNA that encodes a particular
potassium in this case it's a potassium ion channel. So when you inject this RNA what it's going to do is is cause the cell to have a new kind of potassium flux which will change the voltage to be a little spot that's like that I spot.
Guess what happens when you do that the cells get the message very rapidly and they become an eye. If and they so here's the eye sitting on the gut of the animal if you do that these eyes have the right lens and read and all the same stuff.
And there's a few interesting things that you learn from this first you learn that bio electric these bioelectric pattern memories are instructive.
Okay, it's not about messing things up you can actually call up new organs by telling by giving them the pattern they're supposed to be that resetting the memory of these cells of what it is that they're building.
That's first. Second, it's very modular all the all the competencies in the recipient I mean we didn't put in enough information to say how to make an eye.
We just, we just said build an eye here, and they do all the rest they already know how to build an eye but but they needed to be convinced to do so.
Also you find out that this that these these cells in the developmental biology textbook it'll tell you that these cells, anything beyond behind this this front of the head here is incompetent to make eye.
This is where we need to learn a lot of humility because every assessment of competency or intelligence is basically us. We ourselves are taking an IQ test.
Yes, if you prompted with the so called master I gene pack six, then yeah they're not going to make an eye that only works up here in the front of the head.
But if you find the thing that they that they actually respond to which is this this bioelectric prompt, then in fact you find out that there are plenty competent to do it.
It's not their competency that's that's in question here it's how good are we at recognizing the right way to communicate our goals to these cells.
And finally, this I thought was pretty cool which is that this is a lens sitting out in the tail of a tadpole somewhere. The blue cells are the ones we injected.
Okay, these are the ones that we gave them the potassium flow to try to convince them to be an eye.
But what they did was they recruited a bunch of their neighbors to help because there's not enough of them to make an eye.
And these these cells we didn't touch any of these cells directly they they recruited their neighbors, and of course other collective intelligence is do this too so ants and termites will recruit their buddies to help them move something that's too big and so on.
So, so, so now you're starting to see how we can actually read and write the, the information, but but the recipient is not a blank canvas it's actually a very competent material it knows how to do all kinds of things that we do not have to teach it to do.
So this is leading to some regenerative medicine application so there's a frog that when they lose their legs 45 days later, nothing happens they don't regrow them.
We developed a bio electric cocktail that triggers regeneration. It's again so within 45 days you've already got some toes, you've got a toenail, all the pro regenerative genes are coming on here.
Eventually a pretty respectable leg that's touch sensitive and Motile.
So for a year and a half the intervention is only 24 hours. It's not a matter of micromanagement it's not a matter of telling every cell what it has to be you're talking to the stem cells are controlling gene expression isn't any of that.
It's right at the beginning, trying to give the cells a prompt a trigger that says go to the leg building region of more space not to the scarring region.
So for a year, I must do a disclosure because David Kaplan and I have a spin off company called Morphosuticals, where we're trying to use bioreactors on limb wounds of rodents to try to get limb regeneration happening in in mammals, so stay tuned for that.
I'm going to switch gears for a couple minutes and talk about another place where you can actually see these pattern memories, and that is with a plan area.
So plan area are very interesting for a number of reasons. First of all, they are highly regenerative so you can cut them into pieces every piece remembers what the entire worm is supposed to look like.
Okay, so every piece regenerates into a collect one.
The record I believe is something like 275 pieces.
They're highly regenerative they are cancer resistant, and they are immortal. So these asexual worms here which reproduced by fission. They do not age. Okay, there's no no such thing as an old asexual planarian.
Now they do all this.
I would have said a couple years ago I would have said despite now I say because of because I think now we kind of understand more about how this works and incredibly noisy genome.
They can be mix employed every cell has a different number of chromosomes, because being being reproducing by fission so they pull themselves and happen and regenerate.
They don't throw away all of the somatic mutations the body mutations that we do when we reproduce right your children do not inherit all the mutations that you got in your body.
These guys do and for that reason, their genome is a mess, and yet they're the ones with the highly regenerative cancer resistance and immortality.
So, we wanted to ask a very simple question when we when we cut a planarian into thirds you get this middle fragment like this. How does this middle fragment know how many heads, it's supposed to have.
There's an electrical circuit that specifies the fact that they normally need to have one head and this is extremely reliable this happens correctly all the time.
But what you can do and so here's the circuit we you can see one head, one tail, and that's and that's what they will build.
What we've been able to do is rewrite this information to say no two heads and it's a little bit messy the technology still in its infancy but we can say two heads.
If you do that, this middle fragment will build a two headed worm. Now, the amazing thing about this is that this is not an electrical map of this creature.
This is an electrical map of an anatomically normal one headed animal in which we changed the representation.
If you don't cut him he say stays one headed there's not there's nothing wrong with him of anatomically there's nothing wrong with him in terms of gene expression which is what you're seeing here.
It's only when you when you amputate that the tissue actually consults the memory to know what to do. So it is a latent memory, but also it is a counterfactual memory is not true for this creature right now it is a memory of what it's going to do in the future, if it gets injured.
It's the ability this is this is showing you two things first I promised you that we were going to see what these pattern memories actually look like to read them out of the collective intelligence of the brain this is it.
When you ask how does it know how many heads literally this is it this is the memory that that that stores it.
And the second, the second thing is that it is able to store a representation of what to do that is different from what's going on now.
People in cognitive neuroscience call that mental time travel the ability to hold thoughts about things other than what's going on right now so past and future.
The body and the collective intelligence of this of this creature is able to do this primitive thing this is I think where a lot of our cognitive tricks come from is this kind of stuff.
So the body of a planarian can store at least one of two different memories of what a proper planarian is going to look like to guide future regenerative events.
If you have any good memory, this thing remarkably is stable. So if I take these two headed worms and I continue to cut them in plain water no more manipulation of any kind.
They continue in perpetuity to regenerate to headed, even though their genome is perfectly normal we never touch the genome there's nothing wrong with their genome.
But that's not where the memory is. Okay, so if you ask, where is the memory. It's, it's, it's, it's a subtle question I mean the genetics certainly gives you a piece of hardware that by default comes with the memory that's as one head,
the memory is not nailed down by that hardware is actually rewritable. And so here you can see these.
You can see these worms hanging out. Not only can you convince them to have the wrong number of heads you can actually convince them that there are different species.
So, by cutting off the head of this triangular planarian, you can chase it into attractors and anatomical space that correspond to other species head shapes.
So in a flathead like this Pifolina round head like this S Mediterranean, but 100 and between 100 and 150 million years distance between these species and this, but the hardware has no problem visiting these other morphogenetic attractors the way that these species
normally do this is where they normally live. And not only the head shape but actually the shape of the brain and the distribution of stem cells becomes just like these other species.
So, we now are starting to really see the, the power of this of this reprogrammability the idea that the cells are building to a specification it's not just a feed forward thing where certain will certain rules get acted out and it is what it is.
It actually is tracking towards a specific end goal and it's actually minimizing error relative to that end goal. Now, what I want to talk about is that I'm not only can we change the, not only can we change the goals.
We can change the size of the goals and evolution already did this so so the goals of this of this little organism are extremely small, you can imagine the cognitive like own which is the size of the biggest goal it can muster are very small all it cares about are
things that are happening within this time and space of this of the single cell, but when they come together what evolution did leveraging by electrical networks and various other things.
What it did was allow this collective to think of grandiose goals, huge, the idea that were that we're building this giant limb and by the way if the limb gets damaged we're going to have to rebuild and we're not happy until the limb is is complete at that point,
the error drops and everything you know everything quiet down, but but the size of the goal of the size of the goals is scaling up. And then of course it that has a failure mode, which is cancer in cancer the size of the goals scales down these these
are glioblastoma cells back down to their amoeba they're very modest amoeba like goals of proliferation and going wherever life is good.
That's metastasis. So that leads to a to a very specific research program directly in the field of cancer which is, instead of trying to kill these cells with toxic chemotherapy, could we try to reinflate their goal states, could we try to raise
their collective IQ so that they would go back to these these lofty plans of building skin and livers and so on. And so when you do this and so we've done this, we were able to inject human oncogenes and then co inject some some ion channel
cells that would force the cells to remain in electrical connectivity. And here you can see even even nasty oncogenes like KRAS, it's strongly expressed in fact it's all over the place. This is the same animal there's no tumor, because these cells that the genetics are broken but the
physiology is what drives. It's the, it's the, it's the fact that they're connected to a collective and the collective is remembering what it's supposed to be doing.
There's an overview of a couple more things to say after that, and an overview of what I think is going on with the future of medicine and the reason that these these deep questions that that JTF and, and, and people who are interested in in
collective intelligence the reason all this matters so much is because everything in biomedical interventions has been focused around here these bottom up micromanage kind of things you know surgery and synthetic biology and so on.
But, but there's a whole there's a whole ocean of opportunity here around we didn't even talk about this stuff behavior shaping and trying to train networks but all of these prompts and triggers, and which we'll talk about momentarily a gentle implants
and so on, that are really targeting the protocognitive capacities of cells and tissues we're not micromanaging it. We are trying to convince them to get buying and convince them using all of the tools.
And this is this is why why this is an empirical question, because basically the hypothesis is simply this you can use the tools of behavioral and cognitive science to control these things it's not all about bottom up chemistry.
My claim is that and you can see that you can see the details here and everything spelled out in these papers. My claim is that future medicine is going to look a lot more like a weird kind of somatic psychiatry not so much like chemistry and bio electricity is that
it's the it's the same thing that that is used in mind body medicine, but it's that that bio physical mechanism that holds and and maintains them.
The set points for these collective collective cell groups and that is what we can hack. And I want to point out that we are actually not the only.
We're not the only hackers. If you look at an acorn, this is what it makes this is the typical oak leaf, and you might because of how reliable this is you might get the idea that what the oak genome knows how to do is build exactly this flat green thing.
And that's what that's what that's what genomes are good for. But there's this which is this amazing evolved bio engineer this little this little parasite wasp.
And what it will do is lay lay down an egg and some other chemicals that prompt the cells to build this incredible goal. So this is not made up of wasp cells this is made up of the plant cells.
And it is also not an example of genetic modification this this this creature has figured out how to prompt a new competency from these leaves with that we would have never known right if this if this hadn't happened.
We have no idea that a genome that typically builds a flat green things like this is actually capable of building something like this.
And this is what we need to understand actually we need to understand the, the capabilities that that latent space around the one kind of work or maybe a couple outcomes that we see this goes way deeper than just developmental plasticity.
So I want to show in the last few minutes I just want to show you some some examples of rebooting multi cellularity. This is, this is the beginnings of what we call the construction of xenobots.
What we did was take some epithelial skin cells off of an orally frog embryo, they could do many things they could do where they could have died they could have spread out formed a nice two dimensional monolayer.
Instead what they do is here overnight they they collide they call us together. Okay, and they become this it's a little self contained self motile organism that uses little silly little hairs that are normally typically used to move mucus down the body of the of the
temple. And, and this is what they used to swim, and they can go in circles they can kind of patrol back and forth, they can have collective behaviors of different kinds.
Here's one, going down a maze so so here it is swimming down.
It's going to take this corner without bumping into the opposite wall so it takes the corner, and at this point it turns around for some internal reason that we don't know and it goes back where it came from.
The idea is to understand what else are cells and tissues capable of and more fundamentally, where do these goals come from. Here's something interesting that these that these guys can do it's called kinematic self replication.
When provided with a loose collection of cells, what they will do is run around and collect them into little piles.
And because they're working with an agent material, the same way that evolution wasn't the same that way that we as engineers were working with, not a passive material but a bunch of cells.
These little piles mature, and guess what they become they become the next generation of xenobots. And when they mature, what do they do they repeat the process and do exactly the same thing and you get multiple generations.
Now, this is this is quite interesting because we could ask, what did the frog genome learn. Well, the traditional story is that it provided this solution to the problem of how to survive a frog environment and then this is what it learned.
And here are the standard developmental stages and then here's the tappel behavior, but it also can do this and here's the weird developmental stages of a xenobot and then completely different behaviors.
And the thing is, there's never been any xenobots before that there was never selection to be a good zen about no other creature reproduces by kinematic self replication. Why does this work where does it, where does it come from.
And I want to connect this this to the to the biomedical slant that we had a moment ago, which is which is this. I'm going to show you this little video. Watch, watch this little guy moving around, and I could ask what what do you think this is.
And I think that this is some a little proto organism that I got off of the bottom of a pond somewhere. And I'll tell you that if you sequence the genome of this thing what you see is 100% Homo sapiens.
This is made entirely of adult patient cells. And this is a road roadmap towards personalized agential interventions, but here's what I mean by that. The way we create these is, we get donor cells from from adult human patients no embryonic stuff going on here adult human
there's a particular protocol that causes them to become these little cilia lined, they start off as little organoids they get lined with the cilia and they start running around like the zenobots I showed you a moment ago.
So if you were thinking that well zenobots. I mean we know that embryos are pretty plastic and amphibia are also pretty plastic maybe it's some kind of weird frog specific thing that they do this you know developmental biologists call them animal caps.
Maybe this is just an animal catching. Well, if you think that way, what you wouldn't do is make anthrabots, but here we are here are the anthrabots.
And one thing that you can see so this is this this great stuff here are human neural cells plated on a petri dish, and we made a scar here like a like a scratch wound, basically, and what what you'll see is that is that these little
they can they can navigate the wound. And when they pile up at a particular location in this wound we call this a super bot because there's probably eight or nine or 10 of these things here.
What they do is they cause the the they cause the neurons to grow across the gap. A couple days later you lift them up and here's what you can see they took the two sides of the of the neural wound and they and they heal them together.
This is this is just the first thing we discovered no no doubt this is just the beginning of all kinds of unexpected things, but who would have thought that your tracheal cells, which sit quietly for decades in your airway.
Actually, if given the opportunity could come together form a different kind of life form with different behaviors with the ability to heal other body tissues in your body without any genetic modification without any need for
immunosuppression if these things are used in the body that they're your own cells. They share all the priors with you with your body about what health and diseases what inflammation is they don't have to be genetically engineered there are no scaffolds here
no weird nano materials. It's just releasing the natural healing competencies of your own cells. There is so much that we don't know about what these, what all these guys are capable of.
I want to I want to end here just by by saying this that because because life is so good at remapping information.
Life basically assumes that everything is going to change evolution and mutation means your body is going to change the environment is going to change everything's going to change.
So every embryo and every new morphogenic system has to not take the priors too seriously and remap what it knows on to a new context I've shown you many examples of that, which means that life is incredibly interoperable any combination of evolved material,
modern material and software is some kind of agent. We already have some examples of cyborgs and hybrids and you're going to have humans with all kinds of different proportion of new parts and new new organs and so on.
All of this all of this is coming. Everything that Darwin meant when he said endless forms most beautiful is a tiny corner of this state space of possible bodies and minds which is going to be here with us in the coming decades.
It means that we have to drop some old untenable categories these binary categories of man machine know all this stuff. These are no good. We're going to have to get beyond questions of what do you look like and how did you get here meaning randomly evolved
in order to understand how to ethically relate to others we are going to have to work out ways to relate to minds and bodies that are nowhere on the tree of life with us that are not like us, and come up with much better categories than what we've been working with
and what we call AI right now these language models, which are everybody's arguing about them and they are so easy to distinguish from the kinds of things that we have been dealing with in the human world, but but they are not the they are not the difficult case they are just the
kind of first part, we are going to have all sorts of hybrid beings that are that are part evolved part designed and part software.
So, okay, I'm going to stop here and just just tell you that summarized what I've said intelligence is everywhere. We need to raise rise above our poor ability to recognize it and unfamiliar guys is this is going to be critical for biomedicine and for the ethical flourishing of not just humanity but all sentient beings.
We have a research agenda, a principle framework to try to get beyond these old polls of teleophobia on the one hand and animism on the other hand, JTF has been hugely important in this in this arena and I'm extremely grateful for that.
And the future consists of dumping these these concepts which are not going to serve as well and move forward in a couple of really interesting areas. So I'm just going to thank the people the postdocs and grad students who contributed to this work.
Again, thanks to the the JTF for the funding that has moved a lot of this forward across collaborators and most of all the animal model systems that we learn from. So thank you very much.
Thank you, Mike. That was super stimulating. Everything that I had hoped for in your talk so I'm going to close us down since we're on the hour I want to thank you again Mike for joining us and thank you so much.
And we're chatting with you more in the future.
Absolutely. Anytime. Thank you all so much.
Bye.
