You
You
Your instructor is Melinda Myers.
Ms. Myers is a gardening expert, television radio host, author, columnist and educator
with more than 30 years of experience and a master's degree in horticulture.
She has authored or co-authored more than 20 gardening books and has written articles
for such magazines as Better Homes in Gardens and Fine Gardening.
Ms. Myers hosts the nationally syndicated Melinda's Garden Moment segments and appears
regularly as a guest expert on various national and local television and radio shows.
In 2013, she received the American Horticulture Society's B.Y. Morrison Communication Award
for Effective and Inspirational Communication.
As you can see, you can grow anything in a container.
Check out these purple fountain beaches.
They're planted in containers and trained over an arch, the perfect entranceway for
an area where there's no in-ground planting.
And anyone can be successful with container gardening.
Whether you're gardening on a balcony, patio or deck or in a large lot, containers may
be the solution to your gardening challenges.
And they're easier to manage.
The smaller size and the controlled environment make you in control.
Plus, weeding's a breeze.
Who's this series for?
Well, if you're an experienced gardener, you're going to learn some new ideas of using
containers in the landscape and the science behind container gardening.
And if you're new to gardening or container gardening, we're going to cover the basics
for you as well.
Containers allow you to add color and interest to your landscape, change out your landscape
design inexpensively and extend the season easily, plus create warm and friendly welcomes.
I'll show you everything you need to get started and how to use containers through all seasons.
You'll also visit several test sites where we'll use containers to solve several gardening
challenges, including limited time.
Plus, we're going to show you some no-fail design strategies today and endless variations.
But first, let's visit our garden design studio where we'll learn a bit more about the facts.
As you saw the garden center, you can grow just about anything in containers, even trees,
but also perennials, ornamental grasses, vegetables, dwarf fruit trees, and much, much more.
Now annual flowers are an easy place to start, especially for those of you new at container
gardening, but it's also great for any experience level.
Use the annuals in pots for seasonal changes, season long color, and for adding color where
there's no room to plant.
You may want to start with annuals that you're familiar with and expand your planting palette
from there.
Now I like to try new annual varieties in a container first before incorporating them
into my planting beds.
Kind of a mini planting test garden of sorts.
You may like to do the same thing as well.
Now here are some common annuals you may have seen in containers.
Petunias, a long time favorite in many types available.
The grandiflores with their big flowers sometimes need deadheading, but many of the newer varieties
like the Wave and Supertunia really provide season long color and bloom with minimal care.
The multi-flowers have smaller flowers in many more, and the million bells, a relative
of the Petunia, are free-flowering, smaller flowers great in containers.
The traditional annual geranium is excellent in a variety of colors, big, bold, round flowers
on top of nice green or variegated foliage.
Spike or jocina provides a nice vertical accent with very little foot room in your pot, so
it's a great one to give you vertical accent.
Or you may want to try one of the colorful cordillines or formiums.
Vinkavine, English ivy, sweet potato vine, and others spill over the containers and can
add really a nice element to your container.
And the silvery foliage of Dusty Miller is a nice foil behind your other colorful annuals.
Now before we chat more about the plants we can grow, let's look at the options for containers.
Things come in all sizes and shapes.
The larger the container, the more potting mix it will hold, and that means it holds
more water and nutrients.
It'll be a bit more forgiving when you miss a watering, but it also will be much heavier.
Now let's talk about some of the more common materials used to make containers and why
that matters.
The material they're made of influences design a bit, but more importantly, their ability
to stand up to the weather.
Now the weight of the pot is important if you're moving it around the landscape or growing
on a balcony or rooftop.
Material also influences moisture and heat retention, impacting the time and effort
needed to maintain your container garden.
Let's start with the classic terracotta or glazed pot.
This is something many gardeners love and enjoy the look of.
Very classic, but it is very heavy.
Now that's a benefit if you're growing tall plants and you're worried about them toppling
over with a lightweight pot.
But it can be heavy to move and it can be heavy on your balcony.
Now glazed pots are another form of clay pot.
They tend to hold the moisture a little more than the porous terracotta pots that dry out
very quickly.
Now again, both are long lasting if they're properly handled, but they are breakable,
so you need to handle them with care.
Now neither is suited to year round gardening and cold climates.
You see when soil freezes, it forms ice, it expands, and crack goes your expensive pot.
So these are some that you want to empty for the winter in store if you're in a colder
climate.
Fiberglass plant pots have come a long way, really improving the looks and the design
of these.
As you can see, very lightweight despite the large size.
They're weather tolerant, so you can use these outdoors year round no matter where you live,
and they tend to be long lasting.
They also tend to be a bit more expensive, at least at this time, but you'll get many
years of enjoyment out of them.
Plastic has also come a long way in terms of design.
Many different color choices available and many different styles, they don't quite look
like the pots that you may think of of the past.
Lightweight as you can see, and they hold moisture much better than terracotta.
Now I leave my plastic pots outside and I live in a cold climate, but you must be careful
not to hit them with a shovel when you're shoveling snow, a snow plow, or anything else
during the cold weather when they're frozen.
Now leaving them out year round does shorten their lifespan, but they tend to be a little
bit less expensive option for year round gardening outdoors.
Wood pots are also another option, an old time favorite, long lasting if you use long
lasting wood, or if the planters are made with painted or stained wood.
So you might want to try that for an option.
They are heavy, but they are weather tolerant as well.
Concrete containers are long lasting, tolerant of the weather, you can leave them out year
round, but they are very heavy, and they tend to be a bit more expensive.
Now the hypertufa that's making a comeback are made from Portland cement, they're a little
bit lighter than the pure concrete pots, but one of the nice parts is you can make them
yourself, mold them into different shapes, and they're great for a variety of plantings.
They are just as durable as concrete, but a little more flexible in terms of options
for you as a gardener.
Now metal containers tend to be long lasting, but they are impacted by the heat and the
cold.
They tend to get cold faster and hot faster, so you need to use that, or keep that in mind
when you're selecting metal containers.
They do hold moisture, and then of course, besides the metal containers, we are looking
at all kinds of quirky containers, things that you may find in the shed, at a thrift
shop, at a yard sale, things that can be planted and give you a kind of a unique and artistic
flair as well as good place to hold your plants.
So next, let's talk a little bit about drainage, whether it's a quirky container or one of
the more traditional pots.
No matter what material your container is made of, drainage holes are a must for gardening
success, because even if you could water perfectly, and I don't know any gardener that can, nature
may provide more water than you need, and soon you'll find your plants floating in your
container filled with soil and water.
Now many people think that putting rocks in the bottom of a pot that lacks drainage holes
and then filling it with soil will take care of the problem.
Well it doesn't.
What happens is the excess water collects in the rocks and then eventually the soil is
saturated and the roots will rot.
Plus, the rocks shorten the water column so the drainage is impacted.
Let me show you with an experiment.
I took this sponge and soaked it in water.
As you can see, most of the water is drained out, but if we turn it vertically, you see
there's much more water left in that sponge, so the longer column holds the moisture and
allows it to drain a bit better.
So keep this in mind, the same applies when we're doing our gardening as well.
So no rocks, but there are some options for handling pots without drainage holes.
And that's called double potting.
When you find that perfect container that lacks drainage holes, but maybe you can't
or you don't want to drill holes in the bottom, try double potting.
So here we have a small container and we like the looks.
We can't punch holes in it, but we want to grow this begonia in it.
So we're going to take some rocks, put them on the bottom of the pot, set the begonia
inside, and then we can water as needed.
If excess water builds up, all we need to do is lift the plant out, pour off that excess
water and return the plant to its container.
It's a great way to manage plants.
It's called double potting.
And this way, your pot always is elevated above any excess water from rain or irrigation
that is provided in the bottom of the container.
Now self watering pots are another good option, especially for busy gardeners or people who
travel a lot.
Now we're going to talk more about these later out in the garden, but I wanted to talk a
little bit about the science behind them.
The water collects in the reservoir in the bottom and these troughs are filled with soil.
You can use columns of soil like this or wicks and then they move the water from the reservoir
below up through the soil, moving from high concentration of moisture and using adhesion
to move that water against the force of gravity up to the plant roots so it can be absorbed.
Now you want to make sure it has a weep hole like this one so that when the water fills
the reservoir, any excess can move out of the pot.
You don't want to see your plants floating after a week of too of rain.
Now let's move to the other table and talk about the growing mix we're going to use.
The growing media is even more important.
Think of it as the foundation of your container garden.
We'll learn more about potting mixes and soils later in this session and a few key points
that you might want to consider.
You know, check the label because all the information you need will be on there.
Potting mixes are made up of organic matter, some drainage materials, but they can vary.
They're the reservoir for your water and nutrients and it's critical for healthy, beautiful and
productive plants.
As I mentioned, you're going to check the label.
You may see names like potting mix, container mix and planting mix.
Lots of different formulas.
Some have fertilizer, some have water retaining crystals.
Check the label.
That'll tell you what is in that potting mix you're looking at and tell you if it's the
right one for you.
Now many gardeners ask me why they can't just put garden soil in a pot.
That smaller volume of soil is not going to drain as well.
Even if your soil in the garden works well, it's not going to work well in the pot without
dressing up.
Now some gardeners like to mix their own and it's a way to control what goes in and sure
you have a consistent mix for all your planters.
We'll talk more about that in lesson three.
Now we've covered some of the basics for the foundation of our plantings.
Let's just talk a bit about the plants.
Select plants to be grown in one container that all require the same growing conditions.
They also need to look good together.
We'll consider color, texture, form and scale.
We talk about some of these as we work our way through the garden center and in our next
lesson.
So let's make a list of where we want to add containers and the supplies we'll need.
And it's off to the garden center for the fun part, plant and container shopping.
There's so many great containers to choose from, but we decided to go with a traditional
ceramic pot and we picked blue because it complemented our design and the surrounding
landscape.
Now once you have the container, you need to select the plants and the design parts
difficult for many.
So you might want to start with the thriller, filler and spiller technique.
The thriller is your vertical accent that creates a focal point in the garden.
In this case, angelonia.
The spiller, calibracoa in this case is going to cascade over the pot, anchoring the planting
to the container.
And the filler, these tie the two together.
Let's look at a few more examples.
When I go shopping for container plants, I like to grab a couple of carts and fill them
up with my thrillers, spillers and fillers.
And I usually start with my vertical accents, picking some old time favorites and new varieties.
Now the spike is a favorite of many gardeners and you may like to carry on that tradition.
Great height and a small footprint, but maybe you're looking for something different.
How about a cultivar of the spike, something with a little color or variegation, change
it up just a bit.
Now I like things that are a bit more unusual, so I love the papyrus.
You may see it in a water garden or in a bog, but it also grows well in a container filled
with a well-drained potting mix.
Different heights depending on the variety.
Nice vertical accent and nice airy foliage as well.
Blue arrow reed is another favorite.
It's a nice tall, narrow, linear plant.
Good vertical accent, a little bit different than anything else your neighbors may be growing.
So you might want to give it a try.
Don't overlook vines on an obelisk, lots of new nice little support systems that go in
containers and it gives you that different look.
Here we've got a giant blue, thumbergy eye, which will give you bold foliage and nice blue
flowers.
I like the growth through nature of verbena binariensis, Argentine or Brazilian verbena.
It attracts the butterflies and hummingbirds to your garden.
Grows through your fillers giving you nice height and a nice floating flowers above the
other plants.
It's just beautiful.
Now we've picked plants that are annuals in our area, maybe perennials in yours, but
this colorful hibiscus is all about the foliage.
Nice height, nice backdrop for other plants or combined with other plants that provide
nice foliage and texture in containers.
And don't forget about your can as an elephant ears.
Now if you're in a cold climate, you'll need to bring the rhizome or bulb inside to over
winter.
But boy, look at that foliage and flower.
Nice vertical accent, good color even when it's not in bloom.
Then I look for some spillers to go with my thrillers.
Now the English ivy and vinca vines are traditional favorites and they work well trailing over
your pot.
But there's some cool new plants available you might want to try.
I like the wire vine.
It's nice and wiry, soft texture, combines nicely with ferns and other shade plants and
it just is a really interesting texture and you may have grown it indoors as a house plant.
Silver Falls Dicondra.
The foliage of the Silver Falls Dicondra provides a nice backdrop for other flowers and anchors
the planting to the container.
And golden moneywort is another one.
It combines nicely with Silver Falls Dicondra but also other plants.
It'll take some shade to full sun.
The more light it gets, the more yellow the foliage.
And for a little change of pace with vinca vine, look for one of the new varieties that
uses maybe a little yellow variegation or light and dark green.
It gives a little twist to an old traditional favorite.
And don't think about fuchsias only in a hanging basket.
How about blending in one with nice variegated foliage and subtle flowers.
This looks great with Boston ferns or other ferns and that wire vine we looked at earlier.
Nice spillage over the container and shade tolerant.
If we are going for sun, how about lotus vine.
It's a biennial so if it has a long growing season you'll get beautiful red flowers.
But in this case it's all about that gray green foliage and it's light and airy so it
goes great with bold leafed plants.
We looked at the sweet potato vine, the yellow one earlier.
This is blacky, equally aggressive but nice foliage to look at.
This plantana good for hot dry conditions.
It fills and it spills and attracts butterflies.
And it's great for those of you that like to let things go a bit dry, more drought tolerant
than other plants.
For fillers almost anything goes that will fit in between the thriller and the spiller.
I like to use herbs and I think curled parsley is one of my favorite.
The texture in the green is just wonderful.
And the swallowtail caterpillars love it as well.
So you'll bring in the butterflies, the caterpillars and you can eat it.
I always call Diamond Frost Euphorbia the baby's breath of containers.
In the old days we used to use baby's breath with our flowers to kind of fill it in and
make it look special.
If your container is not up to snuff try using Diamond Frost.
It kind of weaves in between the other plants and looks great.
I like pentas and if you see the flowers they have five little points like a star and they're
great for butterflies.
Long blooming, minimal dead heading, common reds, pinks and whites and purple and star
type.
Great for a filler, good for bringing in butterflies and long bloom.
And don't forget about traditional favorites like the zinnias and the marigolds.
Easy to grow from seed or transplant.
The zinnias take it hot and dry so they're good for containers, good for bringing in
butterflies and great for cutting.
Really the possibilities are endless.
Let me show you a few combinations that don't work and let you know why.
Now these are all great plants individually but together there's some problems.
Strobalanthus or Persian Shield Beautiful with its purple, silver and pink foliage.
Rexpagonia, another great variegated foliage and the bicolor Calabrocoa.
When you look at these together, way too much color, way too much activity, you really
need a solid color or two in there to break it up and make it effective.
Our next combination is about assertiveness.
These are beautiful plants together.
The coleus, this is a sun coleus, cosmos great for butterflies and this sweet potato vine
looks a little timid and small right now.
But guess what, in less than a month it will take over and gulf that cosmos and crowd out
the coleus.
So make sure your plants are equally assertive when you're growing.
Our last combination is about growing conditions.
This calla lily likes a little shade and moist conditions.
Succulent likes it hot and dry and the water hyssop known as Bacopa really needs moist soil
conditions.
Though they're all pink and blend nicely together, they need different growing conditions.
So not the easiest combination to keep looking good in a pot.
Let's take a look at a few combos for inspiration and keep in mind it doesn't have to be complicated
to be effective.
I love this flat sided pot, perfect for mounting on a wall or a fence and here they've just
used spike, a variegated variety of cordyline and calibracoa.
The mini bells are wonderful in containers, good drought tolerance and free flowering.
Behind it we have this nice combination, a sun coleus great in full sun without fading
combined with a petunia and a verbena.
So we've got some nice fillers and thrillers out of one plant and some nice fillers here.
And check out this combination.
We've got a nice spike with nice variegation for a vertical accent, complemented by another
sun coleus and those colors really blend nicely together.
The pinkish purples are picked up by the filler Angelonia and the white cosmos adds
an element of impact here and attracts butterflies.
I love the spillers of the mandavia, you may have used it as a vine but it also works great
as a trailing plant in the container and we use that pink in the way petunia to help
echo all the pink and blend the purples, pinks and reds together.
And of course the traditional ivy, a nice combination with a little different flair and
look at the deep purple in this coleus and that really frilly foliage that looks good.
Here we have that diamond frost euphorbia, a wonderful filler that's light and airy
and kind of weaves through the other plants.
The coceana or flowering tobacco is great for hummingbirds and butterflies and provides
fragrance in the evening, great container to put by a front door or patio area.
And then we have this nice colorful gazillion, echoes the colors of the coleus and the coceana.
The flowers tend to close up late in the evening so it gives it a little different look.
Then over here we've got the straw flower, great for cutting and the white gives you
a nice focal point and echoes the white on this variegated picopa that makes a nice trailer
for this planter.
Wonderful combination, little bit unusual varieties to keep your neighbors interested.
Now if you really want to go with something different and big, how about going vertical
with an obelisk?
Here we've got a hanging basket and the support that create our vertical accent.
Then we put some fillers and spillers down below.
The whole container is quite impressive and really provides some good scale in front of
your home, on a patio or a deck.
We've got our plants, containers, now we just need to pick up a couple bags of potting mix
and load up the car and we're going to head back to the entrance of our small space garden.
We decided to use containers to make a colorful welcome at our small space test garden.
We've potted most of them up and I left one big container for us to discuss.
Now the first key is selecting a potting mix.
Some of you may make your own and I've done that in the past or you may go to the garden
center and select one of the many available and that's one of the problems.
How do you find the best potting mix?
Look for consistency, for me that's important.
I grow maybe a hundred containers every year so I want to make sure not only is it well
drained and holds moisture but it's consistent bag to bag.
Make sure it does hold moisture and is well drained.
Now some contain moisture retaining crystals.
These crystals are designed to absorb moisture and hold it near the roots of the plants.
You can see they're just light polymer crystals.
We added water and they kind of look like tapioca pudding.
Now the research really doesn't show that it does much good but I'll tell you gardeners
swear by it and if it works for you that's a good thing, do it.
That's one of the joys of gardening.
Now I have to tell you a story though is use, if you get a mix with these in it, don't add
more and if you buy them follow label directions.
I had a contractor send a crew out, he told me send a crew out to install sod middle of
the summer, hot, dry, send them out with the crystals, no directions.
They put an inch of the crystals on the soil, laid the sod, watered, watered, watered.
Next day the customer called, the sod was beautiful she said but it slid off the lawn
into the street so use the proper amount, it's important.
Next, we're going to pick a potting mix.
Some potting mixes are complete with fertilizer.
I like to add my own.
I use a low nitrogen slow release fertilizer, something like a malorganite so I mix it in
with my potting mix or add it to the top of my containers that I purchase so that every
time I water it releases nutrients over a long period of time.
So I get growth without sacrificing flowers and fruit and the other benefit, I don't
have to mix and do this every couple of weeks.
Once at the beginning of the season, maybe one more time mid season, then I add my potting
mix.
Now a lot of people ask me do I need fresh potting mix every year, it's expensive.
I choose to invest in it and here's why, we've got a small container and if there's an insect
or disease problem we can wipe out the whole garden easily and my investment is also in
the plants and the beauty and the short growing season that I have.
So I like to use fresh potting mix every year but I recycle it and reuse it in my compost.
I dump those pots, put it in my compost and it ends up in my garden so I'm not being wasteful.
If you do reuse, add at least 50% new to freshen it up and add some more nutrients and organic
matter.
Some people also want to know do you need to fill up the whole pot.
If you use all potting mix in here, it will be heavy but you'll hold more moisture and
nutrients, gives you a little break on watering but with this heavy pot we may want to use
a false bottom.
Now I decided to use a commercial false bottom like this Upsa Daisy, they come in different
sizes in the disc set into the bottom creating a false bottom.
You may have noticed we have drainage holes in the pot and in the Upsa Daisy because drainage
is very important.
Now I know a lot of you may create your own false bottoms.
I know many gardeners use those packing peanuts, make sure they're not biodegradable because
if they are they'll biodegrade in your pot and stay in the sidewalk.
So use the non biodegradable.
A gardener told me he likes to put them in a net bag like you buy onions or oranges in
because then at the end of the season he can lift it out of the bottom of the pot, shake
off any soil and store it for next year to reuse them.
I know a lot of you crush up old cell packs or maybe you use old water bottles, any kind
of material just to fill up the bottom of the pot.
It's lightweight and easy to do.
I'd recommend covering your homemade false bottom with some type of permeable fabric
like weed barrier or here we're using Rema and then it keeps the soil or your potting
mix out of the false bottom so it doesn't settle throughout the season.
But I find the Upsa Daisies are great and they're easy to find in my shed and garage
because they're bright orange.
I'm going to put some potting mix in my container, a good well-drained potting mix, add my slow
release fertilizer and finish up planting.
But before I do that I want to talk about the plants we selected.
I used Papyrus for my vertical accent.
This one's King Tut so it's going to get about 4 feet tall, perfect scale for this big container
and for the front entrance.
It'll be spectacular when people come to visit.
Sweet potato vine, one plant is plenty for this pot.
It will fill and spill my spiller and it'll cascade over through the fence railings and
over really creating a nice softening to that entrance and a welcome.
For our fillers we're going to use some Coral Bells.
This will repeat the color and texture from our front bed so it'll tie this all together.
It'll be perfect.
And then for a little added benefit I wanted to use Heliotrope.
The fragrance is incredible.
It's also great for butterflies too.
And when our homeowner is sitting at the front entrance she'll be able to smell this wonderful
scent as she sips on her coffee.
I'm going to get busy planting and we'll show you the end result in a moment.
Before I give you that preview of our final planting we have to get this big pot up the
steps and as you can guess it's heavy.
So you might want to use something like a potlifter to make the job easier so the homeowner
and I can both carry this pot up the stairs carefully together.
We had some nice gardens in front of the town house but we wanted to bring the sense of
the garden right to the front door.
So we started with containers right here by the bench.
We filled them with some vertical interest, ribbon bush.
It mimics the vertical interest we used with the papyrus but a little less overwhelming.
Then we used Bacopa as our spiller, much less aggressive than the sweet potato vine and repeated
the purples in the coral bells.
We popped in some coral bells so that we'd pull that garden from the front to the bench
and of course included some fragrant heliotrope.
So when the homeowner sits here she can enjoy the lovely fragrance.
On the landing we went with a tall narrow pot.
We needed the scale but we didn't want a big footprint since the person may be carrying
some things up to the front door or several guests coming in to visit.
We wanted to leave enough space.
We used the papyrus for a vertical accent, again keeping things in scale, sweet potato
vine that will spill through the fence and over the edge of the landing and the heliotrope
for a fragrant welcome.
And of course our big pot right at the front entrance and carrying the color blue through
the containers up to the front door.
We repeated the coral bells, the heliotrope for a fragrant welcome and that papyrus will
get to be a good 4 to 5 or 6 feet tall and will be dramatic as a front entrance as the
sweet potato vine spill over the edge.
Now this only really took us an hour or two to do this and we used the filler, spiller
and thriller method and if you do that you can create great containers just like we did.
I enjoyed putting together the containers for our front entrance so much that I couldn't
resist coming back again this fall to add a little seasonal interest.
As you can see we changed out the heliotrope that tend to fade out in the heat like many
cool season annuals and replaced them with asters for a little fall fancy.
Then we added some ornamental peppers, couldn't resist the beautiful fruit.
Now though they're frost sensitive in a container they're easy to bring indoors if your area
is subject to fall frost.
Then bring them back outside, usually a couple weeks of beautiful weather before really cold
weather sets in.
We added some colorful pumpkins, bit of the season and a bit of extra color and wrapped
that sweet potato vine around to tie it all together.
And speaking of sweet potato vines, up on the top landing we have a beautiful container.
The sweet potato vines just spilling over the edge really getting the neighbors attention
and the cardinal vine crawling over the back railing adding a bit of red and dark green
as well.
The papyrus are great vertical accent, occasionally had a few broken stems due to wind so we trimmed
those out as we went through this season.
It worked out quite well.
Not only did we use the thriller filler and spiller technique within the pot we also carried
that idea throughout the front garden with the top landing, middle landing and carrying
it right down to ground level.
You too can do the same.
In this session we learned about the different types of containers and the materials they're
made of as well as how to plant them.
In our next session we'll look at the challenges of landscaping a small deck and learn a lot
more about design.
See you then.
