In this session, we'll use containers to create three seasons of interest on a small
deck.
Plus, we'll solve some garden challenges of privacy, color, and small space design.
We'll mix some edibles with ornamentals for a tasty and attractive solution.
Look a little bit more at design principles, both in general and for small spaces.
But let's start with the visit to our test garden.
Containers are great for both large and small areas, and they'll be perfect on this small
deck.
Now, if we take a look around, we can see that we've got some screening issues.
On one side, the neighbors put up a nice screen, but they've left the end open, so they can
pass a cup of coffee in the morning or a glass of wine at the end of the day.
On this side, we've got a more open area.
Now they get along with their neighbors, however, a little bit of privacy would be
good with both.
What I love is this homeowner's convinced that homeowner to put up a little bit of screening
so that they both get the benefit and the space is taken up on their larger deck.
On this end, we're going to leave the view open.
It's a beautiful green space, so it's a nice view, and it gives you that sense of space,
making the small deck feel much larger.
Now the homeowner wants both edibles and ornamentals, and I'm sure we can fit that bill for them
and still leave her plenty of room to sit and enjoy this area.
Well, this is everything the homeowner wants to put on the patio or deck.
Now we've got a lot of plants here, and we don't want to give that overcrowded sense,
but we do want to pack in a lot of edibility and color, and I think we can do a lot of
that.
If we have leftover plants, we'll find another place to squeeze them in, and another pot,
another container, another area of the landscape.
We're going to use the dead space over here.
This is a great place, this little alcove.
She'll be able to look out onto her plants, frame nicely by her tomatoes and other edible
plants.
She'll be able to sit on the deck and look in through the beauty of her plantings.
We're going to really soften the screen to the neighbors by putting some hanging baskets,
and we don't want to waste any space, so our herbs will be over the railing, convenient
to the grill, but not taking up any space.
Now design is as important in containers as it is in your landscape, so we're going
to use color, just like we do in other parts of our landscape.
Yellow is a great attention getter, and we're going to repeat it throughout the patio to
tie everything together.
The golden moneywort will spill over several planters, really softening those structures.
We'll use some variegated thyme in the railing planter.
The fragrance is great, the edibility is wonderful, and the yellow will tie the alcove planting
to the railing.
We'll also include some edible flowers like calendula and yellows, so that we can again
echo the color and use those to brighten up our salads.
In Lantana, great for containers because of the heat and drought tolerance, we'll use
those in several places, including on the screen, to repeat the yellow and tie it together.
Now I love to use complementary colors, those that are crossed from each other on the artist
wheel, like yellow and purple.
Putting them together in design makes those colors really pop, and so it's wonderful.
Some nice fragrant purple elissum, and then of course our edible purple basil.
Now one thing to consider are seeds.
We don't want to forget that planting flowers and herbs from seeds is a great way to maybe
extend the season or save a little money, and edibles like fruits like blueberries and
strawberries are a great way to just increase the interest in fun.
So let's get started by planting some tomatoes.
You may not have thought about growing tomatoes in a container, but it works great, especially
if space is limited or maybe sunlight.
Now for best results, grow them in a three, better yet five gallon pot, and you may want
to even consider putting in some ornamentals.
Now if you look at this container, you can tell I'm cheating just a bit.
The bigger the pot, the less often you water.
But in this case, we're going to squeeze some in, so we're going to put a little more fertilizer.
I always like to use a slow release, low nitrogen fertilizer whenever I'm gardening, and especially
in containers, because every time I water, I'm fertilizing.
We're going to need to water more frequently also, because we have more plants and less
potting mix.
Now I love this self watering pot that you see here.
It's got a nice reservoir on the bottom, so it holds the water.
If it rains a lot or eye over water, there's a drainage hole right here, so the excess
water can drain out instead of drowning our plants.
We can fill it from above or in this spout and fill that container.
And then what's nice is there's a built in staking or support device, but you'll notice
I haven't put mine on yet, and the reason being, one of the benefits of planting in
a container is jump starting the season.
So we're starting a bit early, and we can either bring the pot in, but this is kind
of big and heavy, so we're going to leave it out, but cover it with a floating row cover
that will protect these plants from frost.
Once the danger of frost is passed, we can remove this and put the supports in place.
We've added strawberries and moneywort to continue our design theme and add some beauty
to these plantings, and we're going to put it in place and then water it well, because
once it's watered, it's going to be even heavier.
Next, we'll pot up some blueberries.
I also wanted to include blueberries for our container plantings.
It's the perfect candidate for a pot, because blueberries are very particular about their
soil.
They like it moist, well-drained, lots of organic matter, and slightly acidic.
Now most of us don't have those conditions in our landscape, so we can create them in
a container.
Now, not only am I putting blueberries here, but I'm also including some decorative plants
like the golden moneywort for that yellow to echo the Lantana and Calendula, and also
those fragrant purple Elyssum.
Now I finished up one of the pots right here, and you may wonder why did you put it in such
an ugly container?
Well, here's the deal.
We're going to set this pot inside our decorative pot, because in this cold climate where I'm
gardening right now, we need to give those blueberries extra protection.
So we're going to sink that pot into a vacant area while we move our decorative container
indoors where it can be stored safely for winter.
So one potting blueberries, like other plants, carefully slide it out of the container.
We've already added some fertilizer into that potting mix.
We're going to loosen any girdling roots, and then backfill with a good well-drained
potting mix.
Now, as I mentioned, we're including decorative plants, because these will go in front of
our tomatoes to really give a nice display.
Once I finish potting this up, we'll set out all the containers and take one final look.
Well, we've done our initial layout of our containers, and just like any good landscape,
there's always some fine-tuning and adjustment that needs to happen.
You may notice that some of our pots didn't end up where we initially planned.
Some of them didn't look good together.
They were a little overpowering, so we moved things around.
We also elevated some of the pots.
You can do that by overturning containers, or in our case, we took a small step stool
and tucked it behind the plants.
It's a great way to get the height you need with your existing pots.
We also have our herb garden in place here on the railing, and it's wonderful, because
as our homeowner goes to visit her neighbor, she can brush against those fragrant herbs.
Plus, it's conveniently located near her grill.
We're deciding to wait on the screening a bit, because we couldn't find just the right
planters, but like every good landscape, you can do it in stages and take time until
you get the solution you're looking for.
You know, our neighbors were also waiting on the other side to get our trees in, so
once those are in place, we'll add those for screening.
And we'll be back in summer and fall to change out our plantings, because it's a great way
to get seasonal interest in even a small space like this.
But most importantly, I want you to relax and enjoy your new space.
Welcome back to our design studio.
We'll go back out to our deck in a few minutes to see how it progresses through the season.
But first, let's talk a bit more about growing conditions.
Because our plants are growing in a limited amount of soil, actually most will be in a
soilless mix, the environment has an even greater impact on the plants.
We'll need to check the water daily, maybe even twice a day in smaller containers or
extremely hot weather.
Because the light impacts growth rate and the need for water, we'll need to water those
pots in full sun more frequently.
A good thing is, pots can be moved into more sun if needed or a bit more shade during extremely
hot and sunny weather.
Plants also adapt to their climate.
A look at more heat and drought tolerant plants show forms and textures that allow plants
to survive these conditions.
Green narrow leaves, spines and hairs help to reduce the impact of sunlight and moisture
loss.
Here's a great example of a rooftop garden in Manhattan, New York.
You can see the sedums are thriving despite the heat in this open sunny area.
Sedums, the plant with the red flowers, are a common plant used in rooftop gardens.
Not only are they heat and drought tolerant, but pretty cold tolerant, making them a good
choice for root top gardens.
Now shade tolerant plants typically have larger leaves for greater leaf surface for
more efficient light absorption.
Keep these in mind when designing your containers.
And remember, light and temperature vary with the season and so should your plant selection.
And that may impact your design as well.
Here we have a beautiful shade container full of begonias.
The lower Rex begonias have great texture and beautiful color and really it's all about
the foliage.
And then the taller begonia is a dragon wing begonia.
And this plant is great in the shade, but also in full sun.
The waxy leaves hold up well and it will be covered with flowers all season long.
Hardiness is another factor to consider.
Now when growing perennial trees and shrubs and containers, we've been talking a lot
about annuals you see, but depending on where you live, some plants that are perennial and
milder climates are used as annuals in cold climates where winter temperatures are too
harsh for them to survive.
So we need to consider hardiness when looking at perennials, trees and shrubs.
On the tag, you'll see that hardiness zones are listed quite often.
And I have an example right here.
It tells you, in this case, cold hardiness.
It's a plant's ability to survive the minimum winter temperature.
You can ask your garden center professional or check the hardiness map for your area to
identify your hardiness zone and what plants will thrive within.
Here's a good example of a mix of hardy and not so hardy plants in this botanical garden.
The tree will definitely be hardy and can be left out year round.
But the non-hardy plants are in separate containers.
And this allows you to bring the formium, the tall spiky leafy plant on the left in
for the winter and grow it as a house plant.
The annuals will end up in the compost pile at the end of the season, but we can preserve
that tree.
This way you can grow a wide variety of different hardy plants, annuals, perennials and trees
and shrubs in one area in separate individual pots.
Now let's start with the United States Department of Agriculture Hardiness Map.
They're available online in catalogs and from knowledgeable garden center staff.
In North America, these will be the USDA Hardiness Map and the American Horticultural
Society Heat Zone Map.
Now when you're looking at one of these maps, you want to first look at it overall and identify
your zone.
Now if you take a look at the key, you can see the regions are broken up in 10 degree
increments.
Then those are subdivided by 5 degrees to kind of narrow down the choice.
So if you take a look, you can find your zone.
The same applies when you're using other hardiness maps.
So take a look and find your location.
And as you look at the map, you'll notice there are small islands of higher or lower
hardiness zones within those larger regions.
Now these differences are due to the impact of water, large bodies of water, or mountains
or hills, higher elevations such as heat islands from the city that can impact that small area
of the environment.
Now in my case, I'm based in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and it's a zone 5B.
So that means the average minimum winter temperatures are about minus 15 to minus 10 degrees.
Now even though Chicago is also a 5B and it's only about 70 or 80 miles away, I see a slight
difference in the plants that thrive there, but don't do as well in Milwaukee.
So hardiness zone is a starting point, but you may want to adjust accordingly.
Now I live relatively close to the lake, Lake Michigan, and in the city.
Both have great impact on the weather.
My winter tends to be a bit milder because of the lake effect and the heat island from
all the hardscapes, the concrete, the blacktop and buildings that they're emitting.
So these two factors create a microclimate, rather large one, in my community.
Plus, my springs are cooler because of the lake, but that first fall frost comes much
later in my area.
Now the cool things about containers, it lets you push your hardiness zone.
For example, I have a cut leaf Japanese maple growing in a container for about 5 years now,
and that's really pushing the limit.
I do give it protection over the winter, but unlike many of my fellow gardeners, mine's
thriving and theirs are struggling to get through our cold winters and erratic springs.
And I know many northern gardeners that are growing citrus like this out on their patio
or deck for the summer and inside for the winter.
Some even are growing limes and have enough to kind of spice up their cocktails in the
evening.
Now for containers you overwinter outdoors in harsh climates, select plants at least
one, preferably two zones hardier.
We'll talk about overwintering container gardens and cold climates in a later lesson.
But here's an example of a container with a tree in Minnesota at the Minnesota Landscape
Arboretum.
They've used a red maple that's good and hardy for that area, one zone hardier than the Twin
Cities, and it's got a lot of perennials and annuals spicing it up through the growing
season that will die back over winter, but the tree will survive.
Now heat hardiness is less frequently used, but is especially important in hotter regions.
Heat hardiness is based on the number of 86 degree days in a year.
Now 86 degrees is the temperature where plants can suffer injury.
And believe it or not, it's important even in cooler climates.
Pansies are a great example.
They thrive in cooler temperatures, but struggle or even die in hot weather.
Those trying to grow paper birch may find the same issue.
They're native to the cool northern woodlands.
We bring them down further south, put them out in the lawn and wonder why they die.
So look for heat hardiness, especially when you're trying to have a beautiful garden in
hot, dry summer conditions.
So look for those microclimates in your zone or landscape as they relate to both heat and
cold hardiness.
This can be as simple as a small sheltered area within your backyard.
Look in your neighborhood, much like we did for cold hardiness.
You might be able to push the limits and also the challenges.
And that microclimate may be as small as it is in our urban test garden, between the
upper and lower deck.
Now selecting the right plant is critical for growing healthy, colorful, and productive
plants, but we also want to create a pleasing look.
This is where design principles meet plant selection.
Here's an easy place to start, color and texture.
Use these to create impact while unifying and balancing the overall container design.
Color can impact the feel of the container and the surrounding garden.
Warm colors like orange, reds, and yellows make large areas appear smaller.
They create a focal point.
They make that area feel warm and energized.
Here's a great example.
Notice your eye is attracted to the orange of the canas and the coleus in this picture.
And that's also including the yellow-orange of the lantana and the nasturtium.
The green in the background kind of fades away as the warm colors of this container grab
your attention.
Now cool colors include things like green, blues, and violets.
They make small areas feel larger.
They tend to be cooling and calming.
When you think of a zen or a Japanese garden, there's a lot of green and minimal color,
calming and feeling.
You can do the same with containers.
Here we've got a lovely container.
The bold leaves of the hosta are green, with the Trata scantia vine hanging over the edge
with the green and purple and the purple of the terenia, the cooler colors hanging together.
And notice that the warm color of the impatient jumps right out.
You need a lot of cool colors to balance out just a few of those warm colors.
We can unify with color as well.
Monochromatic designs using one color throughout are probably the easiest to conceive, but
you need to be pretty creative to keep them from looking boring.
Here we have a beautiful spring container.
The upright plants are stock.
They're fragrant and great in cooler temperature.
Combine that with pansies, another good cool weather plant.
We've got some multi-flora, a little bit smaller flowered petunia that will flower freely
spring through summer.
The foliage hanging over the front of the pot is lamium or dead nettle.
The silver variegated foliage is excellent, and this particular one has white flowers
to really continue that monochromatic design.
We can also unify using color, but create a focal point with complementary colors.
These are colors across from each other on the artist's color wheel.
For example, red and green, purple and yellow, blue and orange.
They really create a good focal point in the landscape.
If you take a look at this container, you can see the orange calicoa, you may know those
as mini petunias, are cascading over the front, and they contrast with the black pearl pepper,
the purple foliage and the small black purple peppers.
These are edible even though they're very tiny, but notice how they play off of each
other creating a big focal point.
The vertical accent is a clayomy, one of the dwarf types, and that just continues that
whole mix.
We can also use a blending of colors.
These are colors that are near each other on the color wheel.
Here's a good example.
We've got a repetition of color from the foliage, the pink and the foliage, the pink and the
impatience, carried over to a little bit darker pink and red, going into the purples
of the coleus.
You can see how the variations all go together.
Blending colors are kind of harmonious with just minimal transition.
Another echoing I've mentioned before, but in case you're not aware of it, is the practice
of repeating one color from one part of one plant to another or to the container.
Here we've got a nice succulent, and you can see the rusty edges of that succulent really
echo the rust color of that container.
Here we've got the pink and the foliage echoed by the pink of the impatience to tie that
planting all together.
This is a great example of a shade depart sun planter.
Here we've got individual planters, but they're put together as a garden made of containers.
You can see the red coleus echoing the red impatience, echoing the red in the coral
bells in the center of that planting, and the red stem of that cordal line pulling
it all together.
We repeated red throughout that collection of containers to create a more unified look
in the garden.
Using texture is another way to create interest in your garden.
Bold texture or big leaves or big round flowers, they grab your attention.
Fine textured plants have fine, narrow leaves or smaller flowers or more upright growth
habit.
It tends to soften and add depth to your garden, even your container.
Well there's no doubt what gets your attention in this planting.
The big, bold, heart-shaped leaves of the elephant ear really grab your attention.
To the right of that is the Brugmansia.
You can see that flower hanging down, and it's got bold texture as well, counteracted
by some of the fine texture in the surrounding plants.
On a much smaller scale, we have the shade planting.
The griffin begonia in the middle, which has the green leaves with the coppery silver
highlights, are bold textured leaves.
The Trata scantia is cascading over the top.
The silver in that plant echoes that in the griffin begonia, but softer texture, great
backdrop for the bold leaves of the griffin begonia.
Now in this mixed container, it's a lot of fine textured plants.
Notice the difference in the look and the feel here than those that had a focal point.
They all work, it's just something to consider when you're putting your plants together.
Now scale is very important as well, and that's relative to the plant to the pot and the plants
to each other and the plants to the backdrop or the surrounding landscape.
Now here we've got a nice mixed container.
When we take a look at it, really the planting is about twice as tall as the pot.
The vertical accent here is a red fountain grass, and it's really adds some nice height
to keeping that planting and scale with the pot.
We also have some blood leaf cascading over the edge of the pot to anchor it in and also
keep things in scale, and in the middle we have lantana.
Lantana is a great container plant, good for full sun, great for attracting butterflies
and very drought tolerant.
We've repeated color to tie it together, but really keeping it in scale with the planting.
Here we've got Shasta Daisy as our vertical accent, but we added a nice structure artworker
obelisk to really keep things in scale, so it doesn't necessarily have to be your plants.
Dittany of Crete is an ornamental oregano cascading over the edges.
It's unique form and texture, really is fun to add.
It's sure to get attention from your visitors.
Now here's a planter in front of a two-story house, sometimes hard to do with just one
plant or even a group of containers to keep things in scale.
This gardener selected a large pot.
He trained some vines up on an obelisk to give it some additional height.
Using a wide variety of vines, cascading over, licorice vine in the front, great food source
for swallotail caterpillars, but also nice silvery accent.
So really we've used a vine to help create scale, so this pot looks in scale with its
two-story house behind.
Here we've used a banana plant.
Take this planting away and boy, you don't have a very attractive corner to this building,
but the banana is totally in scale.
Now for those in the north, you'll have to start early to get that banana that tall or
over winter it as a house plant, but it really provides some nice bold texture, plus the
big leaves of the banana keep it in scale with the house as well as the height.
Now height may be achieved by using several containers, some elevated on planters like
you see here and combined with several different ones or placed on steps, or perhaps you just
want to stack your containers.
This is a great example of taking some creative containers, putting plantings around them
and mixing it up to add some interest to your planting.
Now we've got a nice mixed container here and if you looked at it, that palm is pretty
big for the pot it's in, but because it's inside the planting bed, it's really in scale.
There are tall plants behind, that palm really is in scale with those plants in front of
it and anchored with the pot.
So even though it appears to be a little out of sorts, really it works quite well.
Now we gave our spring planting a couple of months to grow and then the warm weather
flowers began to fade.
Now let's go back to our deck to see what it looks like with our summer annuals.
We're here in our small space checking up on some of the solutions and how we creatively
use containers to deal with our gardening challenges.
First of all we had this nice privacy screen that belongs to the neighbor.
She was kind enough to let us mount brackets on here to hang hanging baskets for a little
color that's softened that barrier.
We've got climbing vining, black eyed Susan vines, a trail up and over the railing, adding
color behind our glider, plus some purple verbena binariensis.
Great added color plus they're good for bringing in butterflies and hummingbirds.
In here we've carried out the purple with the Bacopa and some Lantana, some nice hot
warm summer annuals to add a little blazing color to this back garden.
We're going to take a look at our herb garden, do a little deadheading and harvesting.
Our herbs and edible flowers are really looking good and really providing a lot of color and
interest not only on the deck but to our meals.
Now to keep things looking good we do want to do some deadheading.
Here we've got nasturtiums and if we just take a pair of garden shears, cut off the
flower at the base, remove our faded flowers, we will get more flowers coming.
After harvesting of your herbs we'll keep them full and compact and looking good and
you basically just harvest as you need them.
Cut right above a set of healthy leaves so the plant left behind looks good and use the
leaves as needed.
You'll get the best flavor and most intensity in oil if you harvest right before bloom.
We're going to look at the rest of our plantings and see how we change things out just a bit
for the hot summer weather.
It's early summer and we're making a few changes in our containers.
We're taking out some of those cool season annuals and replacing them for more hot weather
tolerant plants.
Our snapdragons we were ready to move but they looked pretty good so we moved them into
a pot of their own and in our big artistic container we put fountain grass that will
flourish all summer, added a little antenna really in keeping with the scale of that container.
It will be quite dramatic in just a few weeks.
We also have some insect problems.
Summers of time when pests move in, insect and diseases.
Our calendulas are holding their own but a look at the leaves show you that some things
have been doing damage.
White fly napeds are the pests.
We'll talk a little bit more about pest damage later but a strong blast of water or insecticidal
soap will keep the populations down and still keep them edible for you to enjoy.
We've got some blueberries that are coming on.
I'm so excited that we'll be able to harvest some for maybe oatmeal in the morning.
It'll be a nice tasty treat from our containers.
And in our planter back here we changed out our pansies.
We've got blue arrow reed which is going to be a wonderful vertical accent up against
the siding here and verbena binariensis tying it into the verbena over on the other side
so we'll bring in the hummingbirds and butterflies and carry that purple all the way through.
On the alobia and sweet elissum and we've got sweet elissum here sometimes when the
heat of summer comes in they phase out.
You like to mix them with other plants because they'll tolerate the heat, they'll just kind
of hold their own, trim them back and then when the cool weather returns they'll look
great.
So mixing them up with other plants, great solution there.
And our tomatoes.
We've already got some tomatoes forming, I can't wait for that first red ripe tomato
right from our container garden but you may have seen those white fly moving and a few
aphids.
We're going to keep monitoring for pest, controlling those two again with eco-friendly
solutions and watch these spots on the leaves.
We'll clip them off for now but we'll continue to monitor because it's easier to control
a few insects and a disease early than later on.
We'll be back in this space to check out our fall version of this beautiful small deck
container garden.
We've shared some good ideas you can use for your small space.
They'll work well on a patio, deck, front steps or even a fire escape.
Use a couple, all or some and repeat as space allows.
As you'll see on our big deck design segment, next session we'll cover some more design
challenges including temporary fixes.
See you then.
