It's summer here, but it's never too early to start thinking fall.
We've got some ideas for changing out your containers for added fall color, plus we'll
prepare a few for early spring bloom and create some indoor and outdoor winter gardens.
So let's get started with a visit to our small space deck.
You may notice we've made some changes up here in our small space deck.
As the homeowner started using this area we re-landscape, she decided some of the containers
were better suited for this corner or another area, so she moved them around.
That's one of the benefits of container gardens.
They're much easier to move and rearrange than say a tree shrub her perennial planted
in the ground.
We also made some seasonal changes.
You may notice that we've added asters, a great way to add some color and some fall
interest or spring interest in another season.
And the other thing we did is we got rid of those tomatoes where you may remember that
they had white fly.
We tried treating the heat and drought of the summer, made it hard to keep them doing well.
She harvested a few, but decided she'd go to the farmer's market instead and put in these
beautiful yellow Daisy type Rudbeckia and the blue spiky Veronica or Speedwell.
What a great combination.
That blue and yellow really brightens up that corner and fits perfectly into our fall display.
Plus pop in a few pansies to carry out that color and that fall season as well.
She also did some grooming throughout the season, pruning back the fennel, using it
as needed and pruning it to keep it nice and airy and light and fitting the container.
She regularly harvested her herbs like the basil and the thyme and that really kept the
plants nice and compact, but also kept them producing more so she had plenty for cooking.
Now some of these plants would be hardy in this area over winter if planted in the ground,
but because they're in containers they'll need special care.
Others are frost sensitive and won't tolerate the cold winter temperatures, so we'll bring
those in.
We'll talk a little bit more about how you can preserve your container garden over winter
or throughout the seasonal changes in your area in just a moment.
There are different methods for overwintering your plant.
It varies with where you live, the type of plant you're growing and the space available.
Now if you're in a milder climate, you can leave your containers out all winter long.
Just be sure to water thoroughly whenever the soil is dry.
For those in colder areas, you can leave containers outdoors as long as they're weatherproof,
can tolerate the freezing and thawing of the soil, and your plants are at least one or
two zones hardier than the area you're growing.
They'll usually last and survive quite well without any additional protection.
Now some plants may be hardy in your area if they're growing in the ground, but elevating
them, the roots are exposed to freezing temperatures, and so that's what can kill your plants.
So for example this blueberry, hardy here normally but not in a pot, so we're going
to overwinter it.
It's a little bit early.
We typically like it to be dormant, the leaves off, a lot of cold temperatures, but since
I'm here, I thought I'd share this technique with you anyway.
First of all, I found a nice box.
I'm going to put this in an unheated garage.
I'm going to add some insulation.
I find packing peanuts work well.
The bad ones for the environment that don't biodegrade like we have here.
The biodegradable kind will break down in moisture, good for the environment, but bad
for insulation because they will break down in moisture and can stain your patio deck
or garage wherever you're overwintering them.
So we're going to fill the bottom of the box with the packing peanuts.
Lift your container and set it in.
Now you notice, besides the blueberry, we had some moneywort in here.
And moneywort's a perennial even in colder climates, and I've had it overwinter in six
inch pots above ground.
We're just going to leave it intact.
You can trim it if you want to make it a bit neat and tidy.
Annuals won't make it, but you can either remove them so you have less dead material
to deal with in the spring or at them.
We're going to fill around with insulating material, packing peanuts.
Anything that provides insulation and a little bit of air space will give you good insulation.
And we'll set this in an unheated garage.
Unheated because we need consistently cool temperatures.
A heated garage is a bit too warm.
The other thing we could do if we have a vacant spot is sink this pot, the whole container
in the ground with just the plant above ground.
Then the surrounding soil insulates it, and that's probably the easiest way if you have
available space.
And we're going to do that in the corner downstairs by the deck, a little bit of a
sheltered area and a place to sink that pot.
The other thing we can do is put them in a sheltered location, use bales of straw, maybe
you used them for your fall decoration, bags of potting mix or soil, or anything you can
use to insulate the roots.
I like to use my annual pots, so the pansies and geraniums and things that are going to
die over winter, I leave them intact, set them around my weeping lilac, my garden glow
dogwood, a variety of plants that would be hardy in ground, but not as pots.
Surround them and then shovel snow on top.
The nice part about that is when the snow melts, it waters the container.
I mentioned you can put things in unheated garages, put a board underneath on top of
the concrete and then insulate as we just did here or with any insulating materials
you have.
You do need to water thoroughly whenever the soil is dry and thawed.
So that means you're carrying a water can to the garage in the middle of winter for some
of you, makes your neighbors wonder.
Or one gardener told me a great strategy, she uses snow.
So when she's shoveling snow, as long as it's not been de-iced with de-icing salt, she
puts a scoop on each plant.
Can you imagine when her neighbors are thinking as she takes those scoops of snow into the
garage?
As they melt, they water the plants and her job is done.
Fall here means the end of the gardening season, so it's time to clean up, store things away
and move some non-hardy plants indoors.
Now fall in your area may mean it's time to switch from your summer garden to your fall
and winter garden.
In either case, I hope you'll bring some of your garden indoors to enjoy year round.
Now we're going to bring some of our foliage plants inside.
We use this palm along the deck in a dark corner to give us a little bit of greenery.
Indoors we're going to put it in a sunny window.
Now we left it in its old black nursery pot because we hid it behind some other things,
but indoors we'd like to make it look good and also protect our floors.
So I brought out a container that looks nice with no drainage holes.
I used an Upsadaisie, a false bottom to elevate the pot and provide drainage as well.
You could also use stones, just remember it's going to be heavy.
So basically I'm going to lift the plant and place it in the pot.
Now you can see I've got lots of space around that container so I could use some mulch,
I could use some sphagnum moss, anything to make it a little more decorative for my
indoor conditions.
The fern is also going inside and if you've tried to overwinter a fern you know the low
light and humidity really makes it a challenge.
So you want to put in a bright light indoors even though it's shade tolerant outside and
then make sure you group it with other plants or put it on a tray with a saucer with pebbles
to increase the humidity.
Even with a decorative pot that doesn't have drainage holes we'll still want to protect
our floor or furniture.
I like the cork mats that are available at many garden centers.
The cork side down, the hard side up, it provides a little protective layer.
Add to that a saucer to capture any excess moisture.
I use both so that I'm sure to protect the wood surfaces in my home.
For larger collections you may want to use a plastic or waterproof tablecloth or placemat.
It's a great way for added protection whether it's a tabletop, your hardwood floors or carpeting.
You'll want to make sure you can enjoy the beauty without creating more work for you.
Even plants indoors has some added challenges.
The light's a lot less intense.
Just by moving indoors you reduce the light to one-tenth.
Then add to it the shorter, often grayer days of winter in many parts of the world.
You have tougher growing conditions plus the humidity's low and you need to adjust your
watering schedule.
So let's get our plants off to the best possible start.
Take all those old containers filled with soil and dump that soil in the compost bin.
As long as you haven't had an insect or disease problem, it's safe to compost it.
That soil and that old tomato plant infested with white fly went into the garbage.
Check your local municipality for regulations for disposing of that type of yard waste.
I like to have everything going in my favor so I start with a clean, fresh pot, also something
a little more decorative for indoors, and of course some clean soil as well.
And we're going to adjust our watering accordingly.
So let's get started creating some beautiful indoor gardens.
I'm often asked how to overwinter geraniums.
A lot of people tell me their grandparents used to rip them out of the ground, put them
in a brown paper bag and stick them in a cool, dark corner of the basement.
Well, I don't know about you, but my grandparents had a root cellar, cool, dark and damp.
My basement, on the other hand, is a little too warm.
The plants start to grow and dry out.
Now if you live in a northern climate you can give it a try.
They're going to die from frost and winter anyway, but I've got a couple of other methods
that also work.
Bring the whole plant in, grow it in a sunny window like a house plant.
The downside takes up a lot of space and you bring in a lot of unwanted insects as well.
So I prefer cuttings.
And this is a method you can use not only on geraniums, but also on herbs like basil,
marjoram, thyme, also on annuals for some of us like Lantana and Vinka Minor and Vinka
Annual Vinkus.
So those are some good options.
And notice what we did here.
We used some pot feet to protect our railing.
What happens often if we put a plastic pot or even a clay pot right on our wood deck or
wood railing, it traps moisture, we get mold, mildew and we stain the deck.
The pot feet allow space and air, so you really avoid that problem.
Now a lot of you may be used to starting cuttings in a glass of water.
What happens is the roots that form there are different than those that form in soil.
So you make your plant root twice, once in the water and second when you pot it.
So I like to use this little potting device.
I've disinfected my container any time you reuse a pot.
You can use something like a weak bleach solution, one part bleach to nine parts water or alcohol.
Dip it in that solution to disinfect and then dip it in water before filling with clean
potting mix.
I filled my container with potting mix and then I'm taking a small terracotta pot and
I've plugged up the bottom, I've used a little glue to plug up the bottom because this is
my water reservoir.
I'm going to set it inside my pot and fill it with water.
When the soil, the potting mix around this terracotta pot dries, the water moves from
high concentrations to low, keeping the soil moist and that'll keep my cuttings nice and
moist so they'll root.
So let's take the cuttings.
Now when people take cuttings, they often want to get bigger cuttings, thinking bigger
is better.
Not really, shorter cuttings, fewer leaves, less leaf surface, you'll lose less moisture.
We're also going to remove the flowers and I know that's hard but we can put those in
a vase and enjoy them indoors.
We don't want all that energy going into flower production but rather into root production.
We want to remove our lowest leaves because those are called the nodes and that's a point
of growth and that's where we'll get the new roots forming.
Now if you've tried rooting geraniums or coleus or other plants and have had troubles,
you might want to use rooting hormone.
It's a powder that contains a fungicide to prevent disease and also hormones to encourage
root growth.
So we're just going to roll this in, cover the bottom like that, knock off the extra
and we'll just stick this in so the nodes below ground into our potting mix.
We can put several cuttings in here, make sure the soil is nice and moist before we
put it in the bag, even if we have our self watering pot, this will reduce the need for
that and loosely cover it with plastic.
We don't want to tighten it totally but this makes a little mini greenhouse, keeps the
humidity high, it increases your success rooting.
In a couple of weeks, gently tug, if it holds tight, the roots have formed, you can lift,
pot them up in their own containers and grow them in a sunny window just like your other
house plants.
Now let's look at some other ways to bring our plants indoors.
You can also take the whole herb plant indoors just like we talked about with geraniums.
Mint's great because you can pick your fresh mint leaves for your favorite beverage or
maybe rosemary, I love the fragrance with a gentle pet.
Now I like to leave the plant fully intact because the more leaves, the more energy produced
and that will help the plant adjust to its new environment.
Some people do like to trim it back, just cut it above some good healthy leaves so it
looks nice on your window sill.
Now moving them from the highlight outdoors to the inside, these sun loving leaves will
turn yellow and drop off and eventually be replaced by shade tolerant leaves, those that
are more efficient at absorbing the sunlight.
Now we're going to adjust our water and care accordingly and you might want to give your
plants a jump start with a new product, one of the plant strengtheners like jazz spray.
What happens is scientists found that when plants are under stress, whether it's cold
or heat or insect and disease or moving indoors from outdoors, they produce certain molecules
that beef up their natural defenses and in response they're more vigorous and better
able to tolerate those stressors.
Now they isolated those molecules, applied them on other plants and found the same thing
happened to those treated plants.
So you might want to do this to give your plants a little edge.
So we can do plants but you may want to try starting fresh from seed.
I find that's a great opportunity and it's so much fun to watch those seed sprout and
grow.
Now you can look for herb seeds in your favorite garden center or catalog and all the information
is right on the packet that tells you how to start and grow the herbs indoors and out.
We've got a clean container, we've got fresh potting mix and I'm going to plant these in
groups.
So I'm going to make a couple little furrows and seeds, you plant them about twice the
diameter deep.
I'm starting with chives, they're nice big seeds to start with and then I'm just going
to sprinkle those in the furrow.
So we'll end up thinning them out because we'll have so many seeds growing there.
We're going to lightly cover and gently tamp.
Once this is all planted then we'll be sure to water and get things growing.
Now we've got nice moist warm conditions to get our seeds to sprout and in a few weeks
you should start seeing signs of growth and before you know it you'll be harvesting fresh
from your windowsill herb garden herbs to use in your favorite dishes and beverages.
If the space is limited or you want to bring a little spring indoors early or perhaps you
live in an area where the winters aren't cold enough to force bulbs, I've got a fun idea
for you and your family.
Take some containers, clay, terracotta plastic or in this case I have metal pots, I drilled
a hole in the bottom, put about an inch of soil in the base, just a well-drained potting
mix and I'm going to place three daffodil bulbs in here.
Now I've got a mix of medium sized so that they'll fit.
Now the goal is not to leave these in forever so they can be good and tight like this and
then I'm going to cover them with potting mix.
Once in, gently tamp to get good seed or good contact with the bulbs and to remove any airspace.
Then we're going to take some grass seed, sprinkle it on the soil surface because grass
will stay dormant at the same temperature that we're forcing the bulbs.
We'll water this in gently because we don't want to wash away the grass seed, we've just
lightly covered but we want to moisten the whole thing.
Then we're going to place this in a refrigerator for 12 to 15 weeks to give the bulbs a chill
they need to grow and bloom.
Once they're chilled we can bring them out.
In about a week you'll have a perennial ryegrass starting to sprout, in about three to four
weeks the rest of your grass will be up and your daffodils will be blooming, a fun way
to bring a little spring indoors and create a beautiful centerpiece as well.
We're going from small to large to create something bold and beautiful for those of
you with a little more space or perhaps using containers on your patio or deck in spring.
We're going to force these bulbs as well but we're going to do a bit of layering.
You may notice I didn't pick a beautiful pot because these liners are going to sit inside
our beautiful glazed pots in front of the house.
Typically we put an inch or two of leaf compost or well-drained potting mix like I've done
in the bottom of the container.
Next we'll start with our tulips.
They like to be deep, to be insulated from the winter cold and the summer heat.
We're going to put them with the flat side towards the outside of the pot.
That way the leaf grows out and holds the flower stem in place, doesn't get so floppy.
We're going to pack those around the outer edge.
We're going to give you some light pink and some deep rosy pink tulips to give us some
good mid-spring color.
Now we're going to pack our bulbs in pretty tight because we don't plan to leave them
here for year after year.
Once they're done blooming we can either compost them or plant them out in the garden.
Usually takes another year for those plants to produce blooms.
Once your tulips are in place we're going to cover those with potting mix.
Sometimes I'll mix my tulips and daffodils on the lower level but I'm using a little
bit smaller daffodil bulbs.
I'm going to cover my tulips, gently press to ensure that I have removed all the air
pockets and then I'm going to place my daffodils and hyacinths next.
The daffodils are kind of a nice cream color which will be really nice with that pink and
rosy pink flower of the tulips.
Hyacinths you can tell because the bulbs are purple, they're nice and big and we'll
mix these in.
They're kind of a nice salmon that will complement the pink.
That layer is planted and the good news is the tulip flower and leaf stems will work
their way around the bulbs on the next layer so you don't have to worry about any interference.
Cover those bulbs with more potting mix and our last layer are going to be minor bulbs,
things like squills and crocus and in this case star flowers.
We have some white star flowers, early bloomers, wonderful bulbs often used for naturalizing,
used in the lawn, used in the garden and we're going to plant these a couple inches deep.
We're going to scatter them over the top, they'll be the first sign of spring in our
forced bulbs and they'll be a beautiful addition.
As they're fading our tulips will continue.
Good news is these are long season bloomers so we might get a little overlap.
We're going to cover this up, water thoroughly until the excess runs out the bottom, again
tamping before we water.
Then we're going to need to give it about 12 to 15 weeks of cold.
The chill helps to initiate flowering and so we'll have blooms next spring.
We can take these outside, bury the pot outdoors if you live in a cold climate.
You can also take this in an unheated garage, insulate the pot as long as it's consistently
cold, you'll get the chill you need.
You can also take this and sink it in, say a prefab pond feature where you empty the
water, set these in, mulch, cover it with a board to give them the chill they need and
insulate it from the soil around.
A refrigerator works great, we need 35 to 45 degrees temperatures so those in the south
or warmer climates may need to use a refrigerator or find another cool place to give their
bulbs a chill before setting them out in the garden.
The good news is you'll have a big beautiful spring garden in one pot that you can enjoy
for several months in the garden.
If you want some quicker results or maybe you don't have room in your spare fridge to
force bulbs, you might want to try paper whites.
They're a type of daffodil, also called narcissus, that doesn't need the same treatment.
You can plant them in soil though some prefer to be forced in water.
We started some here in potting mix, we used a well-drained potting mix with a good mix
of fur, a little bit of sand and some peat moss.
We planted it in a shallow wide pot using 5 bulbs per 6 inch pot and covered it right
up to the shoulder.
That's about the point where the bulbs flare out.
Watered thoroughly and will keep it slightly moist.
Put it in a cool location for a couple of weeks to get the roots going and then into
a bright sunny but cool location for top growth to begin.
These narcissus prefer to be started in pebbles.
We put a nice layer at the bottom of this pretty container and now we'll cover the tops
right up to the neck.
We want to cover nice and deep and the reason being is once those leaves start to grow,
they can topple if the bulbs aren't properly weighted down.
As you can see, these are covered right up to the neck, right where that narrow part begins
on the bulb.
We're going to add water to these right below the bottom of the bulbs, give these two weeks
of cool temperatures and then again move them into a bright sunny window but in a cool location.
Cooler temperatures prevent them from growing tall and flopping over.
You may have heard that old technique of adding a bit of gin or vodka to the water.
It really does work.
Cornell University found that that alcohol helps stunt the growth so you won't have those
tall floppy narcissus crawling over the edge of the pot.
Instead, they'll be upright, sturdy and provide wonderful fragrance throughout the room.
Whether gardening indoors or out on larger small scale plots, going vertical is a fun
way to increase your gardening space and fun.
Basically, green walls have become the trend.
Putting gardens on narrow spaces along the outside of buildings helps conserve energy.
Indoors it saves space and it's a fun way to bring greens indoors.
Low light plants like lettuce and spinach can grow in the shade but also in the lower
light indoors.
Add some artificial lights and you can increase the diversity of plants you grow or maybe
it's house plants you prefer.
We bought a prefabbed vertical wall planter.
You can see little slanted shelves on angles that will fill with potting mix like we've
done here.
We're doing a mix of greens so that we can harvest throughout the fall and into winter,
let them in place and be careful that you leave enough space between the top of the
root ball and the top of the shelf so that when you water, the excess soil doesn't spill
out.
Give me a few minutes.
We're going to plant this up.
I'll finish it up and give you a few pointers on growing it indoors.
Well, we've packed it full of edible greens, very colorful, nice texture.
We'll keep harvesting when the outer leaves are about four to six inches long.
We've packed them in tight because we're going to have low light and they'll be slow
growing.
We want to water often enough to keep the soil moist but not soggy wet.
You want to make sure you have a saucer underneath if there isn't a moisture collecting vehicle
on the bottom of your vertical wall, otherwise you'll have a puddle under your planter.
Indoors are out.
That could spell trouble.
Well, let's take everything inside and see how it looks.
Isn't this wonderful?
Don't you feel like you're in a tropical paradise or greenhouse and it's right inside?
We've brought the palm in and we were sure to protect the floor so we wouldn't have any
sweating from the pot that might ruin our hardwood floors.
We've got all our collection of herbs, some we brought in as plants, others we started
as seeds, and we don't waste anything as gardeners.
So all the things we clipped off, we brought a few flowers indoors to brighten the table.
It's a nice waterproof table with saucers we should be set in this area.
Our fern's right in front of a bright sunny window so it's sure to get maximum light.
Grouping it with the other plants increases humidity.
Our vertical wall is attached to the countertop and so it gets this nice bright light through
all these windows and it's convenient to harvest.
Pluck a few leaves to serve as a salad to your guests.
And best of all, pretty soon we'll have beautiful paper whites popping up white blossoms that
will fill this area with wonderful fragrance.
Let's go back to the garden design studio and find out more ideas.
I hope you've gotten so excited about containers that you want to keep it going indoors.
Let's talk about holiday plants for extra color and seasonal interest throughout the
winter.
Now we've forced some spring flowering bulbs to enjoy indoors.
You may want to time it so you have blooming bulbs for spring holidays or party events.
After they receive the 15 week chill, move to a cool sunny window and water is needed.
Now usually it takes a few weeks for them to flower.
Move to a cooler spot if they're maturing too fast and a warmer spot if you need to
speed things up.
Just realize they tend to grow long and leggy in warmer temperatures and the low light indoors.
Now you may remember we potted up these little containers with daffodil bulbs and grass seed.
You can see that our grass is growing great.
We may need a little trim with the scissors and our narcissus or daffodil bulbs are just
starting to peek through.
Soon we'll have beautiful bulbs blooming above this grass.
Now we also created a layered bulb planting and it's starting to sprout.
We potted up a few extra because you may remember we did a couple of pots to be used outside
for our urban garden tester to use in her containers for nice spring bloom.
But we wanted to jump start the spring indoors.
As you can see our white stars have already started to sprout and the leaves have emerged
and if you take a peek the hyacinths are just starting to pop through and our spring garden
in a pot will soon be rewarding us with a bouquet of flowers to enjoy.
Now after you enjoy these blooms, remove the spent flowers, water is needed and fertilize
with a dilute solution of flowering house plant fertilizer.
In the spring when the danger of frost has passed you can plant these outdoors or leave
the container, leave them in the container for a fall planting.
Now they may not bloom that next spring or summer but eventually will flower and add
color to your spring or summer garden depending on the bulb.
Now you may remember that our homeowner, our urban gardener potted up some paper whites
and she enjoyed them so much the fragrance just filled her home and so she planted a
few extras to extend that enjoyment throughout the spring.
These have just been up and growing in the last month and boy that fragrance is incredible.
And here she put an amaryllis in the middle so once these paper whites are done blooming
she'll have the beautiful flower of the amaryllis to take over and give her a good display.
Proper selection, transportation and care will prolong the beauty and your enjoyment.
Rack plants from extreme heat and cold when transporting.
Always wrap the plants in a protective sleeve and never let them sit in a hot or cold car.
And your florist or garden center should do that for you.
Remove the wrap when you get home especially true for poinsettia.
When their leaves are upturned they admit ethylene gas and that speeds up brightening
and decreases bloom time and their beauty.
Fill back the foil so that the light can reach all parts of the plant and then punch holes
in the bottom of the foil to ensure good drainage when you water thoroughly.
Or better yet set pebbles in the bottom and that way you'll elevate the pot above any
excess water that collects in the foil, decorative pot or basket that lacks drainage holes saves
you a little work as well.
This is a good strategy with any house plant creating a gravel tray of pebbles in the sauce
or other tray to elevate the plant above any excess water that collects in the saucer.
This means you can water thoroughly when needed and not have to pour off the excess water.
Instead let it evaporate and increase the humidity around the plants.
Here are a few more tips for growing plants indoors.
Avoid drafts of hot and cold air and add artificial light if needed.
Now the quality of light, the wavelength, influences flowering and this is a big concern
for indoor container gardeners who are trying to grow flowering plants under artificial lights.
So if you're trying to grow things like African violets, consider natural sunlight supplemented
with artificial light because sunlight provides the full spectrum of light that plants need
to grow and flower.
But not all artificial lights do.
Make sure the bulbs you select contain both the light for leaf and stem growth, that's
blue and red light to promote flowering.
Then extend the enjoyment of your Christmas tree, set it in a snow drift or anchored
in the garden and decorate with cranberries and homemade feeder ornaments, provide shelter
and food for the birds and it's a great way to add motion and color to your winter landscape.
And be sure to take pictures and make notes along the way.
Here are a few highlights from our test gardens.
As we've seen, containers are a great way to add beauty to any situation.
Use them as a total garden or add them to an existing landscape.
They also can be used to enhance a good view and hide the bad ones or include a few to
feed yourself, the birds and the butterflies.
We've given you lots of ideas so go out, get creative, but most importantly get started
and enjoy your containers year round.
