Always be on the lookout for new plants, containers and combinations you can try in your container
gardens and visit garden centers like here at Maryfield.
They're full of inspiration ideas you can use in your own landscape.
In this session we'll create an outdoor living space using containers plus design some specialty
and themed gardens in a pot.
Then we'll look at some pest problems and how to manage them in your container gardens.
But first we've got a quick fix for a seeding area.
We wanted to create a nice outdoor living space using containers and we wanted it cozy and
intimate despite the fact it's in a large landscape plus we needed a quick fix so we
edged the area to define our space.
Then we cut the grass really short covered it with cardboard and mulch.
In fact you can see a little bit of the cardboard peeking out of the edge.
We'll cut that out later.
Then we want to get started designing and a question I'm often asked is where do you
start?
We started with a focal point a good place to do it and we use this colorful bistro set
to be the main element in our design and played off of that.
Now we further delineated the space by using these colorful containers.
We filled the containers with shrub roses, low maintenance, easy care repeat blooming
and hardy and lobelia and as you can see this blue is perfect to go with that bistro set.
Many of the lobelias are not real heat tolerant and so what often happens is they phase out
in the summer so they won't look so good when the roses are at peak.
We're using Techno and Laguna which are more heat tolerant so that we'll have good looking
plants throughout the season.
This looks good but what if we want to do a bit more?
We can start by dressing up the table.
We have this beautiful nicely shaped vase with a little hint of blue that blends nicely.
We cut some flowers from the nearby roses to tie this all together.
It looks nice but maybe you want something that's a little more long lasting.
So we looked for a few containers.
Now the blue on this is gorgeous but it's a little too small.
This is just as important when we're looking for a container for a tabletop as it is when
we're planting or gardening in ground.
And this pot a little too big.
Not only is it too big but the colors just really don't fit in with our landscape design
so I think we'll stick with the vase for now until we find the perfect solution but in
the meantime let's dress up the backdrop a bit.
We could have done some hanging baskets or artwork on the fence but since we had a little
more room we decided to go a little more funky and take advantage of the space.
We started with a bottle tree and put colorful bottles on this frame to be a focal point
behind the bistro set.
Then on either side we have a pot filled with soil, cardinal vine that they can climb up
those colorful spirals.
The red cardinal flower will look great when it's in bloom.
Now I think the space is looking just fantastic.
Let's talk a little bit about pruning these roses to keep them looking their best.
We pruned roses throughout the growing season to keep them looking their best removing faded
flowers and stimulating new growth.
It's also a great time to watch for pest problems.
As I was clipping I found some holes in the leaves and I looked at more damage as I continued
to prune.
Now one of the things to keep in mind is timing.
A lot of insects can cause this kind of damage but at this time of the year it's probably
rose slugs.
I'm not seeing a lot of damage so my guess is they're done feeding.
Spraying would just make you feel better but do no good for the plant.
We also want to prune to remove faded flowers so they look nice.
Here most of the flowers on this stem have bloomed out.
So we're going to prune the whole thing back to the first set of five leaflet leaves.
That way the new growth will be nice and stiff and sturdy and really show off our flowers.
By continually doing this we'll have a good looking plant and strong sturdy stems throughout
the season.
Now we'll go back to our garden studio to learn more about maintenance, managing pest
and more design tips.
As you're grooming and watering containers keep an eye out for insect and disease problems.
Early detection will allow you to manage these problems as they arrive.
Believe me it's much easier to control a few aphids than the few hundreds that can develop
in a week.
Now let's look at a few common pest problems in their control.
I like to use plant health care approach to managing insects and disease.
This applies whether you're growing plants in containers or in a garden.
Now one of the steps is deciding whether control is needed.
Some problems are just aesthetic and require no control.
Faciation is a good example.
You may have seen the flattening of stems and proliferation of buds on lilies or silocia.
In fact the crested cox comb is a result of faciation.
Not sure what causes it?
It's not a problem that will spread.
There's no need to control.
It's just an aesthetic issue.
So we just enjoy the added benefit and see what happens the next year.
Now some problems are environmental so no control is needed or even possible.
Seasonal needle drops a great example.
On evergreens their needles last for a few years but not forever.
So the older needles drop.
They drop along the inside from top to bottom.
So it's very typical to see and fall yellowing and browning and dropping of needles.
More will fall after a hot dry summer and insect infestation but it's a normal process.
Something that happens no need to control.
Now some problems can't be effectively controlled.
Cytospora canker on spruce is a good example.
This fungal disease causes the needles to brown, discolor and drop from the center of
the tree out branch by branch.
Now there's no effective control spray, basically water during drought, mulch the soil to keep
the roots cool and moist.
It won't kill the tree but you lose that nice Christmas tree shape.
So even though there is a disease problem there's no effective control so spraying won't
do any good.
It will be harmful for the environment and a waste of your time and money.
Now if control is needed and it's effective use the most environmentally friendly method
possible.
Things like sanitation, hand removal traps, barriers and natural products like soaps
and neem work very well.
Neem is a plant derived pesticide.
Then you want to evaluate your success and adjust as needed.
So let's apply this to a common pest problem.
Aphids also known as plant lice seem to be a universal pest.
If you wait nature may take care of them.
Watch for ladybugs and praying mantids to move in and devour this insect pest.
You'll have to tolerate some of the damage caused by the aphids and that's wilting,
yellowing and browning of the leaves but working with nature usually means less work in the
long run.
An alternative is to spray the plants with just a strong blast of water to knock them
off the plant.
Only enough to manage small populations.
You can also trap them in a yellow bowl filled with soapy water.
A fun thing to do is use reflective mulches.
Not real aesthetic but what happens is the aphids orient themselves by the sky so they
see the sky above and reflected below.
I'm not sure who figured it out but it really does work because they crash into the mulch
and die.
Now you have to do, you can also do weekly applications of insecticidal soap as well.
Many gardeners ask me about making their own insecticidal soap.
You know mixing a little dish soap or laundry detergent with water to treat for insects.
Well if you choose to make your own, test the mixture on a leaf or two before spraying
the whole plant to make sure it won't damage the plant.
And you want to test before spraying the whole plant every time you open a new bottle since
these soaps are developed and tested for washing dishes, clothes and hands but not for controlling
insects on plants.
You see, manufacturers often change their formulations so your dishes are brighter,
clothes are cleaner but it can damage even kill your plants.
You know I like to leave the testing to the experts and buy a product developed for and
tested on plants.
Now another common problem is blossom end rot on tomatoes especially in containers.
Now this is a physiological disorder not a disease so knowing the cause and solutions
are key.
Blossom end rot is caused by a calcium deficiency but before you reach for the fertilizer check
your watering routine.
Fluctuating moisture levels, drought and saturated soil like you often see in containers may
be the real cause.
Remember too much or too little water can interfere with the uptake of nutrients and
since water is the vehicle for getting nutrients from the soil into the plant watering is key.
Now monitor and adjust your watering and you usually solve the problem.
And fortunately it's usually just the first set of fruit that's affected.
Just cut away and compost the black portion.
It's not disease so we don't need to worry about spreading the problem and you can eat
the rest.
Let's switch gears a bit and talk about different theme gardens you can create with containers.
We'll take a trip to the tropics and we don't even have to leave home.
Tropical plants are a great way to create a tropical paradise even if you live in the
far north and many are shade tolerant so they're a nice choice for shade gardeners as well.
Here we see some wonderful Pretoria canna.
The big bold leaves are variegated and the orange flowers just pop.
When I think of tropicals I think of lush foliage and lots of good color.
We've got some nice coleus that echo those yellows of the foliage of the canna and we've
got some cascading annuals to really finish off that nice tropics in a pot look.
Here we're going to revisit this garden we saw earlier and again that combination of
bright colors from the foliage, the palm like leaves, the cordiline and all of those plants
combined together picture those in the corner of your back balcony or on your deck.
What a great tropical backdrop for your patio dining area.
And here another canna.
Cannas and bananas are really some popular plants.
We've got some ornamental peppers, the orange fruit of the peppers echoing the orange flowers
of the canna and of course that sweet potato vine that cascades over the pot.
It's so lush that it's a great tropical look but it also balances out the large leaves of
the cannas as well.
Now some plants like bananas and cannas can be overwintered as dormant rhizomes, quarms
and bulbs in cool dark places for winter.
If you live in the northern climates or you can grow it as a house plant and brighten
up the indoors, we'll talk more about that in lesson two.
Now those looking for a bigger challenge may want to read Dr. David Franco's book Palms
Won't Grow Here and Other Mists.
Basically he's been growing things like palmettos, fiber bananas, jasmine at Miami University
and I mean Miami Ohio, not Miami, Florida.
I was lucky enough to visit with him and his research is on genetics involved in hardiness
but what he developed was a neat overwintering system.
He took some plastic and made cylinders to go around those less than hardy plants and
put a little roof on top, leaving space in between.
He filled it with dry leaves and found that he could overwinter and push the zone several
zones warmer so that he could really preserve some of those.
So if you're looking for a challenge, check out his book and give it a try.
Now let's look at some plants that are from a hotter and drier environment, succulents.
These have become a big trend in containers and one of the nice things about that, it
allows even cold weather gardeners and those growing in wetter regions to embrace the form
and beauty of cacti and succulents.
Now those smaller plants, when you start out, can be overwhelmed by many containers so you
want to keep it in scale with the container because the plants are pretty subtle.
They're beautiful but it's about form and subtle colors of the creams and the blues
and some of those so you really want to make sure that your plant or complements not competes
with those plants.
Now when you're growing succulents and cacti in containers, you want to use a better drain
mix.
Now that potting mix will contain a little more sand, grit or perlite or vermiculite
to improve the drainage.
You may want to start out with a basic potting mix and amend it or just go and buy a cacti
and succulent mix.
Make sure your container has drainage holes and during wet periods, you may need to move
them to a slightly protected or dry area to prevent root rot.
Now cold climate gardeners may choose to bring these plants indoors for winter if so, you're
going to want to save some space indoors when they move inside.
Here are a few examples of some container gardens.
This is one of my favorite from the Northwest Flower Show.
Here we have a cushion of succulents on this old chair.
A little different approach to the chair planter.
You could use hens and chicks or many of the small scale succulents to achieve this.
Here we've got a nice group of succulents in an old child's wagon.
It's very subtle.
The red is echoed off the plants onto the wagon and it's tucked into a larger planting
area.
Gravel mulch really gives you the feel of the southwest or a hot dry area.
So it's really about the whole thing, how the container is displayed and how it ties
to the plants inside.
My friend Jerry found this old fountain at a garage sale and it was leaky and he always
wanted to repair it and it just sat in the shed for a few years and then he caught the
itch to do succulents and he thought, what a perfect way to display him.
The reason I like this is the fountain is very subtle with the white, a nice backdrop
for the colorful cacti and succulents but it also elevates them at a higher level because
those small plants really get lost at ground level.
Here they're elevated and the whole display is a fun addition to any landscape.
Now one of the things you may notice about this container is we've got a succulent with
moisture loving begonias and how can you make that happen?
I love the color echoing that's done here.
The silver on the begonias are echoed by the silver of the Silver Falls Dicondra but
we've got that one succulent sitting by itself.
Well here's a secret of what you can do.
Take a container for your, say, succulent, fill it with a well-drained potting mix or
cacti and succulent mix, set it inside your larger container with a regular potting mix
and that will be more suitable for your begonias.
You can keep the soil moist for your begonias and a little drier for your cacti and succulents.
You can also use this strategy for changing things out throughout the season.
Pop in a mum for fall, pop in pansies for spring.
By keeping them in containers it makes the change over easier and less damaging to the
roots.
Now container water gardens are a great way to add water features to even small properties
or a balcony or deck.
In this case you want a pot that lacks drainage holes, the opposite of what I've been telling
you all along.
Select water garden plants and many garden centers are carrying them already arranged
or individually so you can arrange them in the container.
You might need some bricks to elevate at the right height and you're going to keep that
container full of water.
Now there's no need to worry about mosquitoes because you may have a container big enough
that you can have some small goldfish present and no munch on those mosquito larvae.
Or maybe you can use a solar pump, that's what I do.
It's not making a big spray of water but it keeps the water moving, discouraging mosquitoes.
Or you may pick up one of these mosquito cakes or flakes, basically put it in the water,
the flakes take action right away, the cake lasts longer, but this organic product only
kills the larvae of mosquitoes but it won't hurt kids or pets or other beneficial insects.
Here are a few examples of water gardens.
This is at Longwood Gardens and I love the way they've used similar pots, filled them
with water.
Now you've noticed that we've used elephant ears and canas here as well as papyrus.
They can all grow in the soil but they can also grow in a water garden.
And I love the way they've got the big plants in the back, the smaller ones in front and
they put it in the middle of a walkway to kind of direct traffic as well.
It may be something as simple as an old wash tub.
This is at the Philadelphia Flower Show where they painted it a bright color and then they
just put papyrus in.
So it was about the color from the container, the texture from the papyrus and a little
bit of greenery from the canas.
This is a trick that I thought is a great idea for busy gardeners.
This is at Burner Botanical Gardens where they had two big pots.
They filled them with water and then they potted the papyrus and the cana in pots with
drainage holes and a water garden potting mix.
They set them inside the container.
So if you think about it, it's a different kind of self-watering pot.
These water plants thrive in moisture so if you're going on vacation, make sure you've
got plenty of water in your pot, walk away, you come back, it'll still look good.
I thought a great solution for busy gardeners and you still get the look and feel of the
tropics.
Now bog gardening can be similar to water gardening and it's a fun way to grow carnivorous plants.
So that might be fun for the young gardeners or those of you that may have had the fortune
to visit a bog.
Things like Venus fly traps, pitcher plants and sundews.
These are carnivorous plants that feed on insects and they're used to living in moist
soils, very acidic.
You want to look for moisture tolerant plants.
Now here the potting mix is half sharp sand and half peat moss.
We mix it together and we keep it consistently moist.
This is a nice picture of a container filled with a pitcher plant.
Again, very subtle but boy, what an interesting texture.
Maybe set that in a focal point on your patio or next to a water feature.
And here we have a nice mix.
Again we're using some canas.
Curly reed is that twisty plant that you see there.
We've got some elephant ears and a wide variety of water plants growing in this bog garden.
Now as you can see containers allows to expand our plant pallet and design options.
They also allows to mix it up a bit and here's a great example.
When you look at this planting filled with containers, we've got an evergreen.
We have some moisture lovers.
We have some desert plants and they're all grouped together.
We use color, form, and texture to tie the planting together.
But by potting them up in individual containers with the proper potting mix, giving them the
right amount of moisture, we're able to mix it up with a variety of plantings.
Now let's take it down a bit and scale that is.
Now fairy gardens and miniatures are all the rage and it's a fun way to get non-gardners
of all ages excited about gardening.
It works great indoors or out.
We're going to make a fairy garden.
Now I decided to use a container with a drainage hole.
Just makes my job easier but that means I need a saucer to catch the excess water.
We're using a well-drained potting mix.
I'm going to use indoor plants for my fairy garden.
We'll put a little bit of soil in here.
Now we look for some miniature plants and fortunately many garden centers are carrying
a lot of miniatures for fairy gardens and railroad gardens.
This Bonsai Barbados cherry is excellent.
They've pruned it to look like a miniature shade tree.
It's going to provide the shade for our fairy.
We're going to squeeze this and start with this as our focal point because the rest of
our garden will be built around it.
Just like we do our containers for other reasons, we have a focal point or a thriller
and this will be our thriller.
Now what was fun is we found these wonderful pi lias that to me look like almost like little
azaleas or little flowering shrubs because of the new growth being so nice and the little
new growth being so nice and pink.
We're going to plant these in clusters just like you would shrubs in your landscape.
Take them out carefully.
Now I did a little bit of practice kind of thinking about how am I going to put these
together, what was my theme and I love the color on these.
Now we're going to need to prune these like we would an outside garden but a little more
often mainly because they're so small and we're trying to achieve a smaller garden.
So we're going to put this last pi lia in place and then I'm going to put a little
additional potting mix around it.
I'm saving my tag, something I always do because it's a great reference for the future.
If they work out, it's wonderful to know and that'll be something that you can use for
future reference and if it doesn't work out then you know to switch it up next time you
plant.
So we've got these anchored in kind of temporarily so we have a nice little grouping here.
Now we have a miniature faux evergreen, you can see that these are just nice and tiny
so they'll fit into great spaces, doesn't that look like just a little evergreen shrub?
I think we'll put that out here for now, add a little bit more potting mix so we can elevate
it.
Nice and high because we want everyone to see the individual plants, okay.
Now that we've got these in here, we're going to finish filling up with potting mix and cover
that up, gently tamp so we've kind of got our landscape, our plantings design.
Now fairy gardens and miniature gardens are all about kind of the accessories that we
use and I had lots of fun looking for some.
I plan on doing fairy gardens with my granddaughter, she's just about the right age, can you just
see those young gardeners having fun?
So maybe we'll put that slide right under the shade of our tree.
We did some fun hunting to look for different features, we found some broken pieces of pavers,
you might find those at your garden center, some slate, so I think we can make just a
little bit of a patio maybe over here, okay.
And then we always want the birds and the wildlife to come in, so we've got a little bird bath,
where should we put that?
Maybe put that, and you know the nice part is we can move things around over here.
It's a little tall so we'll just bend the bottom of that to adjust the height, one of
the nice things you can do and place that in position, okay.
We're going to need a little soil here I think in a minute, used a little gem, can find these
at craft stores as well as garden centers to create some water.
Now we don't have to mow the grass in our fairy garden, we're going to use some moss
to really kind of fill in and create some nice ground cover in this area.
We're going to dress up the pot with this moss, and then we're going to have a little
walkway so our guests can find their way, and basically just using a little bit of gravel
to create a bit of a walk, kind of clean it up just a bit.
You can use mirrors to create water, little ponds and reflecting ponds, you can look,
you can use, our slide was kind of falling over here, you can use little miniature chairs
that are available, and then you just want to dress it up as you finish it and kind of
clean up the act and make it look just nice and presentable.
We're going to water it in and really make this look presentable, and again it's something
that you're going to work with, experiment with a bit, I'm going to work on cleaning
this up just a little bit, and then get some pruners out, prune it up just to take away
some of these stray branches, so there'll be plenty of room for my fairies to go underneath
and do some sliding.
So be creative, look for some most suitable plants and accessories and you can do a great
job.
Here's a bit more inspiration.
Let's go back to our sitting area and try our hand at stacked gardens filled with succulents.
It's late season and we've got these beautiful knockout roses that don't need deadheading,
and if you've been deadheading your shrub and hybrid tea roses, it's time to stop if
you're in a cold climate.
They'll keep growing and blooming until it gets really cold, but we want to switch them
from flowering to forming rose hips.
Beautiful flowers we want to enjoy, and as you can see, we're starting to get rose hips
forming.
We've also added some seasonal interest with pansies.
They're beautiful in the blue, really complements the container and is a good contrast, a complementary
color to these knockout roses.
Now you may remember we had some Lobelia in the containers over here.
They were nice, but the heat took them out, except for those in the shade.
A good indication that sun, shade, heat all have impact on our plants, and it may vary
even just a few feet away.
You may remember we have this beautiful cardinal vine.
The nice part about that cardinal vine, not only did it provide beauty on this side, but
it found its way through the fence and gave us a little added benefit on the other side.
Well here, I wanted to take a moment to talk about something you may see happening in your
garden, and that's the mutation on this shrub.
The homeowners installed this beautiful variegated shrub, a euonymus, and they selected it because
of the creamy edged leaves.
They thought it would brighten up the corner.
But in the middle, you'll see these bright green leaves showing.
Now what happens is, plants with variegation are often a mutation of, say, a green plant.
It mutates, a propagator goes, that would be great.
They take cuttings, start propagating it.
Grow those plants, and occasionally you'll see it revert, but it's really just another
mutation back to its original green.
If you like the variegation, prune out the green because this will compete with that
and give you a whole different look in your landscape.
Another fall touch is the centerpiece.
We simply took a pot of cool wave spreading pansies that'll spill over the edge, hid that
container with some decorative gourds and mini pumpkins.
It looks great and no potting necessary.
Now if you want something a little bit bigger, you might want to carve out your pumpkin early,
fill it with pansies.
But remember we talked about scale earlier this season.
This is a little big for this table, so we're going to put it on the ground where we can
enjoy it, and that big impact is a welcome addition to the area.
I thought I'd share with you an idea.
I picked up at a garden club.
They used these as their centerpieces for the table.
They actually had three tiers.
Basically, they just took saucers, drilled holes in the bottom for drainage, used small
plastic pots to separate the layers, and then carefully, after the glue set, filled it
with soil, potting mix, and then succulents, impatience, whatever you'd like.
We basically used sedum, great for a season long interest, those of you in mild climates.
Sedums and hens and chicks are popular plants for green roofs, and this is the same concept,
shallow soil exposed to the elements.
You want to be careful when planting them.
We divided large plants, but smaller plugs are a lot easier to start with.
You want to tamp them in, leave space for them to grow, and remember to water thoroughly.
You may want to keep one saucer whole free and extra one on the bottom so you can set
this on top, elevate it so you can water without the plants sitting in the excess water, but
not damage your furniture.
This will be great.
We'll move it inside into a sunny window and see if we can keep it going, but if you use
succulents or tropicals, you may be able to easily move this in and out.
I've got something else that you might want to try inside.
You may not think of this as a container, but those of you gardening in the 70s may
remember sprouting seeds in a jar much like this.
Now I invested in a sprouting jar, just a little bit opaque, a top that has a grate
on it so the seeds don't fall out.
I started these seeds just three days ago, and they're almost ready to use on a sandwich
or a salad.
Very fun.
You don't need to invest in fancy equipment like this.
All you need is a mason jar, cheese cloth, and a rubber band, and then seeds for sprouting,
of course.
Make sure you use organic seeds or those that are free of pesticides and designed for sprouting.
You can use anything from sunflowers.
This is a mix of beans, some radish, or broccoli.
Fun sprouts, very nutritious eating sprouts.
Now basically all you do, take about a tablespoon, put them in a jar, and soak them overnight.
We're going to cover it with the cheese cloth, and then rinse twice a day.
If you don't, they get a little bit moldy, so you want to make sure that you rinse them
twice a day, and about three to five days you're ready to harvest, probably the fastest
growing crop you'll ever garden.
Now the modern version is called microgreens, so instead of growing them soilless in a jar,
we're going to grow them vertically.
Basically I use a seed starting mix.
I'm going to use some sunflower seeds.
They're fun.
They taste kind of like a fresh, nutty sunflower.
Just pop them in the soil, spread them out, cover, and then water.
Now this particular microgreen setup is like a mini greenhouse.
So I have a bilch and roof.
If it gets too much condensation, I can ventilate it.
I started these microgreens just three days ago.
These are sunflower greens, and they'll be ready.
You can see the little seeds on the top.
They'll be ready to harvest with a pair of scissors in about two days.
You can eat them just as a snack in and of themselves, or put them on a sandwich or
a salad.
Fun.
Kids really like these, and they're nutritious.
You don't need a fancy sprouting container mix.
You can use something like a recycled food container.
Again, seed starting mix, some seeds.
You've got a built-in greenhouse.
So it's a fun way to recycle and grow your own greens.
Well, it's just about time to wrap up this session.
In this session, we provided a little bit of something for everyone by creating mood
and space with containers.
In our next and final session, we'll talk about fall and winter care.
Plus, we'll plant up an indoor container and give you ideas for holiday gardens.
See you then.
