In this session, we'll look for ways to use big plants and containers, everything from
trees to shrubs to large ornamental grasses.
We'll learn how to design with them and care for them.
Plus, we'll start by looking at how to use these types of containers on a big deck.
We're on this large empty deck, and it's a great way to extend your living space outdoors,
but there's really no privacy.
A look over here, we can see our small space test garden.
You can see the plantings have really livened it up, and it's a great view.
However, the neighbors would like a little more privacy when they sit out and relax
or entertain.
You can see the screening we've done has helped with the other neighbor, but we have a little
work here.
On this side, boy, you can reach over and grab a burger right off the neighbor's grill,
so we need to do some privacy here so this space is more usable.
It's full sun, no place obviously to plant and ground because we're on a second floor
deck, so we need to look at some options.
We could do screening, something like fabric-filled frames, we could do some lattice work like
our other neighbors did, but we decided to go with containers filled with trees, shrubs,
and ornamental grasses.
This homeowner is very busy, he has small children, doesn't have time to really put
a lot of effort into taking care of the plants, so we looked for a different solution for
this space.
We decided to use a combination of evergreen shrubs and ornamental grasses.
We wanted to create seasonal interest, and if one of these dies, it's much easier to
replace, a little less noticeable.
Whenever you're using perennials, trees, and shrubs on a deck or patio and overwintering,
you want to make sure they're at least one, preferably two zones hardier so that they're
sure to survive the winter.
Otherwise, a little extra protection will be needed.
We picked smaller trees because even though big ones were available, the weight would
be an issue, hauling them up the steps, so we wanted to go a little lighter.
Also we wanted to save money, so what we did is, we elevated them on pots.
We turned over some nursery pots, free in their recycling bin, to elevate the plants,
to give them a little better screening ability, and as they grow, we can always remove the
pots accordingly.
Let's talk about the plants I selected.
We've got the boxwood as an evergreen backdrop.
Now we're in a mild climate, so this is a good choice.
We'll have screening year round, and the plants will tolerate this full sun and the mild winter.
We just want to make sure that it's watered whenever the ground is thawed and dry.
Beautiful backdrop, just in case we have a mild winter day and you want to sit out on
the patio or deck.
In front of it, I used black lace elderberry.
Look at the texture and the color against the evergreen.
Those cut leaf leaves really soften the evergreen, and the purple just adds a bit of color.
Plus we'll have flowers in late spring or early summer, followed by fruit.
The birds will love it, and if the kids happen to eat it, it's okay.
You may know, elderberry jams, jellies, and of course wine.
In front of the elderberry, we put the switchgrass, Shenandoah switchgrass.
Wonderful flowers, late season, red tips on the leaves, it looked great, and then in
fall, we'll have good fall color, and in the winter, the beige leaves against the evergreens
look great.
Now, in the back between the elderberry and the grass, we covered those pots with burlap,
and that's one of the things we can do to give a nicer backdrop.
We invested in some beautiful, colorful containers in front because we do have kids using this
deck, so it added a splash of color for the whole family to enjoy.
Let's take a look at what we did on the other side.
We went for a less expensive fix on this side.
We found this charming old bench would add seating and help us with our screening issue.
So we put it next to the deck, so we've got a great place to sit and watch the kids play
or relax, and then put planters on top.
We used ornamental and annual grasses in this case because the idea was screening the view
when we're most likely to be out on the patio or deck.
Colorful pots once again because that's part of the charm and part of the screen.
Now let's go back to the garden studio for more ideas.
Let's talk a bit about selecting healthy plants, whether it's an annual perennial tree or shrub.
Start by looking at the leaves.
They should be the proper color.
In this case, a nice deep green.
When you look at this fern, you can see that all the pinet, those are the little leaflets,
are nice and green, no signs of brown or yellowing.
That means it's received the proper care.
This pepper on the other hand is not looking so good.
Purple leaves mean it's probably not received enough light, possibly not enough water.
So this is when we leave on the bench and look for a healthier specimen.
There's no point in buying plants that are struggling.
We also want to look for signs of pests.
So check the upper and lower surface of the leaves and all along the stem.
We want to make sure there are no insects present.
Now sometimes you may miss the insect, but see a clear sticky substance called honeydew.
And that means aphids, mites, white fly, scale or mealy bug may be present.
So take a second look because these insects suck plant juices, secrete the excesses, honeydew.
Again, we don't want to spend money on bringing insects home.
Look for holes.
That may mean beetles, caterpillars or other insects are feeding on the plant.
And we want to avoid plants that have spots, lesions and cankers.
Those are sunken, discolored areas on stems and branches.
That means there's a disease present.
We don't need to buy that.
So really take a good look and make sure your plants are good and healthy.
If you're buying seasonal plants that are only going to bloom for a short while like
these Callan Coies, these are both beautiful.
Now the benefit of the one on my right, in my right hand, is that there's a lot of buds
left to open.
The one on the left looks gorgeous now.
A few unopened buds, but it's really put on the main show.
Having this one is going to give me a longer bloom time.
So keep that in mind when you're buying seasonal or holiday plants.
The other thing to keep in mind with perennials is that you want to look for getting the best
benefit.
Now this ZZ plant is tropical for many of us, but as you notice there's lots of stems.
And so what we could do on perennials, if we buy a good healthy plant with multiple stems,
you can divide that and end up making this into two, three or four plants.
So it's another way to kind of get added value out of your planting.
Now when we're looking for trees and shrubs, we want to look for some certain characteristics.
This coral berry shrub has got a good example of well-distributed stems.
And we want to look for that in our trees as well if they're multi-stem.
Your tree should have a straight tall trunk and branches with wide crotch angles.
So if you think of a branch, here's the trunk and here's the branch.
That angle should be wide.
That means it's good and strong.
You want to make sure that proper pruning cuts were made.
So the pruning cut should be on an angle above an outward facing bud where a branch joins
a branch or outside the branch bar collar.
And that's that area where the branch meets the stem.
Not a stub, but there's a little donut of a tissue that will be healed.
That way you're going to have a good, healthy plant.
You also want to make sure that there are a nice distribution of stems and branches.
Limited number of crossing and rubbing branches, because those eventually need to be removed.
So by buying the good, healthy plant properly pruned, it's getting off to a good start.
Now we're talking a lot about looking for good structure and health, but for containers,
you might be looking for something a little more unusual, like this flying dragon.
This is quite the attention-getter.
This really caught my eye in the nursery.
It's an amazing plant.
It's got an artistic feel to it.
So instead of the normal upright tree or spreading shrub, we're going for something a little
more artistic in appearance and definitely attention-getter.
As you notice, the tag on this one is hanging on the branch.
Very common with trees and shrubs.
So you may want to take a close look at this when you're buying your plant.
And if you don't know about the plant, don't be afraid to ask.
This unique plant grows about 8 to 15 feet tall, depending on where you live, prefers
full sun and is drought tolerant.
Now it's rated hardy to zone 5, my area, but I'm a bit skeptical, so I'm going to give
this a try, but I'm going to put it in a container, of course.
Once you have your healthy plant, we need to provide proper care.
And whether you're growing a large or small plant, they need light, water, and nutrients
to grow.
And the same principles apply.
You want to water thoroughly and as needed.
Check daily and more often for smaller pots, and especially during hot weather.
Now I find my finger the best moisture meter.
So when in doubt, I'll put my finger down in the soil several inches, or the potting
mix.
And for plants that like it slightly moist, I water thoroughly whenever it's the consistency
of a damp sponge.
Then it's time to water.
For cacti succulents and other drought tolerant plants, you can let them go a bit drier.
Now when you get to be a little more comfortable with watering containers, you may just be
able to lift them up and tell that the pot's light and it needs watering for those smaller
containers.
Now fortunately, it's very difficult to overwater outdoor container gardens that are planted
in the proper potting mix and in a container with drainage holes.
Now we're going to fertilize it planting and according to label directions.
But stop fertilizing perennials, trees, shrubs, and other perennials mid-season because late
season fertilization can stimulate late season growth that may not survive the winter.
This is another advantage of using a slow release, low nitrogen fertilizer.
You'll apply it in spring and then you're set for the season.
You'll reduce your workload and avoid over fertilizing and fertilizing too late in the
season.
Now those of you with harsh winters have a few more things to consider.
Use an all-weather container like wood, concrete, or fiberglass that's suited for your outdoor
gardening year round.
As I mentioned in our first session, I use plastic pots for many of my trees and shrubs.
As long as I don't hit it with the shovel in winter, it's fine.
They last about three years and that's perfect because by then it's time to replant.
Now consider insulating the roots since the roots are in a small volume of soil above
ground.
The temperature when it drops below freezing, it can kill the roots and then the plant.
So here's what I do with many of mine.
It's not pretty, but I'm the only one that sees them in the winter on my back patio.
But the good part is I've kept my weeping lilac, climatis, and many tender perennials
and borderline hardy trees and shrubs alive for more than 10 winters.
So basically what I do is I push all my containers up against my brick garage.
It's in a very sheltered location in my patio between my house and the garage.
Then I surround my perennials, trees, and shrubs with my annual pots still filled with
soil and the dead annuals, of course, in winter.
Use that to insulate.
And the bags you see are leaves I didn't get mulched and incorporated into my gardens,
so I left them bagged, used them to protect my plants, and then I cover them with snow.
Again, it's not the prettiest thing, but for these plants that are out of sight of the
public and my friends, it's a great way to keep them alive and they'll be beautiful
the following summer.
Other overwintering tactics that may not look the best but work well include sinking the
pot in the ground.
This is great if you leave your tree, your shrub, vine in its original container, or
just a large nursery pot.
I always make a visit to the recycling pile at my nearby garden center, pot things up,
set them in the beautiful pot, and then sink the ugly one in the ground, insulating the
roots.
You can also move your plants in an unheated garage.
This works great for those in the north.
Just remember to water whenever the soil's thawed and dry.
We'll talk more about this in our next lesson.
Now you can reduce the risk by growing plants that are at least one, preferably two zones
hardier, and use large containers.
The bigger containers mean the more soil and the more insulation for those plant roots.
This is a great example.
We've got Tiger Eye Sumac here, which is a good, hardy plant, at least two zones hardier
than where this gardener was growing it.
That fine texture is balanced out by the bolder leaves cascading over the edge of the plant,
and we've combined annuals, perennials, along with the shrubs, so we really have different
layers of interest and different colors as well.
Now here are some creative ways to use large containers in your landscape.
One, you can use them to screen bad views.
If you take a look at this collection of pots, you can see we've kind of designed a garden
of containers, much like we would in ground, with the taller plants in the back, that being
the moosa or the banana, with its big, bold leaves, really blocking the view of that kind
of work area in the backyard.
Next to it is the canna with its beautiful red flowers, and again, nice, bold foliage.
Those big leaves make a nice backdrop for the colorful coleus that we see in the middle,
the lantana, skirting the canna, and the spiky texture of the formium on the left is a great
addition to the garden.
If you traditionally use spike plants, you might want to try this for a change of pace,
and cascading over the pot is a sweet potato vine, vigorous and bold enough to counteract
the big leaves of both the banana and the canna.
Now we can also set our containers inside a garden to create a focal point or a vertical
accent, and here we've got not only a pot in the garden, but we've used an old chair
to elevate it so it's a good vertical accent.
Plus, we've used a variegated geranium, the colorful foliage combined with the red flowers
of the geranium are great, add those purpley blue petunias for a nice combination, set it
in that old chair that otherwise might be headed to the thrift store.
We can also use our containers along walks or drives to create a living wall or border.
Now here, this is at the Dallas Arboretum in the fall, obviously, and one of the things
I loved about this planting is beyond those planters was the restaurant on this side towards
me was the entryway.
So they created a bit of screening for privacy for those people dining in the restaurant,
but kept the view open enough so people knew it was there.
In the hanging basket on the right is Silver Falls Dicondra, one of my favorite trailing
plants.
It just hugs the pot and creates almost like a ghost-like look, and they pop some white
pumpkins in on top to give it a little seasonal flair.
They've combined that again with some cannas and elephant ears for some big, bold texture
and sweet potato vines.
Also notice how they use the pumpkins to complement that design, almost like additional containers,
and then a variety of planters of tropical plants, annuals and some shrubs to create
a nice division between the restaurant and the public space.
You can also use planters to direct traffic to the front door or along a walkway.
Here at this Botanic Garden, this is Inniswood Botanic Garden, they've got a planter on the
corner so people don't cut across that bed that's just getting ready to be planted, but
yet are directed to the front entrance or to the side educational center.
You can see they've used a variety of plants.
You may notice the snake plant in front with the dark green leaves and the yellow edges,
nice vertical accent peeking up through all the foliage.
Now you may notice an indoor plant, if you live in the north, or as a ground cover or
outdoor plant in warmer areas, but here it makes a great vertical accent, combined with
other containers, including the silver foliage of licorice vine, that's the plant skirting
the ground that's kind of a silvery color, good for dry conditions, a nice foil or backdrop
for colorful plants, and it makes a nice juxtaposition with that coleus.
Now we can also use containers to create shade where there's no planting space available.
Here we've got a nice plant combination, we saw this a bit earlier, but what I like about
this is it really nestles in place and provides a little shade in the late afternoon, we've
got a combination of a shade, small scale shade tree, behind the bench we've got a large
leaf canna that looks great, and keeping that nestled and anchored in place.
We can also use containers to create a focal point on the patio or deck.
Here we've got a nice combination, we've kind of redirected traffic, created a nice backdrop
area.
In the center is a palm, now some of you may have grown them as house plants, some of you
may have them as large scale plants out in the landscape, the fine texture is really
nice against many of the bold leaves that we often see used in containers.
In the front we have several cordiline, those are the red spiky plants, related to the spike
plants some of you have used, but the bolder leaves and the red color give it a little
different interest.
Those in northern climates may be bringing those indoors for winter and taking them back
out for summer.
Now I always laugh because I usually see pictures every year of somebody showing me their four
or five, six year old cordiline or spike plant that they've brought inside and taken out.
Usually it dies when they've lost a friend to help them carry it in and out over winter.
That's where those potlifters come in handy, but you can see we've created a garden with
a variety of plants in this collection.
Some of the commonly used plants for large scale areas include trees and shrubs that
are hardy to your area and as I mentioned one or two zones hardier is even better.
But you might also want to consider dwarf varieties that won't quickly outgrow the pot
or the space and drought tolerant plants that are more tolerant of drier conditions are
great to use for containers, a little more forgiving if you happen to miss a watering.
A couple you may want to consider, crab apples.
Crab apples and crab apples are grown pretty much the world wide.
Crab apples are wonderful for their flowers in spring that can be white, pink or red.
They're nice foliage in the summer, decent fall color depending on the fall weather of
a yellow and then the fruit that persists fall into winter and sometimes even into spring.
Now some of you may have grown crab apples in the past and going, what do you mean?
The leaves drop on the ground in the summer, the fruit creates a mess.
You want to look for newer varieties that are disease resistant so you don't get apple
scab and lose the leaves mid season.
You want to get those with small persistent fruit that hold on all winter so they don't
drop and create a mess.
I have a candy mint crab apple in my front yard.
It has two toned pink flowers and red fruit that persists until late spring when the birds
move through and feed on that fermented fruit.
A nice treat for them and it's a wonderful treat for me as I get to watch them clean
up the fruit and move on.
I showed you a picture earlier of tiger eye sumac that chartreuse foliage really adds
a nice element to the landscape and it's a good hearty plant.
Now I've heard mixed results or mixed reviews from gardeners, some say it can be as aggressive
as the straight sumac, others say it's a little tamer.
Putting it in a pot is a great way to keep it contained.
I found one of my favorite combinations is that with willow amsonia with the beautiful
blue flowers in early spring and allium with the big bold round flowers.
Now lilacs are good hearty plants, they've got good heartiness, good salt tolerance and
there's a wide range of them.
Bloomerang is a repeat blooming lilac which may be something you're looking for if you
just don't want something that blooms once and done.
The fragrant flowers are great in a small scale, 4 to 5 foot tall and wide plant is
excellent for containers.
But then there's all the traditional ones and some of the asiatic types like the palabin
and myri that tend to have smaller leaves, smaller flowers and better disease resistance.
One of my favorite for season trees or shrubs is serviceberry.
They come in shrub form or tree form, white flowers in spring, blueberry like fruit that
you can eat if you can beat the birds to them, great fall color and smooth gray bark.
There's lots more choices that you may want to consider but this may just get you started
thinking about some opportunities.
Now edibles are great in small space, edible trees and shrubs, those that produce fruits
and berries we can eat.
A new apple called urban apple is a narrow tree and early producer.
I can't wait to purchase a few and create a nice screen around my patio.
Go on upright and I'll be picking apples in just a couple of years.
There's also some new dwarf blueberries that grow great in a container and a thornless
raspberry.
Now I have to tell you as a small space gardener that loves raspberries, I tried growing the
regular plants in a big pot, it took up a lot of room, the thorns were a nightmare and
I only got a few fruit for all the space.
I tried the new thornless raspberry, raspberry shortcake, small scale thornless, I had several
pickings throughout the first year, much easier to handle, great for small space in the ground
or even better yet in a container.
Now ornamental grasses are another option, they give you great height with a very small
footprint.
We often use annual forms like the annual fountain grass, annual for many of us and
then it's done at the end of the season.
But many of our perennial grasses will also work.
Many of the miscanthus are suited perfectly for containers.
Make sure you get miscanthus senensis, the next word, it's lot less aggressive or keep
the aggressive ones only in a pot.
They come in sizes from as little as three feet, little kitten, to as tall as silver
feather which is about 12 to 15 feet high.
In the container it tends to keep the size down just a bit.
The fine texture is great, the seed heads that persist through fall and winter are a
nice addition to your winter garden.
Switch grass native to North America is a wonderful plant that has many new varieties.
North wind really holds up well in the winter ice and snow for those northerners.
It grows five to six feet tall, has blue green leaves and nice flowers and seed heads that
look like fireworks.
Pandoa which we're using in one of our small gardens is a nice shorter one with red tinge
grass and red tinge flowers and then seed heads again that persist.
There's lots of choices out there for ornamental grasses.
We've seen a lot of examples of large tropicals like the banana, canna and elephant ears.
We're going to talk more about managing those throughout the year but there are different
sizes available and different bold texture to really give you a good impact in those
large containers.
And don't forget about tall annuals, biennials and perennials.
Cleomy is a favorite, you may notice spider cleomy.
It has kind of a musky, kind of skunky smell actually on warm evenings, not offensive just
kind of interesting and the flowers can be white, pink or purple.
The seed heads are long and narrow and they kind of look like a spider.
They do recede readily so it's kind of a nice receding plant if you like the looks.
Canna pot, a good vertical accent.
Purple majesty millet has beautiful wide leaves, kind of looks like a millet or corn
plant with a spiky brown seed head.
The birds love the seeds so you get the added benefit.
You have a nice vertical accent, good looking foliage and you'll start bringing the birds
in in late summer, early fall.
We've seen a few examples of the cordiline, spike and formium.
These are very narrow leafed plants that really look good for an upright narrow leaf, good
vertical accent and a good focal point as well.
And of course we can use vines trained up on tall obelisks, trellises and supports.
It's a great way to have something different for your vertical accent.
Here we've got tomatoes and pansies but instead of using a tomato tower, we took a wooden
trellis, painted it a bright blue so it really stood out and then staked our tomato to that
and we put some nice red pansies in front for added color.
So really be creative in the way you're thinking about using vines.
Some others include, vines to include include climatis, not just in the ground, I've kept
one alive for over 10 years in a pot.
Honey suckle vines, climbing nasturtians, hyacinth bean vine, excellent morning glories.
Be careful though it's invasive in some areas so check with your local experts before adding
it to your garden in a pot or in the ground.
Now we used climbing hydrangea in the ground in our garden, in our small space garden and
we talked about, we looked at attaching to the wall and we trained it on the trellis.
But whether you're growing that vine or another, you'll need to provide the support appropriate
for that plant.
For example, the climbing hydrangea attaches by root like hold fast so it needs a rough
surface mason area or wood.
Trellis have twining petioles so they need wire or netting to attach for support.
You also want to make sure that the support is well anchored in the container because
you don't want the plant toppling over.
Some trellises attach right to the pot while others need to be set inside as close to the
bottom as possible.
Now you can also create a tall container by stacking several smaller containers.
It's a great way to display lots of plants in a small space with color, texture and interest
from the ground up.
And we've got a couple examples here.
This is a great way to really show up the subtleties of small scale succulents but yet
give them big impact in the garden.
You may also want to use containers large or small to create intimate areas.
Use large containers and tall plantings at the walls of your outdoor living space.
Our containers can be dividers and accent points.
We'll show you more on this in our next session.
But here's a couple examples.
This is New York City and I loved how this outdoor dining area created privacy using
containers of spring flowering bulbs and evergreens.
Here we've created some intimacy with an elephant ear and a couple of chairs.
And I love this small space garden in Portland where they've divided the deck from the patio
to make small intimate rooms in this smaller backyard.
And if you have the space, they've brought the garden right up to their backyard in this
Oklahoma setting.
We've got a water feature container softening the view, creating intimacy and bringing the
garden to the back door.
So let's go to the garden center to wrap up this session.
We've looked at ways to use large containers to beautify space and create privacy.
In our next session, we'll design an outdoor living space with containers.
We'll also look at different kinds of containers from succulents to themed gardens.
And we'll see how to handle pest and plagues.
See you then.
