Hello.
Hey.
Brown sugar.
That's me.
Can anybody hear me?
All right.
Loud and clear.
Loud and clear. Okay. Am I too loud?
Okay.
Let's see.
Well, that's, that's a little bit more response than I kind of expected.
David.
The hippie and the athlete, you guys are crazy.
Who's that?
Okay, we'll give it just a minute or so more and see if.
Anybody else is going to show up.
So.
All right.
Let me check. I'm checking. I was doing another thing.
Okay.
Okay.
David, what's up with your name?
I'm talking to David.
All right. So that's about three minutes.
Three or four minutes. So.
All right. So my, my intention was to just kind of start where you guys
are.
Let's see.
I'm trying to remember. I know somebody was using.
Google sheets.
Or some other software. Does everybody here have.
Excel or.
Okay, Jacob.
And you do too, David. Okay.
Addison turned off her iPad. So I can't tell.
I can't see.
You can tell her to start her video.
Oh, there she is. Okay, cool.
So do you have Excel, Edison or.
Okay. All right. So.
Because I also had to kind of learn Google sheets and I found out that
it's not so great. So.
All right, let me share my screen here.
Okay.
So.
Too many options.
Okay. So.
Can, can y'all still see me? Yeah, I guess my camera is still on.
Okay. So here's the, here's the assignment sheet.
And so essentially the first task was just to type in all this info.
And this is the way I typed it in.
And so.
That's where I am on this. Okay. And I.
Called it raw data. So, so.
If you want to, so we're going to have multiple tabs as we go across
here.
And so.
That's actually pretty useful as long as you name them something.
Oh, let's see. Someone just came in.
Where is this?
I'm sorry.
Let me stop sharing real quick.
I thought somebody came in.
But it's not okay. Share again.
All right.
So.
Rather than having us sit here and watch me type this in.
I just opened a new blank Excel spreadsheet.
And I typed in this information. Okay.
And I'm just going across here and you can see that's exactly what I typed.
I just.
All right.
And so, and in fact, if you looked at the table in the book,
I think this number.
I made a typo or changed it. So all the numbers should match what's in the
book.
I've got the length in this column, the mass in this column.
And then we did.
Three trials.
Supposedly.
And this is the results from the three trials for the three different
lengths. So this is an experiment.
We didn't actually get the time to do.
In class and our.
In our class experiment, we kept the length set to.
Whatever it was.
And then we changed the mass.
So the table from class will be a little bit different.
Okay. So the first task then is to type in this data.
And then the next task is to try to make it look like this as much as
possible.
Now, unfortunately, I made a mistake in taking this picture.
You see row one.
This picture starts with row two. And I should have included row one.
Which would look like this row.
But I made a boo boo.
So some of you guys caught that and made it look exactly like that
picture, which is good.
All right. So, so that I.
For when I turn in my homework, I want to be able to show that I did
this.
So what I'm going to do now is I'm going to.
Copy this date, this whole table to a new sheet.
So I right click and I'm going to say move or copy.
And I'm going to leave it in this same notebook.
I'm going to move it to the end, but I'm going to create a copy.
So now I have two.
Tabs that have the exact same information in them.
I.
And so what I want to do is rename this tab just to keep my
homework.
Clear. So that's task two. So I'm going to call this.
I'll double click that it highlights it and I can type tasks.
So I'm going to call this task two.
Enter.
All right. So now I want to start formatting this in some way.
So.
Let me just.
Walk through this. So one way to make a title go all the way across.
And be centered is to do a merge.
And on my toolbar here, I have the merge command.
And it says merge and center.
And now you see that is all one cell.
There's no.
Cell G1.
Let's see the other thing I might want to do is go ahead and put in
this color.
So let me highlight these guys and say make the field color.
Match what's on the screen there.
And depending on whether you have a Mac or PC,
you might see different colors here.
So let me just pick, say, this color.
And then look dark enough.
Let me pick a different darker, darker rows.
Maybe that's it. Okay.
And I also wanted to get these ones across here filled in the same color.
So I highlight it and I can use the same color.
I just add by clicking again. So there's some color.
I'm actually below.
I see that that one has a dark red background.
So let me go ahead and pick a darker red.
Maybe this guy.
So now you see that the problem is, is I can't.
See the writing in that one. So I want to change the color,
the color of that text. So I'll highlight that cell.
Go here.
And I'll say make the text white.
I'll say make the text white.
It also looks bigger.
So since that cell is highlighted, I want to make the font bigger.
So I have a,
I can either pick a specific font here.
Or I can just say.
With this thing here, scale it up.
And maybe it's also bold so I can make it bold.
Okay.
So one of the things I noticed is that, um,
Well, I need to change the colors of these fonts to white as well.
So let me go ahead and do that.
I'm going to highlight those things and say make that white font.
And highlight these things and make that a white font.
Okay.
Um,
So I also just look at the way these columns are arranged.
I see it looks like everything is centered in the box.
So I'm going to highlight all of those squares and say center them.
In the box. So there's an icon to do that.
Um, I can also, if I right click,
I get a format.
Uh, cells.
Function, which gives me a whole lot of choices here.
Um, so I could go under alignment and say,
Uh,
Um,
I'm going to line it in the center.
And I actually want this to be in the middle of those boxes.
Let's see what that does.
Uh,
Oh, I see you made a boo boo. So I made this thing too big.
So I'm going to unmerge that.
And then this box accidentally has some color in it.
So I'm going to get rid of that and say no fill. All right.
So it's starting to look a little bit like these things.
Everything's centered.
Everything's in a column.
Um,
The text goes off the screen here.
So what I need to do is adjust the width of these columns.
So if I highlight them all.
I can highlight them.
And then if I put my mouse here and drag.
Well, it didn't do it.
I'm going to undo that with command Z.
I'm going to go here and drag. Yeah.
That's not doing it either.
Okay. So I'm going to.
Oops.
That didn't do so well under that.
So sometimes I'm just poking around here. All right.
So if I double click each of these lines, then.
It makes the column wide enough to put everything in there.
Um,
Which is not good because now I see I've got these huge wide columns.
And I really wanted something that was a, you know,
About as wide as the first column there.
So I need to fix that part of the problem is,
is that I really want this stuff to not be stretched out.
I want it to wrap in the cells.
I'm going to highlight those cells and do a right click.
I'm going to format those cells.
I'm going to say, wrap the text.
Here's a text control button.
I'm going to say, wrap the text.
And let's see what that does.
Well, it doesn't do much until I go in and I make these things.
Now, ah, now.
It made the text kind of fit a little better.
Um, and I can make these, uh,
I guess one of the things I'm not very good at is making these all the same
with some, uh,
Uh,
Just drag it onto a certain way as what I can do.
If I drag this, okay.
Do you see that it says that the width is 1.18 inches.
I'm going to stretch that out to make it like, uh,
Well, make it 1.19.
I can make all of these 1.19.
And I know that somewhere in Excel,
there's a way to do this automatically for all these cells.
But, um,
Okay.
Now let's look at what we notice.
Um,
Y'all are awfully quiet.
Is anybody got a
Question or anything?
Um,
All right.
So one of the things I notice is that, uh,
this picture,
it looks like the lines between the boxes are dark.
So probably I need to see about putting a border on each of these boxes.
So let me highlight all the boxes.
And then I want to go to the border function.
Um,
And there's an icon here.
I can also, if I say format.
These cells format cells,
which is command one on a Macintosh.
Um, there's a tab here for border as well.
So you can really control the borders and find detail if you want.
I happen to know that the thing that I'd really like is already here on this
button where to go right there.
And I want to click this.
Just put a single dark line on all the borders.
Okay.
So that's looking a little better.
All right.
Um,
So at this point, I kind of see.
A couple of things that, uh,
Catch my eye. Well, this column isn't 1.19 wide either. Okay.
So now my columns here are about the same width.
Um,
So one of the things that I notice is the,
the number formatting. So for example,
In this column, it says one.
And then here it's 0.8 and so forth.
So what I want to do is make all these have the same number of decimal
places.
So I'm going to highlight them.
Going to right click.
I'm going to format these cells.
All right.
And it says, it sees that there's numbers in there.
So I'll get this number.
So I select that and I go to number.
Uh, and here I can tell it, give each one of those.
Well, it comes up with two decimal places.
I only want one decimal place.
All right.
And it shows me a little sample of what it's going to look like when
I select that.
So one lot.
Now I have 1.0.
And just, that's what, that's what I wanted right there.
So I'm going to go ahead and, uh,
look at these other numbers here and they're also all to one decimal
place.
So I'm going to do that same thing.
All these numbers.
I'm going to highlight them.
Right click.
Format cells.
Tell them, yes, it is a number and I want one decimal place.
I'm going to highlight them.
Right click.
Format cells.
Okay. So now.
So let me, so you say, well, that's not a big deal.
Well, uh, let me undo it.
With the command Z and look at this number here.
So it went from 12 with no decimal place.
And then command Y lets me redo it.
To 12.0.
So now they're all to the same number of decimal places.
All right. So that might be helpful to you.
All right. We're getting really close.
The problem that I noticed though,
is that like on this one,
it says length and then on a line below it says meters.
So how can I do that?
One way might be to maybe drag the cell like that.
Okay. That kind of does it,
but it's not the right width compared to the target that we had.
So try to play and drag it out a little bit.
It's going to stay with me for a little while.
Oops, but then it switches back.
So what I'd really like to do is.
Figure out a way to put a line feed in there.
So let me.
Go to this and I'm going to go to insert character.
Or insert special character.
Where is that?
Insert a symbol.
I happen to know that that's on the symbols menu.
And that comes up.
2222. Where is that thing?
Special. Okay. Special character.
Now that's not what I want. I want.
Does anybody know where that is?
I'm looking for a line feed.
Could be an arrows.
Or arrows, you think.
Now see that'll just put an arrow in there.
So I'm going to use the help system.
I want to insert.
See what comes up here.
No results found.
Oh, maybe it's under keyboard shortcuts.
That's what I want.
I'm not seeing it.
Looking for a line.
Okay. Did I have to go to my.
Show me my keyboard.
I'm going to insert a character.
What I want to do is insert a character turn.
So maybe what I'm going to do since I can't find the exact thing,
I'm going to try some key combinations.
So if I just hit return.
Okay.
It just goes to the next cell.
That's not what I want.
Double click on it. I want to hit.
Let me try a shift return.
Well, that didn't work.
You know, when I found this before.
Command shift return.
I said, I'm going to remember this because I'm going to make sure
these kids know how to do it.
And there.
Here I go.
All right. So.
Where, oh, where.
Can you just add spaces?
Well, you could add spaces, but that's like.
I call that typewriter word processing.
Because when you do that, like in a word document,
it's always going to come back to bite you.
Right. Because if I say I misspelled the word length.
And I go back and correct it later than that might shift everything
around.
So in desperation, you might do that,
but we're not quite desperate.
I know there's a way to find this because I found it.
And this is the bad thing about Excel is.
I know it's going to be in the help system.
So I'm going to insert.
Okay.
That's entering cells.
Formatting and entering data.
So this is, this is kind of the bad place to be because.
Number one, none of these help things here seem to be.
What I want.
Okay.
Let me cheat.
Because I know how to do it.
Elsewhere. So here's the one I worked from.
All right, so I'm going to go into this guy.
I'm going to.
Highlight that and copy it.
I'm going to close.
I know there's a way to do this and then I'm going to paste it in
there. All right.
Also, if you notice that.
So once you find that line feed character and figure out how to
put it in there, you can cut and paste it wherever you want.
And so actually, if you, let me see this last one.
Average time for 10.
I think I put it in here as well.
Okay, so.
All right, so that, that.
I apologize for not remembering exactly where to get that.
So then the question is, does this really kind of match?
I think this red has to be a little bit different.
I think it's not that dark red. I think it's that red.
And your, your, your knowledge may be, may vary.
Hey.
Oh, that's.
Julie. All right.
So your knowledge may vary on matching colors because of course,
you always have the trouble of matching colors on different
computers and monitors and so forth.
So, okay.
So that's pretty close. All right.
And all these are just the things that I've typed in.
So now I want to go to task three,
which is to replace the last column with a formula. Okay.
So here's where it gets fun.
So let me again, copy this.
Worksheet here.
Move it to the end, create a copy.
All right. And it picks a title for the tab.
I'm going to highlight that. And then I'm going to click in here.
Change this to task three.
Okay. So now this, this tab looks exactly like this tab.
In fact, when I click on them, you can't tell any difference.
And so.
All right. This column.
It's supposed to be the average of these three numbers here.
So what I want to do is replace this number.
With a formula. And this is where the real power.
Of Excel starts to come in. All right.
Oh, wait, more.
Chat.
My chat window. Did somebody chat.
Go to tools. Zane says go to tools.
I didn't see that till now. Let's try that.
Tools.
I don't know what you're talking about.
Oh, customized keyboard.
No, I don't want to do that.
I got my keyboard.
I don't know what you're talking about saying.
So.
Yeah, there's a lot of stuff in there, but I don't see what I need.
Okay. All right. So let's stay on, on this.
So I want to replace this number 20.
I'm going to use a parenthesis.
And I'm going to say add in this cell.
Plus.
This cell.
Plus.
This cell.
So I click in the cell and all formulas start with an equal sign.
And let's talk about, so on an average.
Of three numbers means.
I add those three numbers together and then divide by three, right?
So I'm going to use a.
A parentheses and I'm going to say, add in this cell.
This cell.
Close that parentheses and divide by three.
And so now the number is the same because the textbook was right,
that the average of those.
Is three.
Okay. So that's one way to do it.
We can also use a built in Excel function.
I'll do that in this one.
I'm going to say equals.
Yay, we have more time.
So here I'm going to say equals because I want to put in a formula.
Come on.
Equals.
And I happen to know that there's a function.
Within Excel called average.
And that's my version of it actually completes the typing for me.
So I don't even have to be a good typer.
It also shows me that there's some different functions. Okay.
So I might want to.
Investigate that to see what they are.
But I think what I want is average.
Now, once you've typed in a function, you see,
it tells you how it's supposed to be formatted.
All right.
So if I click on the blue, then I'll get the hyperlink help.
And it tells me how to use that function, which is really, really cool.
So we don't need that.
All right, so it says I should put in number one,
comma, number two, comma, number three.
So I can do that. I can put in number column.
I wanted to take number, the first number from this column.
So I'm going to click there.
I'm going to put in a comma.
Take the second number from here.
Put in a comma.
And the third number from here.
And that's legit.
So can you look right here on this part?
Let's see. Maybe I can make my screen.
So here's the formula.
So here in this row three column F,
I put in, add these three numbers and then divide by three here.
I said use a function called average.
So I didn't have to put in any other.
I didn't have to tell it that there's three numbers there.
It could figure that out on its own. All right.
But there's even a cooler way to do this.
And so I'm going to go to this cell and I'm going to say, let's use the,
put in another formula.
I'm also going to use average.
And I'm going to say,
instead of clicking these, I'm going to say,
I'm going to click and give you a range of numbers.
And then I have to close it with the parentheses.
And then when I hit enter, I get the right thing.
Now it's giving me a little bit of an error message there,
because it doesn't like what I did.
So now this function says, all right,
take the average of this range of cells.
And this is really cool because if I double click on this, well,
let me mess up my work here real quick.
Let me widen this so you can see.
If I double click on this, it highlights that range.
And if I made a mistake in dragging,
what I can do is I can say, okay, I'm going to drag it up there.
No, I want to drag it over here.
I want to drag it down here.
So if I accidentally pick that one,
oops, I get the wrong number, but I can,
I can drag this range selector around.
I can make it bigger.
I can say average these numbers here,
which is wrong.
That's not what I want.
But you see what I'm doing.
I'm able to use this function,
which is average, and then it identifies a range here.
And I can have all kinds of fun with that.
Okay.
So I've done it three different ways here.
Oh, and I want to look at this error.
So it's trying to tell me something.
So I click on the cell and it gives me a little yellow warning
symbol.
And if it is a real problem,
so what it's seeing is, is I did this in the middle of some cells.
So it thinks I made a bad, bad mistake.
So I'm just going to say ignore that error.
Because I didn't make a mistake.
And I'm going to get this back to where I want it.
Okay.
So I've done it three different ways.
I've done them algebra or the math explicitly.
I added those three cells.
Close the parentheses.
And then divide by three.
Here I did a function average.
And then the nice thing about this function then is I could say,
Oh, I meant to include another one.
I could say.
Put in a comma.
And then select this guy.
I could put in another comma.
I could select this guy.
Okay.
So you see having the cells explicit like that.
I don't even have to remember how many I did.
And it'll come up with that average,
which is wrong because that's not what the problem was.
All right.
So, and then this one is using the average function with a range.
And so forth.
So the nice thing about any of these ways to create this formula is I
can copy and paste formulas.
So I'm going to copy.
So highlighted that command C for copy.
And I'm going to say, put it in the, so I'm going to,
I could do command V.
I'm just going to hit enter.
And voila, it calculates those two.
It sees the same error.
So I'm going to say.
Ignore that error.
All right. So, um,
So that, that's the way I would format this table.
Let me look at the final result and see if I, um,
I can copy it.
Okay. So I have all white characters here.
Oh, I didn't.
Why?
I need my carriage return. So I'm going to go here.
Copy it.
Go here.
Okay.
So now I'm pretty much matching what the target was. All right.
I don't hear any rumbling.
Anybody have any questions or comments about what I did so far?
Um, I didn't have a color document.
So I didn't know it had to be in red.
Is that a problem?
Um, no, you're,
whoever printed out your assignment needs a slap on the wrist.
Give me a minute. I'll do it.
No, no, don't, don't go slapping your mama's wrist.
Don't tell her I said that either. She'll beat me up.
But, um, yeah, I mean, that's the thing is, is sometimes that stuff happens.
Um, and some people are color blind. Um, so if you're going to pick a, uh,
Um,
A template.
You need to, or pick some colors you need to kind of be aware that some
people may, um, have a trouble seeing it.
So for example, if I said, Oh, I, I think I'm going to make this really pretty
by making these numbers green. Cause let's say they're all good numbers
and we want to make them green and I go up here and I say green.
Well, if your boss is color blind, he's going to look at that and say,
I don't see anything. What did you do? You know?
So.
Okay.
If you're talking to me, I don't hear anything.
I'm not.
Okay. All right. I just didn't want to mess up.
So I'm going to undo that with a, uh, undo command here.
Okay. So, well, let's actually go and let me make another copy of this raw data.
Let's see if I can get to the end. So this is extra. Okay.
Um, I'm going to try to use, so Excel is pretty smart.
So if I highlight the data and then go to tables,
I can actually pick a format here that, you know,
Oh, now it didn't do a very good job and it put these little arrow things on there.
I don't like that. So let's see if I can find one.
Yeah, it keeps putting these sort functions on here and I don't like those.
So, and I don't even know how to get rid of them.
So it automatically formatted it that way.
It forgot that I had a, so this is why things like auto formatting and stuff sometimes aren't great.
I don't know if any of these will work at all.
Yeah, I see it's not.
It doesn't understand that the first row is a title for the whole table.
So this is why I really haven't gotten used to using any of these auto formatting because most of the stuff I would do.
It just isn't going to work. I'm going to have to change this so much.
I might as well just start where I started and do it all manually myself.
I'm going to get rid of this tab because I don't want to confuse.
So if you go down here and say delete that tab, it'll give you one chance.
But once it's gone, there's no one do for this, at least in my version of Microsoft Excel.
Okay, so now we've got to make a graph here.
So what I'm going to do, I'm going to duplicate this thing.
Make a copy of it. I think that's task four. So I'm going to rename this.
And there's there's a lot of ways to make a graph. I could have a tab with just a graph on it, whatever, but what I want to do.
I don't have the same formula up above. So I'm going to copy that and paste it into there.
So now all these columns have the same formula, but it's a smart thing.
Except it's too smart. It's telling me that I have an error.
And I'm going to tell it to ignore that error. Okay, so now I want to make a graph.
So I'll go down here and pick a cell.
I'm going to go to the charts.
And there's a lot of choices here.
And if you play with Excel, you'll find summer, make more sense for data like this than others.
What I'm going to do is let's see.
So the graph that I want to create has a dot for each data point, and it has a line drawn. So that's a scatter plot.
I'm going to do this with the smooth line and the dots. So that that looks like what I want.
I could also do one where it draws a straight line between the data points, but that's might not be very useful. So I'm going to do this.
All right. It puts this little weird box in there.
And I can actually move this around.
And I can change its size as well.
It's about five inches wide, didn't I?
So three by five. And you can actually type in those numbers if you want.
Okay.
So now what I have to do is I have to go to the select thing to tell it what data to use. So I'm going to go to select.
There's none of these boxes are filled in. In fact, you don't use some of these boxes. So I'm going to say, the first thing I'm going to do is say add a series.
Okay.
And what I'm going to do now is fill in these boxes. So the name of this series, I'm going to click this little bitty data selection icon and the screen is going to change to this.
And so I'm going to say, here's a title for my data series.
So I click that and then hit enter.
It's going to be convenient because if someone says, oh, you need to change the title of your graph, you don't have to go to the graph and change it. You can go to the spreadsheet and change it.
And I'm going to make a plot versus length. So I'm going to select the data for length, which is this. I'm going to highlight those cells. I'm clicking and dragging.
And then the wide values. I'm going to plot. Now this is tricky. You have to highlight this. So it says equals one because it kind of breaks if there's nothing in there.
So you want to get rid of all of that. You want to delete that going here and select these guys.
And that looks kind of like what I want to get to.
So I'm going to, I'm kind of done with this dialogue. So I'm going to say, okay, so there's a graph. Actually, let me make it a little bigger so that
maybe I can see it. Okay, it's not exactly like this graph here yet.
Okay, some of the things I noticed is there's no legend.
The text here doesn't match exactly.
So I'm going to change the title.
And so something like that. So I probably shouldn't have picked the title from up here. So I'm just going to go in here. I'll double click that. Oops.
Double click that and I can highlight this type what I wanted to say, which was time.
And Swain's
the pendulum
varying links.
So just typed in the box.
So right now if I needed later if I want to change this I've got to go and type in that box.
Okay, so to format this and to keep it consistent. There's some things up here under charts.
So I want to
to
Oh, if I highlight the chart, then I get more things here. So let me go here and format.
No chart layout. So I want to look so there's things here like chart title.
Access titles who I want those so the horizontal access title I want it to say
length.
So here I can pick the font and the color.
Let's see.
It looks like it's red.
The font, maybe it's this Calibri or which is close to Ariel.
The font color was red. So I'm going to select that here.
It looks like it's bold.
All right, maybe that's all I need.
All right, and it says access title so I'm going to double click in there and I'm going to type length.
And I think I put it in front of these majors.
Okay, is that right? That's pretty close. And then I need to go back to my so I click the chart and I get these options under chart layout.
Access titles I want the vertical axis title to be when it rotated.
And it also has to so I can.
So now I've got this box highlighted and I can click on format selection and I get this dialogue.
Same font. Oh, I want it to be read.
Okay, and there's a lot of options in here on how this thing can look.
What I want to type is time.
Space and seconds.
And I'm going to click on close.
All right, so the target doesn't have a legend so I'm going to get rid of that legend that one of these chart layout things says legend.
I'm going to say no legend.
Oh, and it fills it up cool.
The other thing is that this has cross hatches.
And I'm not I've only got horizontals here.
So I want to
So when you click on this current selection you get all the elements of the title.
Okay, vertical axis grid lines, major grid lines. I want to format those.
So format selection.
Oh, I selected the wrong one.
I want to.
I want the horizontal axis.
Format selection.
Okay, scale.
Oh, I got to go under ticks.
That's ticks.
That's not what I want.
Okay, grid lines. There's a little tool here for doing grid lines. I want the
grid lines, major grid lines, and that picks some values here and you can move these around as well if you want.
The range on the chart here goes from zero to 1.2 and that matches what I've got, and it goes from zero to 25 and that matches what I've got.
So I'm going to go back. I need to make this font bigger. So I'll just highlight that.
Maybe that is proportional there. Okay, so now the only problem I see is that this line is a black line with black circles and so I got to fix that.
You can do that really quickly. You just put your cursor on the line and double click it and we can, we can do things like put in error bars if we want. I didn't give you any of those.
So the marker style, I want it to be a circle so you get some choices here.
I want to make it a little bit smaller. I can actually see it changing there. I need to make the marker fill. I want that to be black.
And I don't want an automatic line around it. Alright, so let me close that and see if that's close to what I want.
Well, the dots look pretty correct, but the line isn't what I want. Let me go back here.
There's line. I want that to be a black line.
Let me see what that looks like. But it's really thick, so I'm going to change the weight by going here and I'm going to click down the weight until it looks about right.
Ta-da.
Okay, so that kind of matches pretty good what I've got there.
Okay, so that's quite a bit, but you say you can make a chart look just about any way you want.
So if your teacher has a preference, you can match that. If your boss or your company has a preference, you can match that as well.
So the next part of the assignment was to take this chart and put it into Word. And there's two things here that I want to tell you.
If you just copy this and paste it into Word, then whoever you send that document to has your raw data as well.
So if you're working for a company, and this is a graph of your latest multi-billion dollar project, and you're going to go out and try to email documents to people, you would want to check with your boss
that we want them to have the raw data. Usually the answer would be no, you don't want to do that.
What you want to do is just send them a picture of this. And so there's a couple of ways to do it.
So that's what I'm going to focus on.
Since I'm on a Mac, I know how to do a screenshot. So I can do a screen screenshot of this and get a pretty decent picture.
And so that may be what I do. The other thing is if I right click on this, I can say there's a choice here for me that says save as a picture.
And then it says, okay, you want to save it as a PNG image.
Let me put it on my desktop.
So chart or graph.
Okay, so now I just saved an image to my desktop.
That is
something I can easily embed in Word. So let me go to Word.
I'm going to get rid of the chat.
Go to Word.
Here's my new Word document.
Hello guys.
And what I want to do on a Mac, and I don't know PCs well enough really to say, but on a Mac, I can just drag this in here and drop it.
And there's my image
in a Word document.
I'm a horrible typist.
So now that's in there and it's just a picture. No one gets, if somebody double clicks it, they don't get the data.
If I go here, let me just show you what happens if I go here and copy command C that thing.
And I go here into my document and command V paste it.
All right.
It's pretty much the same thing. It looks a little different because it's not perfect. But look what happens if my competitor
clicks this.
Oops.
Cancel our right clicks it.
It can say
select data in Excel.
So you actually are sending them the spreadsheet that you just made as well as the document. So
that's where that could be a problem.
And there's some tricks to having a picture in Word look right as well. If you highlight a, so let me get rid of this thing.
I hate that. I don't like it.
I can go here and say format picture.
I can change the size of it. So oops, it was supposed to be five inches. So it's, it was six. So I do that. And now it's five inches wide by about three inches tall.
So that's one thing. The other thing is to decide how it looks on the page. So you can go to this rap text function.
And like, you can say the one that I usually use is top and bottom.
Because then I can drag this anywhere on the page that I want.
All right, and it'll, it'll move the text around the picture in a funny in an interesting way.
So anyway, lots to learn lots of options, lots of functions.
Any ideas, comments, criticisms.
Do you do it a better way? Does anybody, did anybody find a better way to do some of this stuff? I guess would be a good question.
Yeah, my daddy, he's like a extreme expert Excel. And he helped me a lot because I am not Excel whatsoever.
And so he helped me and taught me some cool tricks and stuff and how to make it where like no one can go in and look at your data and stuff.
And the other thing that I realized is that when I finished my Excel project, I did not put it into Word. And I forgot to do that.
Oh, you better send it to me sometime before Monday. Yeah, if you want to.
But how many points will be taken off?
10,000.
No, I don't know.
The grading is going to be all over the chart on this because it is tough to grade, like I said in class. So if you're out of time and don't want to do it, that's fine.
You can take your lumps. It won't be much worse than a 90.
But you say you know how to do it, right?
It would take you 30 seconds to do it and email it to me.
All right, so anyway, think about that.
David, are you okay? That was kind of quick and dirty.
It's funny though, because it took me and my dad like an hour and a half just to make the graph because he forgot how to do it.
Yeah.
And then he's just sitting there like, oh, what happened to the press that president and it's all done.
Not to mention he was on a line chart not a scatter chart. So,
I'm supposed to match what's in the.
Oh, he did a line chart.
Yeah, so the set see that.
Let me close this word document. I really don't want to save that. Don't save it.
Close Excel. No, there it is.
Give me my sheet back.
Oh, I did close it.
All right, I can't even use my own computer. Oh no, I just screwed up everything I did.
That was a bad click.
That was a bad click.
The frustration is real.
Yeah, so don't do what I just did. So there's times when it should have asked me, are you really sure you want to get rid of that.
And I went too fast. So I had minimized it. And when I tried to reopen it, it said, you're trying to reopen the document you want to revert to the original version and I should have said no.
That that was my bad.
What was I going to show you before I totally get off track there.
David said it took forever to make a graph and there was a one click thing.
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, so.
Yeah, so if you go here and say chart, and you make a line graph.
Yeah, sometimes these things are okay but see none of these are smooth lines.
It's always going to just draw.
Yeah, so it did something there so see it's always drawing straight lines between the data points.
Whereas if you go to a scatter plot, you can say make a smooth line scatter plot and see how that looks different now.
It's really easy to change the type of plot. If you find Oh well, I really don't want the data points to show. You can go here and say a smooth line scatter plot with no data points showing and so forth.
It's really easy once you have some data picked or highlighted or what like I did here. It's real easy to go in and just play with the different charts let's see what happens if I make it in try to make it into a 3D surface.
Well there you go.
So you're looking pretty sharp now. It doesn't mean anything but.
Yeah, I did something didn't I.
3D stacked area chart. 3D stacked area chart. Whoa, dude, that looks awesome. It's useless but stacked bars.
Okay, so, oh pie charts everybody likes pie right bar pie chart.
There's a lot of cool options and sometimes it's fun just to take your data and play around with it and stuff like that so.
I'm so upset with myself.
I know what I'm going to do. I know what I'm going to do.
I never said so alright so lesson that you learn on day one of dealing with Microsoft is I didn't save it as an intermediate file so at some point.
So tip when I'm working on a real project like for my job or something.
If it looks right, I'm going to save it. I'm going to do a command s and save it. I saved my intermediate steps, because you'll you might accidentally do what I did and boom, all your, your, we've been on the phone here for an hour.
And my work is gone I got to start over so that's always a bad feeling right so.
Any other observations questions comments.
Alright, well thank you guys for showing up you make me feel like you love me and that's always good so.
And Microsoft crashed on me so that's not good either.
It might be the fact that I'm doing zoom and Microsoft and Microsoft doesn't like the Chinese or something like that. I don't know.
All right, yo.
I'm still sharing my desktop with you guys. I'll get this thing.
All right. Anyway, I guess I'll sign out and catch all on the flip flop.
All right, see y'all later.
Thank you.
