Lecture 2, The Doctor in Literature, Imposter or Superman
My next two lectures are going to be about images of doctors in literary texts, modern
texts, but also older texts.
And the title I'm using for this one is The Doctor in Literature, Imposter or Superman.
And I want to sort of negotiate the distance between these two terms.
They would seem to be incompatible with each other.
First, why should we look at older depictions of doctors?
One answer could be just curiosity.
But another is that we will discover how little dignity and power the earlier texts ascribe
to physicians.
And this comes as a shock, given the regard that doctors are held in, or at least were
held in, in our own society.
This can be humbling, and it can be tonic also.
And it can provide a kind of shock of recognition.
We will see that there are certain things in these older texts that haven't changed
all that much.
The first absolutely larger-than-life figure that one needs to deal with is Molière, the
very great French writer of comedies in the 17th century.
Molière inherits already a view of doctors.
It's a farcical view of doctors.
He never treats doctors with any seriousness.
He picks up from Rabelais, a kind of learned tradition and a body tradition about doctors,
and from the Comédie de l'Arte, which is the Italian kind of mime comic tradition that
he inherits in the early 17th century, one of the standard types in the performances of
the Comédie de l'Arte is a doctor, a doctor who spouts Latin phrases that no one understands,
a doctor who usually kills as much as he cures, and a doctor who frequently blocks the wishes
of the young with the old male doctor who is standing in the way of a couple that wants
to get married.
And many Molières plays a hinge on these kinds of conflicts as well.
The first Molière text that I would cite is a text in 1666 called the Med Saint-Marc
de la Luy, which is the doctor in spite of himself.
And it's not one of Molière's greatest plays.
But what is interesting for our purposes is that in this play we see how easy it is to
pretend to be the doctor.
That's what the plot's about.
A man who has at one point served a doctor is called upon by the plot to perform medicine.
And he figures out it's not very hard.
They beat him into doing it.
He keeps answering the wrong.
He keeps saying, I'm not a doctor.
They hit him.
So he says, OK, I am a doctor.
If I am a doctor, what do doctors sound like?
Well, they speak a lot of Latin gobbledygook.
So I can do that.
He does it.
And you realize as soon as he starts spouting Latin phrases about disease and about treatment,
everybody takes him to be a doctor.
Molière wants to show just how simple it is, how easy it is to fool people.
He also adds that there is the special advantage that people pay you for your services and
when they die, they don't take the money back, unlike almost any other profession you could
be in, where there would be a kind of reality check, not in medicine, you're home free.
One of the last plays that Molière wrote is called Le Malade Imagineur, which is the
imaginary invalid.
And I think it's one of his great plays.
It's about what we think of as a modern phenomenon, which is hypochondria, psychosomatic illness.
And one of its chiefs character is Argonne, who is cursed with hypochondria.
And Argonne takes his rightful place in Molière's parade of lunatic figures, figures who see
the world according to the diseased optic that is driven by their particular humors
or their particular take on the world, and nothing can straighten them out.
Molière's plays are fascinating because they're monstrous plays.
Argonne plays about people whose obsessions cannot be schooled or somehow gotten past,
that the obsessive characters are the strongest people in Molière.
And in this case, he has added the hypochondriac to his list of vice characters.
Argonne is obsessed with his body.
He's obsessed with its symptoms.
He's obsessed with protocols, with purging, with enemas, with leeches, with bloodletting,
with diuretics, and a very unintended irony of this play is that Argonne is so obsessed
with medicine that he wants to marry his daughter to a physician in order to keep the doctor
close by in the family.
Now, the funny thing here is that in our day, that's not funny at all.
There's many, many Americans think that the best thing you could do would be to marry
your child to a physician, guaranteed financial security, the greatest thing in the world.
The funny thing is that it's funny in the 17th century.
Physicians have no status.
And that the young doctor who is found to be the right candidate, he's the son of an
older doctor, his name is Thomas Diafouaris, he's presented as a fool.
He's presented as an awkward character who has no poise, no finesse, no social rank whatsoever.
So it's very much unlike our own contemporary dream about physicians as a great catch.
In this play, we're not spared very much.
We see doctors presented in a whole range of ways.
We see them catering to the sick like the leeches that they prescribe.
And we also see the anger that they experience when their remedies and prescriptions are not
followed.
I thought I would treat you to one of those little scenes.
This is when the doctor, Monsieur Poulgogne, learns that Argonne hasn't followed the prescription,
hasn't done what he was supposed to do.
And I'm only going to read you the doctor's own responses.
You've got to imagine this as punctuated by people sputtering and trying to get a word
in edgewise.
The doctor will not listen to them trying to say, no, I didn't mean it.
It was her fault.
It was his fault.
Here goes the doctor.
I've just learned some fine news.
I'm trying to translate this so it may sound awkward at times.
People are making fun of my prescriptions that refuse to give you the remedy that I prescribed.
Now that is some boldness, a strange rebellion of a patient against his doctor, a plaster
that I myself had taken the pleasure of composing, invented and formed according to all the rules
of art, and was supposed to have a magnificent effect on your insides to send it back with
contempt.
This is an exorbitant action.
This is an enormous attack against medicine.
This is a crime of les facoutés, which means it's like attacking the professors.
This cannot be punished enough.
I declare to you that I break all commerce with you.
I no longer want to be associated with you at all.
You've got to remember it's always being punctuated by them trying to sputter their way out of
this.
And moreover, to finish all connection with you, I am clearing out to have contempt for
my plaster.
I would have soon cured you.
I was going to clean your body and to evacuate from it all of its bad humors.
All I needed was about a dozen medicines and I could have emptied your sack.
And since you didn't want to get healed by my hands, since you have withdrawn from the
obedience that one owes one's doctor, since you have declared yourself a rebel to the
prescriptions that I ordered for you, I have this to say to you.
I abandon you to your bad constitution, to the interpretness of your intestines, to the
corruption of your blood, to the bitterness of your bile, to the feculence of your humors.
And I wish that within four days you should fall into an incurable state, that you would
then fall into bradypepsi, and from bradypepsi into dyspepsi, and from dyspepsia into apopepsia,
and from apopepsia into leientory, and from leientory into dysentery, and from dysentery
into hydropsia, and from hydropsia into the loss of life, where your madness will have
conducted you.
This has its effect on the stage.
Doctors are hardly the kind of noble, objective figures who are above petty feeling in Malier.
You can see a lot of peak in that particular sequence.
Well, as funny as I think that scene is, the play ends in a way that some of Malier's
greatest comedy is in, which is in total lunacy, complete madness.
It ends with a ballet where Argon, instead of being healed, because healing cannot happen
in Malier, as I said, the people with the obsessions cannot be pulled out of them, instead
he is in a mock way inducted into the medical profession.
And you have surgeons and doctors speaking peak Latin at the end of this thing, as Argon
has brought in.
I want you to hear what this sounds like, and even without much Latin, you may get some
of it.
Habit grandam fievrom com ridublamentis, grandam dolorem capitis, contribulazione spiriti,
laxamento of interest, that's laxative troubles in the stomach, grandam in supermalam ocote,
had problems there, com grandadificultate, with great difficulty, op pena a respirare,
and trouble breathing, vayas mijidire, tell me then, docte bacheleria, student of medicine,
quid ili facere, what must be done, and what is the doctor, or the student of medicine
who is Argon, say to him, clisterium donore, poste assegnare, insuita purgare, to give
the plaster, then to bleed, and then to purge.
At this point, the chorus claps, because this is the classic procedure.
He is declared worthy of entering into the profession.
The doctor then asks him again, me, because a lot of French in this thing, too, si melodia
opinionatria, if the disease is stubborn, non vuol se guarire, doesn't want to be cured,
quid ili facere, then what do you do?
The answer?
Clisterium donore, poste assegnare, insuita purgare, and then he adds, resignare, ripegare,
or reclisterisare, to give the plaster, then to bleed, then to purge, and then to reblead,
and to repurge, and to repaster.
At the end, he is declared and inducted into the medical profession, and they give him,
it sounds exactly the way the Brown honorary degrees are given out here, donotibi e concedo,
I hear our president speaking this language every year, I give to you at this point, virtutim
e prisiansim, the virtue and the power, here's the power he's given, medicandi, practice medicine,
purgandi, to purge, senande, to bleed, persande, to pierce, taiande, to prune, cupande, to cut,
accidente, and to kill, impune per totam terrum, impunitivly throughout the world.
That is the doctor's degree, that is how one becomes brought in.
I think it's useful to have medical students read that, I think it's fun to see just what
a laughing stock the doctor was, how pretentious his formulas were, and of course the older
records were such that doctors did kill as much as they cured.
Moreover, this Latin, in fact, tells us something about the closed, hermetic, professional jargon
of doctors.
How many times have you heard doctors talk to you about your disease or your illness,
or talk among each other, in ways that only an initiated figure could possibly follow?
So the arcane terminology, in fact, is still with us today, it characterizes all the professions,
such as medicine.
The last thing I would say, and it has a kind of unintended pathos here, is that what Mollier
could not have planned was to die in this role.
He dies actually virtually on stage, playing Argonne.
So there's a kind of horrible irony in this text, that in playing the hypochondriac, he
himself perishes tragic ending.
Mollier is hard on doctors.
He mocks them.
He ridicules their pretensions, their abuses.
He undercuts their claims.
And this note is sounded in many artistic texts, well beyond Mollier.
I'm going to jump, even though most of this lecture is on earlier texts, I'm going to jump
into a modern text, it's not a literary text, it's a film, it's one of my favorite films
by Ingmar Bergman, it's called Wild Strawberries, I don't know if you've seen it, it was made
in the late 50s.
Wild Strawberries is the story of a very distinguished and recognized physician, Isak Bari, who
is being honored by receiving an honorary degree, which is a very rare event in Scandinavia,
and he has, the film is about the drive from Stockholm to Lund, where he's going to receive
this degree.
I say that's what the film is about.
What the film shows us are a series of dreams and flashbacks and nightmares, as he makes
this road journey, not just from Stockholm to Lund, but a temporal journey throughout
his own past, and comes to see that underneath this record of apparent triumphs and achievements,
for which he's being honored, is a much uglier story of failure, of denial, of human neglect,
of his family, and of others.
And among the nightmares is a medical nightmare, and it seems to me it comes almost right out
of Malier, except that it has a bitterness and a kind of frightening dimension that
you don't find in comedy.
In this nightmare, flashback, we are seeing the lecture hall where Bari was a medical
student, and where he, in fact, was a medical professor, and used to hold his own lectures
and exams.
Now, he's being forced to be a student, and he sits down, and the professor says, do you
have your examination book with you?
Yes, here it is.
Thank you.
I read him the book, he flipped through it distractedly, and then he gestured toward
the microscope.
Will you please identify the bacteriological specimen in the microscope?
Take your time.
I rose, stepped up to the instrument, and adjusted it, but whatever I did, I couldn't find any
specimen, and in the film you see just nothing but blur as he looks into the microscope.
The only thing I saw was my own eye, which stared back at me in an absurd enlargement.
There must be something wrong with the microscope.
The professor bends over, looks into it, looks at me seriously, shakes his head, there's
nothing wrong with the microscope.
I can't see anything.
Sit down, the professor says.
I sat down, no one moved or said anything.
Will you please read this text, the professor says.
He points to the blackboard, Bari looks at the blackboard, and we have these words on
the blackboard.
What does it mean?
I don't know.
Oh really?
I'm a doctor, not a linguist.
Then let me tell you, Professor Bari, that on that blackboard is written the first duty
of a doctor.
Do you happen to know what that is?
Yes, if you just let me think for a moment, take your time.
Doctor's first duty, doctor's first duty, doctor's, I've forgotten.
A cold sweat broke out on my forehead, but I looked at the professor in the eye, he leaned
and spoke in a calm tone.
A doctor's first duty is to ask forgiveness.
Oh of course, now I remember, and boy your laughs and there's dead silence around him.
And the last part of this torture scene, because that's what it is, it's a scene of humiliation.
It's a scene of a distinguished professor being brought all the way back, being erased
from achievement into ignorance, humiliation.
Finally, there is a patient lying there on the table.
Will you make, please, an amendment, amnesis and diagnosis of this patient?
Boy, you said, but the patient is dead.
At that moment, the woman arose and began laughing as if she'd heard a great joke.
And the professor writes in his examination book, what are you writing?
My conclusion, and what is that?
That you are incompetent.
Incompetent?
Furthermore, you were accused of some smaller but nonetheless serious offenses, indifference,
selfishness, lack of consideration.
Well this has all the makings, of course, of an inside job, of the punishment that we
meet out against ourselves, of the honorary degree that we receive as being fraudulent,
of us being frauds, fakes, and of someone finding us out.
I think most people in their lives have dreams at one time or another of this sort.
Bergman has a particularly punitive imagination, and so he wants to rub it in.
But this modern view of an accomplished doctor's sense of being a fraud suggests that my two
terms, imposter and Superman, are not that incompatible.
I want now to turn to Superman and look a bit at a couple of texts that show us the image
of the doctor as a person of great power.
And then to see what kind of valuation is placed on this power.
And we will see that the first author I'm going to look at is the American writer Hawthorne.
In the Scarlet Letter, and not the recent film that's been made of it, but the actual
text itself, Dr. Chillingworth, Roger Chillingworth is one, I think, of American literature's
most disturbing physician portraits.
He's cold, merciless, probing, and he is intent on violating the secrecy and the sanctity
of others.
He is presented to us as a satanic observer.
And it's not an accident that this portrayal of Chillingworth coincides with the moment
in American medical history when techniques of auscultation, the use of the stethoscope,
are just entering American practice.
They're coming from France at this point in American medical circles.
And so it's as if on the science side of it we have improved technical means of hearing
the patient's illness, and on the writer's side of it we have a kind of questioning as
to what this means to get closer and closer to the patient's illness, to understand what
is wrong with the patient.
Because in Hawthorne's hands, this knowledge, this improved, increased knowledge that you
have of your patients can become evil if it is devoid of love.
Chillingworth invades his patients.
In this novel, I'm sure you remember, he in particular scrutinizes the preacher Demsdale,
who is the unacknowledged father of Hester Prenn's child, Pearl.
Demsdale does not have the courage to make known to the world his involvement with Hester
and that he has sired this child.
Instead, he keeps a secret within his breast throughout the novel.
He's tortured by this.
And at the end of the novel, Hawthorne in his characteristic teasing fashion says that
some people at the end, when Demsdale bears his breast, actually saw written in Demsdale's
chest the letter A. You recall the A is embroidered in Hester's clothing for adulterers.
But we are also to understand that Demsdale, by dint of not acknowledging his own guilt
and participation, literally has it written into his flesh, although Hawthorne refuses
to say that this was for certain truths, as this might have been the case.
In any event, it's that A that Chillingworth is out to discover.
He wants to see it.
And so, when Demsdale finally takes a tortured nap and Chillingworth is there, like a hawk
observing him, here is how Hawthorne describes the doctor's discovery of his patient's ill.
After a brief pause, the physician turned away.
But with what a wild look of wonder, joy and horror.
With what a ghastly rapture, as it were, too mighty to be expressed only by the eye and
features, and therefore bursting forth through the whole ugliness of his figure and making
itself even riotously manifest by the extravagant gestures with which he threw up his arms
toward the ceiling and stamped his foot on the floor, had a man seen, old Roger Chillingworth,
at that moment of his ecstasy.
He would have had no need to ask how Satan comports himself when a precious human soul
is lost to heaven and won into his kingdom.
But what distinguished the physician's ecstasy from Satan's was the trait of wonder in it.
We are not far from the Garden of Eden, from knowledge itself being evil, from being man's
fall, and the term that Hawthorne twice uses ecstasy etymologically means to ex-faces,
to move from one place.
And it's as if knowledge is now figured as a journey for me into you.
It's a kind of violation, it's a kind of breaking and entering scheme, and it marks much of
Hawthorne's work.
The prying figure is central to Hawthorne, and his intentions are always ambivalent.
Critics have said that the relation of the observer to the observed and frequently the
observer as a doctor trying to figure out what makes people tick is, in fact, a sexualized
relationship.
There's a power relationship, it's a libidinal relationship, it's a displaced relationship.
And we can't miss the fact that it's also emblematic of the position of a writer, that
a writer, to create a character, enters into them the same way.
Hawthorne thought about his own practice pretty much the way he renders Chillingworth as a
person who sees into his people in order to render them.
Henry James adopted the same device of the prying narrator who tries to ferric out people's
secrets, and the gradual sense that that is a moral transgression, once again what I said
about Hawthorne, that the entry into another without love is evil.
Now I want you to think about the application of that to medicine.
Medicine is an entry into others.
It is an entry into the inner circuitry, the organic life of a patient who displays symptoms
on the flesh and experiences pain.
And we're going to explore this theme in this course even further.
That medical knowledge is not just achieved by imaging pictures, although we have magnificent
images now which can give us a picture of our inside without having to go in.
We don't have to surgically act in order to have X-rays or CAT scans.
Nonetheless, the doctor in order to enter into patients to make knowledge of what is
occulted and hidden to the view of us, that gesture, that act can have surprising moral
disturbing dimensions.
Another Hawthorne figure who is of interest to us here is the protagonist of a short story
called the birthmark.
He too is a scientist physician.
His name is Alemer, and he is more of a Faustian figure than Chillingworth, and his patient
is his wife, Georgiana, who was presented to us by Hawthorne as a very beautiful woman
with one problem, a birthmark.
And her husband's fixation as a man of science is to remove this blemish.
He thinks he has the sweet science to do it.
Georgiana, has it never occurred to you that that mark upon your cheek might be removed?
And she says that other suitors in the past have found it added to her beauty, but not
her husband.
Upon another phase, perhaps, it might reply to her husband, but never on yours, no, dearest
Georgiana.
It seems so nearly perfect from the hand of nature that this slightest possible defect,
which we hesitate whether to term a defect or a beauty, shocks me as being the visible
mark of earthly imperfection.
Hawthorne compares this man to Pygmalion, who tries to take a sculpture and mold it
to his own liking.
We cannot miss the gender dimensions of this.
A male scientist sculpts and models a female figure to his wants to make her conform to
his views.
And this text, like so much of Hawthorne's, is filled with libidinal implications.
We have Elmer has a dream, and in this dream he puts a knife into her, and the deeper
went the knife, the deeper sank the hand, until at last its tiny grasp appeared to have
caught hold of Georgiana's heart.
He dreams that he's plunging a knife into her.
I think that has its own phallic dimensions as well.
In order to remove this birthmark, well as anybody probably anticipates, this is going
to end badly, that he will in fact remove the birthmark by giving her extremely potent
medicine, but this potent medicine will in fact kill her.
And there I think is a meditation about pharmacology, that we put in fact powerful chemicals into
the body to combat conditions in the body, and we can think even of chemotherapy, and
it is never clear whether the remedy could be worse than the disease.
Hawthorne presents this, as I said, a Faustian story of overreach of a man who grows too
far as she is dying.
His wife tells him, my poor Elmer, you have aimed loftily, you have done nobly, do not
repent that was so high and pure feeling, you have rejected the best that earth could
offer.
Elmer, dearest Elmer, I am dying.
The other figure I want to mention is the German playwright Buchner, who himself came
from a very distinguished medical background, family that had been physicians since the
16th century.
He himself produced his work in the 1830s.
He was a medical doctor, a brilliant medical student, who wrote a thesis on the cranial
nerves of fish, a thesis that was so fine that they waved to his oral examination and
appointed him on the spot a lecturer in comparative anatomy and speculative philosophy at the
University of Zurich.
He started this position in 1836, in October, and he died in February of 1837 of typhus.
Buchner has a fascination with nervous systems of all creatures, including human beings.
And the text that I want to draw on is a text called Wojtsek.
It's the first proletarian drama it's written in the early 1830s.
It's a study of violence, it's a study of domestic and sexual violence, and it's causes.
It's also one of our first documentary dramas.
It's based on three real cases of a man killing the woman he was involved with.
And in this play, the doctor plays at a very remarkable role.
He is one of the consummate bullies of the play, the way he beats up on the title character
Wojtsek.
The play is a kind of caricature of the way medicine imposes its will on others, treats
them as specimens, treats them as guinea pigs.
And so Wojtsek will be used by the doctor, not just to create knowledge, but as a kind
of screen board for the doctor's sense of power.
Take note of this man, the doctor tells his medical students, and you've got all the students
around him with Wojtsek there.
For a quarter of a year, he hasn't eaten anything but peas.
Notice the result.
Feel how uneven the pulse is there in the eyes.
Wojtsek is beginning to black out.
Encourage just a few days more Wojtsek and then it'll be all over.
Feel him, gentlemen.
Feel him.
And the students come up to Wojtsek and they put their hands all over him and they palpate
him.
Apropo Wojtsek, wiggle your ears for the gentleman.
I mean to show it to you before he uses two muscles.
Come on, hop to it.
There's something obscene in this depiction of this man being felt, palpated, all for
the knowledge, partly I think for the delight of the doctor and the medical students.
He is also tortured.
We see scenes where he is tortured by the story of his wife's infidelity.
The captain and the doctor are very deliberately telling him that his wife is fornicating with
this brute of a drum major who comes into town.
And as the captain tells him the story, the doctor stands there and offers medical commentary.
Your pulse, Wojtsek.
Your pulse, short, hard, skipping, irregular.
And Wojtsek is responding to the story in a very different language.
Captain, the earth is hot as hell.
For me, it's ice cold.
Ice cold.
Hell is cold, I'll bet.
It can't be.
God, God.
It can't be.
Doctor, facial muscles, rigid, tense, occasionally twitching, posture, tense.
So as Wojtsek goes through a kind of cavalry of what is happening to his life, all that
the doctor can do is to give us a kind of clinical description of what is going on, what the
body looks like.
I think that Buchner, as a man of medicine and a man of science, is obsessed with making
us see something of the reach of medical and artistic imagination and knowledge, how different
their discourses are, how different their descriptions of the human subject might be.
Wojtsek talks about hell being cold, a very brilliant description of what he's feeling,
and the doctor describes his pulse and describes the twitching facial muscles.
These are different ways of apprehending human emotion, human suffering.
Neither is wrong, but we want to see how different their take is.
Here's another example of it.
This is earlier in the play.
This is the doctor who sees Wojtsek peeing in the street.
I saw it, Wojtsek.
You pissed on the street.
You pissed on the wall like a dog.
Wojtsek says, the call of nature, which is the only law that Wojtsek understands, and
the doctor is furious.
He's been giving him a special diet, and he wants to observe his urination, and he wants
him to pee only when it's appropriate.
The doctor, but pissing on the wall, I have it in writing because he had contracted not
to do that.
I saw it all, saw it with my own eyes, watch where the doctor was when he saw it.
I was just holding my nose out the window, letting the sun's rays hit it so as to examine
the process of sneezing.
The doctor's going to sneeze and then make an experiment of it.
Sneezing is one of the few instances where the body simply cannot be observed in the
kind of rational, analytic way the doctor wants to.
But Wojtsek answers the doctor, and this is where I want to again emphasize these two
languages.
Sometimes you've got a certain character, a certain structure, but with nature it's
something else.
You see, with nature, and he cracks his knuckles, that's like, well, how should I put it?
And he's trying to find words for this.
Wojtsek, you're philosophizing.
Doctor, have you seen anything of double nature?
When the sun's standing high at noon and the world seems to be going up in flames, I've
heard a terrible voice speaking to me.
Now that is the language of art.
That is the metaphoric heart of this play.
Wojtsek speaks apocalypse.
The world is going up in flames, and a voice speaks out of the heavens to him.
How is that going to be labeled by the doctor?
Wojtsek, you've got an aberratio.
Income the Latin terms.
We're not very far from Malier here.
You've got an aberratio.
Wojtsek continues.
He puts his finger to his nose.
The Toadstools doctor, there, that's where it is.
Have you seen how they grow in patterns?
If only someone could read that.
Well, this is enough for the doctor really to have a heyday.
More Latin.
Wojtsek, you've got a marvelous aberratio mentalis parcialis.
Second species, beautifully developed.
Second species.
So once again, the metaphoric language of madness, if you wish, of the visionary state
if you want, but the doctor having a Latin label for it, tagging it, putting it into
his little book of categories.
This is Buchner thinking out loud, it seems to me, about his own multiple identities.
About Buchner is the man who studies cranial nerves and fish, is a lecturer in comparative
anatomy, but also Buchner who is a revolutionary figure in politics, who is an activist trying
to foment revolution in Germany, and of course Buchner as a playwright.
All of that comes across in this comparison and this conflict of languages, of perceptions,
of the bite that science and the bite that art has on reality and on our feelings.
This is the visionary versus the scientific reading of the world.
This is also, I think, the Superman figure, if you wish, given to us as a caricature,
as a figure of considerable power, rational power, but also cultural power, the doctor
is in a position of authority, Wojtsek in this play is a menial, and we see it again
the way Hawthorne presents it as without charity, without love, as a form of exploitation,
as a form of sadism.
The last text that I want to invoke is a modern text, and I want you to be thinking about
the Hawthorne story, the birthmark, which I alluded to.
The birthmark is the man who overreaches his limits, an easy story for us to read because
he's given to us as such a kind of Faustian, arrogant figure, Elmer in Hawthorne's story.
And we can see that in tampering with his wife's beauty and trying to make her better
than she was, he is going to be punished, he is violating the natural code, trying to
break into it, this will not be allowed.
Hawthorne has presented those themes in such a way that we are hardly challenged.
It's easy, we can see that story coming.
This next text is written by Richard Seltzer, who is one of the premier doctor-writers of
our time, he's still writing, he's not practicing anymore, he was at Yale New Haven for years,
and a professor also at Yale, a surgeon, Confessions of a Knife is one of his books, Mortal Lessons
is one of his books.
The story that I'm going to refer to is a story called Imelda, and it's a story that
gives us, I think, a very special view of the doctor as Superman.
It's a modern parable about science as art.
You recall earlier I talked about C.P. Snow and the two cultures and the great divide
that separates art and science, and I just stressed that in Buchner, the two languages
that seem to be so incompatible between science and art.
In this story, Imelda, we see the work of a doctor who in fact qualifies as an artist.
Now what kind of doctor could be an artist?
Well, if you think about it, there's one that comes to mind, surgeon, and the one that comes
most perfectly to mind would be the plastic surgeon.
His material, or her material, is precisely the flesh of the human body, which can be
remade, re-sewn, re-searchered, recomposed, recombined.
So this is a parable about a plastic surgeon who taught where Seltzer was a medical student,
and it's told from the point of view of Seltzer as a student.
This man, Hugh Franciscus, is revered by students as a kind of demigod.
The term that Seltzer uses is he had the appearance of a prophet.
Now surgery has only recently acquired this kind of status.
If you read any of, before antibiotics and before sepsis and antiseptics were discovered,
surgery was considered a very brutal profession.
They were essentially glorified barbers, limb hackers.
They did not have much prestige and dignity in earlier centuries, but an art century that
of course has changed.
This man, Hugh Franciscus, each year takes a group of medical students with him on a
field trip to Honduras or to some other Latin American country, where there's great poverty
and where the people can benefit from his services.
He will perform feats almost of magic on the locals.
And his procedure is to do a kind of before and after ceremony.
He will photograph the patient with the patient's terrible blemishes, what has to be corrected.
He will then perform his plastic surgery.
Then there will be an after photograph and these slides will be brought back to the medical
school and six weeks later shown to the medical students.
That's what he's been doing for generations.
And that's why the students revered him.
Well in Honduras, hot, dirty, poor, dusty, Hugh Franciscus meets this child whose name
is Imelda, shy, thin young girl, comes in with her mother hiding her deformity.
She will not let it be seen.
We know that it is a complete unilateral left-sided cleft lip and cleft palate.
Finally, Franciscus pulls back her arm and here's what we see.
Set as it was in the center of the girl's face, the defect was utterly hideous.
A nude robbery, pardon me, a nude robbery insect that had fastened there.
The upper lip was widely split all the way to the nose, one white tooth perched upon the
protruding upper jaw projected through the hole.
Some of the bones seem to have been gnawed away as well, above the thing, clear almond
eyes and long black hair reflected the light, below a slender neck where the pulse trilled
visibly.
Under our gaze the girl's eyes fell to her lap where her hands lay palm upwards half open.
She was a beautiful bird with a crushed beak and tense with the expectation of more shame.
Franciscus plans to rebuild this face.
He makes his markings, where he's going to cut, how he's going to reposition the flesh.
The next morning she is brought to the operating room, she is prepped for surgery and in some
freakish accident she dies under the anesthesia before he can operate.
With great pain he forces himself with his very weak Spanish because that's why Seltzer
has been brought along as an interpreter.
He forces himself, the doctor, to tell the mother.
But the mother misunderstands, she thinks that he has done the surgery.
And the next day Seltzer as a student meets the mother and she says, well at least my
daughter will meet her maker with all of her beauty restored.
And Seltzer realizes this is impossible.
Can't be done.
And then he realizes as the child later he learns is being taken to the cemetery that
she has been transformed, the surgery has been performed.
And Seltzer has to imagine how this could happen that this dead child was operated on
in these primitive settings with a candlelight.
This doctor returned with his scalpel and his instruments and he performed this surgery
on a dead child so that the mother would have a recomposed figure for eternity.
Six weeks later the photographs are being shown in school and all of a sudden the picture
of a melda before.
After this hideous deformation Seltzer is operating the slide machine and he knows
that the next picture is a picture of this child who has been altered.
He knows that this will be a scandal.
This will be the end of Francisca's career because the data is clear.
The child died prior to surgery.
Seltzer puts his hand into the machine, withdraws the slide.
Francisca's looks at him in this dark room with all of his amphitheater, with all these
students there.
There's a kind of tacit, unspoken understanding.
And the story ends with Seltzer saying that at that point on Francisca's began to reduce
his work in surgery and gradually to withdraw from the profession.
He had seen too much blood.
It is a retelling of the birthmark.
It is a version of how God-like surgeons can be, how much control over nature is possible.
It has great pathos because it is told from the perspective of the young who admire, almost
worship, the semi-divine skills of the surgeon, seeing him at the peak of his powers, and
now watching him wrestling against nature, and also against death, and then cracking
at the cost of that.
Something large, something almost Greek, it seems to me, is present in this story about
medical skill, but also about hubris, about the power, and about the powerlessness of doctors
and of gods.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Bye.
