I want to talk about trauma in this lecture and I have a number of reasons for it.
On the one hand, probably more than almost any of the subjects that I'm dealing with
in this literature and medicine series, trauma brings together the social, the cultural,
the scientific, and also the literary.
We're going to see that trauma is a rather perplexed notion within medical history itself
and that it is singularly suited for representation in literature.
Now why would it be a kind of problematic concept in medicine?
Well partly because trauma is a kind of injury that does not show.
People have always known that human beings when subjected to great violence or wound
could often have a kind of after effect.
They could often experience some form of injury where you didn't have an obvious cause effect.
They knew that shock existed and that it damaged the system,
but they didn't really have a very clear picture of it.
In terms of the discourse of psychology, trauma flits in and out of the talk.
That it doesn't seem to be an easy notion for people to settle on and to define,
partly because there is this strange sort of discordance between the effects,
people who seem to be dysfunctional, have problems,
and the causes which are not easily seen and not easily understood.
Now you can see how this challenges traditional medical thinking.
We're used to taking the view that if someone loses their motor faculties,
if they can no longer speak, if they're experiencing terrible pain somewhere,
that there should be a discernible cause for it,
a lesion or a wound or injury of some sort.
For trauma there isn't any of that, at least not in any clear way,
and therefore people are often suspicious, they don't understand.
They're dubious, like maybe you're making this up.
Where is the injury?
It's in the 19th century that trauma becomes more and more a subject of discussion
and a problem that's harder to ignore, and it is absolutely allied with the development of industrialism.
And in particular there's a considerable amount of literature on the incidence of trauma
in the creating of the great railways in Britain, the United States,
particularly when accidents would happen,
either with people working on the railways or else with passengers,
let's say there would be a minor train wreck or something like that,
and that no one would be killed, but maybe six months or a year later
you would still have complaints being made.
People would explain that they've got problems walking
or they have certain kinds of disabilities,
but that a medical examination would not in fact reveal an adequate or a convincing cause for this.
And there partly, it seems to me, legal explanations at work here as to why trauma gets more and more accepted.
Trauma became a very sort of satisfying compromise position
between people who had been injured and the financial forces behind the railways
or behind heavy industry who were in fact being sued.
Because trauma allowed you to take the view that, yes, I recognize that you have a real dysfunction,
that you were unable to perform your work or to carry out your life in the way that you had previously done,
but at the same time, there's no clear evidence here of a distinct credible medical injury.
And with trauma, you have this kind of middle ground, yes, there's an injury, even though we can't see it,
but because we can't see it, we're going to make a kind of modest settlement on this.
And that's what was often done.
It was a way for both parties to get something out of it.
Now, that's not a very exciting or high road in terms of understanding how trauma gets established,
and nonetheless, it seems to be part of the picture.
And it says something about the unease that doctors have always felt with it,
as well as the unease that lawyers have felt with it.
How do you really make sense?
How do you calibrate this?
How do you actually measure the extent to the damage when the lines that go between cause and effect are so blurred and so unclear?
It's during times of war that even more than industrial development,
that trauma moves really to the center of the medical stage.
And I want to really emphasize the fact that that tells us something else.
It tells us that trauma clearly results from great violence,
but that the understanding of trauma, the crediting of trauma, the concern with trauma,
has a lot to do with cultural issues.
It has a lot to do with moments of cultural crisis or instability.
When certain things that have appeared in the past to be self-evident, like conducting a war,
become less self-evident, become much more problematic,
become increasingly understood as potential causes for injury,
not just physical injury, but moral and emotional injury,
you can't determine that something is like that until you begin to see it in a different light.
And that's why I mean the instability in which certain kinds of stresses become underscored,
become visible to us as stresses rather than just the paraphernalia of reality.
And I want to look at a number of literary texts in which this kind of injury, wound,
but also this kind of cultural backdrop of war, of instability, is very much present.
The first writer I'm going to talk about is someone who really is in bad favor in the academy today,
and that's Hemingway. His work is not much discussed and read,
at least in a number of prestigious universities.
He's not much read in English departments.
And yet I think there's a great loss there.
I think that Hemingway's writing, particularly his early writing,
is really quite illuminating on this front.
As you probably know, as a very young man, Hemingway went to World War I.
He was in the ambulance service, and he was wounded.
And much of his early work comes out of that, a farewell to arms,
the story of Frederick Henry is very close to Hemingway's own experience.
But also the first major book that he published in our time,
a collection of short stories in 1925, is one of the finest things that he ever did.
And it's particularly suggestive in the way that it puts together its materials.
It has a series of short pieces.
Many of them deal with Nick Adams, who becomes Hemingway's surrogate young man,
going through rites of passage, going through certain kinds of adventures,
both on the continent and the war, First World War,
but also back home on camping trips, hunting, fishing, etc.
But the stories also deal with other Americans in post-World War I Europe.
And their classic vintage Hemingway, even though they're very young Hemingway,
they're very chiseled, laconic, tight-lipped kinds of narratives,
what I call the packaging of this collection is that each of these short stories
is sandwiched by tiny little vignettes that are published in italics.
And it makes for an extremely interesting collection,
because it challenges the reader to think about what the unity of this might be,
what sort of larger pattern is appearing here with these little stories
and then these little vignettes.
And I suggest that there is a pattern, and it's related very much to the issues that I'm bringing up.
It's a pattern about violence and about war and about the ways in which that violence can appear.
And I'm going to read you one or two of these little vignettes.
I'll read you these two, actually, that really are contrapuntal,
and I think you'll get a sense of what Hemingway's up to.
Minaretz stuck up in the rain out of Adrianople across the mud flats.
The carts were jammed for 30 miles along the Caragach Road.
Water buffalo and cattle were hauling carts through the mud.
No end and no beginning.
Just carts loaded with everything they owned.
The old men and women soaked through, walked along, keeping the cattle moving.
The Maritza was running yellow, almost up to the bridge.
Carts were jam-solid on the bridge with camels bobbing along through them.
Greek cavalry herded along the procession.
Women and kids were in the carts, crouched with mattresses, mirrors, sewing machines, bundles.
There was a woman having a kid with a young girl holding a blanket over her and crying, scared sick looking at it.
It rained all through the evacuation.
This is absolutely vintage Hemingway.
This also could be Bosnia, for that matter.
It's about an evacuation.
It's about people with all that they own on their backs or in carts moving.
It's about the army troops coming in and out.
And you notice the physical setting.
It's all rain, slosh, mud, and ooze.
And this is absolutely primal Hemingway territory.
The bottom line in Hemingway is slosh, ooze, and muck.
That is the ultimate reality of things.
And against that, the structures of human beings, of law, of any kind of moral code are shown to be illusory.
They're shown simply to collapse.
This is about things returning to the primeval muck.
And it's the total collapse of form.
Evacuation is the last word, and I want you to think of it in all of its dimensions.
The evacuations of the human body, the evacuations of people leaving a city under siege,
the evacuations that take place when a baby is being born.
All of that is what's packed into this passage.
As I say, this is the primal ooze, which is Hemingway's territory.
He never is very far from this.
Now, listen to this.
I said this was contrapuntal.
Listen to the second piece here, which is...
These are all brief.
This is one paragraph, and this is the fourth of the little vignettes.
It was a frightfully hot day.
We jammed an absolutely perfect barricade across the bridge.
It was simply priceless.
A big old wrought iron grating from the front of a house.
Too heavy to lift, and you could shoot through it, and they would have to climb over it.
It was absolutely topping.
They tried to get over it, and we potted them from 40 yards.
They rushed it, and officers came out alone and worked on it.
It was an absolutely perfect obstacle.
Their offices were very fine.
We were frightfully put out when we heard the flank had gone, and we had to fall back.
This is the opposite of the primal ooze.
This is the clean game.
This is the rhetorical structures of war, the game, the elegant structure, the elegant rhetoric of it.
This is that British stiff upper lip tone, frightfully, absolutely, simply priceless.
This is a language that systematically obscures the primal ooze, the muck, the reality that's in the other passage.
This is the polite chit-chat about war.
This is the language of the officers.
These are the words that ultimately are going to be put in the capital letters that Hemingway is going to write in a later book or obscene.
You can't use these words.
But this is the way in which language, pattern, cultural form, and ideology construct their own frames,
and they shield out, they buffer us from this kind of insistent materiality and muck of violence and war.
Art is also allied with this.
It's a barricade.
That's what this passage is about, about building a barricade, watching these people come out and then potting them, shooting them down.
But it's a barricade in more meanings than one, it seems to me.
Those are the elements of Hemingway's work, it seems.
Now, the violence in Hemingway is of all stripes.
I have read you pieces about the war, about people evacuating cities,
and we see other passages where they're firing squads and people are sort of just, they're trying to stand up straight to maintain human dignity,
but instead they have dysentery, liquid is coming out of them, or else they're shot and they slump down into pools of water.
It's a classic kind of event.
It's what looks like it has form and contour, and it finally just either disintegrates or turns into liquid.
One of the lines in Farewell to Arms, Frederick Henry says to the nurse,
It's perfect, friend or enema, that's what Hemingway is.
You want to keep the tight upper lip, you want to keep the body closed, you want to keep what's inside, inside.
Enema says you can't.
Enema says it's all coming out, which is what evacuation means, and that's what happens throughout Hemingway's work.
The more you understand that, the more you understand the labor that is supposed to be accomplished by these fine, high-sounding rhetorical slogans.
That this is there to prevent collapse.
And Hemingway knows that it's a fiction.
He knows that it's illusory, that the barricade can never hold.
Enema will always be the truth, can't work.
So as I said, the violence is of all stripes.
It's the typhoid that returns us to the ooze.
It's police in one story that are gunning down immigrants without even checking out who they are.
It's matadors and horses being gored in Hemingway's favorite sport, which is the bullfighting.
He talks about the guts that pour out of the horses, the matadors who themselves are bleeding.
This is his territory.
The stories that are packaged between these brief vignettes are versions of how much violence, how much trauma a person can take.
And I'd like to comment on several of these pieces.
One of them, which is one of the most perfect pieces, is called Indian Camp.
And it's a story narrated from the perspective, really, of a small boy.
It's not quite from his perspective, but it's about a small boy who we take to be a version of Hemingway.
It's Nick Adams, but very young at this point.
This story is in Wisconsin being taken by his father, who is a doctor, and Hemingway's father was a doctor,
and his uncle George, across the water in a boat because there is a difficult labor that the doctor is supposed to assist with.
A woman is having trouble, an Indian woman, giving birth to her child.
This is going to be a little educational experience.
The doctor is going to take his son, and they're going to see how father performs his work.
This lady is going to have a baby, Nick.
That's what the doctor says.
I know, Nick says.
You don't know that his father.
Listen to me.
What she is going through is called being in labor.
The baby wants to be born, and she wants it to be born.
All her muscles are trying to get the baby born.
That is what's happening when she screams.
There's a clear pedagogical dimension to this.
I am telling you what is happening.
This is a schooling educational event for you.
Watch the way I perform this.
This is what life is like.
This is how it happens.
And of course, the baby is going to be delivered.
See, it's a boy, Nick.
How do you like being an intern?
It's a difficult.
It's a caesarean delivery that the doctor has to perform,
and he has no very sophisticated equipment with him.
The doctor is very proud.
He was feeling exalted and talkative as football players are
in the dressing room after a game.
There's a sense here of great pride in showing his son
how doctors conduct the events of the body.
Now, there's a lot of pain in this story as well.
All her muscles are trying to get the baby born.
That's what's happening when she screams.
I see, Nick said.
Just then the woman cried out,
Daddy, can't you give her something to make her stop screaming?
Said Nick.
Here's what the doctor says.
No, I haven't any anesthetic.
But her screams are not important.
I don't hear them because they are not important.
The doctor says something is happening here
that is supposed to go its course.
The screams are simply ancillary.
They're peripheral.
They're background.
Don't be distracted by them.
Now, what I haven't told you about this story
is that in this hut where the woman is giving birth to this child,
or where he is aiding her to give birth to this child,
there is also her husband who has been wounded,
has cut himself on his foot, and he's lying in a cot.
And he's listening also to these screams.
And there's no attention placed on him.
He's just there.
We are told that he's there.
He had cut his foot very badly with an axe three days before.
He was smoking a pipe.
The room smelled very bad.
And then we move back into the doctor's treatment of the woman.
Well, things don't work the way they want.
The baby is delivered with all of the success that the doctor feels for it.
Very, very pleased with himself.
He thinks he should even win a prize.
Medical journal.
That's one for the medical journal.
Doing a caesarean with a jackknife and sewing it up with 19-foot tapered gut leaders.
Pretty impressive.
You're a great man, all right, the uncle says.
The doctor says, ought to have a look at the proud father.
That's the Indian who's cut his leg.
They're usually the worst sufferers in these little affairs.
I must say he took it all pretty quietly.
And this is what we get.
This story is all four pages long.
He pulled back the blanket from the Indian's head.
His hand came away wet.
He mounted on the edge of the lower bunk.
And with the lamp in one hand looked in.
The Indian lay with his face toward the wall.
His throat had been cut from ear to ear.
The blood had flowed down into a pool where his body sagged the bunk.
His head rested on his left arm.
The open razor lay edge up in the blankets.
And that's when the doctor says, take Nick out of the shanty, George.
Get this kid out of here.
We're not dealing with a birth.
We're dealing with a death.
Now, this is, I said, I think one of Hemingway's great stories.
Because it's a story that is, first of all, rich in its depiction of the meaning of pain and of violence.
That the doctors remark to his son, I don't hear her screams.
It turns out to be horribly wrong because her husband hears her screams.
Those screams are not tolerable.
The husband cannot survive the pain that his wife is going through with this delivery.
That the doctor has succeeded in saying, this is not part of the medical experience.
This is not something that one needs to attend to.
The story proves him totally wrong.
Hemingway writes a story in such a way that we realize that the amount of pain that someone has
can in fact be as determining as the scalpel that cuts the flesh.
And so the father will not be able to survive the cesarean,
even though he himself is not the one being operated on.
But what is so cunning about this story is the way it's told, and that's why it's part of trauma.
We have to go through it.
We have to negotiate the pedagogical success story,
the successful story of the birth and the outing of the child,
to then realize that it has not been a success story at all.
Only at the end, like a time-release capsule, will this story release its bitter medicine,
which is that this has been misconstrued from the beginning,
that the doctor has not understood what the real stakes are,
that the doctor's view has been terribly limited, that he has skewed reality.
So the story really has a kind of punch to it.
It has a punch in the sense of how we come to the information,
how we gradually see what has really happened to result,
and it closes with the death.
And it's also an uncanny story, it seems to me,
because the story of this Indian father,
who could not bear the shrieks of his wife with this cesarean that was being performed,
has a kind of terribly prophetic ring when we know that Hemingway's own father
was also to commit suicide, the doctor, the real doctor.
And of course, we know that Hemingway himself much later was to take his own life.
None of this could have been known when the story was written.
The story was written, published in 1925, all of these people were alive.
But it has a kind of prophetic ring to it.
It's a way of saying that under a certain amount of stress,
you simply go over the edge, you can't deal with it.
Evacuation, enema, that you cannot maintain form, discipline, and pattern.
That certain kinds of violence will simply wreak their will on you.
The next piece that I want to talk about is called The Battler,
and it's one of Nick's American stories.
He is sort of on the road in the United States,
and he encounters this very strange figure who is a prize fighter, a former prize fighter.
And this prize fighter is really not quite in his right mind,
that he has taken too many beatings, his brains have become addled,
and he is like a loose cannon, he's always ready to go off.
And he's traveling the prize fighter with this black man who's called Bugs,
who is a kind of servant friend mate for him.
And the prize fighter speaks in this very erratic, brutal fashion, scary,
whereas Bugs speaks in this very elegant, genteel pattern,
and they are about as strange a couple as you could meet.
And the story is about Nick's encounter with these two.
What made him crazy, Nick asks Bugs?
Oh, a lot of things, the Negro answered from the far.
Would you like a cup of coffee, Mr. Adams?
The black man is very, very decorous.
He handed Nick the cup and smoothed the coat he had placed under the unconscious man's head.
He has just wrapped the prize fighter on the head with a blackjack
because the prize fighter was getting ready to attack Nick.
He took too many beatings for one thing, the Negro sipped the coffee.
But that just made him sort of simple.
Now, what I'm going to read you now is the following sentence that goes with this,
and there is no background for it, and it's never going to really be interpreted,
but I want you to hear how this sort of bubbles.
He took too many beatings for one thing, but that just made him sort of simple.
Then his sister was his manager, and they was always being written up in the papers
all about brothers and sisters and how she loved her brother
and how he loved his sister.
And then they got married in New York, and that made a lot of unpleasantness.
I remember about it.
Sure, of course they wasn't brother and sister, no more than a rabbit,
but there was a lot of people who didn't like it either way,
and they commenced to have disagreements,
and one day she just went off and never came back.
A little bit later, she was an awful good looking woman,
looked enough like him to be twins.
He wouldn't be bad looking without his face all busted,
and you get the sense that the physical mauling that this man has received,
the prize fighter, the battler,
has a kind of un-really commented,
un-not-fully-statable moral, sexual, psychological aura to it,
that it's connected with this strange sort of quasi-incessuous relationship
with this woman who looked like his sister and people said it was his sister
and he got married to her and then she left.
The story is filled with weird doubles where people are replicated in some fashion or another,
and Hemingway, this is again, this is the good Hemingway,
refuses to cross the T's and dot the I's.
He is a master at giving you a story where things are elliptic, things are cryptic,
things are mentioned just in a tiny sort of little piece of pithy detail,
and it's for you to do the rest of the work.
He actually called that the fourth and fifth dimensions of writing.
He said that great writing has the fourth and fifth dimensions
because it requires the reader to add all of this to the very scant record that the text offers.
It's an extremely disciplined, tight form of writing.
The final pieces that I would refer to, I won't really look at them,
but anything in our time has this kind of quality.
One is Soldiers Home, it's about a young person, Krebs,
who returns home from the war to Oklahoma,
and about the terrible misfit, the way in which he just doesn't seem to be able to get his feet back on the ground,
the way his family cannot quite figure out what's wrong with this young man,
why hasn't he gotten acclimated, but back into the stream of things.
And the other story, which is much anthologized and much talked about,
is Big Two-Harted River, which is Nick Adams once again,
this time in the woods, going through the great Hemingway rituals of hunting and fishing,
trying to find the trout, and the kind of remarkable Hemingway style
in which you see exactly how the trout is gutted,
and you see exactly how the line is laid,
and you see exactly how the tent is pitched and how the camp is made.
The carefulness with which Hemingway goes through these small rituals of being out in the woods,
we begin to understand is rehabilitation, it's therapy.
One thinks of the Confederate soldiers who learned how to weave afterwards
because they were so damaged, that the kinds of small rituals that the Hemingway men do
is because of their damage, that if you concentrate enough on learning how to tie your shoes,
or knowing how to go fly fishing, or knowing how to pitch a tent,
that is to keep other kinds of things off your mind,
and that's the way Big Two-Harted River is written.
You sense that this person, Nick Adams, coming home from the war and now fishing,
has been wounded in ways that are not sayable.
The text will not tell you that.
All we see is this very careful, fine-grained, small, up-close effort to mend,
to put yourself back together.
So that's Hemingway.
Now, I want to look at a couple of more texts that are really far, I think,
more provocative today than Hemingway is about trauma,
and the first is called Regeneration.
Regeneration was published in 1992 by Pat Barker.
It's part of a trilogy that's just been finished now,
and it's just won a major prize in England.
And it's the story largely based on documentary information
of the pacifist poet Siegfried Sassoon in World War I,
who was a decorated officer,
and he publicly renounced the war as cruel, evil, and supported by old men.
And he returns to England and is, in fact, has a choice, more or less,
between court-martial or being sent to this psychiatric hospital for investigation.
And he elects the hospital where he encounters this doctor as a real man,
W.H.R. Rivers, who was a distinguished neurologist and also a social anthropologist,
and he tended to Sassoon at Craig Lockhart War Hospital.
All of this is on record.
Barker depicts the life at this hospital with considerable brilliance.
We see that Sassoon is only one of Rivers' patients.
We see others, and we see the dreadful effects of the war in France,
of being in the trenches with the nerve gas.
Now, we're dealing with what came to be known as shell shock in this novel.
Shell shock was a great problem.
I told you trauma is difficult for the medical authorities,
and it's even more difficult for the military authorities,
that at the time of World War I, the military code in England was totally unyielding.
If a person shirked their duty, if they refused to return to active duty,
that was called desertion, and desertion was met with capital punishment, execution.
There wasn't a lot of maneuvering room.
But as the war became more and more unsavory,
and as the numbers started to come in about the numbers of incredible deaths in this war,
and the absolute folly, the absolute lack of any kind of progress,
or even clear motives for this war,
it became harder and harder to execute soldiers who didn't want to return or couldn't return,
and of course many of them came injured back to England by their experiences.
This hospital is the place where the officers went.
There are other hospitals where the enlisted men went.
Rivers patients are a wonderful testimony to the cost of war.
They hallucinate, they have experienced horror head on,
and the story tells us what it is that has made them dysfunctional.
This burns one of Rivers patients.
Rivers had become adept at finding bearable aspects to unbearable experiences,
but Burns defeated him.
What had happened to him was so vile, so disgusting,
that Rivers could find no redeeming feature.
He had been thrown into the air by the explosion of a shell,
and had landed head first on a German corpse,
whose gas-filled belly had ruptured on impact.
Before Burns lost consciousness,
he'd had time to realize that what filled his nose and mouth was decomposing human flesh.
Now, whenever he tried to eat, that taste and smell recurred.
This is what trauma is.
That happened back there.
Now, every time he tries to eat, he can't,
because he gets this experience right back again.
Nightly, he relived the experience,
and from every nightmare he awoke vomiting.
Burns on his knees, as Rivers had often seen him,
retching up the last ounce of bile,
hardly looked like a human being at all.
His body seemed to have become merely the skin and bone casing
for a tormented, elementary canal.
His suffering was without purpose or dignity.
This is true for the characters in this story.
They are all telling Rivers about the horrors of their experience on the front,
and prior, another officer talks about the letters he has to write home.
Dear Mrs. Blogs, your son had the side of his head blown off by a shell
and took five hours to die.
We did manage to give him a decent Christian burial.
Unfortunately, that particular stretch of ground
came under heavy bombardment the day after,
so George has been back to see us five or six times since then.
They don't want that kind of a letter, he says.
These patients are hallucinating.
They're having unspeakable nightmares.
They're losing their capacities for speech,
for walking, they're dysfunctional.
Their imaginations are killing them.
That what happened to them was so violent and brutal,
so unprocessable, undigestible,
that their imagination is continuing to rework it as time goes on.
They're continuing to experience versions of it.
The imagination is really a very critical factor here.
One of the lines, it's almost a throwaway line in this text,
goes like this.
Do you know what Christ died of?
Suffocation is the answer.
Ultimately, the position being crucified
makes it impossible to go on inflating the lungs, a terrible death.
That's what I find so horrifying.
Somebody had to imagine that death.
You had to know that if you nailed someone to a cross,
they would ultimately suffocate.
Just in order to invent it as a method of execution.
River's job is to teach these people to understand their pain
so that they can be sent back to the front.
That's what his job is.
He is working in a military hospital.
He has great empathy and compassion for their pain.
Nonetheless, his position is that once they come to terms with it,
part of which means they must accept this emotional onslaught,
realize that this is not unmanly of them.
There's a very powerful gender argument here
that these officers have been brought up in the old school in Britain.
They think that any show of emotion is unacceptable.
They have to realize that their bouts of weeping, their collapses,
their inability to perform their roles,
that there is no shame attached to this, that this is okay.
And once they can make peace with it, with their own disability,
then in fact they can pick themselves up,
he hopes, and be sent back to the troops.
There's another gender argument here as well,
that the experience in the trenches is one of utter immobility,
with no capacity to live out the kind of chivalric,
glorious, adventurous versions of army warfare
that they had been told about, part of that.
Instead, it's forced captivity almost.
And the text actually says,
it's very comparable to the lives that women live.
They can't go anywhere. They can't do anything.
And that this too challenges their sense of what they have been,
so that they're sort of under onslaught in more ways than one.
It's not simply the violence coming at them.
It's being thrust into roles where everything changes the rules,
where nothing is as they had anticipated.
When Sassoon indicts the war and returns home,
he really sees it as a kind of terrible sort of trial
that the young are experiencing at the hands of the old.
He talks about the old people sitting in their clubs,
reading the newspapers and having their drinks,
talking about the war, and sending off the young to die.
Rivers himself is fascinated with the story of Abraham and Isaac,
and he says, that is the story of our culture.
It's the story of men sacrificing their sons,
fathers sacrificing their sons.
This book is an anti-edipal story.
It's not about a son killing a father,
which is ultimately brutal as it sounds,
the story of human civilization.
The next generation has to have its moment.
Instead, this is the story of the sons being killed,
eaten up by the fathers.
It's an absolutely brutal picture,
and that's what Sassoon goes back to tell the Brits,
that this is obscene.
You don't know anything about this war.
You're sending your young into these terrible situations.
The reason this book is fascinating is that,
as you read the 200 pages of Rivers' experiences with his patients,
with all of their disabilities and their horrible memories,
you begin to see the doctor himself become ill.
He begins to experience the same symptoms of his patients.
He starts to stammer.
He starts to have nightmares.
He starts to hallucinate.
He becomes feverish.
And we realize that this text is showing us
that he himself is experiencing their ailments
and is in some sense becoming shell-shocked by what he's seeing.
He's realizing the impossibility of his own position.
And in one of the most harrowing episodes of the book,
he attends the efforts of a very hard-line colleague of his
who runs the hospital for the enlisted men
where there's much more brutality.
And he watches the shock treatment
given to this young enlisted man who has become mute and silent.
And this man is systematically tortured,
electrodes are put into his mouth to make him start speaking again.
And the doors are locked.
He will not be allowed out of his room.
They keep upping the dosage of electricity.
And Rivers watches his colleague Yale
and do this to this man to create speech back in this man.
And he watches it and then he has a nightmare
and he realizes that what he had seen
is a kind of systematic silencing of a man.
The more they make him speak,
the more they are denying the experience that he's actually had.
And in the dream he has, it's a horse bit
that's being put into this man's mouth,
which was used as slaves in the United States in the Civil War.
The horse bit being shoved into someone's mouth
is the perfect model for a culture that silences its people,
that takes their mouth, their organs for utterance
and for speaking their own minds
and simply brutally changes it
and makes them into either slaves or into animals.
That's what finally happens in this book
in which Rivers discovers, gradually,
discovers it in his own flesh,
in his own physiological responses to what he's been seeing,
discovers the horror of the war.
It's about the ultimate conversion of the doctor
and in it trauma has served as a language.
It's served as an ideological, moral language.
It's as if this is the only way that the doctor could be taught.
Now, the last text that I'd like to refer to
moves from the kind of exciting high ground of war
into a more intimate personal space
and it is an utterly fascinating novel.
It's one of my very favorite novels, the very recent discovery.
It's called Exposure, written by Katharine Harrison in 1993.
And it's a text that has elements that are very sensational.
It reminds us of Mapplethorpe and his photography
and his work that is always at the borderline
between art and pornography and exploitation.
And it reminds us of the photographs of Sally Mann
who has taken all of these photographs of her own children naked
and there are many critics who say that this work is very, very suspicious.
This is the story of a woman named Ann Rogers
and she is the daughter of a famous photographer who's dead now
and her mother had died when she was being born.
The photographer, Edgar Rogers,
career consists of work that he took of her, of Ann, of the daughter.
Work that was taken of her particularly in her early years
between 6 or 8 or 9 or 10, I suppose, and about 13.
He stops photographing her when she moves fully into puberty.
The photographs that he's taken of her,
and these have become famous photographs,
are of her in the strangest positions.
It turns out that Ann Rogers is diabetic.
Edgar Rogers is a very cold man
and the relationship they've established
is that the way she can get his love is to sort of pose for him.
Pose for him in almost dead-like conditions
and so she would self-induce comatose states
and he would photograph her.
And there's a sense in which he wants to capitalize
on the almost dead status of her body,
a body in which consciousness doesn't show at all.
That's what she has thought
and so she spent her early years being his subject.
We later learned that he has also photographed her
unknowingly to her, photographed her masturbating,
photographed her having sex with her teenage friends.
And all of this is the material for an exhibit
that is coming on at the Museum of Modern Art.
And it's the event of this exhibit
that is going to create the breakdown of this novel.
This is a very, very sensational novel.
It's got a lot of things in it.
It turns out that Ann Rogers also has a major drug problem.
She takes crystal meth or speed,
which does havoc with her diabetes.
And it's also the case that she's a kleptomaniac,
that the story opens with her changing clothes in a taxi cab.
And we realize that most of what she does,
the speed, the kleptomania,
these are all pathetic, desperate efforts of a woman to get free
because her life is one of being invaded,
that the father with his photography has captured her most private moments
and there is a sense in which there is nothing that is hers,
that is off-camera.
Well, the story is an astounding story.
She, ultimately, it turns out,
is victimized in ways that even the reader has no idea
that these scenes that we start the novel with,
of her stealing, going into Bloomingdale's and Bergdorf's,
checking out the place, walking away with clothes,
these scenes we later learn are absolutely under surveillance.
In the middle of the book, we actually have a copy of a contract
between her husband and Bergdorf's,
which allows her to steal $25,000 worth of merchandise a year.
There's, of course, a 60% markup
and there's a large price tag for this contract,
but this book is studded with material about her.
We have the contract with the private detective as well,
who has been tracking her.
We have the law court documentation
when there is a trial that she's involved in
for abuse on the father's part.
We have the psychologist's report at the end of this novel
when she essentially goes over the edge.
And the reason that I'm mentioning all of these things
is that the book is about the young woman's abusive experience
as a child, the loss of love,
and the way in which the prodding, invading art of the father
was a disability for her.
But it is in a larger sense about the invasion of privacy
that is a fact of modern life.
It's about the fact of being under surveillance.
It's about the computerized information
that, in fact, all of us are subject to today,
that our medical records could have turned up
on almost anybody's screen
if they have the right modem and the right code.
It's the sense in which public life and private life
are almost indistinguishable in a modern society.
This book is a meditation about the ways
in which the gaze of the other,
whether it's the father or whether it's the camera
or whether it's the police, all get inside of you.
One of the most pathetic moments of this text,
and I'll close this lecture with this,
is when Anne Rogers is dreaming,
and she dreams, she says,
that she was on an autopsy table, that she was dead,
and when the coroner cut into me, he saw that I was empty.
When I saw the knife slip in,
when my entrails revealed with nothing inside them,
I was so relieved, I felt pure and exultant
like an angel I had lived on air.
That is the dream of someone who has been robbed,
invaded, there has been pillage in her life.
That's the form of abuse that this text is about.
Thank you.
