Lecture 7 Madness, Psychosis and Addiction
The topic of this lecture, Madness, Psychosis and Addiction, is in some ways one of the most predictable topics of this course.
You'd expect a course on literature and medicine to deal particularly with madness, perhaps less with addiction.
Because madness would seem to be a kind of irresistible subject for writing.
Obviously the point I'm going to try to be making is that the literary text and art in general give us a kind of take or an illumination on madness that adds to our clinical or scientific understanding.
Ordinarily this would be understood as giving us a picture of it from the inside and needless to say that's certainly one of my major points.
And I've been arguing that throughout this course, is that art gives us the subjective experiential dimensions of things that first personalizes experience often within the text and always through reading.
Reading in fact makes us first personalize what it is we're encountering.
I don't think one first personalizes graphs or scientific documents, but I think that one does a different sort of thing with text.
However, in addition to that, and in reference to the text that I've chosen for this lecture, I want to make an additional argument, which is that art also gives us the cultural and contextual frame for this intense subjective experience.
It links together the inner and the outer picture, and that's even putting it the wrong way.
It shows that they're inseparable. It shows that one is absolutely related to conditions and forms enables the other.
And therefore, we shall see that madness is especially, I think, understandable in those terms.
Madness is particularly in need of being seen as a cultural event because we know that the history of madness is the history of normalcy and abnormalcy of conformity and marginality.
That madness can be thought of as a construct, a construct devised by those who are in the mainstream and considered to be in possession of their faculties.
It has to be thought of as something that is also historical and cultural.
So I'll start with a brief discussion of one of the most famous instances of madness that turns out now to look like cultural history,
and that is Charlotte Bronte's Jane Eyre with its infamous madwoman in the attic, Bertha Mason Rochester.
Now, when Jane Eyre was published in the 1850s, the reading public was divided about the behavior of the protagonist, about Jane herself.
Many of the establishment males thought that this spunky, strong-willed girl was a bit nasty, uncompromising,
and she refuses to conform to the Victorian model of dustility.
Her encounters with the two strong men of the text, Rochester and San John Rivers, essentially just bring out more of her feistiness.
However, other readers at this time were moved by her plight.
It was the plight of a young governess who does not have fortune nor beauty, which is an unusual ingredient for the novel,
and a tiny little girl, really, a little woman who almost starves to death in one of the episodes when she leaves Rochester
and who almost goes mad at the beginning of the book when she's locked up in the room as a child, the red room.
Now, you remember why she leaves Rochester, that although they both love each other and they've come forth with that,
it's become, you know, something that each can discuss with the other, and he wants to marry her, and she's ready to marry him,
there is one major impediment.
It turns out that Rochester has a wife, Bertha Mason Rochester, already, who has gone mad and has been imprisoned in the attic.
I say that the readers were divided about Jane, but in 1850 the readers were not divided about Bertha Mason Rochester.
She was not a figure of any ambiguity. She has to have been a figure of great horror for the readers of mid-19th century.
I think she was a figure of great horror for Bronte herself.
Here's how she's described in the book when Jane and the reader are finally taken into her lair,
and we see her head on, because we've heard her before, but we now see her for the first time.
And I'll just read you a couple of pieces of the way she's described.
What it was, whether beast or human being, one could not at first sight tell.
It groveled, seemingly, on all fours. It snatched and growled like some strange wild animal,
but it was covered with clothing and a quantity of dark, grizzled hair.
Wild as a mane hid its head and face.
The maniac bellowed, we read, the clothed hyena stood up, or rose up and stood tall on its hind feet.
The lunatic sprang and grappled his throat viciously and laid her teeth to his cheek.
They struggled. She was a big woman in stature almost equaling her husband.
And corpulent, besides, she showed virile force in the contest.
More than once, she almost throttled him, athletic as he was.
This is a picture of a kind of physicality and bestiality that are unmistakable.
It's animalistic. She's described as hyena, matted over with hair.
A kind of great power, but also great horror, it seems to me.
Here's how the book speaks of her. Rochester speaks of her.
I don't think it's just Rochester as a male who is trying to get rid of this woman.
This is what he really believes in us.
Bertha Mason is mad and she came of a mad family.
Idiots and maniacs through three generations.
Her mother, the Creole, was both a mad woman and a drunkard.
I want you to hear that combination. A mad woman and a drunkard.
And then he learns later in his own marriage,
bound to a mad, bad and embruted partner.
Bad, mad and embruted partner.
That Bertha is, by all of the language of the text,
given to us as beyond saving, as offensive,
as transgressing all of the norms of civilized behavior.
The family, three generations of mad people.
The younger brother, a complete dumb idiot.
Rochester tells Jane later,
I found her nature wholly alien to mine.
Her taste subnoxious to me.
Her cast of mine, common, low, narrow and singularly incapable
of being led to anything higher, expanded to anything larger.
I lived with that woman upstairs for four years.
Her character ripened and developed with frightful rapidity.
Her vices sprang up fast and rank.
They were so strong, only cruelty could check them,
and I would not use cruelty.
What a pick-me intellect she had.
What giant propensities.
He speaks of his life as the hideous and degrading agonies
which must attend a man bound to a wife at once,
intemperate and unchaste.
Those are her grand abuses, her grand crimes.
Intemperate and unchaste.
A nature the most gross and pure depraved I ever saw.
We learn that she has been locked up, imprisoned,
in a parenthesis in the text.
One night I had been awakened by her yells,
parenthesis comes, since the medical men had pronounced her mad,
she had, of course, been shut up into parenthesis.
I think the word men is not accidental here.
Since the medical men had pronounced her mad,
she had, of course, been shut up.
Now, that is the way Bertha is described in the text.
Bertha is not given to us in this text as the ultimate heroine.
She is the novel's dirty secret.
She is its horror of sexuality, of female power,
of animality, of profanity, intemperate and unchaste.
But, of course, the reality of the novel is that this dirty secret
can't be kept secret.
The dirt comes out.
Her laughter punctuates the novel.
Her outbreaks are richly symbolic.
She tries to burn Rochester in his bed.
She rips apart Jane's bridal veil and she wrestles with Rochester
and she finally sends him to his ruin, at least partial ruin.
He loses one hand and he loses one eye.
Now, this is the language of art.
It's to render madness in its shocking cultural colors
and to render it so powerfully that it still lives 150 years later
when we look at it now in the text.
But 150 years later, the point I'm trying to make
is that those colors look different.
We look at the Victorian conventions,
which Bronte cannot have looked at.
They were her conventions.
That was her reality.
She was part of that system.
She breathed its air.
It was like our conventions, invisible to her,
but not to us 150 years later.
And so what we see is the politeness, the repression,
the docility of that order,
in the sense of how women are expected to behave.
We look upon that as shocking.
And on the contrary, we who have been conditioned by Freud
and by much, much that's been written about the reality of human appetite,
of libido, of id,
we look upon Bertha Mason Rochester,
intemperate and unchaste,
as something that is not so horrible,
as the condition of a locked up woman
of a person whose own nature has never been allowed to be free.
I'm not trying to make a heroine out of Bertha.
I'm not saying this is the model.
I think that she is an excessive figure.
But what I want to say is that she struck horror
into the Victorian minds in a way that she doesn't into ours.
We see her as the mad woman in the attic.
We see the locked up condition as a kind of fear and policing
that are the response to her violent expression of appetite.
Finally, we see, and no one will ever know whether Bronte saw it,
although Bronte wrote it,
the connection between the Wren-like, bird-like Jane Eyre
and the corpulent Bertha Mason Rochester,
little plain Jane who is bullied throughout the tax
by overbearing men, Rochester, rivers,
and by patriarchal values,
and the powerful, even bestial, mad woman
who can't be denied and can't be silenced
and can't be repressed.
We see one as the alter ego of the other.
So it's in seeing that that we can say that art rewrites our map
and it causes us to have a picture of madness
that is a cultural framework.
That is to say, madness, as in some sense,
inseparable from certain kinds of now visible norms.
Madness is a construct.
Those people decided that someone acting like this
had to be called mad and locked up.
The medical men made that decision.
It makes you wonder how the people who are perhaps locked up today
might be seen in 150 years.
The book that I'd like to pair with Bronte's book
is really a sibling text in more ways than one,
because it too literally has a mad woman in the attic.
It's a book that is now a classic,
although it's only been a classic for about 15 years,
20 years, maybe, 15.
And it's called The Yellow Wallpaper.
It's a very brief little story,
20, 25 pages long,
by a woman whose name is Charlotte Perkins Gilman,
and it was published in 1892.
Charlotte Perkins Gilman,
if I had talked about her in 1900,
would have been a household term for you.
She is arguably the leading,
one of the leading, at least,
woman intellectuals in the American 19th century.
She is really a remarkable feminist.
Her titles include a book called Women and Economics,
Human Work, The Home, Its Work and Its Influence.
She writes about what she calls the sexual-economic relationship
in which women are largely paid concubines by their husbands.
That is to say, they are imprisoned in the domestic sphere
and not allowed to have professional activity,
not allowed to vote.
She is a fiery spokesperson for women's rights.
She thinks that the purpose and mission of women
has nothing to do with the raising of children.
She thinks that children could be raised by professionals.
She already points to the wards of the kivots
and other social arrangements
in which children need not be brought up by their mothers.
She imagines houses,
domestic living spaces that don't have kitchens.
Why should women spend their time preparing meals?
She is aware of the terrible impact of gender roles,
particularly on young girls,
from the earliest ages on,
brought up to be mothers, to be concubines,
to lure men into their families, etc.
All of this is something that she has a very, very sharp sense of
and is very critical of
and was much, much recognized for this
at the end of the century and beginning of this one.
She herself had a very hard family life.
Her mother, we know, could not show affection,
we know it because she wrote about it,
that her mother could not embrace her
and that she would actually lie in bed at night, Charlotte,
and would wait and wait and pretend to be asleep
and that when the mother finally thought she was asleep,
the mother would then caress her
and that Charlotte wrote about trying to bluff it,
trying to fake the mother out
so that she could get this embrace,
because it would come if she could wait long enough
but often she would fall asleep herself.
She suffered herself in marriage
and in child rearing.
She had what today we would call, but this term didn't exist then,
a postpartum depression.
And she received what was then called the rest cure
from a man who was the most prominent neurologist of his time,
S. Weir Mitchell.
The rest cure was a protocol, a therapy of prolonged inactivity
for women who had nervous disorders,
nervous conditions, neurostenia.
And there is a lot to be said about the rest cure.
I wanted to read you a couple of passages
that have been written on it by the critics.
The intent of the cure, like the Victorian ideal of femininity
it's thought to instill,
was to render a woman simultaneously and paradoxically
all body and yet supposedly asexual,
a process that entails strict prohibition of intellectual activity,
fixation on physical reproductivity,
and enforcement of child-like submission to masculine authority.
Originally devised to treat soldiers
incapacitated by the trauma of battles,
so we're picking up themes that we've actually seen in Rivers.
The terror and profound lethargy that resulted were termed even in battle fatigue.
The rest cure responded to middle-class white women's trauma
of unsuccessful role adjustment,
which was called hysteria,
by instituting a rigid and highly symbolic therapeutic regimen
of enforced idleness and induced infantile dependence.
The woman was essentially, this is what Mitchell said,
at first and in some cases four to five weeks
I do not permit the patient to sit up or to sow or write or read
or to use the hands in any active way except to clean the teeth.
I arranged to have the bowels and water passed while lying down
and the patient is lifted onto a lounge for an hour in the morning
and again at bedtime and then lifted back into the newly made bed.
This is the cure that Charlotte herself was subjected to.
It's essentially infantilization.
It literally enforces the model of the Victorian woman as a kind of larger child
and it almost drove Charlotte mad.
She wrote the yellow wallpaper in response to it.
She sent it even to S. Weir Mitchell.
She actually was told that he changed his practice after that.
In this story, the protagonist is a young wife with a nervous condition.
We might call her to postpartum, she's just had a child.
And she is prescribed the rest cure by her husband who is a physician.
So this one is really a double duty story.
You've got a male doctor who is a husband taking care of this woman.
They are spending part of a summer vacation in this old mansion that they're renting.
The wife is essentially confined to an upstairs bedroom which is a very odd room.
The floor is scratched and gouged.
It appears to have been a former nursery.
Plaster is dug out of it.
There are also bars on the windows and there's only one piece of furniture in it,
a great immovable bed that is nailed down.
The story in our distance now looks very much like Edgar Allen Poe's work.
It reminds you of the pit in the pendulum.
This looks like a haunted house and you'll see it's going to turn out to be one.
And this bed that's nailed down and the gouged marks on the floors and the bars on the window,
you get the sense that this is a story about torture.
These are the implements of torture.
And maybe in fact the bed isn't a place of torture in more ways than one.
Well, that's just the obvious elements of the room.
There's one other element which is where the title comes from
and it is the very peculiar wallpaper in this room.
Now that's something that you rarely hear about in a short story.
So I'm going to cite you brief descriptions of this wallpaper
and I want you to sort of mull over in your minds what kind of paper this is.
One of those sprawling flamboyant patterns committing every artistic sin,
this is the voice of the woman that's all told from her point of view in the first person.
It's dull enough to confuse the eye in following,
pronounced enough to constantly irritate and provoke study.
And when you follow the lame uncertain curves for a little distance,
they suddenly commit suicide.
She can't follow this pattern, but it engages her and it irritates her.
Plunge off at outrageous angles, destroy themselves in unheard of contradictions.
You get the sense that this is ominous.
It looks like a text itself.
And the little story follows these descriptions.
This paper looks to me as if it knew what a vicious influence it had.
There is a recurrent spot where the pattern lolls like a broken neck
and two bulbous eyes stare at you upside down.
Looked at in one way each breath that's each little segment of paper
stands alone, the bloated curves and flourishes
a kind of debased romanesque with delirium trimmons
go waddling up and down in isolated columns of fatuity.
I want you to think about the insistence here on curves, waddling.
There's a lot of imagery of the female body that's thrown into this paper.
Bloated curves, debased romanesque, delirium trimmons.
On the other hand, they connect diagonally
and the sprawling outlines run off in great slanting waves of optic horror
like a lot of wallowing seaweeds in full chase, like nausea, capsizing, things just move off.
No sense of being able to hold one's position.
Well, this paper engages her.
This paper has a pattern that she's desperate to try to come in terms with.
You could argue she's got nothing else to do.
She's more or less locked in that room.
And if you're in one place long enough,
you really start to scrutinize what's out there.
And so she's looking at this paper.
She wants to get out of there.
She asks her husband to let her change rooms, to not make this their bedroom,
to let her leave the house, to perhaps receive visitors and to be active,
but her husband is not very understanding.
When I get really well, John says,
we will ask cousin Henry and Julia down for a long visit,
but he said he would as soon put fireworks in my pillowcase
as to let me have those stimulating people about now.
You're not in any condition to have company.
All you have to rest.
Dear John, he loves me very dearly and hates to have me sick.
I tried to have a real earnest, reasonable talk with him the other day
and tell him how I wish he would let me go and make a visit to cousin Henry and Julia.
But he said I wasn't able to go, nor able to stand it after I got there.
And I did not make a very good case for myself
for I was crying before I had finished.
Well, what do you think happens in this story?
That wallpaper starts to deliver its message.
It starts to yield its pattern.
And its pattern is clearer and clearer.
Midway on, I can see a strange, provoking, formless sort of figure
that seems to skulk about behind that silly and conspicuous front design.
Behind that outside pattern, the dim shapes get clearer every day.
It's always the same shape, only very numerous.
And it's like a woman stooping down and creeping about behind that pattern.
The pattern starts to appear more and more like a woman, like a woman creeping.
The front pattern does move and no matter, I mean, no wonder the woman behind shakes it.
Sometimes I think there are great many women behind and sometimes only one.
And she crawls around fast and her crawling shakes it all over.
Then in the very bright spot, she keeps still.
And in the very shady spot, she just takes hold of the bars and shakes them very hard.
And she's all the time trying to climb through.
But nobody could climb through that pattern.
It strangles.
So I think that's why it has so many heads.
They get through and then the pattern strangles them off.
Do you hear what you're hearing?
The story of these women who are captured by this paper, creeping, crawling,
trying to get through, being trapped and strangled by the bars of the paper.
We're talking about the mad woman in the attic.
We're talking about the story of her life.
We're talking about the condition of women in this particular culture.
It strangles so if those heads were covered or taken off, it would not be half so bad.
I think the woman gets out in the daytime.
And I'll tell you why privately.
I've seen her.
I can see her out of every one of my windows.
It's the same woman I know for she's always creeping and most women do not creep by daylight.
I don't blame her a bit.
It must be very humiliating to be caught creeping by daylight.
I always lock the door when I creep by daylight.
I can't do it at night for I know John would suspect something at once.
As soon as it was moonlight and that poor thing began to crawl and shake the pattern,
I got up and ran to help her.
I pulled and she shook.
I shook and she pulled.
And before morning we had peeled off yards of that paper.
Then I peeled off the paper.
I could reach standing on the floor.
It's horrible and the pattern just enjoys it.
All those strangled heads and bulbous eyes and waddling fungus growths.
I'm getting angry enough to do something desperate.
To jump out of the window would be admirable exercise but the bars are too strong even to try.
Besides I wouldn't do it.
Of course not.
I know well enough that a step like this is improper and might be misconstrued.
I don't like to look out of windows even.
There's so many of these creeping women and they creep so fast.
I wonder if they all come out of that wallpaper as I did.
But I am securely fastened now by my well hidden rope.
You don't get me out there in the road.
And the last page of the story is that she locks the door, throws the key down outside.
The husband has to knock down the door.
He comes in.
What is the matter?
For God's sake, what are you doing?
I kept on creeping just the same but I looked at him over my shoulder.
I've got out at last, said I, in spite of you and Jane.
And I've pulled off most of the paper so you can't put me back.
Now why would that man have fainted?
But he did and right across my path by the wall so that I had to creep over him every time.
That's how the story ends.
It's a story about an entry into madness.
It's also a story about madness as a visionary state in which this woman sees in the paper
or projects onto the paper her own condition.
And that of so many others, all of the women are going about creeping, trying to get through the paper.
It's an utterly brilliant piece about the way in which incarceration, at least figuratively, is a fact of life.
It doesn't require a lot of jails.
It's the way a culture operates on people.
It's also a story about disgust and horror.
You cannot have missed the way in which these bulbous eyes and these waddling forms,
and there's also a yellow stench to the paper.
People have said it smells like babies, like urine, feces.
It also maybe smells a bit like semen.
That there is a sense of horror about the body and its functions,
which is probably not unallied to postpartum depression in the first place.
The figures I said that she sees is herself.
One of the most fascinating things about this story is as it reaches its end,
this woman who is more and more embarked on her madness is also more and more in charge of her life.
And I want you to measure what a scary notion that is.
She achieves agency, she achieves authority, self-assertion,
and she does it actually in medical terms because she starts examining the wallpaper like a scientist might
and examining herself like a scientist might and looking at other people the way a doctor might.
I wonder why John looks so queer, she says, as if he could fool me.
She moves from being the object of the doctor's experiment
to, in fact, the observer, the subject, the physician, the scientist.
She, the mad person, looks at the world and sees it as the object of her own gaze.
This is all what becoming empowered and having agency are about.
But we cannot miss the fact that this has no social outlet.
This woman, when I teach this story, many students take the view that this is a great victory.
At the end, we have seen this woman achieve a voice, achieve a vision,
achieve a recognition of her own status, which is true. All of this is true.
But you've got to go the next step and say she is bound to be incarcerated,
that the entry into madness can hardly be celebrated as a great triumph,
that the story is merciless in that way, that the only route this woman has to travel in,
since there are no jobs, there is no professional activity,
there's only one direction and it is inside. She goes in.
That produces a vision of great beauty because she sees in that paper her condition
and the condition of her peers.
But it does not lead to any kind of a liberation that we can feel very comfortable with.
So there's the second mad woman in the attic text and I hope you have seen that in both Bronte and Gilman,
madness is inseparable from cultural history.
It's inseparable from patriarchy, from attitudes between men and women,
from the way power is distributed and shared in a culture, who is worthy of it and who's not.
And what happens when people are deemed unworthy of it? These texts are about that.
I think it's easy in talking about the yellow wallpaper to go one step too far
and to celebrate the madness as a kind of artistic temperament,
to talk about how much vision is possible to the deranged mind.
And as I argued in an earlier lecture, we are often seduced into doing that,
that there is a great tradition in the 19th and 20th century of art as privileged perception,
of the margins as privileged places to be, of derangement itself as a privileged condition.
Rambo actually said the dérèglement de tous les sens,
the derangement of all the senses, the disordering of all the senses as the ideal condition of the visionary.
He celebrated it. Even if it means you get unhinged, it was to be celebrated.
I think that responsibly one has to ask the question, what kind of celebration is this?
Is this a party that you really want to go to?
And I think that all of our texts that have had madness in them,
not just the ones I've talked about now, but Buchner's Wojcak poems like Blake's London,
are poems and texts where, yes, you see that madness is allied to a kind of visionary state,
but that it is also a condition of terrible pain, a terrible exploitation as well.
So, literature does both.
It conveys to us the subjective intensity of the mad mind
in a way that some outside description, some clinical description,
probably the case study of a neurologist, could not.
But at the same time, it is deeply cautionary, it seems to me.
It shows us as well the limitations of madness,
the way in which madness is terribly contained by the social order
because people are thrown into asylums,
people are in fact denied any access or agency into the social order.
I'm going to move from madness to addiction.
Not a self-evident move, but I wanted to do it
because addiction is a problem that is very much with us today.
It's a problem that appears in much visionary literature.
Coleridge talked about his own opium.
Kublai Khan is one of the great poems, romantic poems,
written presumably under the influence of stimulants and drugs.
De Quincey wrote the confessions of an English opiometer.
Baudelaire translated De Quincey and wrote poems about hashish
and about the visions that you get when on stimulants
and hallucinatory drugs.
This is standard procedure in 19th century romantic thinking.
We know that the drugs are also
an enormous moral social scourge of modern life,
one that we don't seem to be able to solve.
And therefore, we have to somehow get that kind of double picture
that I have tried to establish for madness,
that we have to somehow do justice to the ecstasy,
to the tripping, to the liberating pleasure that drugs offer,
while seeing the way in which the human being on drugs
is even further confined, victimized, rendered, paralyzed in the culture.
Both perspectives seem to me are crucial.
If you don't have the first one, you don't know why people take drugs.
You remember the theme song of Naked Lunch?
Wouldn't you?
A rabid dog cannot but bite
If you are hooked on drugs, you are hooked on drugs.
It is not a question of weak willpower.
Willpower absolutely leaves the equation.
So you have to understand something about the power of drugs
at the same time as seeing the constraints around it.
I want to allude to an extremely bizarre text
that is never taught that I know of,
and it's called Novel with Cocaine.
It's a Russian text written by a man whose name we don't really know.
His pen name was Agaev.
Some people had thought, actually, that it was Nabokov,
but that's been discredited.
And it was published in the 1930s, sent to Paris and published.
We think that the real Agaev probably died
on his return to Russia during the Stalinist purges.
This story is set in pre-revolutionary days,
and it's the story of a troubled adolescent.
By the way, Novel with Cocaine,
the actual Russian term is more romance with cocaine,
so that you get a kind of pun in the title
and the story is about cocaine,
but it's also about one's love affair with cocaine.
It's about the romance with the drug.
This adolescent Vadim is presented to us by Agaev
as an extraordinarily precarious figure.
We see him despising all the people around him.
In particular, the one who comes in for the most contempt is his mother,
who worships him, dotes on him,
is a woman who has now reduced to not exactly poverty,
but very reduced means,
and his great job in life is to get hold of what little money she's got.
In one scene that I'm going to cite partially to you,
he actually goes in and steals the only piece of jewelry
that matters to her, this brooch.
She comes to school to try to give him money
and he pretends not to recognize her.
He says things about her that make other people think she's an old whore.
It's filled with a kind of coldness and brutality and contempt
for others that I think you almost have to look to Russian literature to find.
The flavor of this story is very much the flavor of Dostoevsky.
It's the flavor of a kind of delight in injury and delight in humiliation.
He also despises his comrades in school,
particularly those that are more wealthy or those that are doing better in class.
He thinks of himself as one of the clever students in the school.
What I like about this story is it gets something across
of what a really turbulent time adolescence is,
of how unbalanced we all are at that point in our life,
as we're trying to figure out who we are, what we represent,
who we side with because that also determines and defines who we are.
And there's a kind of range in this story
where this guy simply cannot line it up,
where he's torn like an tempest in all these different directions.
Part of this rage is sexual.
Vadim's favorite fast time is to walk the streets of Moscow
and to engage women on the streets just by his eyes,
to look at them in raw hunger, appetite, really like a mating ritual.
And the only ones that he can be drawn to are women
who are sufficiently coarse and brazen to return his stare of pure sexual hunger,
and then those he will go off with and fornicate with.
If there's anything beyond pure physical fierce lust,
then he's not interested, can't manage it.
He's only interested in it from that point of view
of this kind of really physical, not mating game,
but physical struggle, conflict.
This is also very callous.
Anybody who likes him, he punishes one young woman who has a weakness for him.
He brazenly gives his venereal disease to, knowing that he will infect her.
He goes off and has sex with her anyway.
He has one tempestuous relationship with a married woman,
but because he starts to love her and realize that she loves him,
in the great climax of their relationship, it's an anti-climax.
He cannot manage it.
He's only interested in it from that point of view of this really physical,
not a perfect game, making physical but fruggles, conflict.
This is also very callous.
Anybody who likes him, he punishes one young woman who has a weakness for him.
He brazenly gives his venereal disease to, knowing that he will infect her.
In fact, he goes off and has sex with her anyway.
He has one tempestuous relationship with a married woman,
but because he starts to love her and realize that she loves him,
he does not want to be in a relationship with her.
He has one tempestuous relationship with a married woman,
which is not perfect.
He goes off and has sex with her anyway.
He goes off and has sex with her anyway.
He is not interested in it.
He's just a little bit upset.
He doesn't want to be in a relationship with her.
gives his venereal disease to, knowing that he will infect her, he goes off and has sex
with her anyway.
He has one tempestuous relationship with a married woman, but because he starts to love
her and realize that she loves him, in the great climax of their relationship, it's
an anticlimax.
He cannot manage.
He's only interested in you, according to this really physical old game, making physical
but fruggles, slick, huh?
This is very calc of Alice.
Anybody who likes him, who punishes him, he is young.
One has a woman who bore him weakness.
He bravely gives his venereal disease to, knowing that he will infect her, in fact goes
off and has sex with her anyway.
He has one tempestuous relationship with a married woman, but because he starts to love
her and realize that she loves him, in the great climax of their relationship, it's
an anticlimax.
He cannot manage it.
He's only interested in it, from that point of view, of this kind of really physical, making
game, but physical struggle, conflict.
This is also very callous.
Anybody who likes him, he punishes.
One young woman who has a weakness for him, he brazenly gives his venereal disease to,
knowing that he will infect her, he goes off and has sex with her anyway.
He has one tempestuous relationship with a married woman, but because he starts to love
her and realize that she loves him, in the great climax of their relationship, it's
an anticlimax.
He cannot manage it.
He's only interested in it, from that point of view, of this really physical, old, imperfect
game, making physical, but struggle, conflict.
This is also very callous.
Anybody who likes him, he punishes.
One young woman who has a weakness for him, he brazenly gives his venereal disease to,
knowing that he will infect her, he goes off and has sex with her anyway.
One, he has an tempestuous relationship with a married woman, but because he starts to
love her, he starts to realize that she loves him, in the great, the max relationship of
their relationship, it's an anticlimax.
He cannot manage it.
He's only interested in it, from that point of view, of this really physical, making game,
but physical struggle, conflict.
This is also very callous.
Anybody who likes him, he punishes.
One young woman who has a weakness for him, he brazenly gives his venereal disease to,
knowing that he will infect her, he goes off and has sex with her anyway.
He has one tempestuous relationship with a married woman, but because he starts to love
her and realize that she loves him, in the great climax of their relationship, it's an
anticlimax.
One, he has an tempestuous relationship with a married woman, but because he starts to
love her, he starts to realize that she loves him, in the great climax of their relationship,
he's a very callous.
One young woman who has a weakness for him, he brazenly gives his venereal disease to,
knowing that he will infect her, he goes off and has sex with her anyway.
He has one tempestuous relationship with a married woman, but because he starts to love
her, he starts to realize that she loves him, in the great climax of their relationship,
it's an anticlimax.
He cannot manage it.
He's only interested in it, from that point of view, of this really physical, making game,
really physical struggle, conflict.
This is also very callous.
Anybody who likes him, he punishes.
One young woman who has a weakness for him, he brazenly gives his venereal disease to,
knowing that he will infect her, he goes off and has sex with her anyway.
He has one tempestuous relationship with a married woman, but because he starts to love
her and realize that she loves him, in the great climax of their relationship, it's
an anticlimax.
He cannot manage it.
He's only interested in it, from that point of view, of this really physical game, making
physical, but struggle, conflict.
This is also very callous.
Anybody who likes him, he punishes.
One young woman who has a weakness for him, he brazenly gives his venereal disease to,
knowing that he will infect her, in fact, he goes off and has sex with her anyway.
He has tempestuous relationship with a married woman, but because he starts to love her,
to realize that she loves him, in the great climax of their relationship, it's an anticlimax.
He cannot manage it.
He's only interested in it, from that point of view, of this really physical, making game,
but physical struggle, conflict.
