In this lecture and also in the next one, I'm going to talk about the bedrock issue
that underlies medicine and life and probably art, which is death, not a very cheerful topic.
On the other hand, not an avoidable topic, and certainly one that I think benefits from
the kind of elimination that the arts offers us.
Now this lecture is going to be more on the notion of witnessing death, which is what
most of us experience throughout our lives, because the actual dying is something that
we only encounter once, but the witnessing of death, the exposure to death of others,
can happen many, many times, unfortunately.
You realize, of course, that we've already touched on this subject more than once, and
in particular, I evoked the death of the grandmother from the points of view of Proust and of Sheldon
Newland and how even a very wise medical commentary differs from the kind of novelistic
depiction that you have in Proust.
What does it mean to witness the death, and to what extent is death a reality more for
witnesses than it is for others?
I'm going to cite a text from Faulkner's As I Lay Dying, which is a very, very wise
book about death, and Faulkner's character, Dr. Peabody, says this, I can remember how
when I was young I believed death to be a phenomenon of the body.
Now I know it to be merely a function of the mind and that of the minds of the ones who
suffer the bereavement.
The nihilists say it is the end, the fundamentalists the beginning, when in reality it is no more
than a single tenant or family moving out of a tenement or a town, splendidly dynamic
picture of death as a form of mobility.
I want to emphasize in this lecture what I have called the perspectival dimension that
the arts restore for us.
Death in particular must be thought of in these terms.
Are we the person who dies?
Are we the loved one who attends the death of someone?
Are we the doctor who ministers to someone's terminal illness?
Are we a bystander who happens to see death?
Or are we a taxpayer who picks up the bill so that the cost of death can be somehow borne
by the culture?
Everything as you know is an expensive proposition.
I'm going to look at a range of pieces and I'm going to gradually move further and further
in on this topic.
The first piece that I want to allude to is a very unusual article published in a Journal
of Medicine and it's about the death of a man who was called William T. in a hospital.
He was comatose, he had been brought in and the decision had to be made whether or not
to keep him on artificial systems or not.
And the article talks about the most humane way to arrive at this decision.
He cannot speak.
There is no family available.
There is one relative who has said, I'm sorry to hear about this, the relative was a thousand
miles away and was in poor health himself, an uncle, can't deal with this.
So there's William T. in this hospital who is going to decide to pull the plug on William
T.
And the argument proceeds that the model that perhaps could be most useful here is the model
of the Greek chorus, it's a very bold suggestion, that the Greek chorus represents the people
of the community who appear in the Greek tragedies as the kind of benchmark vision of reality.
They don't have the high profile and the bad luck of people like Oedipus or Antigone.
On the other hand, they represent common sense and they represent the community.
They're a voice that's very prominent in the work of Molière.
They represent a norm, so culture is lucky to have a norm.
What would the norm be in the hospital?
How could the voice of the culture help determine when a person is supposed to be allowed to
die?
And what Catherine Montgomery Hunter, who is one of the very fine writers in literature
and medicine, argues is that what you want to do is consult all the people who have dealings
with William T. The residents who admitted him when he came in and he had come to the
hospital many times prior to becoming comatose.
Also the nurses who tend to him and he's not totally vegetative.
He's barely comatose, so it looks like one has the illusion that he's responding to
events even though they know that in reality that can't be the case.
But he seems to respond to noise.
They are even a little embarrassed at talking in front of him because they somehow feel
that maybe he hears them.
And then the other people in the community, the medical community, the doctors who don't
see as much of him, of course, as the nurses and the interns, the lawyers, everybody has
to be brought into this.
What she says is let us bring all of these people together and essentially determine
among ourselves those of us who knew him since he cannot speak his own story what the value
of this life is, whether or not it is or is not appropriate for it to come to an end.
What Hunter says as well is that William's life must be taken into account by the chorus.
They must reflect on the individual's moral trajectory and time and place, their facts
that are missing, she says, just as the citizens of Thebes knew some but not all of Oedipus'
stories.
So the left at home old men climbed the battlements to describe the signal fires lit on the hills
from Mycenae to Troy.
So too we can reconstruct William's story, restoring and restoring him.
In the last paragraph of this essay goes like this, he was born black in the American
South, ten years before the civil rights bill was passed into law, his parents separated,
he left his birthplace, he went north, participating in one of those mythic patterns of American
even Judeo-Christian experience, an exodus in search of a promised land.
It is a story told and retold in our novels and films as well as in sermons and family
stories but it didn't work out.
William lost contact with his family, he was lost to work and friends and a home before
he was through adolescence, he killed a pain with alcohol, his body began to fail, pancreatis
and alcoholic hepatitis developed, he compounded the failure with inattention and abuse, he
hoped for rescue but lacked strength to manage it himself, he forgot his insulin for days
then took it all at once to make up, he didn't mean to die.
That's what it means to try to re-story this man, to re-create the events that led to this
condition, led to his presence here and to make a decision that wouldn't just be the
cost of this bed in the hospital, wouldn't just be the brutal economic facts that also
are obviously part of the equation.
And yet the person left out of this story is William T and that these people as solicitous
and caring and compassionate as they are are trying with the best of intentions to grasp
what the emotional, moral quality of that life might have been, none of them ultimately
knew him.
So I start here with the most distanced and one of the most humane efforts to try to construct
the meaning of a person's life as a measure of their death and their death as a measure
of their life.
Other encounters with death tend to be more affective, more emotional, more trying, more
demanding, sometimes more tragic.
How do we let go of someone whose story we know because it's also our story?
And the text that I want to refer to is a really wonderful short story called What the
Cystoscope Said written by Anatole Breyard who was one of the book editors of the New
York Times and who recently died of cancer and wrote a full length set of stories about
the sense of liberation he experienced when he knew he was under a death sentence.
This story is the story of a father-son relationship told from the point of view of the son.
It's a story of real pain and a real humiliation.
It's a story about death being intolerably brutal.
And in saying that, I want us to think about that old chestnut that we have about aging
gracefully and dying with dignity.
I'm going to cite you what William Galen has said about that.
This is a physician.
Consider the struggle in America to define such terms as death with dignity, which really
means death without dying, and growing old gracefully, a related term that on closer
analysis means living at home a long time without aging.
Dying in one's sleep at 92 after having won three sets of tennis from one's 40-year-old
grandson that afternoon and having made love to one's wife twice that same evening.
This is about the only scenario I have found most American men will accept as fulfilling
their idea of death with dignity and growing old gracefully.
This story, what the Cystoscope said, actually toils in the same vineyard that Galen is pointing
out about what dignity does mean, what we take to be, in a sense, our entitlements and
how brutally they are taken from us in dying.
Not in death, but in dying, in the process of dying.
The father who is dying in this story is a strong, tough man, physically strong, at
least until the sickness that is going to take him away, and the son admires that strength.
The very first line of the story captures what the story is about.
When I saw my father with the horse collar around his neck, I knew immediately.
Father is yoked by disease.
This is going to turn out to be a cancer, or even though in the first page or two they
denied this strange pain could be cancer.
But being yoked already tells you that he is experiencing a servitude that he's never
known in his life before, that his own physical strength is not going to be adequate for this.
He has been a workman, a foreman for construction people, a man, as I said, of physical strength
and integrity and authority, and one of the most, I think, perfect touches of the story
is that when the son walks with him from the hospital, they go to pick up his toolbox
and the son decides, let me carry it, dad.
And the son discovers how incredibly heavy a foreman's toolbox is.
He picks this thing up and it's as if he's discovering the very weight and density of
his own father.
He picks this thing up and tries to heft it on to his shoulders.
He says, I'd seen that box all my life, but I'd never picked it up.
I would no more have picked it up than I would have picked up my mother, as my father sometimes
playfully did.
Still, now that the time had come, I approached it without thinking.
The handle was hard, it even seemed calloused like his hand.
I bent over and wrapped my palm and fingers around it and straightened up.
The tendons inside my elbow and shoulder stretched to their full length and snapped painfully
taut.
I almost lost my balance and the tools clinked telltale in the box.
My father looked away and glanced uncomfortably at the carpenter foreman.
This is trying to replace the father, to share the load, to do some of the work, to be a
man, to measure up and it is not easy.
The son accompanies the father to the hospital, as I said, and they have to perform a test.
The doctor talks to the father and he says, we have a little surprise in the program for
you today.
We want to get the inside story on you, so we're going to give you a cystoscope.
They can sometimes be unpleasant, but I don't think that will bother an old soldier like
you.
I want you to hear the same emphasis here on virility, on manhood, on physical strength,
and on one's dignity and integrity being totally bound up with those virtues and those characteristics.
You're a tough man, a strong man, a brave man, this won't bother you.
We want to get the inside story.
This whole text is about the inside story.
What is the inside story of someone dying, or of a son watching his father die, losing
a father?
The test is performed, the son has no idea what the test is about, how it's performed,
and then the nurse says, your father's in there.
But my father wasn't in there, the text writes, it reminds me of that proof thing, that wasn't
my grandmother on that bed.
My father wasn't in there, sprawled on a table, incredibly out of place, lay a plaster
Prometheus, middle aged and decrepit, recently emptied by an eagle, the reference obviously
to Prometheus with the vulture that eats it his liver, recently emptied by an eagle,
varnished and highly glazed as though still wet, or perhaps when you look closer this
was just an illusion born of an idea, and what actually lay there was only an eviscerated
old rooster, capture some of the sexual drama at hand, no longer a cock, but an eviscerated
old rooster, plucked white, his skin shiny with a sweat more painful than blood, whatever
it was, it wasn't my father.
It might have been an old man, trembling and staring into eternity, whom I helped, avoiding
the puddles of his exploded bladder to dress, the puddles of his exploded bladder, we're
not far from Hemingway territory here, the evacuation, the primal ooze, the muck, that
is the reality, and we like to call it bedrock, but that suggests that it's hard, firm, it's
not, it's loose and wet, that is the inside story, this story is coded in male-female
terms about hard and soft, about erect and supine, when the boy gets home or the young
man gets home and sees his mother and she knows as they look at each other, mom I said
again and she burst into tears on my breast crying so copiously that after a while I felt
like a child who has wet himself, absolute repeat of the father's exploded bladder, it's
as if you can't keep your water, that the water in the bladder, the tears in the eyes,
this is going to be the medium of the story, and this man, the story about manhood and
about physical strength and dignity is going to have to take into account that primeval
reality, story is about flow, the inside story, what the cystoscope actually said, the cystoscope
as you may know is a test they do about the bladder and you do it by entering into the
penis and you get your picture of the things and it produces a result here.
Story as I said insistently is coded along sexual lines, the father at some point in
the hospital explains to the son that he hasn't had an erection for months, that it's about
that kind of loss of one's stature.
It's an amazing story because Royard has the, I think, the range to make it an unpretty
story, to make it a politically incorrect story, and I tell you it makes it a tricky
story to teach to today's students.
In this hospital where the father is now being kept and treated for an incurable cancer and
in great pain, in the hospital we are over and over reminded of how decimating the experience
of growing old and weak and dying is in terms of people's strength, in terms of their virility.
And so the son, who was a young man in his prime, decides that he is going to have sex
with the nurse, this attractive nurse who is totally professional and takes no personal
interest in the father and who looks at him with a kind of bemusement as he comes every
day to visit his father, he has decided that his project is to nail her.
He's got to get this woman and it's put in the kind of terms that I'm putting it.
There's something brutal and dominating about it, and this is what I said is politically
incorrect.
It's sexist from the word go, and yet what I'm trying to get across here is that the
logic that's being played out in this story is so human and so, in a sense, compelling
that it resists any of the terms, any of the measuring codes we would want to use for
it.
Miss Shannon is the nurse's name.
Her complexion was so fair, her lips so red, her eyes so blue that she reminded me of a
patriotic image in pastels, the winner of some titles such as Miss American Flag.
She seemed invariably in high spirits, making her rounds with an expression of almost insane
glee.
I found this first surprising then incongruous and finally obscene.
Although she fascinated me, I began to detest her.
And although she seemed more candy-like than carnal, I longed to bite her round aseptic
and ungirdle behind as it moved, tauntingly alive, beneath her silky nylon skirt.
Once when she stood silhouetted against the window, her thighs clearly outlined as though
by their own gleaming light.
I felt for a dazzle moment a wild impulse, a kind of call, to seize her and fuck her
in the middle of the floor, and thus by sympathetic magic to resuscitate those failing men to
whom she must have seemed more mirage than oasis.
There's an undeniable kind of dialectic here, a kind of dynamic that's in play, that to
somehow assert his virility in this dominating way on this woman, who is really an unwitting
player in this piece, is to perform a service for these men who are being deprived of their
dignity and of their own physical strength and prowess.
Like magic, he calls it, and that, I think, has its own integrity, even though the way
of the game is going to be played is ugly.
And so he will proceed.
He'll proceed with this plot, and it is as ugly as I've said.
He is going to deceive her, he plays up to her, he gives her a lot of this philosophical
gobbledygook, like, oh, I know that you deal always with people at the edge of death, you
must have gathered so much wisdom.
If you could just share some of that with me, if we could just have an evening together
where you could tell me what you have learned from the eyes and mouths of people about to
die, all of this stuff, this thick rhetorical garbage, part of it's true, but part of it
is just to interest her, and she goes along with it.
She is willing to finally have a date with him.
And so he does that.
He says, I have a book I want to give you, there's an insistent parallel here with language
and sex, with giving her a book, and at the same time having sex with her.
And so he will, in fact, get to this woman, and it will be described in a way that is
extremely logical in this story.
As we went up the four flights, my eyes were so intent on the pink beneath her white stockings
I thought I even discerned delicate blue veins, that I stumbled and had to steady myself by
seizing the banister.
I had cleaned and ordered the apartment with an obsessive devotion, and I snapped on the
lamp expecting her exclamation, but she said nothing.
She just walked three steps further into the room and stopped, take off your coat, I said.
And she unbuttoned it for me to remove.
I strode over to the bookshelf, still following the script, and seized the saline.
She's going to hand, he's going to give her a book of saline.
When I turned with it in my hand, about to hold it out, I saw the futility of the gesture
in her eyes.
Confused but undismayed, I let the book fall, and seized her in a death grip, and bore her
backward to the bed, where I took her with all her clothes on.
Being with feverish haste, I nailed the coffin, dug the grave, and dropped my precious load.
You can see that in the very language of the text, Boyard is carrying out that same act
of substitution, that this is the language of the carpenter, this is the language of
the father, this is a deed done for the father, this is a vicarious performance of the father's,
all of this done by the son, and you can say this is gross, but this is also sublime in
its own way, and it's also impossible.
And yet, those are the dynamics of the story.
This is about one of the ways in which death is meaningful.
This is a coming of age story.
It's about a son replacing the father, which is what happens in the very act of generation.
And so, that subtext must be accounted for as much as it sticks in the throat of many
young people, particularly women students, understandably, as they read this story today.
I said the stories about language.
He tells her that he has a book for her to read.
He says that he wants to hear her stories, but it's about language in still further ways
as we've talked about it in this course.
It's about what the Systoscope said.
It's about we want to get the inside story, which is why they give him the Systoscope exam
in the first place.
What is the inside story?
And that picks up an issue that we have been looking at ever since we talked about Elaine
Scarry's book about the body in pain, about pain as a new language.
And now I want to talk more about the father's dying.
At that moment, this is before the father has been hospitalized.
This is when their own personal doctor is there.
At that moment, by way of bidding the doctor goodbye, my father declared himself.
We heard a cry that sounded as though it came from a creature that had just acquired a voice
in the further reaches of pain, and was now exploring that pain and that voice simultaneously,
intermittently confusing one with the other.
I stood there like a singing teacher, fascinated by a pupil who has just produced an unearthly
sound, unable to decide whether this was the most beautiful sound I'd ever heard or
the most blood-curdling.
Pain as language, as a new language, as a declaration of the creature that must be understood.
And as the boy watches his father die, he keeps thinking there has to be a key to this
secret.
Should this pain be with a program?
Can a man emaciate without meaning?
His struggles were not beautiful to behold, but I beheld them.
I felt it was my duty not to miss a single one of his writhings.
His whole body had become a tongue, you hear again this language, pain.
His whole body had become a tongue addressing its message to me.
He was leaving so little behind that nothing could be ignored.
I wanted to make movies of him to educate my children.
Watching him, I learned that the convulsions of death and the convulsions of love, and again
linking the two realms of this text, differ only in that these were experienced utterly
alone, the kind of limit situation of the body, whether it is in having sex or in dying
where it rides and struggles and it expresses something that is so primitive that we have
no vocabulary for it.
This story is trying to create a vocabulary for that.
Pain as the key to the secret.
How to find the words, how to tell the story.
How to tell the story.
How to understand that someone's death is a story.
It is not just a body entering death, it's a story.
It has a shape.
It's about the relationship of the living to the dying, about those who are left with
those who leave, and that has its own kind of authority, its own kind of beauty, and
we know so little about it.
And Boyard is trying to find a way to get that story onto the page.
That's the inside story that is hardly esoteric or exotic because it will happen to every
person who lives, but it hasn't been told.
And the only analog that Boyard can find for it here, not now the story of the subtext
of the son trying to nail the nurse, but rather a memory that the son has of when he went
away to war.
And this is a memory that the boy has at the last moments of his father's life.
He's sitting there, they've said come in quick because he's fading now, he's going, and
the boy is sitting there next to his father and he begins to remember when he went away
to war.
And they didn't think he'd come back.
This was, I suppose, the Korean War or World War II.
Didn't think he'd come back, and his father insisted on going with him to Penn Station
to take the train in New York.
And he got into the car, and as in all farewells, great awkwardness, no one knows exactly what
to say to the other, and all the father can say is keep punching, boy.
He said, he disappeared down the aisle, I stared through the window.
I waited for the platform to move for the train to go out.
He may never return from this trip, he knows that, the father knows that, but the train
doesn't go.
And all of a sudden the father returns on the other side of this window.
His lips moved, he was saying something to me, I couldn't hear through the double pain
so I nodded and smiled.
He spoke again and I said that's right, Pop, and people turned and looked at me.
The train didn't move, he was going to wait.
And he unbuttons his coat, the father does, and he pulls out a cigar.
And there's this elaborate pantomime, see, I'm going to smoke a cigar while I wait for
the train.
Yes, I see you're going to smoke a cigar while you wait for the train, and the train doesn't
go.
And this young man who thinks he's going to his death, and this older man who's losing
him standing there, separated by this window, with this pantomime, he struck a match and
cupped it, and the train didn't start.
Tilting his head back he withdrew the cigar, the train didn't move.
He spoke to me again and I nodded and smiled, but something came over his face, some urgency
which he had been inducing all the while, like a constipated person reading a newspaper
on the toilet.
He began to gesticulate and move his jaws grotesquely, shaping words which before would
not be molded by his mouth.
The train began to move in slow spasms.
He walked alongside, gesticulating and grimacing.
I rose out of my seat, semaphoring through the glass.
Now he was running, that's the end of the memory, the next paragraph.
I took up where we had left off.
Pop, I said, you've been a good father, just what I wanted, just what you were supposed
to be.
You made me into a good son, and I'll always remember.
You did what you were supposed to do.
You don't have to reproach yourself with anything, I'm proud of you, you can be proud
of yourself too, I love you Pop, just like a son loves his father and as a man too, God
bless you Pop.
And then you realize as a reader that this is the conversation that he's having with
his dying father.
This is the way art juxtaposes those two moments of his going off to war and the terrible awkwardness
and straining brilliantly actually compared to constipation.
And then the release, through a membrane, through a wet glass window, imperfectly, Paul
could have written it, through a glass darkly.
And you realize that this is the inside story, this is the story of a farewell, of a kind
of severance that has a kind of intolerable beauty to it.
So that's what art offers, at least when it is conducted with the dignity of this piece,
despite its shocking elements.
How to Let Go, Freud in his classic study, Morning in Melancholia, defines morning really
in physiological terms.
He's talking about psychology, but it could be physiological.
He says that when someone that we love dies, we learn not by volition, but by reality,
we learn to sever the connection, to cut the cord.
We learn, in fact, to remove the ego's attachment from the person who is no longer alive.
And Freud says that this is a difficult procedure and it takes a long time.
He says that all of the bonds which unite us, to our loved ones, and you actually have
to visualize this, all of these bonds must be brought up to the mind and cut one by one.
It's not like that.
That's what we call morning.
And finally when they are cut, the ego becomes once again free and inhibited and can attach
itself to something else in reality.
And Freud says this is the work of nature.
This isn't choice, this isn't morality.
This is an organism that realizes that it continues to have a connection with something
that no longer is real and therefore learns to cut its losses, comes to terms with the
reality principle.
Well, I wanted to read you a poem called The Five Stages of Grief by Linda Pastan and
to comment on that reality principle and to see it from a slightly different angle.
Pastan is working with the terms of Kubler-Ross about the stages of mourning that we go through
and it's the perspective of a husband and a wife.
The night I lost you, someone pointed me toward the five stages of grief, go that way, they
said.
It's easy like learning to climb stairs after the amputation and so I climbed.
Denial was first, this is the term that's used.
I sat down at breakfast carefully setting the table for two.
I pass you the toast, you sat there, I pass you the paper, you hid behind it.
That's denial, not acknowledging that he's not there at all, going through the same ritual.
Anger seemed more familiar, I burned the toast, snatched the paper and read the headlines
myself but they mentioned your departure so I moved on to bargaining.
What can I exchange for you?
The silence after storms, my typing fingers.
Each of the stages of Kubler-Ross's theory of mourning are recast in exactly the domestic
terms of this life lived together, of having breakfast with your spouse.
Before I could decide depression came puffing up a poor relation, its suitcase tied together
with string, in the suitcase were bandages for the eyes and bottles of sleep.
I slid all the way down the stairs feeling nothing.
And all the time hope flashed on and off in defective neon.
Hope was a signpost pointing straight in the air, hope was my uncle's middle name.
He died of it.
After a year I'm still climbing though my feet slip on your stoned face.
And now we get this imagery of the Alps, mountain climbing.
The treeline has long since disappeared, green is a color I've forgotten.
But now I see what I'm climbing towards, acceptance, it's all in italics here, acceptance
written in capital letters, a special headline, acceptance.
Its name is in lights, I struggle on, waving and shouting.
Below my whole life spreads its surf all the landscapes I've ever known or dreamed of.
Acceptance, she says, I finally reach it but something is wrong, grief is a circular
staircase, I have lost you.
It reminds me of the Proust piece, how it differs from Newlands, that people die but
they don't die in us.
She gives the lie to Freud's theory of mourning that the ego cuts its connections.
She says that the work of memory is precisely the reversal of the work of the organic cord
cutting, that the work of memory is a way of hallowing making present to our emotions
and minds that which is not physically here.
I think she says something further with this staircase imagery, I have lost you, that acceptance
is both a victory and a defeat.
Yes, now I am unfettered, now the ego is once again as Freud would say free and uninhibited
and that may be thought of as a form of impoverishment as well as a form of gain.
What I think she is saying is that the work of mourning is not only about the death of
a loved one but it is about the death of oneself, the person who loved is dying, that's the
way mourning proceeds.
That when mourning finally succeeds in Freud's terms and we can feel equanimity with our
dead, it's because the person in us that loved in a kind of grieving, unaccepting way that
person has finally, probably mercifully, died as well.
It is oneself that alters through mourning.
I have lost you, something is wrong.
I'll close this lecture by talking a few minutes on one of the great classics about dying and
it's Tolstoy's story, the death of Ivan Ilyich and here we do close in because the perspective
moves from that of the bystander, the son, the spouse to the actual dire.
That's not how Tolstoy starts his story, he starts by referring to Ilyich's death as
a newspaper event which is how we learn about the deaths of most people that we know, the
obituary column and it gets across the way in which death is a social pragmatic issue.
Ilyich's death means that somebody else can now get his place within the bureaucracy, he's
a high-placed functionary, somebody else now, the whole game is like the dominoes, one falls
over and all of the others now can change positions, that's how Ilyich's friends think
of his death and then the friends speak to the widow and she starts talking about the
cost of the burial plot and she wants to know if maybe there are ways to get more money
from the state for his pension and you realize that death is all of these things too, death
is not just the moral issues that we're talking about, there are lots of economic issues,
there are lots of pragmatic moves that have to be made, finally death is embarrassing,
the friends who come in don't know how to behave in front of this corpse that is in
state which already smells just a tiny bit, whether you're supposed to make the sign of
the cross, how are you really supposed to conduct yourself in front of a dead person.
After that beginning which announces something, it seems to me about the social distancing
of death, the refusal to look at it head on, after that the story enters into the life
of Ivan Ilyich, it is a life that is utterly colorless and bland played by the rules a
complete secular existence, Ivan Ilyich was a remarkably successful functionary, a magistrate
and it's a life that if our modern terms using sautrient vocabulary, existential vocabulary,
we would consider entirely inauthentic, Ilyich considered his duty to be what was so considered
by those in authority, he has played by the rules, he has done the things that you were
supposed to do and as examining magistrate Ilyich was just as cameleful and decorous
a man inspiring general respect and capable of separating his official duties from his
private life.
We are given a retrospective of Ivan Ilyich's life, this successful magistrate who has died
and we are told that the first problems in Ilyich's life came about after his marriage
and in particular it came about when his wife became pregnant, that his life had been decorous
and harmonious and easygoing until then but from the first moments of his wife's pregnancy
something new, unpleasant, depressing and unseemly and from which there was no way of
escape unexpectedly showed itself.
This pregnancy from my point of view is the awareness for the first time on Ilyich's
part that he shuns moreover of a somatic physical regime of a life of the body which has nothing
to do with his career as a magistrate playing by the rules, he begins to see that there
is a rival order in life that the swelling body of his wife announces not just a new
logic but a new authority and this is disturbing.
His marriage is not a good one, as his wife grew more irritable and exacting he transferred
the center of gravity of his life more and more to his work, the children have sicknesses
as children do, we learn even in a scant paragraph two of their children died, family life became
still more unpleasant for him, I want to stress the fact that these details of the children's
illnesses of the messiness of tending to babies of the death of the two children that they
actually had, two of them, five that they had.
All of this is presented in this text as disturbing details that one wants to get out of the way
and that's exactly what Ilyich does, he does what so many people in this culture do, he
throws himself increasingly into his work, that becomes the center of his life and what
I want to say is that by dents of doing that the story forecasts exactly the indifference
that he is going to meet with when he is dying, that as he makes the deaths of his own children
unimportant unpleasant details it forecasts others future response to his own dying, that
is the way of the world is that when people are dying, when they are thrusting their own
somatic lives at us, when they're ill, our natural inclination at least in many cultures
is to keep it at bay, concentrate on what we can control, get into our work, that's
the life that Ilyich leads and it works up until a moment which really is biblical, Ilyich
has bought a new house, he is much involved in furnishing it, he is showing the upholsterer
where to put certain lovely drapes that he's bought, he climbs on a ladder and falls and
I said it's biblical because the fall is more than just the fall off the ladder, at
that moment he doesn't think he has entered himself but from then on he begins to have
a pain that he doesn't know how to deal with and this pain will not go away and he calls
in the doctors and the doctors say well maybe it's a floating appendix, maybe it's a floating
kidney and they give him nothing but contradictory protocols, each one has a different interpretation
and none of them will face the question that bothers Ilyich, is this serious, am I going
to die, Ilyich enters the medical regime, he enters a world in which doctors will minister
to his situation and what he recognizes in the doctors is a kind of bland professionalism,
a skillful performance, a way of working through the conventions of their own field which have
nothing to do with his existential dilemma, he wants them to tell him that he is not in
trouble and what they do is go through the rigamarole of medical diagnosis and analysis
and as he sees this he realizes that this is the story of his life, this is just what
he has done all his life as a magistrate, the poor people have come to him worrying
about life and death whether they are going to be let off or fined and he has pranced
and sung and danced exactly the same game, the oldest professional game in the world
and it doesn't make a difference if you are a doctor or a lawyer or an Indian chief, we
go through our hoops and routines and we ignore the actual existential quandary pain and dilemma
of the people who come our way and that is the way Ilyich goes through his last stage
of life, he begins to realize that he has lived wrong, his death is about his life, he
has lived wrong, he has lived a kind of shadow game of the right promotions, the right jobs,
the right salaries, the right furnishings, the right houses, the right schools and none
of this means anything now and moreover he alone realizes that his wife and daughter
and son are still playing exactly the same game and so at the end of the story we have
three days of screaming on Ilyich's part, three days of screaming at the end of which
he begins to see a light and only then acquires a kind of humility and a kind of generosity
at once, he forgives his family and he enters at last into a kind of peaceful acknowledgement
of death but what is so wonderful about Tolstoy's story is that this story of dying is a story
of living, it's about how a man has lived or to put it more bluntly a man's discovery
that he hasn't lived at all, thank you.
