Welcome, ladies and gentlemen, to an intellectual odyssey.
An odyssey that I hope will be as fantastic to you and as exciting as Homer's odyssey
without keeping you away from home for 20 years.
Our odyssey will be a survey of the evolution of the sciences and of the relationship between
science and society in the course of the 20th century.
An intellectual history, then, of the physical life and social sciences, and I specifically
emphasize that we will be spanning the ideas and theories characteristic of the physical
life and social sciences in the 20th century without distinguishing between the so-called
hard sciences of physics and chemistry and the so-called soft sciences of economics and
sociology because it is through their intellectual unity, through the common ideas and theories
that we get a sense of science as a cultural phenomenon in the 20th century, and because
from the point of view of society, science is a unity.
Rightly or wrongly, the science-society relationship is driven by a perception of the unity and
the intellectual integrity of the sciences.
So we will be looking at both the intellectual inside of science and the social context outside
of science and seeing these as two sides, so to speak, of the same coin, distinguishable
but not separable.
And this has been, for me, the primary professional and intellectual commitment of my career
for almost 40 years now.
I have been studying and teaching the history and philosophy of science from the perspective
of the social context within which the conceptual framework of the sciences develops.
I specifically use the term evolution, which I am borrowing from biology.
In the minds of Charles Darwin and Alfred Russell Wallace, evolution meant the emergence
of novelty by introducing discontinuities into an underlying continuity.
This is a critically new and highly innovative concept in the 19th century that becomes very
much more important still and of broader application in the 20th century.
Evolution means that in time, unpredictable novelty emerges, and the way that it emerges
is because an underlying continuity is transformed by unpredicted discontinuities, in the case
of biology we call them mutations, for example, that for biology gives rise to new species,
but in intellectual history there is an intellectual analog of mutations, ideas that transform
earlier ideas without dispensing with them.
This is why I believe it is valuable to look at science in the 20th century as an evolutionary
outgrowth of 19th century science and not a revolutionary rejection or displacement
of 19th century science, because that would suppose that because 19th century scientific
theories are now considered to be wrong, so they are irrelevant.
They're gone, they're history.
On the contrary, they are living elements within the transformed theories of 20th century
physical science, life science, and social science.
Our odyssey, our intellectual history, will be organized not by discipline, but by around
five broad themes.
The theme of matter and energy, the theme of the universe and our conception of the universe,
and what we mean by the term universe, contrasting 1900 and 2000, the earth, our understanding
of the earth, life, and mankind.
Those will be the five themes, and we will also be looking at several seminal developments
in mathematics that were profoundly influential on the practice of science and on the ways
that science was applied in the course of the 20th century.
I want to emphasize that because ordinarily abstract mathematics is simply dropped out
of presentations of the history of science, and yet some of the most exciting intellectual
developments in the 20th century came from a small number of developments in mathematics,
and we'll be looking briefly and of course qualitatively at those.
Our survey of the sciences will then have this dual character.
It will have the intellectual inside interwoven with, but occasionally we will look specifically
at the social context outside.
If, as I said, we are going to do a survey of the evolution of 20th century science out
of 19th century science, then we need to identify the core ideas of 19th century science that
provided the continuity that was transformed into new kinds of ideas and theories in the
20th century.
And I want to highlight eight of these.
This will get us started on the theme of matter and energy, but we will find that these ideas
recur in different forms across the sciences.
And as need be, we will introduce new 19th century ideas as we talk about some of these
other themes as they are appropriate.
So for right now, there are eight ideas that I'd like to call your attention to.
One is the idea of the atom.
