If A is the parent of B, B cannot be the parent of A.
But the sibling relationship is symmetrical, as the brother-sister relationship would not be.
If A is the sibling of B, then B is the sibling of A.
So there's an example, a simple example of a relationship that has properties of its own.
And the recognition of this led to a hierarchy of abstract logics which built on the properties of the relationships
between relationships, etc.
And this strengthened, in the 20th century, this strengthened the conviction that relationships had a reality
and did not have to be reduced to configurations of things.
The sixth of the eight ideas that I want to call attention to in the 19th century
that are critical for understanding 20th century science and not just physics,
the wave theory of light.
From Newton in the end of the 17th century until the first third of the 19th century,
the prevailing theory of light was that light was like tiny little ghostly atoms,
which Newton called corpuscles.
Newton formulated a corpuscular theory of light which in the 19th century was finally discovered to be utterly inadequate
and it was replaced by a theory that light was made of waves, was a wave phenomenon.
Because it's a wave phenomenon, waves are distributed in space,
waves have a certain periodicity, a frequency they're called, they have a wavelength,
each wave has a characteristic length, etc.
And so the wave theory of light, it became one of the great triumphs of 19th century science.
It was perceived in the 19th century to be one of the great triumphs of 19th century scientists
to have improved on Newton's corpuscular or atomic theory of light
in which light was like a stream of little bullets.
Coordinate with the wave theory of light and really its maturation.
In 1865, James Clark Maxwell, Scottish physicist, published an electromagnetic theory of energy
of which light is just one type, light is just one set of frequencies within the total spectrum
or spread of frequencies of electromagnetic energy.
A little below light, a little below the visible level is the infrared level that we experience as heat
and a little above it is the ultraviolet level, but when you go, which causes sunburn, among other things,
but when you go way beyond it, then you're out into x-ray land, for example.
So Maxwell's electromagnetic theory of energy, which by the way explained what it meant to say that light was a wave,
was perhaps the most important theory in physics by the close of the 19th century.
Idea number seven, probability and statistics.
There were natural processes that required probabilities in order to describe them.
In the 20th century, this becomes a principle of nature in quantum theory,
but in the 19th century, in order to explain the relationships among the pressure, volume and temperature of gases,
Maxwell and an Austrian physicist named Ludwig Boltzmann had to introduce the idea that probabilities, statistics,
were not just a function of our ignorance of the information we needed to give a total picture of nature,
but that in fact certain fundamental natural phenomena were by nature probabilistic.
And this was merely suggested in this kinetic theory of gases of Maxwell and Boltzmann,
but in the 20th century this becomes a very important concept.
And finally, of course, the idea of evolution, which we've already discussed.
I'm going to mention three of the many discoveries and of the many instruments that were invented in the 19th century.
Three need to be called attention to because they are going to recur throughout the course.
First of all, the color corrected microscope.
The microscope had become useless by the beginning of the 19th century because the things people were interested in looking at
required powers of magnification that were beyond uncorrected microscopes.
The corrected microscope, which allowed you to have high power magnification without blurring, was introduced in the 1830s and 1840s.
And by the end of the century, biologists could see not only cells, but the nucleus within the cell
and within the nucleus structures called chromosomes, that were called chromosomes.
So the color corrected microscope was a very important discovery.
And so were two other instruments that are less familiar to us.
One is called the spectrometer, actually an extraordinarily simple device, not that easy to make,
but conceptually extremely simple, which when you pass a beam of light through the spectroscope,
it breaks up the light into the various frequencies of which it's composed.
And this will turn out to be a critical instrument for building up a body of data that quantum theory, for the first time, explained.
And the second instrument, even more unfamiliar than the spectroscope, is the interferometer, invented by Albert Michelson,
who was the first American to win a Nobel Prize.
He won the Nobel Prize for physics at the turn of the 20th century.
And Michelson invented a machine, his fascination in life was getting the speed of light down with excruciating precision.
And in order to do that, he invented a machine that allowed essentially allowing two beams of light to overlap.
And then by doing this, the interferometer allows you to measure extremely small distances.
There are interferometers are in use in industry and research labs all over the world today.
But that device will turn out to be of critical importance to us when we move on to talk about quantum theory.
