Because if you have a spaceship that takes off from Earth
and it reaches a very, very high speed traveling towards the nearest star,
it's reached a uniform speed.
And from the Earth, you measure how long the rocket ship is, the spaceship is,
and you come up with, well, it's going to be a length much shorter than when it was on the ground.
When the spaceship comes back to Earth, corrosion apart,
it's going to be the same length that it was when it landed.
But time doesn't behave that way.
The people on board will have aged less than their twins on Earth.
This is sometimes called the twin paradox or the clock paradox.
If you put a clock on board that spaceship, when it comes back,
it's not going to have the same time as the clock that it was synchronized with on Earth.
The explanation for that is that in order to come back,
it has to go through a period of deceleration and reacceleration,
the forces are now acting on it, so the special theory of relativity, in fact,
does not apply to that, you have to use the general theory of relativity,
that we're going to get to that.
So the special theory of relativity required rethinking what we mean by space and time,
but perhaps more dramatically, out of plugging into traditional physics,
those two assumptions that I mentioned,
the principle of the relativity of motion and the constancy of the speed of light,
a bizarre equation drops out, equal mc squared.
Now, we may think of atomic bombs,
but what's really shattering about this equation is, as I mentioned in the last lecture,
the 19th century was tremendously proud of the concept of energy
and the science of thermodynamics establishing energy as a feature of reality parallel to matter.
There's a conservation of energy law, there's a conservation of matter law.
Now comes an equation which says that the two are really two different facets of the same reality,
that matter and energy are inter-convertible.
You can convert matter into energy and energy into matter, at least that's what the equation says.
The equation had no practical significance until the 1930s.
Since then, special relativity theory has been confirmed so broadly that it's just a routine tool that scientists use.
But there are the two features of the special theory of relativity that we need to pay attention to.
One, that it makes all measurement of space and time relative to frames of reference,
and therefore it suggests that space and time are not things, they are relationships.
And you remember how important relationships become in 20th century science.
This is 1905 and they're beginning to emerge here in physics.
And second, the relationship between energy and matter.
We will soon see how 1905 was a peculiar year for that equation to appear
because it was just two years after Marie Curie showed that tiny specks of radium
released enormous quantities of energy, energy that could not conceivably be accounted for by any known chemical process
and so it was speculated that some kind of nuclear energy was being revealed in the course of radioactive disintegration.
And E equal MC square, of course, by 30 years later in the middle of the 1930s,
the theory of fission came along which completely vindicated the E equal MC square,
but not with consequences that we are completely happy about.
Between 1905 and 1917, Einstein occupied himself with two parallel tracks.
One was to develop further his contributions to quantum theory.
Concurrently, he also, starting in 1907 in particular, he started generalizing the special theory of relativity.
On the one hand, it was not that satisfying to have the theory of relativity limited to the special case
of observers that were only in uniform motion, but there was also another problem.
So this is one of the nice things about science is that very often scientists are motivated by problems.
It's the selection of the problem that often is the key to whether a scientist will be perceived as a creative genius or not.
You don't start with the solution typically.
The problem that Einstein was concerned with after the special theory of relativity
was a peculiar feature of Newtonian science that had been accepted and really unquestioned until the early 20th century.
There is such a thing as gravitational mass. We call it weight.
That is to say, the effect that gravity has on a material object, giving it what we call its weight,
and that comes from the force of gravity acting on the mass of the object.
But then there's the inertial mass. That means the mass of the object as determined by its resistance to being moved.
