Einstein had his own problem. He was troubled by something so simple that you would ordinarily dismiss this as an elementary school sort of thing.
What does it mean to say that two events happened at the same time?
From the 17th century until 1905 when Einstein made it the focus of this paper, it was just taken for granted that you just see when two things happened at the same time.
But Einstein pointed out that since everybody believes that the speed of light is limited, it's fast but it's limited,
how can in order for you to see that an event distant from you happened at the same time as an event near you,
then you have to get a light signal from that second event. It takes time for the light signal to travel to you.
So as a matter of fact, if you're standing in a place and you see something very close to you happen and you, out of the corner of your eye,
see that something further away is happening at the same moment, guaranteed that one didn't happen at the same moment.
Because it took time, that one had to happen earlier because it took time for the light to travel to you.
So Einstein took these two problems and he solved them in the special theory of relativity in a way that is very simple,
reminding us of this idea of the emergence of complexity out of simplicity.
Very simple theory, the special theory of relativity, but its consequences are tremendous.
It rests on two principles, one of which had been accepted by physicists for 300 years.
It's called the principle of the relativity of motion. When two observers are traveling at a uniform speed,
there are no forces acting on their laboratories that are not the same in both laboratories,
then the laws of physics will be identified by both of them to be the same.
If you drop rocks off the tower of Pisa and you come up with Galileo's equation, s equal one half gt squared,
and you do the same thing in New York, you're going to get the same equation.
It's not going to be different.
That's what's special about the special theory of relativity.
It restricts itself to comparing the laws of physics in frames of reference that are moving uniformly with respect to one another.
That means there's no forces causing accelerations or decelerations.
If you're on a ship that's pitching and heaving in the sea, then the laws of physics are going to look awfully different to you
than they would be on the shore.
But if the ship is moving smoothly at a constant speed on a glass smooth sea
and someone else is doing the same experiment on shore, you're going to wind up with the same law.
Everybody agreed with that. That was not controversial.
It was the second piece of the special theory of relativity that was new.
Einstein said, let's take the empirical fact that everybody keeps coming up with the same speed of light and make it a principle of nature.
You make it a principle of nature that the speed of light in a vacuum is a constant for all observers regardless of their motion,
whether you're heading towards the ray of light, running away from the ray of light,
you're always going to measure 186,000 miles per second.
It's counter-intuitive.
There's nothing else that we know of that does that,
but let's make that a principle of nature because it does not contradict experimental evidence.
And what follows?
What follows is the special theory of relativity,
which includes such dramatic conceptual change as looking at space and time as relationships, not things,
which is what Newton had defined them to be.
From Newton until 1905, space and time with some few exceptions were accepted by scientists according to Newton's definitions
that space had an existence, a Euclidean character to it that existed independently of anything in space
and that time was like an absolute clock ticking away at the heart of the universe at a uniform rate,
whether anything happened or not.
According to the special theory of relativity, all spatial and temporal measurements,
if I measure a length or a temporal interval, that measurement is relative to my frame of reference.
If I change my frame of reference, I'm going to get a different number.
Knowing the special theory of relativity, I can connect all of these numbers.
So the special theory of relativity is a deterministic theory.
It's unfortunate that literary people seem to have responded to this theory as if it meant that everything was relative.
It only means that measurement of spatial intervals and time intervals is relative to the frame of reference.
But all frames of reference, once you know how fast someone is moving, you can make adjustments for it
and say, oh, that person came up with a length of 98.7 feet, but given the way they were moving,
that's equivalent to our 100 feet in our laboratory.
And so there's no surprises there at all.
But there is a little surprise.
