The next time a star explodes in a region that this instrument is sensitive to,
then we would expect to see some kind of a change in the shape of space in the immediate environment of the Earth.
And if this instrument isn't sophisticated enough and sensitive enough,
NASA and the European Space Agency are collaborating on a space-based interferometer,
which is millions of miles in which the legs are millions of miles apart
and which would be able to detect changes in space much smaller than that, 10 to the minus 16 centimeters.
So scientists take very seriously the prediction by the General Theory of Relativity
that there are such things as gravity waves, which would propagate at the speed of light
and, in fact, would have to be carried by something called a graviton, analogous to a photon.
That is, say, the carrier of gravitational energy should be the kind of a thing that a photon is.
Photons carry electromagnetic energy.
Now comes, in a certain sense, the most amazing prediction of the General Theory of Relativity
and one which Einstein himself could not believe.
And so he modified the theory because he thought, surely, the theory can't be right if it predicts that.
In 1917, a Dutch physicist named Willem de Sitter,
wrote to Einstein, this was only two years after the General Theory of Relativity was published,
in which he showed Einstein that certain solutions to the equations that he published for the General Theory of Relativity
implied that the universe was expanding, implied that the universe was expanding,
and, furthermore, it actually implied that, under quite realistic assumptions,
the expansion would be accelerating.
Einstein was quite well aware of the fact that contemporary astronomers did not believe that the universe was expanding.
There was not the slightest shred of experimental evidence that the universe was expanding.
And so Einstein, between 1917 and 1922, kept going back and fiddling around with his equations,
introducing a term to eliminate the expansion of the universe, because there ain't no expansion.
Now, of course, the great irony is that perhaps the single greatest scientific discovery of the 1920s is that the universe is expanding.
For decades after, Einstein used to say, it was the dumbest thing I ever did, playing around with my own theory to make it right.
And it's also very revealing and interesting about Einstein as a character, because in other respects,
Einstein was not bothered by whether experiments confirmed his theories or not.
I mentioned earlier his 1905 paper on the Brownian motion.
In 1905, Einstein's theory of the Brownian motion did not, as a matter of fact, match current experimental evidence.
And in 1906, he published a follow-on paper in which he mentioned this divergence,
but said he was confident that future experiments would vindicate the theory, which they did.
And yet here, well, maybe it's age, here it is, a mere 10 years later.
And Einstein, well, if astronomers say it's not expanding, then I guess I have to modify my theory.
So the general theory of relativity has cosmological implications, that space is finite, the universe is expanding.
If it's expanding, then it's finite in time too, because it means it had a beginning.
And that space, time, matter, and energy are intimately connected.
We are going to stop for the moment and not follow the cosmological consequences of the general theory of relativity.
We will reserve that for a future lecture, and we're going to turn to quantum theory for two reasons.
First, because Einstein himself was one of the architects of quantum theory.
And second, because in the 1980s and 1990s, physicists have been attempting,
since the 1980s and 1990s, physicists have been attempting to unify quantum theory and the general theory of relativity.
And so we'll pick up on that theme. Thank you.
