Now, an extension of this was actually rather quickly noted by a German physicist whose
life was unfortunately taken in World War I and he was on the Russian front and he actually
made this calculation in the trenches and sent it back home.
Calculated that under an extreme case and an extremely dense concentration of the matter,
the light wouldn't get past it at all.
In 1939, semi-independently, the Hungarian-American mathematician John von Neumann predicted the
existence of something that in the 1960s was given the name by John Wheeler at Princeton
was given the name a black hole as a region of space in which the concentration of matter
is so intense that radiation cannot escape from it.
So the general theory of relativity has dramatic consequences that are still being played out
and we need to talk a little bit more about these consequences.
I mentioned the light bending which confirmed the general theory of relativity, 1919 expedition
and the fact that it then, that the theory predicts black holes which mathematically
anticipated in 1939 were actually identified in the 1970s and are now believed to be very
widely distributed throughout the universe.
For example, current thinking as we will see in a later lecture is that every galaxy has
a massive black hole at its center.
But the general theory of relativity has other consequences that we need to think about.
One is that the general theory of relativity is flat out explicitly ontological.
That means a fancy philosophical term for describes reality.
It makes claims about reality.
It is possible to interpret the special theory of relativity epistemologically.
That is to say as a statement about what we can know about measurement, metrologically
would be a better term, metrologically in terms of what we can measure.
So it is possible to interpret the special theory of relativity metrologically as a
statement about measurement.
Well you can only, every measurement of space, every measurement of time is relative to a
frame of reference.
In the general theory of relativity, there is no escaping the claim that this is what
space is, this is what time is, this is what matter is.
Now the general theory of relativity predicts gravity waves.
The general theory of relativity predicts that when there is a change in the distribution
of matter in the universe that waves ripple through space that can be detected and that
affect the shape of space everywhere else in the universe.
Just as when a star emits a photo time, when a star emits light and we can see it after
billions of years traveling through space, I use this example before if a star becomes
a supernova, which is something that stars routinely do in the course of ending their
lives.
So when a star becomes a supernova and it explodes, depending on the original mass of
the star, a number of things can happen and we'll be talking about that too in a subsequent
lecture, but the main thing that happens is that the mass of the star is now distributed
over a huge area, whereas before it was all concentrated.
Now when that event happens, it sends gravity wave ripples across the universe, which manifests
themselves as a change in the shape of space.
So for example, space becomes a little flatter because now it's not a bowling ball anymore.
Now the bowling ball has exploded and what's left is a golf ball and a lot of little fragments,
none of which can disturb the rubber sheet much.
So now space is much flatter.
If space is flatter, dimensions change.
They don't change a lot, but measuring length will be different because before, since the
space was curved, lengths were, let's just say, shorter and now they're going to come
a little bit longer.
No one has ever detected, well, no one has yet detected gravity waves.
There have been a number of attempts to do so and at the end of the 20th century, the
National Science Foundation funded the construction of America's first gravity wave telescope,
which is based on Michelson's interferometer.
It is a device which is several miles long, which is capable of determining a change in
the distance between two fixed points as small as the diameter of a proton.
