Welcome to the third lecture in our survey of the sciences in the 20th century.
Last time we looked briefly at the special and general theories of relativity.
Both of those theories, radical though they were, were deterministic theories that explained
natural phenomena in a way that would have been recognizable by 19th century scientists.
They both used modes of reasoning and forms of mathematics that would have been recognizable
by 19th century scientists.
They left in place some of the great achievements of 19th century physics, especially the atomic
theory of matter, the wave theory of light, and Maxwell's electromagnetic theory of energy,
which as I said in our first lecture, was considered by the end of the 19th century
to be perhaps the most glorious achievement of 19th century science.
The theories of relativity left those in place.
So radical though they were, they were not nearly as radical as quantum theory.
Quantum theory overturns the conceptual structure of 19th century science wholesale.
Quantum theory is the crown jewel of 20th century science, but because it is framed
in highly abstract mathematics, because to understand quantum theory requires a considerable
amount of preparation, very few people who are not specialists, and including quite a
few scientists who are not specialists, have an understanding of the intellectual dimension
even of quantum theory and of what is so exciting about it, how it has changed not just our
conception of physical reality, but how it has changed our conception of rationality
itself.
So it is worth our time to take some time to go through quantum theory in some detail,
qualitatively of course, but looking at the evolution of quantum theory, which is in fact
a 20, a holy 20th century phenomenon.
I am going to periodize quantum theory and divide it up into three stages, from 1900
to 1929, which I am calling the heroic stage of quantum theory, heroic because that was
the period during which the founders of quantum theory had to wrestle with so radically transforming
what they had been taught as young physicists.
From 1930 to 1964, quantum theory is what I would call a working stage.
Quantum theory was formulated into what is called quantum electrodynamics, QED for short,
which is the quantum version of Maxwell's electromagnetic theory, and that theory turned
out to be the framework within which an enormous amount of physics and chemistry was done in
the 1930s, 40s, 50s, right into the 1960s, and we will be following up on quite a bit
of that.
From 1964 on, quantum theory is in what I have called its mature stage, and in that stage
a totally new theory of matter was formulated, and the beginnings of the unification of all
of the known forces of nature into a single theoretical framework, which we will trace
in subsequent lectures.
In this lecture, I want to talk about the first heroic stage of quantum theory, but
running through all three stages is a single principle that is absolutely fundamental to
quantum theory, and that is the quantum.
That is to say, the belief that at the ultimate level, when you get down to the most fundamental
level of natural processes, nature is discrete, not continuous.
Even space and time, according to quantum theories in the 1980s and 90s, are ultimately
atomic.
They are ultimately discrete.
They are ultimate little bits of space, and you can't get any smaller than that, and units
of time, and you can't get any smaller than that.
These are very small units.
But nevertheless, they prevent continuity.
They exclude the idea that space and time are continuous.
Our ordinary experience leads us to believe, classical science from the 17th to the 20th
century believed that nature was deep down continuous, and certainly space and time were.
But quantum mechanics is based on the principle that natural processes ultimately are discrete,
and we're going to be talking about how they came to that conclusion in today's lecture.
