Newton had talked about them as indestructible spheres.
Only God can make and create atoms according to Newton.
So, atoms were solid. They could not be divided up.
In 1896, J.J. Thompson discovered that atoms had an internal structure.
J.J. Thompson discovered that there was such a thing as an electrically charged particle inside the atom.
This is all by itself a fascinating discovery,
but it leads to the problem of how are these electrons organized inside the atom?
And Thompson himself favored a model which people have compared to putting,
raisins in putting, in which the electrons are the raisins,
and the positive stuff is smeared out like the pudding, but three-dimensionally.
It's a lump of positive charge, electric charge,
and then the negative electric charge takes the form of raisins distributed inside the pudding.
And then the question was how are they distributed?
How are the electrons distributed?
Because that makes a big difference, and it was also thought that maybe we can explain
why certain atoms combine together in chemical bonds
if we understood how the electrons are arranged inside the atom.
Of course, as you well know, this pudding model of the atom disappeared fairly quickly.
And between 1906 and 1910, a number of alternative models of the atom were suggested,
and in particular, the one that stuck was Ernest Rutherford's model,
which resulted from an experiment that he asked two of his graduate students to do,
Geiger and Marsden.
We know about Geiger because of the Geiger counter, and Marsden.
So a German graduate student at his lab and a British graduate student,
he told them to expose thin sheets of gold, which is pretty heavy metal,
thin sheets of gold to rays from radioactive material.
In particular, radioactive materials emit three kinds of rays,
as we will be talking about shortly, alpha, beta, and gamma rays.
The alpha rays, which is the one that Rutherford was interested in using,
are really helium atoms stripped of their electrons.
So in modern language, the alpha ray is a bullet made of two protons and two neutrons,
but they didn't know that in 1910.
Rutherford's idea was that since the alpha rays are positively charged,
and if you shoot them at these gold atoms, then the way that they get scattered,
that's the technical term in physics, the way they are deflected when the positively charged
helium nuclei or alpha rays come close to the electrons in the gold atom,
they'll be scattered.
And the way to look at that is that would give us a picture maybe,
it'd be like a probe of understanding how the electrons are arranged inside the gold atoms.
Well, what happened was quite surprising.
Every now and then, one of the helium nuclei got bounced almost straight back.
That's a bit of an exaggeration, but they got bounced back.
That should not have happened.
You expect that the positively charged alpha ray, when it comes close to the nucleus,
which is positively charged, will be pushed away,
but then there's the attractive side of the electrons,
and so somehow you expected it to go through the gold foil,
but to go through certain narrow angles,
and maybe you could figure out something about the electrons inside the atom from that,
but they got bounced back.
As a result of these experiments, Rutherford proposed that atoms are mostly empty space.
In fact, they are over 99% empty space.
The nucleus is a tiny fraction, approximately 1% of the volume of an atom is the nucleus,
and then there's this cloud of electrons at that time,
we did not understand their organization in 1910,
that are orbiting around the nucleus, negatively charged, tiny little electrons,
orbiting around the solid nucleus.
That was the solar system model of the atom that Rutherford proposed in 1910.
It has one major flaw.
According to Maxwell's electromagnetic theory,
the electron should instantly spiral into the nucleus.
There is no way to keep those negatively charged electrons
orbiting in a stable way around the positively charged nucleus.
So Rutherford's model looks right experimentally,
but theoretically it's totally wrong.
