Now, this is really puzzling because electromagnetic, the wave theory of light, one of the great
triumphs of 19th century, we overthrew Newton, we outgrew Newton, and now Einstein is bringing
back an atomic theory of light, but without giving up the frequency part.
That is to say, light still has a frequency, not particles don't have frequencies, well
it has a frequency and it behaves like a particle, so there is a curious duality to photons,
to these quanta of electromagnetic energy, but Einstein showed that not only does it
work in the photoelectric effect, but between 1905 and 1909, Einstein taking the quantum
hypothesis as physically real, applied it to a series of puzzling problems in physics
and chemistry and solved them, and other physicists following this lead applied the quantum hypothesis
to problems in physics and chemistry and found solutions that were very satisfying.
So in some sense, Einstein wrote the foundational paper of quantum theory even though Planck
deserves the credit for introducing the quantum hypothesis.
Einstein's 1905 photoelectric effect paper, which I mentioned to you was the one that
he received the Nobel Prize for in 1921, that paper also raised another issue, which
subsequently came back to in a sense haunt Einstein and has been a controversial issue
in physics ever since.
He didn't invent this issue, it had arisen in the 19th century but was simply not taken
all that seriously.
Einstein works into this paper the claim that for us to take a physics theory seriously,
it has to be capable of giving us a picture of reality.
The general theory of relativity, radical though it is, is a deterministic theory that
gives us a picture of reality, of space, time, matter, energy.
Einstein says that to take a physics theory seriously, its conceptual structure must be
consistent because if it's logically inconsistent, how could it be true of reality?
This was a prejudice of Einstein's to the end of his life, and we're going to see how
this becomes, this put him in tension with the intermediate as well as the mature phases
of quantum theory.
The very theory that he was the primary architect of in the first decade of the 19th century
by the 1930s, he was an outsider.
So quantum theory between 1905 and 1909 has solved a number of interesting problems.
Some people took it seriously, some people didn't take it seriously, primarily it was
young people who took it, young physicists who took it seriously, but quantum theory
became center stage in physics with the work of a young Danish post doctoral student named
Niels Bohr.
Bohr received his doctorate in 1910 and won an award to study in the laboratory at Cambridge
University, JJ Thompson, the man who in 1896 discovered the electron.
He and Thompson did not get along, they had different styles, Bohr was quite an interesting
character, he's the only Nobel Prize winning physicist who also won a gold medal in the
Olympics.
He and his brother were on the Danish national soccer team, or football team as everybody
else in the world except us calls it, and they won the gold medal.
So his brother was a mathematician, a world class mathematician.
Bohr didn't get along very well with Thompson, he was to Bohr's taste too stuffy, so he went
to Manchester laboratory at Manchester where Ernest Rutherford was, and Rutherford and
Bohr got along just fine, but to understand what Bohr did in 1912, we have to step back
for a moment and look at the development of matter theory, the atomic theory of matter.
In 1806, the modern theory of atomic theory of matter was introduced by John Dalton, a
physicist trained as a physicist as we would call him, who was studying atmospheric physics,
he was trying to understand the way gases mixed in the atmosphere, knowing that the
atmosphere is composed of nitrogen, oxygen and carbon dioxide overwhelmingly, how these
gases mix in the atmosphere, and in the course of working out his theories, Dalton introduced
a particular version of atomic theory that had been, people had played around with atomic
theory ever since the ancient Greeks, but Dalton gave a systematic version of atomic
theory completely wrong as far as we're concerned, but it was the seed from which atomic theory
grew in the course of the 19th century, but Dalton's atom, and in fact the atom until
1896, was a solid little thing.
