Now remember, the explanation of the spectroscopic data was that the frequencies of light emitted by specimens,
a specimen of iron, let's say, was related to the orbital transitions that were permitted for electrons orbiting around an iron nucleus.
Now what happens if you take that light and you start sort of munking around with it?
You make it go through magnetic fields, for example.
And what happens is it turns out that you start getting new frequencies.
Well, what's going to explain those new frequencies?
By 1922-1923, enough new kinds of spectroscopic experiments had been done on light that started to call the quantum theory of Bohr and his allies into serious question.
But there was no going back.
For these people, there was no going back.
They had already so abandoned the concepts of 19th century physics that it was not a question of, okay, let's admit quantum theory was a mistake and go back.
It was a question of going forward, but how to go forward.
So the way turned out to be first darker and then bright.
In 1923, a French graduate student, an aristocrat from one of the most aristocratic families in France, Louis de Broglie,
wrote a doctoral dissertation in which applying the quantum hypothesis in a sort of, if one can use this expression, naive way,
to traditional Newtonian mechanics suggests that matter, matter which is conceived to be an atom, should also have a dual character,
just like electromagnetic energy, that matter is made of particles, but it should sometimes behave like a wave, which is quite startling,
a quite startling claim to make, but de Broglie showed that mathematically speaking, it all made sense.
Mathematically speaking, there was no experimental confirmation whatsoever in 1923 of this prediction that if you had a beam of electrons,
you could make it behave in a way that suggested that it was a beam of waves, not a beam of particles.
If true, this would extend the duality, the wave particle duality from energy to matter.
Now, as a matter of fact, jumping ahead for the moment, in 1927, two Americans and independently two British physicists experimentally confirmed de Broglie's prediction.
And the way they did it was to adapt a technique that had been suggested in 1912 by Max von Lowy at a time when x-rays were not understood.
And von Lowy said that if they are a form of electromagnetic energy, then if you shine them on a crystal, you should be able to see the crystal because it has a periodic structure.
You should be able to see that they are electromagnetic waves, because x-rays are extremely high frequency electromagnetic waves.
And within a year, an experiment was done that in fact became the basis of x-ray crystallography, a tremendously important tool, especially in biology.
1953, it's what Watson and Crick used in order to discover the structure of DNA.
In 1927, Davidson and Germer here in the United States and the Braggs and the father and son physicists in England adapted this technique and shined a beam of electrons on a crystal
that showed that the electrons behave as if they were waves.
And two years later, a German physicist named Otto Stern showed that even atomic beams display a wave-like character.
So now all of a sudden things have gotten darker. Quantum mechanics is exacting a higher price still because now it requires that we accept the idea that wave particle duality is not just a curious fact about energy,
but it's a curious fact about matter as well. That matter also has. So then what is happening to matter?
We can no longer have confidence that matter is the solid stuff, or since it's not solid anymore after Rutherford Solar System, it's not the stuff of which natural phenomena are constituted.
So matter was becoming increasingly problematic and this had been one of the responses to the discovery in 1896 of radioactivity.
I've referred to this a number of times already, so we should sort of wrap it up.
