As we saw in the relativity theory, quantum theory begins with a problem that physicists
had that resisted solution for two decades.
The problem should have been relatively simple.
It is a direct consequence of Maxwell's electromagnetic theory.
If you have a body that absorbs all of the electromagnetic energy that falls on it, so
this is called in physics a black body.
A perfectly black body would absorb whatever light fell on it and whatever other electromagnetic
rays, infrared, ultraviolet, whatever.
And you can in fact have a laboratory version of such a black body.
For example, if you made a pinhole in a bowling ball shaped sphere, then any radiation that
hit that pinhole would be trapped inside the sphere and would go bouncing around inside
it.
The black body can absorb all frequencies of light.
Good.
So what?
As it does so, it gets hotter and hotter.
It's absorbing radiation.
Just like the black top on a road on a sunny day, it's getting hotter and hotter.
At a certain point, the black body starts radiating.
It starts radiating because it's hot.
Not because the radiation is leaking out, but because it is radiating electromagnetic
energy because it has now reached a temperature.
So now, the question is, how is the energy of the black body distributed among these
different frequencies of electromagnetic radiation?
Some of it visible light, some of it not.
It absorbed all of it.
How is it going to re-radiate it?
It seemed like a fairly straightforward problem.
And very quickly, physicists came up with an equation that accounted for the distribution
of energy at low frequencies, and other physicists came up with an equation that accounted for
the distribution at high frequencies, but nobody could come up with one explanation
that covered both high and low frequencies, and this was perceived to be really irritating.
It was really irritating because it should have been a straightforward application of
Maxwell's electromagnetic theory, along with certain assumptions that 19th century scientists
like to make.
In December of 1900, to give birth to the new century as it were, Max Planck, the German
physicist Max Planck, read a paper in which he presented an equation that explained it
all.
It covered the low frequencies, it covered the high frequencies, it solved the black
body radiation problem, but at a price.
For the equation to work, you had to assume that energy, electromagnetic energy, could
only be emitted or absorbed in packets.
Not continuous.
It would be like going to a store and saying, well, you can buy an ounce of this, or two
ounces or three ounces, but you may not have an ounce and a half.
Nature says you can have an ounce of energy, or two ounces, or three ounces, but you may
not have one and a half ounces.
This is absolutely contradictory to Maxwell's theory, but in fact to classical physics.
The energy can come in any size.
How can nature have a restriction on how much energy something possesses?
Planck called the fundamental unit of energy a quantum, for the Latin word for a packet,
a discrete unit.
Eventually in the late 1920s, 1927, it was given the name photon, and we're more familiar
with it as a photon, but it was called until then a quantum of energy.
Planck spent the next 12 years trying to get rid of the quantum, trying to find an equation
that didn't require making that assumption.
So at a certain level, Planck introduced the quantum hypothesis, but he didn't believe
it.
He thought it was just an artifact of the equation that he had written, and that he
had to figure out a way to get rid of it.
In 1905, Einstein, and you recognize this style, said, let's make it a principle of
nature and see what happens.
That was his photoelectric effect paper, and he showed that if you take it seriously, if
you assume that electromagnetic energy acts as if it were a dilute gas of atoms, then you
can explain the photoelectric effect beautifully.
You can explain the number of electrons that are emitted by a photosensitive surface and
their energies, and they can't be explained without making those kinds of assumptions.
But Einstein said, let's not play around and say, well, emitted and absorbed, they just
are electromagnetic energy comes packaged.
