Lecture 6 Matter and Energy QED meets Fission and Fusion
Welcome to our second lecture on quantum electrodynamics and the story that as we left off put us
in the mid 1930s with the discovery of the neutron and a satisfying to physicists of the
day satisfying theory of beta decay of how electrons can come out of a nucleus in the
process of radioactive decay by the decay effectively of the neutron when it comes out of the nucleus.
It does not stay around for many minutes before it disintegrates into a proton and electron
and a neutrino.
What this did the discovery of the neutron which was a natural so to speak consequence
of pushing quantum electrodynamics in order to understand the electrons that were emitted
from beta decay remember I mentioned in the last lecture that the focus of quantum electrodynamics
is on the interaction of electromagnetic energy and matter primarily the orbital electrons
in around atoms that so that studying electrons is quite a natural thing for QED and in fact
it is often talked about as Dirac's relativistic theory of the electron.
So that part is understandable in the context of QED but the discovery of the neutron in
order to resolve the issue of understanding the electrons that are emitted in beta decay
that the existence of the neutron focused attention on the nucleus.
So now we have a three particle theory of matter.
Dalton's atom was a solid little micro billiard ball.
Thompson's atom of 1896 was a fuzzier object because an internal structure it had these
electrically charged particles somehow distributed in a positively charged mess of electric stuff.
Rutherford's atom had electrons and protons plus some neutral stuff that just had weight
electrically neutral stuff that just had weight but in the mid 1930s we now had a new theory
of matter in which all atoms are built up out of electrons protons and neutrons as if
you had three buckets an electron bucket a proton bucket a neutron bucket and you could
sit there with this ultimate Lego set and you could pick electrons protons neutrons
and build any atom that you want.
How do you put the electrons and the protons together in the nucleus?
We know now thanks to quantum theory in its heroic stage how to arrange the electrons
in shells around the nucleus how do I arrange the protons in the neutrons in the nucleus
and furthermore isn't it odd that all of those protons all with the same electrical
charge are able to stay together in the nucleus shouldn't they blow each other apart?
Why is the nucleus stable?
So now we see a set of problems that define nuclear physics as a specific focus of physicists
in the mid 1930s and a number of lines of thinking the study of radioactivity the study
of fission of the quantum electrodynamics and now this new focus on nuclear physics begin
to begin to converge.
One important stage in the mid 1935-1936 was the theory that protons and neutrons are arranged
in shells within the nucleus analogous to the shells of the electrons orbiting around
the nucleus that the nucleus is not a solidly packed mass of electrons of protons and neutrons
that the protons and neutrons are arranged in shells.
The Japanese physicist Hideki Yukawa an interesting story all by itself how many Japanese physicists
made major contributions to relativistic and quantum theory physics in the first half of
the 20th century what's interesting about that story of course it was how rapidly after
the Meiji restoration of 1868 the Japanese culture was able to move into world class
status not just militarily and economically industrially but intellectually so to speak
playing the west game and that would take us a bit far afield but Hideki Yukawa was only
one of a number of physicists we will meet another one soon who made important contributions
to quantum theory Yukawa suggested two things.
