So there are two kinds of experiments.
Scattering experiments, which are exactly what they sound like.
Calculating with what probability any given particle,
if it's electrically charged, if it's positively charged,
depending on its mass and its energy,
or if it's electrically neutral depending on its mass and its energy,
what's the probability that it will be scattered by a particular kind of atom?
So if you know the quantum theory of the atom well enough,
you can calculate what the probability is that it will be scattered
and what the angle would be.
What's the probability that it will be absorbed?
Now, if you cause an atom to absorb another,
if a nucleus absorbs another particle,
it will change the character of that atom.
If it absorbs a neutron, it could simply become an isotope of itself.
Same atomic number, but now it has a greater mass
and it displays subtly different properties.
Or it could, absorbing the neutron,
the nucleus could become unstable, split what was discovered in the middle 1930s.
In a frenzy of radioactive, of research on the nucleus,
especially associated with radioactivity,
trying to understand the quantum mechanics of fission,
which means using QED to calculate the probabilities of these kinds of absorption events,
because those are the most interesting ones,
then that's called finding the absorption coefficient.
What is the frequency with which a certain type of atom will absorb,
let's say, neutrons that are fired at it?
This context of trying to apply QED to fission, to understand fission,
was what occupied scientists in the period, roughly speaking, 1934 to 1939,
and there was a great focus on uranium,
and a number of things were discovered by 1939,
which was that uranium was sensitive to slow neutrons,
that with a certain probability that QED allowed you to calculate,
you could predict the probability that uranium atoms would absorb that neutron fission,
and as a Hungarian physicist, refugee physicist in the late 1930s,
realized that when the uranium atom fissions, it releases neutrons, as well as energy.
And these neutrons, since it releases more than one,
can then go on and create a chain reaction,
so that in a short period of time,
if you can induce a relatively small number of uranium atoms to fission when you want them to,
they will cause lots of other uranium atoms to fission because of this spread of the neutrons.
So the concept of a chain reaction that would release a tremendous amount of energy in a short period of time,
because of the sensitivity of uranium to slow neutrons,
all of that, based on QED calculations,
was well known by the end of the 1930s, and the physics literature was loaded with this.
In addition, it was understood that the uranium isotope 235,
as opposed to naturally occurring uranium ore,
which is overwhelmingly uranium 238, so it has the same atomic number,
but it has a slightly greater mass, naturally occurring uranium.
Most uranium is in the form of the isotope called U238.
Only one out of every 143 atoms of uranium occurring out there in nature is uranium 235.
Uranium 235 is much more sensitive to these slow neutrons.
If you were going to make a bomb, then you needed lots of uranium 235,
otherwise it would have to be hopelessly too large.
