First, with regard to the nucleus, he suggested that what we needed to find were two interactions,
which we now call forces, a strong force and a weak force, a strong interaction that keeps
the nucleus together in spite of the protons wanting to push each other apart, and a weaker
interaction that keeps the neutron stable inside the nucleus, because we know that when
it's outside the nucleus, it's unstable and the neutron decays.
The strong interaction and the weak interaction become, in the 1960s, the strong force and
the weak force, two of the four fundamental forces of nature according to physicists.
The strong force, the weak force, the electromagnetic force, and gravity are the four fundamental
forces of nature by the end of the 20th century, and a comprehensive theory of nature would
therefore have to account for all four of those, and in our lecture on the unification
of nature, we will talk about the unification theories after 1964 that arose in physics
after 1964.
But here in the 1930s, for the first time, we begin to get clarity on this issue.
We need to account for the strong interaction, the weak interaction.
We know about the electromagnetic interaction, and then there's the gravitational interaction,
which is still beyond us and was not considered at the time to be relevant for nuclear physics.
One fact about quantum theory that has been consistent since the quantum electrodynamics
is the notion that every force is carried by some kind of particle.
What's the language that the physicists use?
What is the carrier of the electromagnetic force?
The photon.
The photon carries the electromagnetic force, and that's the idea of the quantization of
natural processes that the photon is the means by which an electrically charged particle
acts on another electrically charged particle.
There is a carrier, so to speak.
So this strong force has to have a carrier, the weak force has to have a carrier, and
gravity has to have a carrier.
The name of that particle is the graviton, but we have not yet detected gravitons.
We will talk about the forces, the carriers of the strong and the weak force in the subsequent
lecture when we talk about quantum chromodynamics, the mature stage of quantum theory after 1964.
Yukawa postulated that a carrier of the strong force would be a short-life particle that
lived briefly within the nucleus and that he gave the name meson to.
Meson for middle, a mesotron or subsequently shortened to meson.
This was in 1937.
Almost immediately, cosmic ray experiments revealed the presence of particles called
mesons, which seems another one of those magical rabbit out of the hat tricks the physicists
pull.
In this case it got more complicated because after World War II it was discovered that
while there are mesons, they're not Yukawa's mesons, that the cosmic ray meson was not
the meson that he had postulated.
That meson is not relevant, but there are mesons, and in fact there are families of
mesons and different types that need to be taken into account, but it's just interesting
that at the time people got very excited because we found Yukawa's meson.
Now they found the neutron, they found the positron, they were right those times, but
they didn't find the right, they didn't find the right meson.
What we're talking about however is the focus on nuclear physics, and this is an expression
of the attempt to work out a theory of the nucleus, and especially a theory of the nucleus
that would be consistent, a theory of the nucleus that would be consistent with our
growing experimental evidence about radioactivity and about the ability of atoms to fission.
Now here we get to be for the first time to get a feeling for what does quantum electrodynamics
do as a theory.
I mean, if you're a physicist what do you use it for?
In the next lecture we're going to talk about what good is it, and I said what practical
applications does it have, but in this lecture let's for at least clarify what do you do
with this theory?
It sounds hopelessly abstract, well quantum electrodynamics when used by physicists has
a rather specific task, it allows you to calculate the probability that an atom will absorb or
scatter a particle that approaches it.
If you fire a neutron at a specimen of uranium atoms, what's the probability that any given
uranium atom will absorb that neutron or deflect it?
