That's a non-zero probability, but it's very small.
On the other hand, according to the special theory of relativity,
it can't be near Jupiter now because it can't go more than 186,000 miles a second.
Now, I measure the electron and by golly, it's still sitting in the same place.
Instantly, all of those other probabilities of where it might be in the universe go to zero.
I mentioned before that physically interpreting the meaning of these probability functions,
whether they have a physical character or they're simply imaginary,
like the equator, has been controversial since the mid-1920s.
Nevertheless, the issue becomes, in quantum theory, it is possible to imagine a situation.
In fact, in 1935, Einstein co-authored a paper.
It's not clear how much he actually wrote of it, but he stood behind the content,
a paper that he co-authored with two physicists named Podolski and Rosen.
It was called the Einstein-Podolski-Rosen paper, almost everybody calls it EPR.
EPR of 1935, and since there was a second one, EPR-1, Einstein posited a situation
which he showed that, you know, according to quantum mechanics,
you could have a physical situation in which one particle could influence another particle
instantaneously. Isn't that ridiculous?
It is ridiculous. Therefore, quantum theory cannot be complete
because it's got to patch up these...
Bohr showed, and most people agree, that he showed that Einstein was wrong in setting up
the argument in that paper, and that that argument does not militate against quantum theory.
But as a matter of fact, it is correct that according to quantum theory,
as an Irish physicist named John Bell showed in the early 1950s,
he set the thought experiment of Einstein-Podolski-Rosen in 1935.
He set it up as a mathematical expression, saying,
if you did that an experiment like this, then you plugged the numbers into this
what's called equality. It's not an exact equation.
It just says one quantity has to be either greater or smaller than another quantity.
Equality is not important.
And then that will tell you whether quantum theory wins or Einstein wins
if you could do the experiment.
It took 30 years, but a French physicist named Alan Aspect
at the University of Paris figured out how to do the experiment.
Now, in the last 20 years, this experiment has become so routine
that you could probably do it at a high school science fair and not win.
But what you do is you create a pair of particles, photons, let's say,
that are sort of created out of the same event,
and they go off in opposite directions.
Quantum theory says that if you do certain things to this photon over here,
you make a measurement of certain properties on the photon over here,
you will instantly cause that other so-called entangled photon to acquire property X.
As soon as you measure property Y on this photon, that photon must have property X
because these two photons when they were created had a certain probabilities
of being in X or Y condition.
Once you know this one, that one has to have that effect.
Instantaneously, and it doesn't matter if they're a million miles apart
or a hundred million miles apart, it will instantaneously change.
That was the Bell thought experiment based on Einstein's thought experiment of 1935.
Aspect actually did it, showed that that's what happens. Quantum theory wins.
Most recently, in the year 2002, a team of physicists at the University of Vienna
were actually able to use this demonstration device based on this experiment
to transmit a quantum encrypted signal across the river Danube in open air.
You don't need all that exotic equipment to do it,
and this is in fact being explored as the basis for what's called quantum cryptography,
which would seem to be a code that could not be broken.
Now, those are two philosophical aspects of quantum electrodynamics.
That is to say, first, attempting to really understand the ultimate constitution of matter
and energy and the relationships between them.
Two, the philosophical issues at stake which are not so abstract, they're important to us.
Is science about reality or is science about experience?
Are scientific knowledge claims a matter of pragmatics or revelations of the truth?
