Quantum chromodynamics, the theory of the strong force, quantum electrodynamics which is the theory of the electromagnetic force, a theory of the weak force which is now interwoven with quantum electrodynamics into the electroweak theory and the standard model creates a single common framework that unites quantum chromodynamics and the electroweak theory.
Again, the line of reasoning is very strongly dependent on using gauge theory, the scale invariance assumption, using group theory in a very creative way, using certain mathematical techniques in a certain creative way and the concept of spontaneous symmetry breaking among the many other things that physicists do in order to use,
I mean, these are, these are, as I said, tools that are used, sort of the intellectual analogues of tools, there's the substance of the theory of course takes the form of sets of equations.
So this already is a kind of vindication of what in December of 1900 was Max Planck's tentative hypothesis that the process of the emission and absorption of electromagnetic radiation is discrete, not continuous.
It was so unexpected and for Planck himself so tentative, as I mentioned, he spent 12 years trying to undo it. It was almost as if the gods had whispered it in his ear and he had no clue as to what he had just said.
And between December of 1900 and the end of the 20th century, that notion that at some level natural processes are discrete, not continuous, has flowered into a comprehensive theory of matter and energy that allows us to give
satisfying theoretical accounts, then this all may be wrong. In 100 years, someone may be taping or not taping, I'm sure, but somebody may be recording a history of science in the 21st century, who will find it laughable that at the end of the 20th century, people were so confident that they were on the right track.
It's possible, just as we look back on 19th century physics and say, you know, it was heroic in its own way, but Maxwell was wrong, but the Lord Kelvin was wrong, their ideas of genetics were wrong.
It's possible, but at the moment we can give satisfying accounts of the universe from minute fractions of a second after the postulated Big Bang, and we'll be talking about that in greater detail.
Well, I keep talking about unification, but we've got a cousin out there that we have not touched. We've got something out there that has been left dangling and that is gravity.
We don't, I guess, really mind ignoring gravity inside the atom. It doesn't seem as though we need to use gravitational force inside the atom, but if we're talking about a comprehensive theory of matter and energy that scales up to the universe, so then one of the four fundamental forces of nature as everybody recognizes is, in fact, is gravity.
So you've got to include gravity. Attempts to unify the general theory of relativity with the standard model, right, the standard model being the name that physicists give to the unification of the strong force with the electroweak theory.
The attempts to unify gravity with the standard model are called supersymmetry theories, and for reasons that should be sort of clear, namely we're looking for another level of symmetry.
The level of symmetry that whose collapse led to the isolation of gravity as a force from the Higgs field force, which when it collapsed led us to, right.
So that's the kind of symmetry we're looking for. There have been, this is obviously extremely difficult stuff. I don't mean it's difficult to describe or explain, that's true, but it's difficult for physicists.
We're talking about attempts to conceptualize situations that are utterly beyond any kind of experience that any of us have had, even in particle accelerators.
Because we're talking about a unification prior to approximately 10 to the minus 43 seconds after the Big Bang when, according to the standard model, gravity had already frozen out.
