The idea being that if you were not clever enough to understand mathematics,
there's no way you're going to be able to understand the ideas that Plato's going to teach,
even though the philosophical idea is because he wasn't going to teach you mathematics.
But that was a proof that you were clever enough to be able to understand philosophical ideas.
So we need to think about mathematics in terms of, and what I want to structure around two ideas.
Mathematics as the language of science, and mathematics as the language of right reasoning.
Mathematics as the language of science, echoing something that Galileo said in the early 17th century,
that the book of nature is written in mathematical language,
and its characters are circles and triangles and squares, that nature is fundamentally mathematical.
So that when you use mathematics in science, you are speaking the language of nature,
and that's why mathematical theories in science are true,
because they are in some sense an image of the underlying structure of reality.
Already in the 17th century, there was considerable controversy over what role mathematics should play in the sciences.
René Descartes, one of the founders of modern science, and a major contributor to modern mathematics,
the inventor of analytic geometry, among other things, which allowed geometric forms to be expressed
in terms of algebraic equations of very, very important development.
Descartes argued strongly for mathematics as the core of science, natural science.
Francis Bacon, another founder of modern science, most famous for his writings proposing what we call the experimental method
in science, was extremely suspicious of mathematics, and claimed that too narrow a focus on mathematics
would be devastating to progress in natural science, that science was not fundamentally mathematical,
that mathematics was at best a useful tool for, let's say, analyzing data,
but had nothing to do with the structure of reality.
Now this argument, which went on, so to speak, in the first decades, the first third of the 17th century,
was effectively resolved between the time of Galileo, let's say in the 1630s,
when his work became extremely well known throughout Europe,
and the end of the 17th century with Newton and Leibniz, that math won.
Math was the language of science.
In the 19th century, this issue was revived over the question of what's the connection between mathematical models and reality.
Okay, mathematics is the language of science, but what is the correlation between mathematical theories
and what's actually happening out there?
So this kind of revives the Descartes-Bacon argument in a more sophisticated form.
We're not going to throw mathematics out, I just want to understand what I'm supposed to conclude when you show me your mathematical theory.
And we see in the 19th century a number of physicists who explicitly uncouple their mathematical theories
from whatever is going on out there in nature.
I don't know what's going on out there, but my mathematical theory describes the behavior of nature
without making any assumptions about what's really going on.
Others argued that that's not enough, that the success that mathematics has in predicting unexpected phenomena
requires us to believe that there's some deeper connection between mathematics and reality,
that a mathematical theory that works is connected to what's going on underneath there,
and that you can, in the mathematics, find clues to the physical reality.
And we have seen that several times in the course of the 20th century, especially in the course of quantum theory.
Looking in mathematical formalisms, which we have made up, for clues as to what physical reality is like.
Heisenberg, to mention one, with interpreting the non-commutativity of his matrices as revealing a fundamental truth about nature,
namely the uncertainty relations, would be just one of a number of illustrations that we've already seen of this phenomenon.
So mathematics as the language of science enters into the 20th century with a really rich history of controversy,
but at the same time a strong consensus that mathematics must be the language of science.
