Welcome to the first of two lectures devoted to talking about the role that mathematics
plays in the sciences. It's necessary to do this not just because mathematics has an
integrity of its own and it's beautiful and so on, but as I indicated at the close of
the last lecture, one of the characteristics of 20th century natural science, and we'll
see that this carries over to the social sciences as well, is that they became increasingly
mathematical. Just as chemistry in the course of the century became increasingly formal
in its theoretical models and increasingly utilized mathematical models as Paul Flory's
mathematical theory of polymer structures and of course the assimilation of quantum
theory to understanding chemical reactions, it was also true in genetics in the early
20th century that mathematics became a fundamental tool of people who were either advancing or
arguing against genetic theory and in the 1920s mathematical models of the spread of
genes under natural selection became an extremely important tool as we will see in the resurrection
of Darwinism. And in economic theory, for example, throughout the century mathematics
has played an increasingly large role. So we need to talk about mathematics because
it is in a certain sense responsible for a disturbing development in the sciences. The
sciences from the beginning of modern science were at least in principle supposed to be
an open and democratic process. The practice of science was supposed to be open and democratic
in the sense that anyone was capable of doing research and if they followed the rules of
the game, so to speak, if they used the scientific method, then their publications, their writings
could find an audience because scientists were not interested in what your religion
was. They were not interested in your economic condition. What did you have to say? And there
are so many illustrations of this in the history of science that surely in spite of the fact
that there were individual prejudices, of course, in terms of being European, in terms
of being male. Nevertheless, it makes sense to recognize that one aspect of science was
that contrary to other social political institutions, science has an open and democratic character.
But by the early 1900s, in fact, by the late 1800s, physical science had become something
like an esoteric cult because of mathematics and the spread of mathematics into the social
sciences, into psychology, into economics, as I mentioned before, and of course, increasingly
into chemistry and then throughout physics has made it the case that people without
specialist training, I mean, scientists don't like this kind of language, but for the rest
of us, there is some truth to the notion that science constitutes a kind of a priesthood.
The physical sciences constitute a kind of a priesthood. Anybody can get to be a priest
if they have the patience and the intelligence to get through which hoops, to jump through
which hoops. Typically, the most difficult hoops to jump through are the mathematical
ones. So it is critical, I believe, in order to understand the evolution of science in
the 20th century, to have some feeling for the role that mathematics has played in the
sciences, a role that I call imperialistic. Mathematics displays a certain imperialism.
Not mathematicians. They don't insinuate themselves into the science, but mathematics pushes its
way, so to speak, speaking anthropomorphically, pushes its way into the sciences and frequently
gets a tenacious hold there and becomes a hurdle, becomes a barrier to entry that needs
to be overcome in order to prove yourself. You know, it's sort of reminiscent of what
the sign that was supposed to be above, by legend, above the entryway to Plato's academy.
Let no one who is ignorant of mathematics enter here.
