Lecture 11, Matter and Energy, Chemists Become Designers
Welcome to the eleventh lecture in our Odyssey, our survey of the evolution of the sciences
in the twentieth century, and we take in this lecture a step away from quantum theory,
a small step away from quantum theory, and look at the evolution of chemistry of as a
science in the course of the twentieth century. It's worth reflecting for a moment, as we
do so, on the difference between our understanding of matter and energy in the year 2000, compared
to our understanding of matter and energy in the year 1900. To compare our theories
of matter and energy, in particular what we've just gone through and without reviewing them
again, what we've just gone through in following the evolution of quantum theory, our theories
of matter and energy at the end of the twentieth century with our theories of matter and energy
at the beginning of the twentieth century. I think that we can be justifiably impressed
and proud vicariously at the fact that human beings were able to formulate such intellectually
sophisticated and creative theories which give us far more powerful explanations of
a wider range of natural phenomena than we were capable of providing back in 1900. And
I think that we have laid a foundation to support the claim that quantum theory is the
crown jewel of twentieth century science, independent of its application even in other
sciences, but of course one of the reasons I mention this is because chemistry in the
twentieth century increasingly was influenced by quantum theory itself. The so to speak
the essence of chemistry is the way that atoms form molecules, the way that molecules
interact with one another in the context of chemical reactions. So molecules with molecules
or molecules with atoms and these interactions are what chemistry is about. Now these interactions
are, it came increasingly to be believed after 1900, are about take place at the outermost
orbital electron stage of the atoms. So chemical reactions, the essence of chemistry is associated
with understanding the behavior of orbital electrons at the outermost level. That seems
to be the determining force of when how atoms will combine with one another to form molecules
and how molecules will interact with one another when they are put into physical proximity.
So it is a natural so to speak that the quantum theory should be applied to chemistry because
what quantum theory was about right up to the strong force, what quantum theory was
about overwhelmingly until the middle of the 1930s when the focus shifted to physics was
the behavior of electrons. And so it probably is hardly surprising but nevertheless an impressive
achievement that Linus Pauling in the 1930s developed a quantum mechanics based theory
of the chemical bond. So chemical bonding now is in a certain sense is one of the most
fundamental features of chemistry as a science and so understanding the bond in terms of
quantum theoretical terms was one fact about the evolution of chemistry in the 20th century
that it assimilated quantum theory at by 1940 Linus Pauling's textbook had become the dominant
text his textbook on a theory of the chemical bond in which Pauling described two kinds
of bonds weak bonds called ionic bonds and covalent bonds which are strong bonds in the
case of ionic bonds an electron is transferred from one atom to another.
