Now, what kind of a proof is that?
The classical term for a proof in mathematics is demonstration from the word to show, Latin
root to show.
The idea of a mathematical proof was to show the line of reasoning so that anyone who followed
it could see that the conclusion had to be true.
That's why we do proofs.
We don't just take some mathematician's word for it that x is true.
Let me see your proof.
Now, if a computer is one step in the proof and you can't check that because no one's
going to do the 300 million calculations, then what kind of a proof is that?
What does a proof like that teach us about our reasoning, which is historically one of
the virtues of mathematics, is that it teaches us about our own reasoning?
Those are unresolved and perhaps unresolvable questions, but it is a fact that mathematicians
after considerable controversy in the 1980s have adapted to some extent to the use of
computers in proofs.
What I want to turn to now, very briefly, is to talk about some developments in 20th century
mathematics that have proven to be extraordinarily fertile in natural science.
In spite of all of these background philosophical confusions and issues which are not well resolved,
it continues to be the case, whether you want to call it unreasonably effective or miracle,
it continues to be the case that mathematics, new forms of mathematics continue to be fertile
in natural science.
One of these, one expression of this, is what is called, I think, a little unfortunately
game theory.
Game theory came to attention in 1943 with the publication of a book by the Hungarian
Emigre Visicist, also at the Institute for Advanced Study, in the 1930s, John von Neumann,
who played a major role in the development of computers at the end of and after World
War II, really the central role in computers as we programmed them, and played an important
role in quantum theories, quite a polymath and major figure in the Manhattan Project.
In 1943, he and a collaborator, Oscar Morgenstern, published a book on the theory of games, which
builds on work that von Neumann had started in the late 1920s, and actually published
on earlier, but it was in 1943, in the middle of World War II, that game theory began to
send out shock waves throughout the intellectual community, because it gave a mathematical
model of rational choice, a mathematical model of how to calculate what the right, what the
rational decision was to make in a particular situation.
Almost immediately, von Neumann applied this immediately to military tactics, and this
turned out, and it turned out to be quite fertile, in showing that commanders facing
specific situations could calculate what the most rational choice was, what the highest
probability positive outcome could be in different kinds of situations.
Maybe the prisoner's dilemma is one example of this that's become quite famous, but the
broad implications of game theory are that rational decision making means making decisions
consistent with this mathematical analysis of outcomes and the weight that you put on
negative outcomes, positive outcomes, so that defined rational decision making in the context
of the war, quickly adopted by military planners, but after the war, it has become absolutely
central to political science and economics, for example.
Game theory is extremely influential in psychology, economics, and political science.
We will, in subsequent lectures, be looking at late 20th century challenges to this notion
of rationality.
And in fact, the last few Nobel prizes in economics, really a Nobel Memorial Award
in economics, I have gone to people who have argued that people's economic behavior is
not rational in this way, and that that doesn't mean people are irrational, it means that
this model does not correctly describe what intelligent decision making is, keeping the
word rational out of it, but game theory has been extremely influential, and for reasons
that I just mentioned.
The second area that sounds also odd that we would be able to find any positive value
from is a branch of mathematics created in 1951 by an IBM mathematician named Mandelbrot,
who built on work that was done in the late teens and early 1920s by a range of mathematicians
who studied something called self-similar algebraic curves.
That means shapes, each part of which has the same shape as the whole.
And he gave the name fractals to this branch of mathematics.
Fractals are a branch of mathematics that studies the way that objects can be constructed
when the rules for building them are to apply over and over again the same formula.
