These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled, Science in the 20th Century, a Social Intellectual Survey, Part
2, Lecture 13, Mathematics and Reality.
Welcome to our second lecture on mathematics in the 20th century, mathematics as the language
of science, mathematics as the language of reason, and the challenges to those notions
that accumulated in the course of the 19th and early 20th centuries.
At the end of the last lecture, we left mathematics in what could legitimately be called a state
of confusion as to the nature of mathematical truth.
It should be startling to the rest of us, as it was to mathematicians, that something
that had been taken for granted within mathematics and within western culture for so long could
actually be such a problem, namely, accounting for the nature of mathematics and the nature
of mathematical truth, the basis of mathematical truth.
So there was, it is legitimate to say, without being guilty of much exaggeration, that there
was confusion among many mathematicians at the turn of the early in the 20th century,
1900 to 1910, 1920, about the fact that the formalists, the logisticists, the intuitionists
were duking it out, and there was no clear winner and a couple of pretty clear losers,
even though the losers included some of the greatest mathematical thinkers of the period.
Let me say that this confusion did not at all hamper the productivity of mathematicians.
They continued then, as they have continued throughout the 20th century, to generate new
mathematics at quite an astonishing rate.
The body of mathematical knowledge, creative new mathematical knowledge generated in the
20th century, dwarfs the mathematics created in previous centuries, in spite of the fact
that the 19th century was one heck of a century for mathematics, just as in the sciences,
the 20th century overwhelms the accomplishments of the 19th, so too in the case of mathematics.
So this confusion did not translate itself into intellectual paralysis, but it is a
legitimate problem when you begin to lose confidence in the foundations of your discipline.
In general, it is fair to say that mathematicians live with a peculiar unresolved problem,
peculiar when we put it this way, and that is, what is the nature of mathematical objects?
Do they exist independently of the human mind or not? Now, when confronted with the bald
question, many mathematicians will say, well, no. As Hilbert and Brower said,
mathematical objects are created by the mind. But on the other side, you've got what Eugene
Wigner of Princeton in 1960 called the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural
sciences, which says that there's got to be more to mathematics than that. Well, so there's a
branch of mathematicians privately will confess that most mathematicians do believe that mathematical
objects exist independently of the mind, that we discover mathematical objects and their
properties. We don't invent them, that we discover the triangle and its peculiar, its distinctive,
I should say its distinctive properties, and that leads to a problem. If mathematical objects
exist independently of the human mind, how do we learn about them? Well, we don't learn about it
from empirical experience because mathematical objects do not exist in the world. There are no
triangles in the world. There are no mathematical triangles in the world. There are triangular
bits of metal or wood or leather, but there are no mathematical triangles or circles or spheres
or squares. So we can have learned it empirically. Ah, the intuition is say, I got you there. We
have intuitive access to these objects. So if you believe that mathematical objects are invented
by the human mind, you've got the miraculous effectiveness of mathematics in the natural
sciences to explain. If you believe that mathematical objects exist independently of the human
mind, then you have the problem of explaining how we learn about them. Are we born with them as
Descartes seemed to believe, or he believed that they were innate, or somehow are they revealed to
us because God allows us access to the divine mind as Augustine believed, the Bishop of Hippo in
the fourth, in the fourth century. This is an unresolved problem in mathematics and it has
some connection to the use of mathematics in the sciences, but we're just going to let it hang for
the moment because I want to focus on girdle and touring.
