Lecture 14, The Universe, The Universe Expands
Welcome to the next episode in our Odyssey,
our intellectual survey of the sciences in the 20th century.
And today, in this lecture, we're going to be discussing a subject
that is hard to beat for a grandness of scale, the universe.
We are going to, in the next three lectures,
talk about the universe as understood in 2000
by comparison with the universe as it was understood in 1900.
And I think you'll see that this is an extraordinarily dramatic contrast
that reveals a great deal about why it makes sense
to talk about the evolution of the sciences in the 20th century
because it's not just a matter of scaling up the universe,
it is a completely reconceptualized universe that we live in in 2000
by contrast with 1900.
And let me interject here an observation about the underlying plan of this course
and that is to focus on the observation that evolution applies
not merely to the content of the sciences,
but what we're seeing in the course of surveying the evolution of the sciences
is an evolution in our thinking about nature.
It's not just the specific theories in physics and chemistry and biology
and sociology that evolve, but this evolution in the theories
reflects an evolution in the way we look at the world.
And we'll see this especially when we in the social sciences
see late 20th century ideas of rationality
and how the very notion of rationality has changed,
something that we looked at in the second lecture on mathematics.
Now, the one thing that the mathematics, the glimpse that we had
of the development of mathematical thought in the 20th century
is that one of the things that one can say evolved
is even the way we think about thinking,
that confusion in mathematics that as I called the controversies
over the nature of mathematical truth,
that reveals that even the way we think about thinking
changed in the course of the century.
So let's keep that sort of in the back of our minds
as we look at this extraordinary contrast
between the universe in 1900 and the universe in 2000.
In 1900, the universe was a pretty homey place.
For a moment, go back to Copernicus in 1543.
Copernicus's theory, which was, sort of speak,
the beginning of modern astronomy,
argued that the Sun was the center of the universe
and the Earth and the other known planets at the time,
Mercury and Venus and Jupiter and Saturn,
rotated around the Sun along with the Earth.
And the fixed stars according to Copernicus
were pretty far away, but they were pretty close together.
In fact, he said they thought that the fixed stars
were in a band about two miles thick.
I don't know whether he meant Polish miles or German miles.
They're not exactly our miles, but they're still,
that's a pretty thin band.
And they were all pretty much the same distance.
And the reason why Copernicus thought they were very far away
is because of a phenomenon that has a forbidding name,
but it's really very simple.
It's called paralactic displacement.
Paralactic displacement is familiar to us
from the following phenomenon.
If you close one eye and you line something up
with your thumb like that, and then you switch to the other eye,
it looks like your thumb jumped.
The two objects are no longer in a line.
That's paralactic displacement.
If Copernicus's theory that the Earth rotates around the Sun
were correct, contradicting the previous 2,000 years
of Western astronomy, which said that the Sun rotated
around the Earth, which by the way is also a good common sense
because we see that happening every day there's a Sun out.
Then an immediate objection to Copernicus is how come
two stars that look like they're in a straight line in June
also look like they're in a straight line in December?
Because if in June you line up two stars
and the Earth has now moved to the other side of the Sun,
they shouldn't be lined up anymore.
That's called paralactic displacement.
Copernicus, of course, had no way of estimating the distance
to the stars, and since he believed that his hypothesis
was correct, and by the way there was no experimental evidence
for it at all, because he believed that it was correct
that the Earth rotated or orbited around the Sun,
he simply assumed that the distance to the stars
was so far away that the width of the Earth's orbit
was insignificant. He was quite right about that,
but he could not know what the scale of the universe was.
Between Copernicus' time in the middle of the 19th century,
astronomers had pretty well worked out the scale of the solar system.
They pretty well understood that the Moon was about 200,000 miles away,
although it varies from a minimum of about 190,000 miles
and a maximum of about 230, and that the Sun was about
93 million miles away, and from those they were able to
get reasonable estimates of the distances to Mercury, Venus,
Mars, Jupiter and Saturn using Kepler's and Newton's laws.
