At least that's the way Hubble interpreted the fact that the spectra all were shifted.
Furthermore, he was able to estimate roughly, and then he came to accept this as a fundamental principle of nature,
that the further away a galaxy was, the higher the redshift was.
It means the faster the galaxies were moving away from us.
He was able to measure eventually galaxies moving away from us at a third of the speed of light.
We're talking 60,000 miles a second, the entire galaxy moving away at 60,000 miles a second.
People in the 17th and 18th century that had converted to the Copernican hypothesis used to write
and make fun of their predecessors who thought that the fixed stars could whirl around the Earth every 24 hours.
How ridiculous, but we believe that galaxies made up of billions and billions of stars
can move at almost the speed of light, the ones that are furthest away from us.
In any event, in 1929, Hubble made clearly the announcement of the decade that the universe is expanding,
that the universe is not static.
It's not only that the universe is not the Milky Way, but a whole assembly of universes,
but even that is not static.
The universe is not in equilibrium.
The universe is expanding, and this was, to put it mildly, quite an astonishing announcement.
You recall, we talked about the fact that in 1917, just a few years after the General Theory of Relativity was published,
the Dutch astronomer Willem de Sitter had told Einstein that his equations implied an expanding universe,
but Einstein didn't know what to make of that, so he eliminated the expansion.
Independently of Einstein in the 1920s, a young Russian mathematical physicist named Alexander Friedman worked out the equations
and again informed Einstein that the General Theory of Relativity cannot be a static universe.
Either the universe is expanding or it's contracting, but it cannot be stationary.
It cannot be static.
Einstein was impressed with these papers, but it was only after Hubble's announcement that he went back and together with de Sitter
re-evaluated the General Theory of Relativity and, of course, removed his Clutsey interference, so to speak,
with his own equations to eliminate the expansion.
The Belgian astronomer, a Catholic priest named Georges Le Maître, also worked with the General Theory of Relativity.
When he saw the expansion, he interpreted it religious, theologically, as validating genesis,
that this shows that if the universe is expanding, then you can take the expansion backwards and there must have been a beginning in time.
The work of Le Maître and Friedman was almost totally unknown until after Hubble's announcement,
except Einstein knew about Friedman's work but didn't change his mind until after Hubble's announcement.
He did not know any General Theory of Relativity as far as anyone has been able to discern.
So Hubble himself, however, had also recognized that if the universe is expanding,
if you take that expansion backwards, he estimated in 1929-1930 that the universe is about two and a half billion years old.
Again, a tremendous change in our consciousness of the world in which we find ourselves.
Now, as we will see when we talk about the earth sciences, in 1913 a British geologist named Arthur Holmes
had used the radioactive dating technique to establish that some rocks were about one and a half billion years old.
So this was, in a certain sense, welcome news. Now the universe was a little older than the earth.
These numbers, of course, are going to be changing in the not too distant future.
Shapley, a fine man and a fine astronomer, sort of drops off, you should not, one can say in retrospect,
that Harvard, the reputation of the Harvard Observatory sort of seduced him away from Mount Wilson.
If he had been on that hundred-inch telescope, one imagines that he would have been Edwin Hubble, but one never knows these things.
In 1938, you remember, Beta, Hans Beta, we talked about the velitis theory of how stars work,
which began to give us some understanding of a process that could be underlying the way that the universe evolved over time.
Now that we understand that we're talking about the universe is billions of years old,
we've got biological evolution on an earth that is understood to be billions of years old.
In the 1930s, there is, so to speak, room for thinking about.
