In 1980, a young physicist named Alan Gooth, who at that point had not yet held a tenured faculty position.
He had moved around the country from one postdoc to another postdoc, clearly highly intelligent, but not quite able to settle down,
find a niche to do enough to make any university make him the kind of an offer that was better than the next postdoctoral fellowship that he was offered.
And he had a very patient wife, as far as I can tell.
Alan Gooth announced a modification of the Big Bang Theory, which is the kind of thing you wonder, how can anybody say this with a straight face?
But Gooth announced what he called inflation theory, that building on an idea by a Harvard physicist named Sidney Coleman that had been published in 1968,
that quantum theory, the quantum theory of the vacuum, suggests that you can have something that he called a false vacuum,
that you can have a situation in which it looks like there's a vacuum, but there's a tremendous amount of pent-up energy that is sort of stalled and could be triggered and released.
Building on this idea, Gooth proposed that at the ridiculous number of 10 to the minus 35 seconds after the real Big Bang, there is no matter at this point.
The universe underwent an effectively instantaneous inflation in which its size doubled 100 times.
In the process, the universe cooled dramatically.
The universe at that point had a temperature of about 10 to the 28th degrees Kelvin.
This is extremely hot.
You would not even bother to drop an egg to boil into water that was 10 to the 28th.
I'm just being facetious.
The 10 to the 28th, can you make any sense that ordinary people can't make any sense out of that number?
You can't say a million, million, million, million, million, million degrees, whatever.
10 to the 28th degrees Kelvin.
It went through this, underwent this expansion, which pulled the universe into essentially a uniform mode with very modest non-uniformities.
And into that universe, we then had the unfolding of the breaking of the symmetries that we described in an earlier lecture that led to,
and I'll give you a chronology on this soon, that led to the emergence of photons and then matter.
It's the inflationary moment that we're interested in here.
It happened effectively, instantaneously, at 10 to the minus 35 seconds, powered by this false vacuum.
That the energy of that false vacuum was released, and Goetz showed that the way that it would be released would be to cause this inflation.
He says, okay, so the universe is very big.
At the time that this happened, the universe was the size of a grapefruit, or I prefer a softball.
In 10 to the minus 35 seconds after the big bang, the universe was about the size of a softball, and it then expanded to 2 to the 100th power.
Now, maybe that doesn't sound like very much to you, but it is enough so that the entire thing we now call the universe,
13.7 billion light years, is just a minute patch on the real universe, the inflated universe, which we will never, perhaps, be able to have any interaction with.
As enormous, as mind-bogglingly vast as we think the universe is, now that we know that it's made up of billions of galaxies with billions of stars,
so forget it, it is a local patch on this inflated universe.
You take that softball, 2 to the 100th powers in size, and 13.7 billion light years is nothing.
So this is a very different universe from what we have been talking about.
Since 1980, the inflationary theory of the universe, which, as you might imagine, was not initially greeted with universal acceptance,
has become the orthodoxy within cosmology, within astrophysics and cosmology,
that this is a critical, this was perhaps the critical moment in the history of the universe,
and the inflation and the breaking of symmetries that we talked about in the lecture on the unification of the forces of nature
are consistent with this model that maps on to the microwave non-uniformities,
so that there is, while you can't do experiments on this yet, you can't make a universe in your basement,
or even in a very well-equipped laboratory, the available empirical evidence is consistent with this theory.
That would be amazing, except since 1980, there have been two comparably dramatic developments,
which require reconceptualizing what we mean by the universe, even the inflated universe.
That's still there, I'm not going to undermine that.
