In fact, studying the microwave background radiation since that time, and in particular
through two satellites launched by NASA in the early and late 1990s, has given us our
oldest picture of the universe.
We have through the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy probe, WMAP satellite, the WMAP probe, a picture
of the universe as it existed approximately 380,000 years after the Big Bang, which is
quite extraordinary.
Now, that's a colossal understatement.
Let's go back to the prediction of the microwave background radiation.
Gamow's prediction was that the background radiation would be uniformly distributed.
It would fill space to the same amount in all directions.
By the mid-1960s, it was understood that this couldn't possibly be correct because if that
were true, then matter would never have clumped together to form stars, let alone galaxies.
There are stars in galaxies, matter did clump together, and so that means there must be
extraordinarily subtle non-uniformities in the microwave background radiation.
If the microwave background radiation is really 2.728 degrees in all directions, the
theory is a total failure because it cannot account for why there are stars in galaxies.
The universe would have lots of atoms floating around in it, but they would all be dispersed
uniformly.
The word anisotropy in the name of that NASA satellite, the first one, had a much nicer
name, the cosmic background explorer.
That's easy, Kobe, but WMAP is a little ungainly, but Dave Wilkinson, that second graduate student
of Dickies, he was assigned the task of looking into the uniformity of the microwave background
radiation.
He made the study of that radiation and the study of the non-uniformities in that radiation,
the anisotropy, the fancy name for non-uniformity, his career focus, and so NASA named that satellite
after him, the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe, and Wilkinson established using the
satellite data, the first satellite not as sophisticated, not as sensitive in its detection
equipment as the second one, that in fact there are non-uniformities, these have been
mapped, graphed there, you can see beautiful pictures of them on the internet, the difference
in temperature is in the 10 to the minus 5 degree range, but there are variations in
temperature that in fact correspond to the clustering of matter into stars and galaxies,
well really galaxies into galaxies.
So the microwave background radiation was a major achievement in not only resurrecting
the Big Bang theory, but in making the Big Bang theory, the theory.
So now we've got Big Bang, but it turns out in the 1970s and early 1980s that quantum
theory does not allow us to extrapolate the Big Bang back, or maybe interpolates a better
word, we're going backwards, to go back to the beginning using what you might call Gamow's
version of the Big Bang, that the universe cannot have simply evolved from a big explosion
of a compact mass of matter, that can't possibly be correct, and so there is a need to understand
the origin event much more using quantum mechanics at a much deeper level than Gamow's initial
hypothesis.
It is broadly speaking correct, but what Gamow meant by the Big Bang, the kind of, let's
just call it ordinary expansion, could not have given us the universe as we see it.
That can't be the case.
