The first was the recognition in the 1980s that an observation made by a brilliant but sort of cranky astronomer named Fritz Zwicky in the 1930s was right.
Zwicky had observed that, you know, galaxies rotate fast enough, you can apply the Doppler effect principle to studying the motion of galaxies and you can see that galaxies rotate.
So the Milky Way being a nice spiral galaxy about 100,000 light years in diameter, you know, the Earth, our solar system is about 30,000 light years out from the center.
So the radius of the Milky Way is about 50,000 light years and we're about 30,000 light years out from the center, not on, it's a spiral galaxy, but we're not on one of the spiral arms.
We're on a little bridge of stars and gas between two spiral arms.
So it doesn't seem like what you might call a prime real estate location in interstellar space, but yet here we are, and we may yet have the last laugh on all of this, that the Milky Way rotates.
It's a spiral galaxy and it rotates because we can see other spiral galaxies.
How do you say, how do you know a galaxy rotates?
You use this Doppler effect by analyzing the light spectrum.
Do the same thing from the Sun to see how the Sun rotates and we can actually do this with distant stars and study their rates of rotation.
Zwicky said, galaxies rotate too fast to hold together.
They haven't got enough gravity.
You may think a galaxy is pretty big with a billion or more stars or even 100 billion stars.
Forget it, it hasn't got enough math.
It should whirl apart.
There's got to be something that's holding galaxies together.
Well, he said that in 1939 and I think you're pretty safe to say nobody paid attention to them until the 1980s when a younger generation of astronomers took themselves much more seriously and said, you know, galaxies not only rotate and that's a problem, but what was really discovered and I want to be facetious about it.
It wasn't just that they were younger.
They found that galaxies cluster.
Not only do stars cluster in galaxies, but galaxies cluster.
In fact, the Virgo cluster, for example, is made up of 10,000 galaxies.
And the question is what holds that together?
What was postulated and what is at the end of the 20th century accepted as the consensus view is something called dark matter.
We have never observed except that it accounts for the gravitational integrity of galaxies and galactic clusters and the clouds of gas that are known to surround galaxies.
So dark matter.
But what's interesting is that dark matter in the it by by the early 1990s was understood to account for over 90% of the matter in the universe.
That means that our entire visible universe made up of the kind of matter we know and love.
Everything we can see out there, even in the inflated universe is a is is less than 10% of what's really out there.
Because 90 over 90% of what's out there, which may be fascinating if we could see it, who knows what they're doing.
Maybe more fun than the producers.
They are it's dark.
And we only know about it indirectly through his gravitational consequences.
So that was quite startling.
Initially said this sounds like science fiction.
But in 1998 came what some physicists say was the discovery of this century, in spite of everything I've said before, two teams who do not like each other very much.
Robert Kirchner at Harvard and Saul Perlmutter at University of California Berkeley announced that not only is the universe expanding, but it's accelerating.
The expansion is accelerating.
The acceleration kicked in when the universe was about 7 billion years old.
Until then, the acceleration had been dwarfed by the force of gravity that was pulling it back.
But as the universe expanded to a point where the force of gravity dropped off, then the acceleration, which actually was right there in the general theory of relativity from the beginning.
If you go back and check your notes, it was there from the beginning.
The universe is accelerating in its expansion, which has serious implications for the future if you take a long view in your investment strategy.
In the next lecture, we're going to talk about how we know all this.
