We begin with X-rays. The first X-ray satellite was launched in 1970, and it was called the X-ray Explorer.
That was the official name for it, but Richard Giaconi, who was sort of the master of X-ray telescopy in the 1970s and the 80s,
he called it informally Uhuru, which is a Swahili name for freedom, and that name tends to stick outside official NASA publications.
People refer to the satellite as Uhuru, and Uhuru was a very important satellite because almost immediately it established two things.
It established the validity of the prediction by Anthony Hewitt and Jocelyn Bell that there were such things as pulsars or neutron stars.
When stars of a certain size go through their death throes and collapse, what's left is an extraordinarily dense concentration of matter,
where the entire mass becomes neutrons because electrons and protons cannot exist separately. The atoms collapse in on themselves.
Remember, they're mostly empty space, but in a neutron star, it's packed together closely enough that you only have a nucleus in effect, and it's all neutron.
We now know in the Quark theory that that's also mostly empty space, but enough is enough.
Neutron stars were discovered by Jocelyn Bell, who was a graduate student of Anthony Hewitt a couple of years earlier in the output of radio telescope observations that she was given as a task.
See if you see anything interesting here. She saw an interesting pattern, an extraordinary repeated pattern of pulsed signals, which is why neutron stars are also called pulsars.
And she reported this to Professor Hewitt, and indeed he was checked and saw that, you know, that's a consequence of the general theory of relativity.
He gets a Nobel Prize. Jocelyn did not, led to considerable controversy. She subsequently was given some other major prizes, but considerable controversy as to whether this was an illustration of a bias on the part of the scientific community against women researchers.
But Uhuru found, so to speak, the signature of pulsars, observed pulsars, because in 1965, the Russian physicist Yakov Zeldovich had predicted that in a binary star system, you should get a X-ray radiation from one member of the binary star as a neutron star.
And this was, in fact, observed by Uhuru. The second thing that Uhuru observed was, also predicted by Zeldovich, was that, you know, under certain circumstances, a star can radiate X-rays in a way that reveals the presence of what was called in 1967 a black hole.
And Uhuru observed a star in the constellation Cygnus, Cygnus X-1, which is a massive blue giant of a star, which orbits around a black hole, an invisible companion.
In other words, we can see that from the motion of the star that it is orbiting something, but there's nothing there where it's, what seems to be orbiting around.
And that turned out to be the first observation of, indirect observation of a black hole.
So that X-ray satellite, which is very primitive, was a very important one. Subsequently, Giaconi designed the first X-ray telescope that could be focused, and in a series of X-ray satellites culminating in Chandra, which was named after an Indian astrophysicist named Chandra Sekar.
The Chandra satellite of 1999, which was launched in 1999, was part of a series that NASA called the Great Observatory Series, which in the 1990s put four major satellite telescopes in orbit to examine the universe from different perspectives.
The Hubble Space Telescope of 1990, the Compton Gamma Ray Telescope of 1991, the Chandra X-ray satellite of 1999, and the final step somewhat delayed, the Space Infrared Telescope Facility of 2003, I guess they ran out of more interesting names.
And that complex of telescopes has allowed us to observe the earliest visible manifestations of the universe, namely the first stars and the first galaxy.
Those telescopes together, especially the Space Infrared Telescope Facility, have given us insight into the first stars which seem to have emerged at 100 to 200 million years after the Big Bang, namely 13 and a half billion years ago.
