The amount of heat that does move up, and now we're going to see it start seeing sharp drops in temperature from that 6,000 degrees,
we're down maybe in the 3,000 degree range now, in the lower mantle, that creates convection currents in the mantle,
because the mantle stuff can move unlike the solid core.
And so you get these convection currents which look just like patterns just like that,
just like you would see in a pot of boiling water.
And they are the ones that are carrying up the molten material.
That's what's forcing them up, is the dissipation of the heat that the mantle picks up at the interface with the liquid core,
where there's this 120-mile band that is extraordinarily reactive and interactive between the mantle material and the liquid iron.
And the basic process of plate tectonics is that it wells up at the mid-ocean ridges, doesn't come up anywhere else,
except for the occasional volcanoes, and those are often also associated with the same kind of activity,
and we've already talked about how they push the continents apart.
But there's a special case that I want to talk of that we've only become aware of in the last 10 years or so.
And that is this material, the ocean crust that makes it pass the lower mantle, upper mantle boundary,
and gets all the way down to the mantle liquid iron core boundary.
When that happens, it creates what is believed to be a jet of mantle material.
It's almost like as if it were a shock to that part of the earth to have rock get down that low,
and the stuff melts and goes squirting back up where it comes out of the earth as a hotspot, a volcano,
or in the case of Yellowstone National Park, the hot springs and lava material that melt the mud and create.
Now what's interesting is, think of the plate tectonics theories, the continents are always moving,
but these hotspots, they have nothing to do with the upwelling that causes the continents to move.
They are because of a phenomenon in which ocean crust is somehow making it down to the mantle liquid iron core boundary.
Those jets stay in the same place.
So as a matter of fact, what is now the hot springs, the thermal phenomenon in Yellowstone used to be in Oregon.
And we can see the fossil remains of that activity, but the western American plate has moved over a period of 100 million years,
or tens of millions of years at any rate, far enough so that what was over Oregon then is now over Yellowstone.
That jet stays in the same place. The continent moved above it.
There are in fact numerous illustrations of this.
There is a hotspot under Hawaii. Anywhere there's a volcano or a chain of volcanoes that are not above an upwelling of the mantle have to be above a hotspot.
So for example, Hawaii is no longer above the mid-ocean ridge, and the creation of new volcanoes in Hawaii is a reflection of a hotspot
that is now Hawaii is shifting. The Hawaiian islands are moving in the Pacific Ocean,
and so different regions are becoming above the hotspot, and that's what's going to cause volcano to emerge in that place.
And we actually can see this process. This is not a hypothetical process.
A major illustration of it is less familiar to us here in America, but there is a region of India called the Deccan Traps,
which is a vast and enormous area of India covered by the remains of molten lava.
Once there were lava floods that covered hundreds of thousands of square miles of India.
There is a hotspot that is now over Reunion Island that was once over the Deccan Traps.
And at that time it was much hotter and much more powerful, and so it created all of that.
Now it's quieted down a bit, just as Yellowstone is not a volcano.
Yellowstone's hot springs and thermal phenomena, but it's not an erupting volcano happily, at least not now, and hopefully not after this lecture either.
But the Deccan Traps have moved on as India pushed its way into Southern Asia.
And so the hotspot is now over Reunion Island.
So this is an overview of a theory that has taken the Earth, an explanation of the Earth, and given us a picture of constant turmoil, constant dynamism,
and even constant violent interaction. And we're now just talking about rock.
