In the 1930s, it was suggested that the earth magnetic field could vary.
And after the war especially, magnetic field studies of fossils and of geological strata
indicated that they didn't all, when rock solidifies from a molten state,
it acquires, if it has metallic components,
it becomes magnetized in the direction of the earth magnetic field at the moment that it solidified.
And in fact, geological strata was showing that the earth's magnetic field was pointing in different directions
in different ages depending on when the rock strata solidified.
You can do this of course only for rock that has been melted and solidified.
If Holmes is right that the ocean floor is constantly being renewed
and if it is the case that the earth's magnetic field changes over time,
then it looks as though you should see stripes in the ocean floor
in which the floor solidified at a time when the magma came out of the mid-ocean vent,
it cooled down, it had the earth's magnetic field orientation at that moment.
And then over a period of time, the fresh lava when it solidifies
will have the earth's magnetic field orientation at that moment.
And if we're talking about long enough moments,
then you should see this difference as systematic changes in the orientation of the earth's magnetic field.
That was the theory and in fact, in the post-war period, the Navy,
for reasons of its own which are related to requirements for targeting submarine-launched missiles,
needed to have an accurate map of the ocean floor magnetic field.
So this is an interesting convergence of science and warfare.
And so for years, ships towed magnetometers around with them wherever they went,
which was measuring the strength of the earth's magnetic field.
And in the late 1960s, this is by the way called Remainant Magnetism by geologists,
Remainant Magnetism is the remnants of ancient magnetism.
And interestingly, it was a field that was stimulated and called attention to by PMS Blackett,
that student of Rutherford's who in 1932 got scooped by Carl Anderson with the discovery of the neutron.
I told you about Blackett and Occhialini.
After the war, Blackett became interested in geology and decided that this was the hot topic to study, Remainant Magnetism.
So in the course of the 1950s and early 1960s, a huge body of data became available.
Now the Navy was secretive about this because this is a military secret.
The exact strength of the earth's magnetic field was useful in establishing the coordinates for sea-launched ICBMs.
So it was not easy to get permission to publish this data and there were restrictions on the publishing of this data,
but the data was there, the data were there, the data were published.
And in 1962, an American geologist named Harry Hess published a paper that he had in effect written in 1939,
I mean he actually had written such a paper in 1939 and decided against publishing it because of the,
he sort of got overwhelmed in the imminence of war, he set the paper aside because he knew it was going to be controversial.
In 1962, he dusted off that paper, added all the magnetometer data, that is all the oceanographic data,
and published what is in effect the pioneer paper in plate tectonics.
That's what the theory, the current theory is of the earth, the theory of plate tectonics,
which is Arthur Holmes' theory sort of updated and argued that what we now knew,
Hess himself, on submarine voyages with the Navy doing ocean floor research,
discovered the remains of ancient volcanoes under the earth.
For example, that the earth was, that the oceans were geologically extremely active.
Very shortly thereafter, we would discover these hydrothermal vents, 1977,
which are in fact the living embodiment of this constant welling up of mantle material
through the mid-Atlantic and mid-Pacific ocean ridges which run for thousands of miles,
and do look, when you strip away the water cover, do look very much like the seams on a baseball.
