Lecture 17, The Earth from Equilibrium to Dynamism
The next step on our Odyssey is going to be the Earth, but it's possible to think of this
as a kind of a come down from the universe. After all, we've just gone from looking at
the enormously inflated universe of 2000, and all of a sudden we shift our focus to
the humble Earth. And yet, conceptually speaking, the change in our understanding of the Earth
between 1900 and 2000 is comparable to the change in our understanding of the universe.
In 1900, the Earth was considered to be a stable entity, at or approaching equilibrium
as it cooled down from its initial molten state. Locally, of course, you could have earthquakes
and volcanoes, and the weather was constantly changing, but that's superficial stuff. The
Earth itself was considered to be a stable place. In 2000, by contrast, the Earth at
the physical level, let's say internally, just looking at the Earth all by itself, the
Earth is a violent, dynamic, constantly changing place. The interior, roiled by convection
currents of lava that are trying to dissipate the 6000 degree heat of the core of the Earth.
The continents being pushed apart as this magma wells up at mid-ocean ridges, forcing
the ocean floors apart, pushing against these continental plates, and moving them at the
rate of about an inch a year. The Earth's magnetic field constantly changing, and in
fact episodically inverting, so that the North Pole becomes the South Pole of the Earth's
magnetic field. The Earth's day, the length of the day, constantly lengthening as the
Moon slowly spirals out away from the Earth, and in order to maintain the constancy of
the angular momentum of the Earth-Moon system, the Earth has to slow down in its orbital
rotation. Massive ocean currents that dwarf the total outflow of rivers into the Atlantic
Ocean. Massive ocean currents transporting vast quantities of water from the Antarctic
to the Arctic, where they sink and come back down, affecting the atmosphere and the biosphere,
the life on the planet. And then externally, we now understand that not only is the Earth
an interconnected system in its own right, but that it is a node in a higher level system
encompassing the solar system and even, in a certain sense, the universe. So the change
in our conception of the Earth between 1900 and 2000 is, I am going to suggest, comparable
in its magnitude, intellectually speaking, to the change in our conception of the universe.
In 1900, American geologists particularly were firmly committed to a theory which attempted
to explain the surface features of the Earth in terms of steady, slow processes of erosion
and sedimentation together with forces generated by the contraction of the Earth's surface
as the Earth steadily cooled. Since the Earth steadily cooled, it wants to shrink. The surface
wants to shrink as the Earth cools, right? It gets hotter, it expands, it cools, it contracts.
As the Earth's solid skin, the rigid crust, contracts, it creates forces that are responsible
for mountains. It was thought. That's where mountains came from. So the American view,
which came to dominate briefly the European geological view as well, is that the surface
features of the Earth are basically the same. That is to say, ocean floor today has always
been ocean floor. Continent today has always been continent. They are both fixed in place
and the only processes that matter are contraction and sedimentation and erosion.
