We have to add to this, in the course of the 20th century, a deeper understanding of the atmosphere and of the oceans
that required that we acknowledge that you can't just study the atmosphere without taking account of the ocean.
You can't just take account of the ocean without taking account of the atmosphere and also of plate tectonics,
which are affecting the oceans because of the nature of the spreading of the ocean floor,
the effects of the mid-ocean ridges with their constant volcanic activity on ocean currents.
Now, 20th century is the site of the serious study of the ocean because we didn't have the technology to study the deep ocean
before we had submarines and research submersibles that could go down miles that had the integrity,
the structural strength to go down several miles and to observe what the ocean floor looked like.
And so in the 20th century, we have come to understand, especially after satellites were put into place
that monitored the earth and the earth surface and the ocean as well as the land,
that there were massive ocean currents, 50 million cubic feet of water per second.
This is many times greater than the total outflow of all the rivers on the eastern United States
and South America into the Atlantic Ocean.
It's just an amount of water that is staggering.
50 million cubic feet of water per second move from the Antarctic region.
This water is very cold, but it happens to be very rich in nutrients and plankton material.
It is very rich in nutrients.
That water moves north, eventually reaching the Arctic regions where it sinks down
and comes back in a constant circulatory pattern.
But along the way, this amount of water, the motion of this amount of water,
cold water moving up to the surface and out from the Antarctic region
has a dramatic influence on weather and on life.
In the wake of this current, there is a beautiful hierarchy of eddies.
A wake like the wake behind a power boat.
There is a hierarchy of large eddies and smaller eddies that you can see from space,
can be imaged from space.
Of course, we couldn't see them down here.
This is one reason why this is largely a 20th century science, late 20th century science.
These eddies churn the surface waters and they spread nutrients.
They warm the cold waters, but they also cool the warm waters.
This has effect on weather patterns and, of course, it has effect on fish life
and marine life, marine life generally.
These ocean currents are an example of how the underlying dynamism of the Earth physically
manifests itself as energy that drives ocean currents that have tremendous implications for the atmosphere.
We only learned about 30 or so years ago about El Nino, for example,
but that's just one example of how ocean currents affect atmosphere
and they affect the biosphere as well, the life sphere as well.
By the way, in the 1970s we discovered these hydrothermal vents where the lava comes welling up out of the ocean
that around these vents there are dense colonies of new forms of life.
In 1991, the research vessel Alvin, for example, actually observed an eruption in what's called the East Pacific Rise
and Alvin studied this eruption and over time, as soon as the temperature of the molten material had subsided,
life started to form.
A dense colony, it wasn't created out of nothing, obviously, but creatures that had been, whose peers had been killed
when the eruption took place, creatures like that came flooding back in
and in a very short period of time, the area was densely colonized.
What we have more recently than 1991 discovered is that it's measured the temperature at which they start coming back,
which surprised everyone because some bacterial life started to appear when the temperature was over 250 degrees.
These creatures are now called hyperthermophiles. They really like a warm climate.
This phenomenon by which the underlying geological process is coupled to life.
The fact that there are dense colonies, hundreds of new species and hundreds of new genera were discovered in the late 1970s and 1980s
when we started pulling up from the ocean floor samples of the life forms,
and then of course the research vessels like the Alvin that can take pictures down there,
but actually pulling up what they call chimneys, these smoking vents that look a lot like chimneys
that have cooled enough for life to cluster around them, pulled up the whole thing,
and seen how dense these creatures never see light and they never experience oxygen.
But they've been living there now, we have fossil evidence, they've been living down there for three and a half billion years.
