So there is some question, and some people who think that life may well have originated not near the surface of the earth,
not in ponds, but that life may have originated deep in the ocean.
And these creatures have a metabolism that's based not on oxygen, but on iron sulfide.
Because the magmatic material, no surprise, is rich in iron.
The magmatic material that wells up at the ocean is liberally laced with iron,
which is the most abundant element in the earth's makeup.
And they use sulfur. Those creatures have evolved to use sulfur.
They originated, perhaps, using sulfur as part of their metabolism,
and the iron catalyzes the biological reactions in ways that we can study and replicate in the laboratory.
So there's an intimate link to the biosphere right there.
Atmospheric studies also changed dramatically in the 20th century.
In the 19th century, I think I had mentioned earlier that John Dalton started his career as a physicist
studying the atmosphere, trying to understand how oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide
three recently identified elements in 1806 when Dalton published a book proposing the atomic theory of matter.
Dalton was trying really to understand, he was not a chemist,
and he was not really interested in that chemical issue, what he was, chemical reactions.
What he was really interested in was the physical mixing of oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide.
So atmospheric studies exist in the 19th century, but in the 20th century,
because of our ability to study the atmosphere at multiple levels, using aircraft, balloons, sounding rockets,
and then after 1960s satellites, our appreciation of the atmosphere,
our understanding of the complexity of the atmosphere as a system has increased by orders of magnitude.
And in particular, I want to focus on one aspect of the atmosphere that is, even at the beginning of the 21st century,
wildly underappreciated, and that is that the atmosphere transports between continents,
insects, seeds, pollutants, sand, bacteria, viruses.
All of them are transported thousands of miles from Asia to America, from Africa to South America,
but there is, depending on the wind patterns, there is a constant flow.
When there is sand from China that routinely, from the Chinese desert,
that routinely rains down on the west coast of the United States, and this sand carries with it bacteria and sometimes viruses.
The world is interconnected in far more complicated ways than we like to think.
You can't say this is where the United States ends and the rest of the world begins.
The atmosphere, which is itself driven by the heat engines below and the heat engine from above, the sun,
affected by ocean currents, affected by our own activity, is also integrating, is also linking the world in complex ways.
And when one realizes that you can't put up a barrier and say, pollutants released in India and Asia stop here,
that, well, we're going to be good with our pollution. We don't care what they do. Wrong.
What they do, and it doesn't matter who they are, if they release pollutants that reach the atmosphere,
that will be spread throughout the atmosphere in patterns that are sometimes difficult to predict.
What is emerging here is, I hope, a sense of why, in the course of the 20th century,
the systems approach to understanding phenomena became increasingly not just attractive,
but almost mandatory, that it was necessary to think from a systems perspective,
the way things are interconnected, because what we've just been saying about the Earth applies also.
