Jupiter was explored primarily by Galileo, a probe launched in 1989, which sort of committed suicide eventually after years of sending us photographs of Jupiter's major moons, and then plunged through the atmosphere, radioing back data about Jupiter's atmosphere.
In the spring of 2004, a joint NASA European Space Agency mission will do the same thing for Saturn, plus landing a probe on the moon Titan, where it is believed there are liquid methane oceans underneath the frozen surface, which could harbor some bizarre forms of life.
And then I've mentioned already Voyager 1 and 2, launched in 1977, which sailed past Jupiter and Saturn, past Uranus and Neptune, to Pluto, and now Voyager 1, beyond Pluto, moving through the Kuiper Belt and out into interstellar space.
Quite a range of accomplishments, and this has been supplemented by collecting or sampling material from the moon, from Mars, from Venus, from Jupiter, from an asteroid, from comet tail, collecting particles from the interstellar wind blowing in from extra, from interstellar space, as well as particles from the solar wind blowing from the sun.
The Apollo moon missions of 1969 to 1972 were the most dramatic events of this period for many people who lived through them, but they need to be put in the context of this extremely rich picture of what we have done in 40 years, 45 years at the last third of the century, approximately, of how much was done.
And so there was a great cost to this. There's a lot of dollars tied up here, and we can legitimately ask, what have we gotten for our space dollars? We're talking about hundreds of billions of dollars in total for all of this space activity.
Well, it seems to me that, first of all, we have to say that we have an understanding of the universe. Without the satellites that showed us in detail the microwave background radiation, we would not have had the detailed development of the Big Bang Theory that we have had.
So we can say that our conception of the universe has been tremendously enhanced. Our understanding of the universe has been tremendously enhanced by space science. So, of course, has our sense, our understanding of the Earth.
So from a scientific point of view, we have learned a great deal, a tremendous amount about who we are, what we are, why we're here, and what our future is likely to be, at least from the perspective of physical processes.
But there's another sense in which the space program has rewarded us, and that is, it has shown us that we could do it. That what had been science fiction as recently as the 1950s suddenly became science fact.
It showed us that we had capabilities that I don't believe almost anybody believed that we had, that we could develop the capability to have routine weather monitoring, Earth monitoring, that we could have routine telecommunication systems that we take for granted, or that we could send probes to other planets and collect that information and see these pictures in real time.
Just the fact of the space program seems to me to be an extraordinary return on our investment. Now, this investment has been very substantial, and it was only possible, therefore, because of very committed government programs that budgeted billions of dollars.
NASA's budget is approximately 14 or 15 billion dollars in the current year. This is fairly typical. These policies are only in place because over a period of decades, the public has supported those policies.
So that when we think about the space program and recognize whatever it's returned to us, that there was a tremendous investment to get that return, and that that investment required the acquiescence of the public.
Not always enthusiastic, those of us who were around may remember that in the late 1960s, shortly before Neil Armstrong set foot on the moon, there was considerable criticism of the tens of billions of dollars being spent on the Apollo program.
In 1960s, especially after the fire that killed the three astronauts, there was a two-year period in which there was quite a bit of criticism, but we see that the program and NASA are robust.
That leads us into trying to understand the kind of relationships among science and society, science, technology and society that are reflected in this kind of government commitment and public support for those kinds of government policies, and that will be the subject of the next two lectures.
Thank you.
