And a very real threat as the 1980s unfolded.
National Science Foundation said we're a science foundation, not an engineering foundation.
Engineers don't do research, they take the research that we do and they apply it.
Other people were arguing that that's not correct and under threat from Congress
that Senator Mansfield, late Senator Mansfield at the time especially,
that okay, we'll create a national engineering foundation, the NSF reluctantly agreed
and created an engineering research directorate and has ever since
supported engineering research centers around the country.
And in fact, they put in their first, in 1980, 81, their first non-scientist director,
an engineer from previously at IBM named Eric Block,
in order to signal to the scientific community that the National Science Foundation
was not too narrowly focused on the concept of scientific research.
The overwhelming majority of federal money, of course, for funding
has not been this kind of peer-reviewed thing.
The federal government, until the Gingrich Congress of 1994,
supported 719 federal laboratories.
After 1994, the Republican-controlled Congress folded a number of those together.
The number, I don't know the exact number now, but it's probably in the 600 range,
not a gigantic reduction.
Those laboratories are largely applied science,
but within those it's impossible to separate basic science and applied science,
and there's a lot of basic science being supported there.
The Department of Defense, the Department of Energy, the Department of Agriculture,
the National Institutes of Health, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
these are massive institutions that distribute tens of billions of dollars
in research dollars overlapping applied and basic research.
So I think that the distinction there is very difficult to support.
One of the consequences of the universities becoming entangled with the government
at the level of support for scientific research was that they became dependent
on scientific research on federal funding in order to maintain their integrity as institutions,
because in response to federal research dollars they create degree programs,
they hire faculty, they build laboratories,
but then the dollars have to keep coming in order to support those
and in order to build new ones, and we'll talk a bit about the consequences
of that dynamic feedback in the next lecture.
What I want to talk about now is another aspect of this entanglement with the government,
and that is that during the 1960s when there was extensive anti-establishment protest movements
in the United States, in the civil rights area, the Vietnam War area, anti-nuclear power,
anti-multinational corporations, environmentalists, mass demonstrations on behalf of all of these,
then there was a focus of attack, surprisingly, was on scientists,
because they were perceived to be in bed with government and corporations,
that they had paid a price that was a kind of a Faustian bargain.
They now had lots of money to do fascinating research,
but they now became allies of what were perceived to be problematic institutions,
namely government institutions and rapacious multinational corporations,
at least that was the perspective of these anti-establishment groups in the 60s,
the intellectual analog of this, concurrent with this,
came an intellectual critique of science which had been absent in the past.
That is to say, intellectuals, especially the ones who didn't know any science,
typically took the scientists at their word,
that they were involved in the creation of an objective account of what's out there.
But starting in the 1960s, historians, philosophers, and sociologists of science
built up a body of very strong evidence
that the creation of scientific knowledge itself involves, is an interpretive activity,
that it is not purely subjective, that it has subjective components to it,
that it reflects various kinds of value prejudices,
that there are alternative interpretations which are possible,
and that therefore scientific knowledge is not objective in the way that it has claimed to be
and gotten away with claiming to be for several hundred years.
Now, notice that this is consistent with our earlier mention of the fact that in quantum theory itself,
and these people used that in the 1929, 1930 Copenhagen interpretation,
that science itself had stumbled over the problem of separating the subjective mind of the scientist
and the objective world out there, and that that boundary turned out to be fuzzy.
So, Warren Heisenberg claiming that what we really did in science was describe our experience,
not describe the objectively existing independent external world.
And this becomes a critique of science that translated, that fed into the 1970s, 1980s science wars,
and we will pick up on this in the next lecture.
