To teach the scientific community a lesson that in the end that the politicians make
the decisions and so for a while we did not have a president, we did not have scientific
advice to the White House, we had gone back to sort of the priest Sputnik era but one
of his last acts as president Gerald Ford formed the Office of Science and Technology
Policy which actually only became operational under President Carter and the Office of Science
and Technology Policy which is now a kind of a branch of advisory personnel attached
to the executive branch, attached to the White House is the way that scientific opinion can
be made available to the president.
Not always happily is from the president's political ambitions are concerned.
President Reagan for example did not see eye to eye with his scientific advisors on Star
Wars Defense Initiative in an echo of PSAC's opposition to the anti ballistic missile defense
plan that President Nixon had.
This politicization of science is part of the government science relationship.
It makes it difficult to separate scientific advice, scientific positions from political
positions of the government and this is quite clear for example in the attitude of the government
towards global warming, selectively picking scientific experts who will support the position
of the administration rather than saying well what's the truth of the matter and the whole
issue of subjectivity, objectivity relates to this question of truth.
Is there a truth of the matter or is it a matter, well you've got your interpretation
of the data and I've got my interpretation of the data, that's what underlies this whole
question of the science wars and the suspicion that science has a political dimension to
it is one of the things that kept the federal government from funding scientific research
in the 19th and early 20th centuries when in the 1860s, again during the Civil War,
the National Academy of Science was created in 1863, the National Academy of Science
for the beautiful building, not far from the White House, has a federal charter but
no budget.
Financially it's a private institution, it is a federally chartered institution but
if it wants to meet, if it wants to do anything, it wants to pay the electric bill then it's
got to get funding from on its own and often this funding does come from grants from federal
agencies to look into certain questions but the academy works on a volunteer basis.
It's research committees, they do no direct research and it's research committees are
really volunteer committees of experts from around the country who serve the nation in
exchange for just their travel expenses in exchange for the prestige of being associated
with the National Academy of Sciences.
So this notion that science has a political tinge to it is inescapable once science becomes
so deeply entangled with the government and the same thing happens with the university.
The university also becomes an increasingly political situation as an institution but
notice also that it becomes an increasingly dynamic institution which for 700 years it
had not been.
Sleepy, nobody would have accused the university between 1200 and the 19th century of being
a dynamic institution although on and off individual universities were hotbeds of social
revolution.
What emerged in the 20th century was a growing public identification of science with truth.
Before this appreciation in the 1960s that came up in 1960s and after that the character
of scientific knowledge is in fact problematic and I'm not sure the extent to which this
is broadly perceived by the public.
The public broadly recognized identified science generically not just physics, not just chemistry
but science, the word science became increasingly associated with truth.
And so for example in 1910 the Flexner report which was the document that reorganized medical
education in the United States was designed specifically to put medicine on a scientific
footing.
