Then in the 1920s, the genetics community made a shift from looking at the genetics of individuals
to looking at gene patterns in large populations and developing mathematical models for how genes would spread.
We'll talk a little bit more about that in lecture 24 so that by the end of the 1920s,
in the early 1930s, there was a synthesis of Darwinian evolution, Mendelian genetics applied to populations
rather than focusing on individuals who was premature to try to understand the underlying biological mechanism
of genetic variation in the individual.
That would become our task after the discovery of the structure of DNA in 1953 by Watson and Crick,
looking at what's called population genetics.
That now becomes a package that in the 1930s was filled out by Ernst Meyer and Theodosius Dubchansky,
two evolutionary biologists who were leaders of the so-called neo-Darwinism,
reviving Darwinism to such an extent that by 1942, the British biologist Julian Huxley used the phrase
modern synthesis to describe Darwin in the mid-20th century, and by that time, by 1942, Darwin was back on top of the heap.
The idea of evolution had gone from comatose in 1900 to the dominant paradigm in biological science by the 1940s
and has remained there ever since, although there is still controversy over whether natural selection alone is capable of powering evolution.
So that is sort of a quick and dirty view of the idea of evolution, how Darwin's idea had to be complemented and adjusted
and adapted before it became the reigning paradigm, so to speak, in biological science in the 1940s.
Now, we're going to explore the relationship between evolution and genetics
and the further relationship between evolution, genetics, and molecular biology in Lectures 24 and 25.
For the rest of this lecture, I want to focus on the idea of evolution itself,
because it is in some sense an extraordinary legacy that we find has been embraced in other sciences besides biology.
First of all, it's probably worthwhile getting out into the open that once evolution becomes the reigning paradigm,
you all of a sudden have a scientific question that had been dismissed in the late 19th century as a non-scientific question,
namely the spontaneous origin of life, spontaneous generation, disproving spontaneous generation, dismissing it as an old wives tale,
as folk nonsense was one of the small triumphs of 19th century science.
You must have heard in high school even about Louis Pasteur and the experiment that he did to prove that there is no such thing as spontaneous generation.
Flies, maggots don't appear spontaneously on the surface of rotting meat if you protect the meat from flies laying their eggs.
So spontaneous generation is out, but if evolution is in, then there must have been a time when life spontaneously emerged.
There was a time when there was no life on the earth, and then all of a sudden there was life on the earth.
Given life on the earth, then evolution has some claim to plausibility.
But it's that transition, it's that hand-waving part.
Well, something happened.
Well, here a miracle happens.
Well, we don't deal with miracles in science, so here something happened.
What happened?
And so this question of the spontaneous origin of life now becomes a scientific question,
and now we don't want to answer it in the folk nonsense way.
We have to answer it in a scientifically acceptable way.
And in the 1920s, a couple of approaches were developed.
One by the British biologist J.V.S. Haldane, another by the Russian biochemist A.I. Oparin.
And the approach had to do with saying that, well, you know, in the early earth, if we look at the kinds of molecules that were floating around in the primordial ocean
and the makeup of the atmosphere, then complex molecules probably just somehow formed,
and these molecules at some point made a transition to becoming a cell.
Well, that's quite a bit of hand-waving there.
Now, you can put a lot of molecules together and you can, but it was really quite a bit of hand-waving.
But then in 1953, Stanley Miller, formerly a student of Harold Yuri at the University of Chicago,
decided to actually do some experiments, reproducing what was believed to be the condition of the earth's early atmosphere
and the early ocean, and then just discharging electrical sparks, as if they were lightning,
and found that, lo and behold, self-replicating polypeptides,
which is a fancy name for saying self-replicating small amino acid chains formed all by themselves,
and they replicated themselves, they reproduced themselves.
