quite separate from the DNA in the nucleus of the eukaryote.
Now, in all sexual reproduction, that ring of mitochondrial DNA remains intact from woman to daughter.
There is except for mutations, the mitochondrial DNA is handed down intact forever through the female.
There is an analogous molecule on the Y chromosome for men.
It's not as accurate, but it also both Stone King and Cann recognized that these were markers for tracing genealogical lineages.
If people had the same mitochondrial DNA, then they were related to one another.
If they had the same Y chromosome marker, they were related to one another.
They had a common ancestral line.
Obviously, the next step was to start sampling the DNA of people around the world.
Hundreds of people, thousands of people, literally in all parts of the world in order to get representative samples of humanity.
Now, you can't get a sample from everybody, or at least it seems awkward.
But what emerged from this in the second half of the 1990s was the following startling picture.
It seems as though all living human beings descend from three lineages of Homo sapiens that emerged in East Africa approximately 150,000 years ago.
Two of these lineages remained in Africa and are there to this day.
One migrated to the South and the other stayed in Central Africa.
So all Central Africans, effectively all Central Africans are descendants of one lineage.
One of the Southern Africans from a second lineage, that third lineage migrated out.
Migrated to Asia 65,000 years ago.
Migrated to Europe 45,000 years ago.
Migrated to the Americas in two waves.
The first wave 25,000 years ago, the second wave approximately 12,000 years ago.
And that's how the world got populated.
This is a picture that is based on the application of genetics and biochemistry to evolutionary paleoanthropology, ancient humanity.
And there is matching evidence from the Y chromosome.
The figures I gave you all come from mitochondrial DNA.
There are some assumptions made about the rate at which mutations accumulate in mitochondrial DNA,
because that will affect differences that we see between populations at different mutation rates.
But if the mutation and the timing, the chronology will depend on the mutation rates,
being able to say 65,000 years ago, 45,000 years ago.
But the Y chromosome data, which is completely independent because it's sex segregated,
is close to the mitochondrial DNA from the female.
So both of these together reinforce a position that for much of the 20th century,
certainly until the 1960s, had been considered a radical one.
Namely, that all human beings are kin, that there is no fundamental difference among human beings,
that all the differences are superficial, that genetically speaking, we are all of the same family and all have a common ancestor.
So there are substantial political and cultural implications to this, which clearly we have yet to internalize.
But the biological picture is very clear.
Now, let's get back to Neanderthal. What happened with them?
Well, Homo sapiens moved into Asia 65,000 years ago.
There is very good evidence that Homo erectus was still living in Asia 65,000 years ago, and much later than that,
they moved into Europe 45,000 years ago when there was a significant Neanderthal population in Europe.
And yet, within 20,000 years, Homo sapiens were the only ones left.
What happened?
Well, you know, if they had been Europeans, we would have said, oh, well, they just killed everybody off,
because that's just the style, right? I mean, look at the last 500 years.
But it's not at all clear that that, in fact, was the case.
We don't know whether Homo sapiens, when they displaced Neanderthal in Europe or Homo erectus in Asia,
by killing them in warfare or by breeding with them.
Well, that is now considered extremely unlikely, because to the extent that it has been possible to get DNA samples from Neanderthal bones.
And because of the time involved, these are not as accurate as you would like.
It seems as though there is really significant genetic differences between Neanderthal and Homo sapiens
that make it extremely implausible that current human beings have much in the way of Neanderthal DNA in them.
So there was probably little or no interbreeding.
