Lecture 23 Life, Human Evolution
We close the last lecture by talking a little bit about the still scandalous character of
the idea of evolution when it is applied specifically to human beings.
And it's easy to laugh at the Scopes trial back in 1923, but it is not so easy to laugh
at the firestorm provoked by the Arkansas Test Case of Creationism vs. Evolution and
by the controversy provoked by Edward Wilson's book, Sociobiology, and the subsequent change
of the name of the field to evolutionary psychology to take some of the sting out of the controversy
that had surrounded Wilson's publication, that is to say, trying to explain on evolutionary
grounds human values so that even cultural values were, according to Wilson, strictly
a consequence of evolutionary biology.
So this is a very important background for what I'd like to do in this lecture because
I mentioned in the last lecture that in the course of the 20th century, the idea of evolution
became intertwined with genetic theory so that Darwin's evolution became the dominant
paradigm only because of the complementary development of genetic theory between 1900
and 1940, and both of those became intertwined with the progressive dominance of molecular
biology in biology going from the early 1900s when certainly there was no such paradigm
of focusing on molecular processes in order to explain biological phenomena to the end
of the 20th century when that was sort of standard for a very large fraction of the
biology community was to approach explaining biological phenomena at the molecular level.
We will be dealing with those two phenomena in the next two lectures, but it's too tempting
to skip over the application of the idea of evolution to human beings, to us.
What does evolution have to say about who we are and how we stand in relation to the
evolutionary biological history of life on Earth?
Darwin himself was extremely cautious, almost deeply reluctant to focus on the application
of the idea of evolution to man.
In 1859, he published The Origin of Species and there is only one sentence which alludes
to the likelihood that this idea of his would enrich our understanding of human being in
the world.
In 1871, he published The Descent of Man and brought out into the open, 12 years later
now, brought out into the open the scientific, so to speak, imposition of the idea of evolution
on human being in the world and human history and of course it did provoke a very substantial
controversy, much greater than the controversy provoked by the idea that species changed
over time.
Alfred Russell Wallace, the code discoverer with Darwin of evolution by natural selection,
never accepted that evolution applied to human beings.
He believed that on strictly evolutionary grounds, one could argue that cultural evolution was
not characterized by the same processes that biological evolution was characterized by,
that human intelligence was way beyond any mutation, any variation that could have been
associated with survival advantage and that there was therefore an absolute gulf between
human being in the world and the rest of the biological community in spite of the fact
that our biological processes are similar to or identical with the biological processes
in animals and as we know even in plants at the very fundamental level and Wallace felt
that there was an absolute gulf.
He also had strong spiritualist leanings which led him to want to emphasize the difference
between human beings and the rest of the life community, the rest of the biosphere.
Nevertheless, by the end of the 19th century, there was a general consensus among scientists,
certainly among life scientists, that human beings had evolved.
But the consensus was that human beings had evolved once, that at a certain point in the
history of life on earth, human beings emerged and that they have gotten better, but they
have not evolved out of a sequence of creatures who were less human than us and before them
even less human than that and before them even less human than that.
