In 1921 and 1924, different fossil kinds of fossil human remains were found in South Africa.
In 1929 and again in 1934, in China, between 1932 and 1939, in a series of caves in what
was then called Palestine, fossil human remains were found.
And now we had, now remember what I told you to keep in mind, the concept of developmental
sequencing.
Now we've got lots of bones of creatures that, as soon as you look at them, you say, oh,
those are human bones.
Oh, that's funny.
They're not.
They're not exactly human.
They're not our bones, but they're clearly human-like bones.
Is there a developmental sequence here?
Is there a code in these bones that we need to decipher?
Are we seeing something like a fossil sequence the way Darwin showed us, the fossils in the
rocks?
And that became the challenge for paleoanthropologists, people studying ancient humans, so to speak,
how to make sense out of this growing number of bones.
In the 1940s, you remember, I told you that neo-Darwinism was now triumphant and the neo-Darwinists
paid some attention to this.
And one of the things that neo-Darwinists do is they classify things.
And they invented two genera of human-like creatures, one they called Australopithecus,
which is ape-like, not descended from apes, but ape-like creatures and hominids, walking
erect with a bipedal gait, relatively loose-limbed, pretty much like us.
And they started organizing these bones in these two categories.
Australopithecus came first, hominids came later.
They also started studying human populations as different adaptations to changing environmental
circumstances depending on where human beings lived.
The underlying premise was that all human beings are kin, but they have developed different
genetic capabilities because they lived in the tropics, because they lived in northern
Europe, because they lived in Siberia, because they lived on the plains, they lived in the
mountains.
It's turned out to be completely wrong.
Once we had understood genetics and DNA, we find that that's not correct, that all
human beings really are alike and have not developed genetic differences among them.
But the neo-Darwinists put the study of these bones on a systematic and scientific footing.
Concurrently, what really would blow the whole controversy up was the work of Louis Leakey,
later his wife, Mary Leakey, and then later their sons, especially Richard Leakey, starting
in the mid-1930s into the 1960s, working in Tanzania in the Olduvai Gorge and discovering
really old human remains, fossil, by really old meaning, millions of years old human remains.
And starting off what came to be known as the out of Africa hypothesis, the hypothesis
that all human beings currently alive on the planet descend from a population that originated
in Africa and radiated out from Africa.
And this applies to all human beings on the planet, without exception, even Europeans.
This was an extremely controversial hypothesis, to put it mildly, in the 1960s and 70s.
It is much less controversial today because of DNA evidence that I'm going to talk about
in a moment.
But this begins to establish for us the sense of these bones.
What is the message of the fossil human remains that have been collected now from all around
the world?
There are very, very substantial deposits.
And then the question is putting them in developmental sequencing, which we are helped to do by the
invention of radiocarbon dating by Willard Libby in the late 1940s, which helps us to
date these bones, as well as radioactive dating for very old geological strata.
And as Mary Leakey specialized in, Mary specialized in studying the tools that ancient humans used,
showing that even millions of years ago, human beings, our ancestors, were tool users.
And that the kinds of tools they used could be categorized.
And you could see a developmental sequence in the tools as they became more sophisticated
over time, and even showing that there were tool factories, that is, that there were sites
at which people made large numbers of tools, and then one imagines shared them, or maybe
traded them in for coupons.
In 1974, a collaborator turned competitor of the Leakeys named Donald Johansson, working
in Ethiopia, discovered the partial skeleton of a female that was dated to be approximately
three and a half million years old.
