from the point of view of biologist and therefore readily observable under the microscope.
And what Morgan discovered in 1910, until that time, Morgan had not been a supporter
of Mendelism.
He was not a genetic theory of inheritance person, but what he discovered was that he
could exactly correlate eye color in fruit flies with a particular chromosome.
And all of a sudden he became a true believer, and he announced that genes are real and that
they are located on the chromosomes, of course he was not the only one who said this, otherwise
he might not have had the impact that he had.
But the study of fruit fly chromosomes, the study of genetic variation, the study of mutations,
using the fruit fly as the experimental subject became a major source of research for the
next 40 years in biology.
And a tremendous number of careers in biology and in genetics were based on fruit fly research,
which is why Caltech wanted to hire Morgan away from Columbia.
So in 1910, we now have a strong scientific argument that genes are real, and from Morgan's
point of view, genes really are like atoms, because here we can correlate eye color with
what seems like a localized physical cause.
It's interesting, therefore, to note that treating the gene as a kind of inheritance
atom and taking it that it's real, it's not just a mental construct or a hypothesis, was
happening at about the same time that physicists were coming to the conclusion that chemists
had come to 50 years earlier, that atoms were real, because you may remember from earlier
lectures in this course, that it was only in the late 1908, 1909, 1910 that the majority
of physicists accepted that the chemical atom was a physical reality, until then they thought
that it was a useful device for describing chemical reactions, but that it was not physically
real.
And so at about the same time that physical scientists are accepting the reality of physical
atoms, biologists are beginning to accept the reality of inheritance atoms.
That's one interesting affinity, whether there's any connection or not is not clear.
There's another one, however, which is, I think, much more fertile and fundamental.
The personians in pursuit of defending Darwinism at the level of the way that continuous small
variations could accumulate in a population and create new species, develop mathematical
models, which had not been done before.
Mendel had very primitive mathematics, that's why you can teach it in high school, because
you really only need to know arithmetic, and maybe a little bit of algebra.
In the case of the personians, they developed progressively more sophisticated mathematical
models for describing genetic patterns over generations, how genetic patterns formed over
generations.
And of course, the pattern that we're looking for is how you can, by accumulating small
variations, wind up with a population down here that's clearly different from a population
over here.
In 1909, 1908, 1909, two men, quite independently of one another, a mathematician, one of the
greatest of the first half of the 20th century, G. H. Hardy, and a German physician who was
sort of an amateur, so to speak, in this field, Wilhelm Weinberg, published what has been
known ever since as the Hardy-Weinberg Law, which is an algebraic expression which allows
you to see how the introduction of a variation, a genetic variation, an inheritable variation
in a population, will spread and stabilize in the population.
So it will reach equilibrium, except that natural selection doesn't allow equilibrium
to be reached.
So that natural selection will continually destabilize the equilibrium that would be
reached, and the Hardy-Weinberg Law gives us the first tool to understand how you can,
how a mutation can spread through the population.
And of course, mutations are not personian, they're baitsonian.
And so the fact that we now have a law which can really help us understand how variations
can spread if we look at the variations as mutations, but they could be small mutations,
that's the difference, is one of the insights that led to the overlapping of the personians
and the baitsonians so that by 1910 the conflict was in effect over, and now what we're looking
at is how we can use insights from both of these parties in order to get a richer understanding
of the relationship between inheritance theory between genetics and evolution, the way that
mutations, the way that spontaneous variations can spread in the population.
In 1915, the mathematician, H.T. J. Norton, published tables which extended the Hardy-Weinberg
Law and actually showed that, let's suppose that a genetic variation gave you a one-tenth
of one percent survival advantage over your siblings and peers.
