We got better at different rates because this is a European scientific concept and the Europeans
believed that they were the benchmark of the excellence of humanity.
So that the different populations of human beings on the planet were different because
they had gotten better at different rates.
The Europeans were the fastest.
They were the most advanced and they developed the most rapidly.
This of course underlay 19th century racism and was used as a rationale for 19th century
racism, talking about the races of man by putting them in a sequence of development
which culminates in European man, Euro man.
For the same kind of racist reasons, the overwhelming consensus was that man had evolved
on the Eurasian land mass, not in Africa, not in South America, clearly not in North
America, but only in Eurasia.
That somewhere in Eurasia man appeared and European man became so to speak the so-called
the leading edge of the development of humanity, not evolution.
We didn't evolve.
We evolved once a long time ago and that was it.
Now we just develop.
We get better by learning to use fire, by learning how to make clothes, by having designer
labels in our clothes, etc.
In 1856, quarry workers in the Neander Valley in Germany, Valley is Tau, so Neander Tau,
uncovered some very strange looking bones and they called in the local high school biology
teacher, a man named Jaund Flurgholt, and he recognized that these were unusual bones,
that they were human, but they weren't us human.
They weren't the bones that any of us could have left.
And so he sent them to, he carefully cleaned them and wrapped them and sent them to experts
to examine, triggering a decades long vicious controversy, very personal and bitter controversy
among European experts about whether these were the bones of diseased modern human beings
or whether they were the bones of a creature that was not quite human or certainly human
but not human the way we're human.
So the Neander Tau controversy began in the late 1850s and 1860s and in fact, as we'll
see, it continues to this very day.
It's not completely settled even to this day.
Did we descend from the Neander Tau or are they distant cousins that have really nothing
to do with us?
But the Neander Tau controversy precipitated lots of this kind of conceptualizing about
the origins of humanity and an attempt to buffer a sort of European modern man from having
had primitive ancestors, bad enough that we evolved as a life form but much worse if
we had to actually evolve through a sequence of creatures who were increasingly less human
as we went back in time.
But unfortunately for them, the Neander Tau bones were not the only ones.
First of all, more Neander Tau bones were found all over Europe and in 1908 two pretty
complete skeletons were formed.
A French biologist was given these skeletons to study and to in a sense make an artistic
reconstruction of what these creatures looked like when they were alive and he was the one
who popularized the image of the Neander Tau as a brutish ape man.
Clearly not somebody that you would want to give the keys to your BMW to to park for you
on a dark night.
And this is, there was absolutely no scientific basis in 1908 for that kind of reconstruction.
But that stuck.
The public image was that Neander Tau's were brut ape men that were barely human and they
were quite interesting to see the way people published pictures of what cave Neander Tau
life was like a male and female and campfire scenes completely imaginary of course.
But we get taken in by these pictures very quickly.
In the 1890s human fossil remains fossil human remains were found in Indonesia.
