And he did impose a moratorium on himself and he urged his fellow biologists to accept
this moratorium on themselves until they could figure out safety procedures for working
with recombinant DNA.
As it happens, and perhaps not surprisingly, the conference ended with a view that this
was dangerous but we can control it.
A committee was formed, which together with the federal government worked out safety procedures
for laboratories that do different levels of recombinant DNA research.
But this is in the early 1970s and early and mid 1970s.
By 1977, just five years after Berg invented the most primitive technique for disassembling
DNA, the protein somatostatin, a hormone which is associated with inhibiting the action
of the release of the human growth hormone, was produced using this recombinant DNA technology.
And in 1980, interferon, which is a protein produced by white blood cells as part of the
immune system's response to antigens that enter into the blood, was produced by inserting
a human gene into a bacterium.
Just a few years later, the FDA approved the manufacture of insulin, which until then,
for decades had been made by processing pigpancreuses, an extremely tedious process and a very messy
one by inserting a human gene for producing insulin into a bacterium.
And this was commercialized so that insulin now, all of a sudden, was available, produced
using recombinant DNA by bacteria into which the human gene had been inserted.
That was in 1980.
It was also in 1980 that the first transgenic plants and animals were created.
And we began to think that there was an industry waiting to be born here.
If we could transfer genes across plants and animals, then we could perhaps produce plants
that had more attractive commercial characteristics and animals that had more attractive commercial
characteristics in terms of cows, for example, and the milk that they produce, etc.
So already by the 1980s, we have medical products of significance that are being produced by
this technology.
In the mid-1980s, the first monoclonal antibodies were produced.
Monoclonal antibodies are exact clones of antibodies produced in response to a particular
antigen or disease entity in the body so that you can now have, we can take a single antibody
and clone it so that it is identical, and in principle at least, we can provide a person
with unlimited exact copies of precisely the antibody that their own body produces in
response to a particular genus.
And if their body doesn't produce enough of it, why we can now manufacture it in unlimited
quantities and give them all that they need in order to respond to a particular disease.
Now in the 1980s and early 1990s, the hype over monoclonal antibodies far exceeded what
was able to be done, but in the second half of the 1990s, monoclonal antibodies came back
and are now a therapeutic tool that is available to physicians.
In 1985, the human growth factor hormone was produced using recombinant DNA technology.
In 1986, for the first time, scientists were able to use recombinant DNA technology to
combine an enzyme and an antibody which opened up a whole new family of pharmaceutical substances
for treating diseases because now we could target cells that recognize the enzyme and
the antibody was carried along with the enzyme.
The enzyme became a carrier for the antibody and in 1997, the first artificial chromosome
was produced, which again suggests in the 21st century that the potential power of molecular
biology for providing increasingly powerful medical therapeutic tools.
Now not only at the level of the physical body, but there is such a thing at the end
of the 20th century as molecular psychiatry.
That is to say, looking at, and I referred to this in the previous lecture, reducing
mind, mental processes to molecular structural processes, the structure of molecular processes,
and for example, there is apparently a strong correlation between suicide and the gene for
the production of serotonin, which is a neurotransmitter substance in the brain.
Similarly, there is a gene that is responsible for transporting serotonin, different from
producing it, just for moving serotonin from one part of the brain to another because it
has to move around in order to carry the chemical message that it carries in the brain.
That gene is associated with depression and the two seem to go together, right, if you're
sufficiently depressed.
So the gene for serotonin transport, the gene for serotonin production, so here we have
profoundly important human behaviors, that is to say, for the individual who suffers from
depression, but the individual driven to suicide.
These are human behaviors, and yet what we're saying is, oh.
