Viruses, as we all know very well, are really effective in getting their way into cells.
If you can combine a vaccine with an antibiotic, a virus, I'm sorry, if you can add an antibiotic
to a virus that you have defanged using recombinant DNA technology.
So we can get into the cell, but it no longer knows what to do when it gets inside.
But the antibiotic is now delivered, so the virus is now what's called a delivery vector.
It is a vector, it is a transmission mechanism, it is a medium for transmitting the antibiotic
to the cell.
And this sounds like science fiction, but it is in fact a product that Merck has created
based on recombinant DNA technology.
And it's just kind of interesting that bacterial vaccines which had been superseded by antibiotics
the original bacterial vaccines that had a philosophy of prevention.
Antibiotics are a response to illness.
You take the antibiotic when you're sick.
The bacterial vaccines was to prevent, just as you get a polio vaccine, to prevent getting
polio.
And we've lost track of that.
After World War II, bacterial vaccines more or less went away.
We're familiar with viral vaccines, but they've actually come back in the 80s and 90s because
of a number of severe bacterial illnesses that have once again become public health problems
even in this country and certainly in others.
So there's one example, just one, and it is I believe representative, one example of how
the pharmaceutical industry has moved increasingly in the direction of molecular therapeutic
products.
Now I'd like to spend some time talking about the imaging branch of medicine, medical imaging,
which obviously has to begin with x-rays.
X-rays also discovered in 1896.
Just three years later, 1899, Thomas Edison had created the fluoroscope, which is one
implementation of x-ray technology, and was manufacturing and selling fluoroscopes.
Between 1899 and 1910, at which time there was a substantial production of x-ray machines
for doctors and dentists' office, one must wonder at the stamina of our ancestors because
these machines expose people to staggering doses of radiation, which often had severe
and fatal consequences for the technicians and the physicians and the dentists who were
using them, their nurses and so on.
But we don't hear about massive numbers of people suffering from it, although individuals
did, because the exposure time of these machines was in minutes, sometimes 10 minutes or more
of exposure.
But in 1912, happily for all of us, an MIT faculty member who was also a consultant
to General Electric produced an x-ray tube that only required seconds of exposure.
And that became sort of a standard for the next few decades, and improved versions of
that, of course, brought the time down even further.
World War I was a major influence in that the Army wanted portable x-ray equipment to use
in Europe, and thousands of people were trained to be x-ray technicians when they came back
after the war, that we now had essentially a pool of equipment and expertise that made
x-rays available.
Now, why would people want to use them in very large quantities?
Well, the answer came because of a real or perceived tuberculosis scare in the 1920s,
and chest x-rays became almost universal.
But one must wonder if the chest x-rays becoming universal was a factor that the companies had
the equipment and the people and they wanted to use them so that they could get money from
it, or whether we really all needed chest x-rays.
That I'm sure is a very complicated question with no simple answer, but certainly, again,
reveals the way that circumstances and technologies and ideas and value judgments are enmeshed
in complicated ways.
X-ray technology developed in ways that we're familiar with, and the thing about it that
I want to call attention to is that it's an outside in imaging.
We bombard the body with x-rays.
The x-rays pass through the body.
They're absorbed by dense material like bone, and they go through the soft material so you
can image dense material using x-rays.
But let's sort of humor me for the moment and accept that this is an outside in kind
of imaging.
