A significant improvement on X-rays was what we're familiar as CAT scans,
computer axial tomography scanning, which is the idea for which begins in the 1920s
with a Frenchman who came to the United States and had this idea of rotating the X-ray machine
around the patient to get a three-dimensional picture of the patient's body.
And between 1929 and the 1970s, this was tried out in various places in Europe and the United States,
and there was such a thing as whole-body rincanography, which is a whole-body X-rays.
In the 1930s, there were several companies that made prototype machines,
but it was only in the 1970s that a commercial machine was invented in England.
GE, in maybe the best sense of the term, stole the market away from EMI,
which was the British company that introduced the first commercial machine.
They improved it and they subsequently came to dominate the market.
But CAT scans are interesting, I think, primarily because the underlying technology
is based on a mathematical tool that has nothing to do with medical imaging.
The tool is tomography, which is a way of building a two-dimensional image out of one-dimensional data,
a three-dimensional image out of two-dimensional data.
Many scientists in many different disciplines use tomographic techniques,
which are mathematical technique for figuring out from a data set a more complex picture of what the data is describing.
And it was recognizing in the 1970s, oh, we can adapt this technique to medical imaging
that led to CAT scans, but that's still an outside-in technology.
What has happened in the last third of the 20th century is that we have an inside-out imaging technology,
which is based on the activity of molecules inside the body.
And these allow us to image not just things in the body, tissues and bones,
but processes going on in the body.
And that, I think, has given physicians and scientists powerful new tools for studying life processes.
One of these, of course, is the MRI machine, Magnetic Resonance Imaging Machine,
which is based on a discovery by the physicist I.I. Rabi at Columbia University in 1939
in which he was able to measure what's called the magnetic moment of a nucleus,
the way that the nucleus is magnetized.
And this led his students to develop over the next 15 years machines that scientists, physicists and chemists used to do research
and that industry discovered could be used for testing materials by exciting the atoms in specimen materials
by imposing a very strong magnetic field around them,
and then seeing how these atoms responded, in particular the hydrogen atom,
since we're mostly made out of water and water is H2O,
anything that excites hydrogen atoms gives off signals that we can build a picture out of,
and that's what MRI machines do.
And when in the late 1980s, superconducting magnets were added to these machines to get much more powerful fields,
we have much more powerful images of what's going on inside the body anywhere there is a hydrogen atom,
which is effective everywhere in the body.
So we're exciting hydrogen molecules.
The other technology that images us from the inside out is PET scans,
positron emission tomography.
Notice tomography is the same mathematical technique,
but now what we're doing is we're injecting into the body radioactive substances that decay in a particular way,
and we're capturing the signature of that decay and building up an image of the organs
and of the activity of the organs in which those molecules are contained.
So we have here, we have here another example of molecular medicine of imaging the body from the inside out,
rather than from the outside in,
another instance in which we see the pervasiveness of this mindset and of the spread of the same ideas that underlie molecular biology.
