Benedict and Mead and a number of other Boazian students were anti-Freudian in the sense that
they rejected Freud's notion of an unconscious that is responsible for why you behave that
the way you do.
But not all Boazians were anti-Freudian and however those were are much less well known.
He ran Cardina for example was a Boazian who thought that Freud's views and Boaz's views
of culture and the way that personality reflects culture were compatible with one another.
But this empirical relativistic approach to the study of culture was very distinctively
American in the period roughly speaking from 1920 to 1950.
In 1950 there was a sharp reversal.
Leslie White and Julian Stewart in particular led a movement to shift anthropology in the
direction of the hard sciences.
That this humanistic personality culture stuff was all too airy-fairy.
This is not science.
If you want to be an anthropologist and you want to claim that anthropology is a science
then you've got to be scientific.
That means that culture must be understood materialistically, deterministically and they
claim that every culture had a kind of an inner structure that evolved deterministically
well I shouldn't use evolved and deterministically together after what we've been talking about
that unfolded deterministically over time and that a factor driving this unfolding was
the technological systems available to that culture.
Also by understanding the materialistic structure of a culture we've got to handle on how that
culture represented an adaptation to a particular kind of cultural niche so it's ecological
anthropology in fact subsequent students of White and Stewart used that term ecological
anthropology.
It's a way of looking at a culture as a materialistically driven system that has laws and that's the
job of the anthropologists to understand what are the causal mechanisms at work in
a culture that are responsible for the way that it unfolds in time.
This has some similarities to the Marx and Engels interpretation of culture which of
course was also very materialistic except for the class conflict part.
Of course from the Marxist point of view once you take the class conflict out then there's
no Marxism left but the idea they material what they share in common is the idea that
cultures develop over time for materialistic reasons and they develop deterministically
and it's up to the anthropologists to understand what are the laws of that kind of development.
This hard anthropology, this materialistic, deterministic interpretation of culture became
increasingly prominent in the 1950s and into the 1960s.
It was complemented in the 1960s by a tidal wave that overwhelmed all of Western European
and American intellectual life and that was something called structuralism but we're
ready for that.
Claude Levy-Strauss, a French anthropologist, published a number of research works that
claimed that culture was structure, that what made a culture what it was was the network
of relationships characteristic of that culture, that all meanings and values derive from the
structure of that network of relationships because different network structures give
you different kinds of meanings and values and we'll come up against this notion again
in other sciences.
Networks have different structures depending on the structure, wherever you have structural
similarities then you're going to have the same kinds of meanings and values.
This was applied not just in anthropology but it was applied to literary criticism,
it was applied to political science, to sociology, this structuralism became the most fashionable
intellectual movement of the 1960s and 1970s and this was an alternative to but was not
necessarily in opposition to White and Stewart's ecological anthropology.
