Early in the century, two important figures were Bronislav Malinowski and A.R. Radcliffe-Brown.
Both of them studied the so-called primitive cultures, or the cultures of people that Europeans considered to be primitive.
But they had, even though they were colleagues, they were certainly not intellectual pals,
they had polar opposing views of culture.
Malinowski studied cultures as cultural processes, rituals, the institutions of a people,
as expressions of their biological, psychological and sociological needs.
Individuals have biological needs, psychological needs, sociological needs,
and they create institutions and rituals and values that satisfy those needs.
So for Malinowski, culture is a product of human beings who have needs and who create means of satisfying those needs.
Not just cooking recipes, but satisfying psychological needs and sociological needs, as well as biological ones.
Radcliffe-Brown looked at it the other way around.
He was only interested in the way that existing cultures caused individuals to behave in one way,
rather than another.
That growing up within one culture caused you to behave in one way, rather than growing up in another culture.
For Radcliffe-Brown, culture was the given, and it was the way that culture,
he was interested in understanding how cultures caused the individuals who were born into them to have the values that they had,
and to display the behaviors that they did.
So these are two opposing methodologies and two contrasting methodologies,
conceptions of what a culture is and of what is interesting and important to understand in a culture.
At the same time, early 20th century, German anthropologists were interested in what's called ethnology.
They were interested in studying the specific rituals of individual cultures, much narrower focus,
and American anthropology now comes onto the scene and becomes, as all the American social sciences do in the course of the 20th century,
if not globally dominant, but a major intellectual influence in global social science,
which American thinking had not been in the 19th century.
So just as in the physical sciences, American science became globally dominant in the course of the 20th century,
especially after World War II, in the social sciences, even earlier, American ideas became increasingly important and increasingly emulated.
American anthropology initially was dominated by a German immigrant named Franz Boas,
who came to this country in the early 1900s and became a towering intellectual influence
in a number of fields. We'll see him come up again in sociology and linguistics, for example.
Boas was a relativist. Boas believed that there was no law driving cultures through some evolutionary development cycle,
that every culture had its own integrity that needed to be respected and understood as its own adaptation to the world as the people of that culture understood it.
And therefore our job was to go out and study it, and literally study it, respecting its own integrity,
and study its language, study its rituals, without trying to make any judgments about them.
His students, and the most famous of them are Ruth Benedict and Margaret Mead,
created a school that was called Culture and Personality.
What they were interested in, analogous to Radcliffe Brown, was how do people grow up?
Internalizing the institutions, the rituals, and the values of the culture in which they belong.
So, for example, when Margaret Mead wrote her extremely influential, even if possibly completely incorrect, coming of age in Samoa,
the motive was to understand why the teenagehood in Western European and American society was such a painful psychological experience,
whereas in Polynesia, being a teenager was quite a happy experience.
And the idea being that the teenagers in the West behave the way they do, have the anxiety and stress that they do,
because they are internalizing features of their culture that create conflict within them.
That being a teenager is not naturally stressful and anxiety-generating.
This is a reflection of internalizing external processes.
And if you go to another culture in which there are different external structures, then being a teenager is fundamentally different.
So, that was the idea.
Culture and personality.
Boaz's influence here was a highly relativist one.
Ruth Benedict's famous book is called Patterns of Culture.
Again, there is no way of judging the way people behave and what they believe in and what they do.
You have to recognize that cultures have a wholeness and an integrity,
and the people who grow up in those cultures reflect the kinds of values and processes that are distinctive of that particular culture.
