Lecture 30, Humanity, Society, Sociology
Welcome to another node in the web of disciplines that make up the sciences.
If this is lecture 30, then it must be sociology.
And indeed, the subject for today's lecture is sociology,
a science that has provided an extraordinarily rich trove of ideas in the course of the 20th century.
In fact, inherited a rich trove of ideas from the 19th century.
In 1900, sociologists tended to be grand theorists.
By the year 2000, sociologists had become much more focused on social processes and institutions
and relationships among institutions.
And we are going to track this transformation or evolution of sociology as a science in the course of the 20th century.
But it is more than most sciences.
It is necessary to acknowledge the debt of 20th century sociology to the great theorists of 19th century sociology.
In particular, Auguste Comte, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, John Stuart Mill, Herbert Spencer.
And then, as I said in the last lecture, the man who can be considered the founder of modern sociology
and who straddles the turn of the 20th century, the French sociologist Emile Durkheim.
Auguste Comte, in the period roughly speaking 1830 to 1860, was invented the word sociology
and was in some sense the first great theorist of society, the first to try to formulate a scientific theory of society.
Comte formulated an evolutionary theory of the human mind.
That is to say, he focused on how the human mind has evolved from its earliest animist beginnings
when human beings could only think animistically through polytheism, through monotheism,
through a metaphysical state of mind which he considered to dominate the post-medieval position
until the scientific state of mind or what he called the positivist state of mind
in which the human mind is now mature enough that it is capable of basing its response to experience on fact-based reasoning.
And he called that positivism.
So for him, a scientific response to experience was to base our experience on a logical analysis of facts
and their relationships and to base our action on this kind of a rational scientific analysis.
And he thought we could do the same thing with respect to society and that what he published in quite huge books
was a plan for creating a reason-driven society, a rationally structured society that would balance order and progress.
Comte identified immediately the two poles of social behavior, namely statics and dynamics,
that on the one hand, people want stability. On the other hand, we know we want progress too.
Stability and progress are in conflict with one another. How can you have order and progress?
And Comte had a plan. He was a reformer activist social scientist. He was not merely descriptive.
And the plan was that the progress was in the hands of scientists and industrialists.
Order was anchored in an invented series of conservative religious rituals
that everybody had to at least pay lip service to and that the rituals would anchor social behavior
so that you would not have disorder every time the scientists and the industrialists came up with new ideas,
new technologies, new industries, etc. And he thought that by balancing, by integrating the conservative ritual structures
in society and rational responses by scientists and industrialists together as a kind of a team,
a science-led industrial policy that you could have a reason-driven society.
Marx and Engels, of course, are familiar to us as having a theory of society that is materialistic, deterministic,
very definitely deterministic and one that is in which social evolution is driven by an unstable force,
namely greed, private property, pursuit of self-interest, which guarantees social instability until we reach an equilibrium state,
which they call communism.
