Lecture 31, Humanity, Society, Political Science
Political science is to sociology, as archaeology is to anthropology.
Let's think about that for a moment.
Back in lecture 27, we talked about anthropology emerging as a science at the end of the 19th century
and then evolving through the 20th century.
And then when we came to the last third of that lecture approximately,
we talked about archaeology as the material side of anthropology,
that what the archaeologists are studying are the material remains, so to speak, of cultures.
And culture is what anthropologists are attempting to understand.
Analogously, political scientists are attempting to understand the relationships of power and authority in a society.
So sociology is broader than political science.
Sociologists are interested in other social institutions than the political ones.
For example, kinship relationships would be legitimate.
And sociologists are interested in studying institutions such as educational institutions
and the family kinship relationships being an illustration of that.
The political scientists are more narrowly focused on the relationships of power and authority.
And in particular, what is it that allows a society to, so to speak,
hang together given the way that power and authority are exercised in a society?
Because very often the exercise of power and authority should fragment the society,
should push individuals apart depending on how power and authority are exercised.
So how is it that authorities maintain their unity, their integrity,
given the distribution of power and authority?
How are power and authority legitimated?
These are the kinds of questions that political scientists are interested in.
And this is therefore a subset, so to speak, of sociology.
Political scientists are sociologists, but not all sociologists are political scientists.
At the beginning of the 20th century, the dominant western concern about
when it came to power and authority was with the state.
That's an expression that should be in quotation marks, the state with a capital S.
It is very difficult, as I mentioned in the last lecture, for us to really feel
at the beginning of the 21st century, it is difficult for us to feel here in America,
the power that the term the state had for Europeans.
Not just Germans, but for Europeans generally.
I accept Great Britain, that's really off the coast.
So for continental Europeans, the state meant something very real, very powerful
that evoked very powerful responses from citizens.
The state was the source of what is called the organic unity of a people.
The organic unity of the German people.
The organic unity of the members of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
The organic unity of the French people, the Belgian people, was associated with the state.
And the ruler, the king, the emperor, was the embodiment of the state.
Again, we do not even begin to feel the same attitude towards our elected representatives
as late 19th century Europeans, regardless of their intellectual sophistication,
felt with regard to the king, the Kaiser, the emperor, the emperor of France, Joseph.
It had nothing to do with his personal competence about which almost nobody knew anything anyway at the time.
It had to do with what he embodied the state, and therefore was the source, ultimately,
of all meaning and value, of all power and authority.
It all flowed out from the center.
And even when these governments became democratized to the extent that they,
in the course of the 20th century, first half of the 20th century, became democratized,
it is still, and it remains the case even today at the beginning of the 21st century,
that the government in European countries tends to be far more centralized than we are familiar with.
That Paris represents the center of power and authority in France, for example.
