This book was savaged by Friedrich Hayek, an economist that had been hired by the London School of Economics
and who remained a lifelong, violent, intellectually violent opponent of Keynes.
Keynes retreated, so to speak, from the public scenes for several years.
He had a team of associates at Cambridge that he worked with.
And then in 1936, he reappeared with his General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money,
which is the Bible of mid-20th century economics.
One of the things that Keynes argued was that economic stability is the government's responsibility.
So when we have governments who are activists with respect to the economy,
in large measure, this is Keynes' legacy, that this is one of the tasks of government to maintain economic stability.
Second, deficit spending is perfectly okay.
The government needs to prime the pump during recessions and depressions in order to get back to economic stability.
And he had a model for how you could get economic stability, in which I won't go into the details of here,
but the model was based on activist government policies that used income expenditure models
in order to estimate, to project economic output and then to relate economic output to employment.
And Keynes' equations, he also was an extremely innovative mathematician
who in the 1920s developed an innovative probability theory, like as Jevons did,
which was based on subjective values.
Remember the Marginalist Revolution says that economic values are ultimately subjective,
economic decision making based on subjective values.
He developed a probability theory based on subjective values that turned out by the 1950s to be extremely influential
as developed by others because Keynes himself sort of pulled back from the subjectivity and said,
well, they look subjective, but they're really objective because if a hundred people have the same knowledge,
they will all make the same subjective decisions.
You turn out to be quite wrong about that.
But others, including the British mathematician Frank Ramsey in the 1920s
and then an American mathematician named Leonard Savage in the 1950s,
took Keynes' work and showed that, yes, you can keep the decision subjective
and still calculate utility measures, benefit measures, and get them out of these mathematical equations
so that it's not anybody can choose anything.
Even if the values are subjective, they are calculable.
In any event, Keynes' work became the basis for western government economic policies starting in the 1930s,
adopted in Britain, eventually adopted here in the United States, not without objection.
During the war in 1940, Keynes published a pamphlet, How to Finance the War,
which the British government adopted, strict rationing and forced savings
were the means by which the British government financed World War II and got through the war.
At the end of the war, he led the British delegation to Breton Woods.
He was very ill. He was actually dying at the time,
but he played a critical role in the creation of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, and then he died.
Meanwhile, back in 1932, Lionel Robbins was brought into the London School of Economics,
which was created in 1895 to be sort of an alternative intellectual research center,
a university-level research center in England, alternative to Oxford and Cambridge,
and Lionel Robbins was brought in to head the economics program, and he hired Friedrich Hayek.
He also reoriented British economics by undermining completely Marshallian economics,
the work of Alfred Marshall that I mentioned before,
bringing that marginalist revolution through Pareto into British economic thought.
So for 30 years, Marshall's work blocked the marginalist revolution, so to speak,
from the primary role in British economic thought.
Robbins restored Pareto to centrality and brought a number of brilliant young economists
to the London School of Economics, who in the 1930s substantially developed Pareto's thought,
sometimes combining it with Keynes' thought.
John Hicks, one of those young men, brought Keynesian thinking here to the United States,
but mixed with Pareto thinking.
So the British Keynesians always considered that heretical, not real Keynes,
because it had been painted with Pareto.
And then after the war, continued to develop Pareto's thinking,
which was, remember, keyed to including social optimization,
along with individual optimization in economic decision making.
And this raised a serious issue.
Can economics, as a science, identify social optimization?
That implies a value judgment. How can economists do that?
How can economists develop models that say this is what society ought to be allocating resources for?
This is how wealth ought to be distributed.
