He looked at what was the social optimization.
So markets needed, according to Pareto,
in order to have real economic equilibrium in a society,
you needed to factor in social optimization, social utility,
as well as individual utility.
You had to optimize individual utility.
And he worked out equations that would allow you to calculate
equilibrium conditions for achieving this kind of economic equilibrium.
And by the way, this was almost immediately recognized as a valuable planning tool
for the new kind of welfare socialist-influenced welfare economics
of post-World War I Europe.
And when Pareto was revived in the 1930s in England,
after World War II, the neo-Paretians developed
that used Pareto's work extended by them to be the planning tools
for the new welfare states of Western Europe that emerged after the war.
Maybe welfare economics has a different connotation here than in Europe,
but essentially socialist-influenced economies of Scandinavia
and Germany, Belgium, Holland, et cetera.
Those all reflect Pareto's influence.
Here in the United States, where Schumpeter came as a relatively young man,
here in the United States, I would call attention to the thinking of Thorstein-Veblen,
an American intellectual, very eccentric character,
who was responsible for a school called institutionalist economics.
Veblen believed that when you looked at economics, you had to take economic factors
and economic values, you had to take into account historical and social
and institutional realities in a society.
You couldn't just look at buyers and sellers, but you had to look at the social context
within which buying and selling takes place.
So at the first level, this means paying attention to, for example, the firm
as the source of supply.
You can't just look at supply without taking into account the context
how is supply generated.
So it's generated, for example, one way when you have the putting out system
of the early 19th century in which people in their homes do work
and the pieces move from home to home where some people do the spinning
and some people do the weaving and some people do the dyeing.
You get a very different situation when you have an integrated corporation
in which raw material comes in one door and the finished product goes out the other door
and you have 15,000 people working inside a gigantic factory in a coordinated way.
And if you have a vertically integrated modern corporation that owns raw materials
and railroad lines, so you need to know that before you can analyze supply-demand relations.
You can't abstract the supply-demand relationship and ignore the context of the supply
or the context of the demand.
So you have to understand the social factors, historical factors, institutional factors.
This turned out to be pretty complex, to put it mildly.
And although in the United States for about 20 years or so,
this kind of institutional economics was very important in terms of trying
to develop economic theories, it petered out in the 1920s.
But we will see it comes back in the 1990s.
But I give you this as a kind of background for the, so to speak, real action in economic theory,
which begins really in the 1930s with the figure of John Maynard Keynes,
who is the Chomsky of economics, although not politically,
and he is a figure of that stature in the field of economics.
And we all in the West experience Keynesian economics because of the assimilation
of Keynes' ideas by Western governments since the mid-1930s.
Keynes himself was an extraordinarily flamboyant and socially well-connected British intellectual
associated with the Bloomsbury group of sort of radical intellectuals in Europe,
socially radical intellectuals in England, in London in the early 20th century.
Virginia Woolf was another member of that group.
He was a member of the British Versailles delegation but walked out because he felt that what the French were demanding
and what the British were willing to go along with in terms of punishing Germany was crazy
and was going to lead to another war.
So he just left the Versailles peace negotiations.
In the 1920s and early 1930s he was extremely active as a vocal on many public issues
having to do with the gold standard in England and then in the early 1930s, approximately in 1931, 1932,
he published a book on monetary policy.
