From Watson through Skinner to the 1970s,
mind didn't matter.
All that mattered was as far as
psychologists was concerned, what were concerned,
all that mattered was behavior.
That's what psychology was all about.
All of these people studying mind,
they're just hopeless romantics.
All of a sudden, the cognitive is, I say,
that's what cognitive is all about.
It's knowledge psychology.
It is a thought.
It is about perception,
memory, learning, reasoning.
Why?
That's Wundt.
That's the Wundtian agenda.
It's about how the mind creates
internal representations of the world.
Well, that sounds a lot like what
James and the Gestalt psychologists were interested in,
so that what we see in the last 25 years,
especially of the 20th century,
is a shift towards the scientific study of mind
and of mental processes.
We have now, however, much more powerful tools
with which to study these processes,
especially in the 1990s, functional MRI machines
and PET scanners that allow us to actually watch
mental processes in real time,
like when you ask people to recite a noun
as opposed to a verb,
and then see where in the brain we see activity,
because that's what the MRI and the,
remember when we talked about medical imaging
at the molecular level,
that's what MRI and PET scanners do.
They image processes.
They don't image structures, they image processes.
Now, we can reconstruct those structures,
and we can get the structures from CAT scans, for example,
and secondarily from MRI images,
but functional MRI and PET scanners
are particularly good at imaging processes,
and by the 1990s, they were fast enough
that we could monitor these processes in real time.
And some of the things we were discovering,
as we studied, how does the mind really memorize?
How does it learn?
How does it reason?
What's going on in the brain when the mind is learning,
memorizing, reasoning, speaking, feeling, hearing music,
hearing one kind of music
rather than another kind of music,
when it's making decisions.
We already saw this at the end of the economics lecture
in terms of PET scanners revealing that
the emotional part of the brain is active
during decision-making, is more active
than the so-called reasoning parts of the brain.
So this has allowed us, this cognitive psychology,
morphing into cognitive science,
and in the 1990s, especially cognitive neuroscience,
has allowed us to begin the process of correlating
brain and mind, and to study mental processes.
But some of the discoveries that we're making
are certainly disconcerting.
On the one hand, you can say,
oh, isn't it wonderful that we now see
we are able to take the best of Vunt and James
and the Gestalt psychologists
and put them into a high-tech scientific framework.
From another perspective,
one of the things that's come out is,
it looks as though conscious will is an illusion.
It is possible now to study decision-making
in enough detail that there is a growing body of evidence
that we start to act before the conscious thought
to act occurs to us.
So that conscious will, I think I'll have that cookie,
that the hand starts to move
before that thought pops into your head.
The hand doesn't literally start,
the muscles start to be activated
before the conscious thought pops into the mind,
which poses some really interesting philosophical questions.
Well then, who is it that wants the cookie?
If it wasn't me, who am I?
If the conscious will is an illusion,
then where does willfulness come from?
Is there willfulness, and then whose will is it?
What is the self really like,
and where do we get this power to organize our experience
and to reason the ways that we do?
These are the kinds of questions
that at the beginning of the 21st century,
we are now able to explore using neuroanatomy,
neurophysiology, and totally new kinds of conceptual tools
that have been developed overwhelmingly
in the last 25 years by cognitive psychologists,
cognitive scientists, and neuroscientists.
This leads in a very natural way into our next lecture,
which is the study of artificial intelligence research
and the connections between cognitive science
and artificial intelligence research are very fertile.
