At the end of the last lecture, we saw, somewhat ironically, that mind had returned to psychology.
It's a sobering thought that for about 50 years, so many highly intelligent people who
were psychologists could have dismissed mind as irrelevant to psychology, but that's also
an interesting fact about the evolution of western culture, western intellectual culture
in the 20th century.
So we saw that mind returned to psychology in the form of cognitive psychology.
And we talked a little bit about cognitive psychology and how the strands that were woven
out of which it was woven included the work of Wilhelm Wundt and William James and the
Gestalt psychologists at the end of the 19th and the first third of the 20th century.
But there's another major influence that led to the cognitive psychology and its immediate
expansion into the broader field of cognitive science beyond psychology, so that applying
the insights of cognitive psychology and the methodology beyond psychology and anthropology
and neurophysiology and neuroanatomy linking all of those disciplines, a very important
strand that was woven into the emergence of cognitive psychology in the 1970s and its
rise to dominance in the 1980s is the field of artificial intelligence which is itself
tied very closely together with the area called cybernetics, the name cybernetics invented
by Norbert Wiener from a Greek word which effectively means control theory.
Cybernetics is machine control theory and there's a fascinating story to be told about
this.
In 1942, the Josiah H. Macy Foundation funded a conference and in fact it turned out to
be an annual conference that went on for 10 years and the purpose of the conference from
the point of view of the Macy Foundation was to figure out how to prevent wars, world wars.
The idea was that war is a form of madness and surely if lots of highly intelligent people
who know something about psychology, the mind and sociology get together they can figure
out ways that when this war ends we can start somehow influencing the public through education
through various kinds of training programs through who knows putting something in the
water that will prevent this kind of collective madness from ever happening again.
That was the agenda of the Macy Foundation.
As it happened however, the conferences were effectively co-opted by a group of scientists
and mathematicians who were really interested in giving a physicalistic account of the mind.
I won't say that they were not interested in stopping the war and preventing war, sure
they were interested in preventing wars at some level but what they were really interested
in was how the latest developments in science could finally be used to model the mind, to
explain mind physically.
The very first conference in 1942 chaired by the biologist Warren McCulloch who in fact
was the chairman for all ten conferences.
The very first conference was enormously rich, in fact it's astonishing at how much happened
at that very first conference when the program was still loaded with presentations by psychologists
and social scientists, anthropologists, sociologists, Gestalt psychologists, psychoanalysts, Freudians,
all of whom had thought they had something to say that the Macy Foundation wanted to
hear.
For example, Warren McCulloch, the chairman, together with his collaborator and an erratic
genius named Walter Pitts, had developed the first electrical model of the neuronal circuits
that exist in the brain, an electrical circuit interpretation of the nervous system in which
neurons were elements in an electric circuit.
So this is an electrical model of neurons and they showed that by interconnecting these
nodes according to the rules of electrical circuitry, they could mimic the way the nervous
system seemed to function, the way that electrical signals traveled among neurons and between
neurons and spread between neurons.
