It seems laughable to attempt to summarize what we have, what we have talking about over
the past 34 lectures. It seems also laughable to attempt to abstract the major ideas from
the physical life and social sciences as we have been discussing them over the past 34
lectures. But I would like to use this lecture to share with you six provocative thoughts
I think can be abstracted from 20th century science, from this survey of 20th century
science. I thought that are suggested by what we have learned about the sciences in the
course of this survey. First, it is unquestionably the case that the scope and the explanatory
power and the applicability of the sciences, of all the sciences has increased since the
17th century. The scope of science, the explanatory power including the predictive power and the
applicability, the fact that more and more science, what scientists know can be turned
into usable knowledge, that there has been unquestionable progress. This has increased
and not only has it increased, but the increase has been accelerated. It has been nonlinear.
It was faster in the 19th century than it had been in the 17th and the 18th century.
It was faster at the end of the 19th century than it had been in the early part of the
19th century and the acceleration continued throughout the 20th century. In fact, without
having any real statistics, my guess is that the rate of acceleration increased in the
course of the 20th century. In this sense, science has unquestionably been progressive.
With respect to the question of why this acceleration, that's quite interesting. I don't know that
there is an answer. I certainly don't have an answer, but I'd like to suggest four things
that could be responsive, that certainly contribute to it. First, that starting in the mid-19th
century, science started to be socialized differently than it had been in the 17th, 18th
and early part of the 19th century. That by socialization, I mean how society provided
a home for science, especially the universities emerging as centers of scientific research,
and science becoming a career path for lots of people from different socioeconomic classes,
whereas previously it was a matter of gentlemanly science and the occasional non-aristocratic
scientists, somebody like Robert Hook, for example, in the 17th century, somebody who
was not truly a gentleman who, because of their sheer genius, was able to forge a career
path. Michael Faraday in the early 19th century would be another example of that, working
class man, poorly educated, who self-educated himself and became a major figure in 19th
century science. But starting in the second half of the 19th century and throughout the
20th century, the sheer number of scientists that are working are clearly contributing
to the accelerated rate of the accumulation of scientific knowledge. Second, of course,
funding. That's another way that science has changed in the 20th century and starting in
the second half of the 19th century, all of a sudden society started funding scientific
research to an incalculably greater extent than it had in the 17th to 18th and first
half of the 19th century. And of course in the post-World War II period, that rate of
funding has itself accelerated. Third, the connection of science to technology, and these
are not independent of one another because it's the applicability of science that led
to funding, greater government funding and public support for that funding and to the
way that science has become institutionalized, especially the way industry has oriented itself
around science because of the transfer of knowledge from science to technology and the
use of technology to create wealth and power. The fourth is feedback of expectations. We
came across that feedback term in the last lecture in cybernetics. There are expectations
not just from the public but within the science community. The expectation is when you become
a scientist that you will generate new knowledge.
