And a wide range of realities, because we saw in special and general theory of relativity
that space and time are networks of relationships.
That matter and energy in quantum theory are networks of relationships.
This is a source theory that language is a network of relationships.
Durkheim and Weber, that society is a network of relationships.
The economy, a network of relationships.
We saw neural net theory modeling the mind as a network of relationships among neurons,
none of which knows what the heck is going on, so to speak.
And yet the activation pattern of the network would seem to have some causal correlation
to the output of the network.
Networks are a fascinating new idea and new area of study.
Modeling networks is, so to speak, one of the hot areas of scientific research.
People have been mathematically modeling networks only for a few decades.
It's a branch of mathematics which used to be called graph theory.
Now it's called network theory.
Networks have structures, network structures have properties that are quite independent
of the specific implementation and the specific nodes.
It's the relationships among the nodes that give networks their properties.
This is analogous to the chemists discovering in the 19th century that the structural arrangement
of atoms in a molecule is itself responsible for physical properties and chemical properties
of the molecule.
Regardless of what the atoms are, the same atoms arranged differently give you different
properties.
So the notion of structure, network, relationship, these are co-related concepts when Claude
Levy Strauss in the 1960s introduced the notion of structuralism as we saw in anthropology
and sociology into the idea that the cultures are networks of relationships.
What he was trying to say is the same structure, if we can identify the structure of a culture,
any other culture that has that same structure will have many of the same properties.
You're going to see the same kind of kinship relationships, you're going to see the same
conception of moral obligation, etc.
Structuralism is a profound and very radical notion that structure alone, John von Neumann
for example thought that that was a big mistake to think that you could reduce function to
structure alone, and maybe it's too much to say structure alone, but structure is increasingly
perceived as the key to explaining properties.
Genes do not unilaterally do anything, genes function in a network of relationships to
other genes and even to the proteins that they code for manufacturing, because as Howard
Temmins showed in the late 1970s that it turns out that there is a protein that is produced
by DNA that influences the activity of the DNA, it's called reverse transcriptase and
under very specific circumstances this enzyme, this protein is produced and then influences
the subsequent, it's a feedback from the protein to the DNA, very radical concept by the way
because it has, it's not supposed to be the case, it's supposed the genetic transmission
is supposed to go from DNA forward, not from the cell back to influencing the DNA, but
reverse transcriptase does.
So this idea that genes function in networks, the proteins in a cell and the cells are interconnected,
network powerful concept, understanding network structures, even the internet, the worldwide
web within the internet has a structure which emerges because of the way that the interconnections
are made, they are not at all random of course, there are nodes that have millions of connections
and some nodes that have two or three connections, the internet itself has a mathematically modelable
structure which gives it many of its properties, its strengths and its vulnerabilities which
people who choose to do so can exploit through viruses.
So this idea of relationships, second the concept of system, we've seen that again and
again, the concept of system, treating natural, recognizing that phenomena have a systemic
character which means they have a holistic character, you can't just build them up out
of building blocks, you have to understand the so to speak the holistic pattern that
the individual pieces have adapted themselves to.
And the concept of system goes along with the concept of emergence, that is to say systems
have properties that their individual elements do not have, that's what the word emergence
means, very powerful concept, just consider something as simple as table salt.
Table salt is a molecular system which has two components, sodium and chlorine.
Sodium is a metal that explodes on contact with water, chlorine is a noxious green gas.
