Lecture 36 Looking Around and Looking Ahead
In a dynamic, non-equilibrium environment, forecasting is treacherous and prophecy is
utter folly.
Nevertheless, we can perhaps say a few things about science in the 21st century.
We can perhaps identify some areas in which we can anticipate that science will be going
over the next few decades.
One area that seems particularly disruptive is in astrophysics and the attempt to make
sense out of the discovery of what has been called dark energy.
That's the 1998 discovery that, based on interpreting certain kinds of supernova observations,
that the expansion of the universe is accelerating.
This acceleration, therefore, means that there is a force at work that is pushing the universe
out.
This is not just pushing the matter out, it's pushing out space, time, matter and energy
because, as we know from general relativity theory, all of those are interconnected.
What we're saying is that there is a force at work which is part of the fabric of the
universe and which is causing the expansion of the universe to accelerate.
That this force manifested itself, it now looks like, at about, when the universe was
about 7 billion years old, so approximately 6.5 billion years ago, this force manifested
itself.
But that would be really too bizarre.
So it must always have been there, but it was masked by gravity early on in the first
five or six billion years.
As the universe expanded and the gravitational force of the total amount of matter and energy
in the universe weakened by the expansion of the universe, then about 7 billion years
ago the force that we have come to call dark energy began to manifest itself.
It is not clear whether the rate of acceleration is constant, whether the rate of acceleration
is increasing, whether the rate of acceleration is decreasing.
We have no, it's still very much up for grabs.
But between 1998 when two teams of astronomers, one on the west coast, one on the east coast,
and the figure that we have identified, he has a colleague at Harvard who would say deserves
equal building and so on, that observation was, for the first few years, highly controversial.
But since 1998, there has been a steady accumulation of supporting evidence that this acceleration
is real.
Now you may remember, I hope you remember, that back at the very beginning of this course,
I mentioned that in 1900, Lord Kelvin gave a public address in which he referred to how
far science had come in the course of the 19th century, and that it seemed as though
we were, in effect, approaching a definitive account of nature.
There are, he said, two small clouds on the horizon.
Now these two clouds were the inability to explain the Bellach body radiation problem,
and the peculiar inability to measure the speed of the Earth relative to absolute space.
Now of course, that first cloud, that turned into quantum mechanics, and the second cloud
turned into relativity theory, which totally transformed physics in the 20th century compared
to the 19th century.
So we need, again, if history teaches us anything, now we should be forewarned that not to be
dismissive of little clouds, and dark energy is, I suspect, a big cloud, which may require
a fundamental change in gravitational theory.
So the general theory of relativity may need to be modified or replaced, if, as we collect
more information about dark energy, it could, the whole thing could be a colossal misinterpretation,
or it could be that we are in the process of learning something fundamentally new about
the universe that will retroactively require that we modify theories that we think are
in the bag, theories that we feel very confident about.
