That's what you're for. That's what your career is hinged to. And of course, the public does expect it.
So this expectation, this feedback of expectation that we will continue to generate new knowledge,
creating institutions that reinforce the opportunity to create new knowledge, the linkage to technology,
the linkage to government, all of these are contributory, but they may not be explanatory.
But they certainly seem to be relevant to why we have seen this acceleration in the rate at which scientific knowledge
has accumulated a clear socio-cultural phenomenon over the last 150 years.
Second provocative thought is the question, does this progress, does this sense in which
physical life and social sciences are clearly progressive, scope and explanatory power increasing,
does that mean that the sciences are progressing towards the truth?
Separate question, much more controversial. How would we know that the sciences were approaching the truth?
In the absence of independent access to what the truth is, how would we know when we got there?
Can we take it for granted that because science is becoming increasingly explanatory,
that the scope and explanatory power and predictive power and applicability are increasing,
that that means we're coming closer to the truth?
Well, now we see where a course like this can be very useful in terms of creating a framework for thinking about this question.
Think for a moment of what science was like in 1900 and what it is like today.
Think of how we use words like atom, matter, universe, economy, language, mind.
We're using the same words, but we mean fundamentally different things today than we meant then.
They're talking about space, time, matter, energy, atoms, and if we would have to say to them,
you're using the same words, but you're talking about a different world.
The atom in 1900 was maybe real, maybe not real, seems to be solid except it's got these funny little electrons inside it.
It was only 1910, 1911 that we got the solar system out of the atom and then in the 1930s we got the neutron and then we got the quarks.
We don't mean the same thing, it's not just semantic.
The word universe has a totally different meaning in 2000 when we're worried about dark energy and we're worried,
and we're talking about inflationary universe and 13.7 billion and the Big Bang and in 1900 they meant the Milky Way.
The earth, the word earth, what could be more familiar to us, but we don't mean the same thing after plate tectonics than they meant in 1900
when they thought that the earth was either at or approaching equilibrium.
Now think about what science is likely to be like in 2100.
Is it really the case, can we be arrogant enough to think that in 2100 scientists will, even if they're still using the words matter, energy,
that they're going to mean the same things that we mean?
Here's where the history of science is, I think, revelatory.
The history of science strongly suggests that science in 2100 is going to be profoundly different from science in 2000.
Just as science in 2000, as you have seen, is profoundly different from science in 1900,
which was profoundly different from science in 1800.
But it's not just science that has changed, science gives us an account of the world, of reality.
So reality has changed.
Of course, reality can't change.
How do we know?
What we know is what we mean by reality, and that certainly has changed in fundamental ways.
Is it going to stop now? Have we reached the end?
History suggests probably not, overwhelmingly not.
Third point that I'd like to call to your attention is a cluster of ideas that have emerged in the course of 20th century science
that seem to be of fundamental significance in terms of shaping the way the direction in which science is going.
First of all, the idea of relationships, which we have seen recur again and again and again.
Relationships linked to the idea of networks, because networks are relationships,
and structure, because networks are structured relationships.
So these three words, relationships, network structures, are co-related,
and they represent a single new way of conceptualizing phenomena, conceptualizing reality.
