Switching out of physics, we are unquestionably going to be increasingly involved in biotechnology,
and we must recognize, as we suggested in earlier lectures, that the action of genes is actually quite poorly understood
because of the network phenomenon that I mentioned in the last lecture.
It's only in the last few years that biologists have had to sort of calm down a bit and recognize that gene action is through networks,
and not just a network of genes, but a network that includes the genes, the proteins, and not just individual cells
because there are intercellular signaling mechanisms that affect the metabolism in which the metabolism of one cell
can affect the metabolism of another cell, which will reflexively influence the way genes in an individual cell behave.
So that the action of genes is actually far more complex than it seemed in 1953 or even in the 1960s
when it looked like, oh, genes code for proteins, here's the code, now we understand how genes work.
That is a kind of atomic or atomistic approach that, as we've talked about in a couple of lectures now,
we have gone beyond, but saying that we have gone beyond it is different from being able to functionally use
this perspective of a network understanding of gene action and of metabolism.
Nevertheless, and I did this in the last lecture with respect to science, just think for a moment of what medicine in 2100 is likely to be like.
Medicine in 2050 at the rate at which we're going, as a matter of fact, compared to medicine in 1900, compared to medicine in 2000.
So if we start with medicine in 2000 compared to medicine in 1900, and then we think, well, it's almost certainly going to be the case
barring massive catastrophe to the human race, which we're always capable of inflicting on ourselves, not to mention the passing asteroid or comet,
but barring massive catastrophe, the medicine in 2100 is as likely to be superior to medicine in 2000 as medicine in 2000 has been compared to medicine in 1900.
I suggest that that's the case, that empirically we have some basis for believing that that's the case.
And as we read in the newspaper about stem cell research and about biochips, et cetera, we are getting glimpses of forms of medical care that we cannot imagine today any more than anyone in 1900
could imagine, PET scans and functional MRIs and the kinds of neurosurgery that we do, et cetera.
I referred at the close of the lecture on anthropology and archaeology to what seems to me to be one of the most puzzling aspects of a 20th century study of nature, especially of humanity.
And that is the acceleration of cultural development among Homo sapiens starting approximately 12,000 years ago.
Without repeating what I said before, if you recollect, it looks as though hominids had a very, very modest cultural evolution from approximately two million years ago when Homo erectus emerged
through Homo sapiens about 160,000 years ago to approximately 30,000 years ago when there was nobody else left except Homo sapiens.
Maybe some Homo erectus in Asia seems that they survived longer than the Neanderthals and coexisted with Homo sapiens.
And then all of a sudden, somewhere around 12,000 years ago, we simply see cultural development, organized settlements, trade, manufacture, quite sophisticated.
We're not talking about flaked stone tools anymore, we're talking about quite sophisticated technologies and artifacts and forms of social organization.
What happened? I see that as an area in which we can anticipate, hopefully anticipate considerable light being shed on our own evolution, our own cultural evolution.
The assault on consciousness is going to continue.
I don't think that we can doubt that. The lecture that we concluded to lecture 34 on artificial intelligence research and cybernetics is just a piece of the intensity with which neuroscience is being pursued at the beginning of the 21st century.
I think that we can confidently anticipate that the attempt to understand consciousness as a neurophysiological phenomenon, physical, chemical, biological, that can be modeled on a computer,
perhaps even simulated on some kinds of computers, maybe some neural net kinds of computers, the assault on consciousness is going to continue.
