Case Western Reserve University's Institute for the Science of Origins proudly presents
the Origins Science Scholars Program.
The Institute advances the scientific understanding and application of origins and evolution of
human and natural systems.
The Origins Science Scholars Lectures are presented with the assistance of Case Western
Reserve University's Segal Lifelong Learning Program, College of Arts and Sciences, and
Media Vision.
This evening, it's my pleasure to welcome Professor Joseph Lamana, the Gene M. and
Joseph S. Silber Professor of Brain Sciences, and Professor in the Department of Physiology
and Biophysics.
Professor Lamana is an expert on blood flow and metabolism in the brain, on the adaptation
to hypoxia, which is the lack of oxygen.
He served as president of several learned societies, and it's my pleasure to welcome
here tonight to talk about the origin of mitochondria.
Please join me in welcoming Professor Silber.
Today we're talking about mitochondria, and it's going to be in three parts.
The first is going to be about the origin of life.
We can't talk about the origin of mitochondria without talking about the origin of life.
You'll see why shortly.
Part two will be about the origin of mitochondria themselves, and then the three will see how
they had a role in the development and evolution of multicellular animals.
To begin with, we have to talk about the time frame.
This is called the biogeologic clock, and it breaks up the four plus billion years of
earth history into a nice circle, which shows that for most of the existence of the earth,
there was not multicellular animals.
So we have first is the period here where the earth is formed, and it's beginning to
cool, and within a billion years or so, we have the origin of life, the first evidence
that life exists there, and then for most of the existence, most of these billion years
after that, there's not much in the way of multicellular life.
So the single cell life began almost as soon as the earth was cool enough for life to occur.
So we're going to look at when it began, the conditions under which it began, and some
leading hypotheses about what generated life to begin with, and then what changed, how
the conditions changed.
Important to all of this is the consideration of energy.
That's the ability to generate and manipulate energy that defines life.
The basic ingredients for life, once the conditions cool on earth enough so that the chemicals
remain stable, you need energy, which can be in the form of light, heat, or chemical
energy.
You need the chemical components.
These are the molecules, organic molecules.
They had to come from somewhere, and they had to get there first.
And then you need water, and so that's part of the conditions on earth had to be cool
enough for liquid water to be available.
So to get right to it, we have evidence from microbial mats of life existing at about three
and a half billion years, pretty strong evidence.
We have the earliest physical evidence at about 3.7, but we also have a theoretical
belief or theoretical understanding that life could have occurred in hydrothermal vents
at about four billion years ago.
And this is a description of the eons of the earth showing these particular eons.
We have the Hadean eon named for Hades, as you might expect, because apparently the conditions
there are what we think of as hell, with the sulfurous volcanoes and bubbling molten magma.
And then you have the Archaian period, and this is the period under which life first
arose.
You have then a long period of time in the protozoic, which single cell life in the beginning
of multicellularity, but not much in complexity, and then the Phanerozoic, which really means
the obvious life period of time.
What we notice here, I just want to mention this, this LHB is the late heavy bombardment,
and that's a period of time when there were lots of meteorites hitting the planet earth,
and these carried with it water, and they also, I see meteorites brought water, and also
meteorites carried organic compounds, and we know from the meteorites that we've seen
recently that if we calculate how much organic materials in a meteorite, and how many meteorites
there were, there's plenty of possibility for carrying most organic life, organic compounds
to earth by meteorites.
And then you have the rise, right at about 3.6, 3.7, of bacterium archaea, which are
the prokaryotes, they are single celled organisms, and they arose under conditions without oxygen.
That's the most important thing.
The atmosphere initially contained just hydrogen and helium, that's because most of the universe
is hydrogen and helium, so when the earth coalesced first, that was the natural compounds
in the environment.
They're too light to stay on the earth though, earth's gravity cannot hold the light gases,
and so both hydrogen and helium will leave the atmosphere reasonably quickly, and the
atmosphere then becomes a mixture of what comes out of the volcanic vents, lots of volcanic
gases, mostly steam and water vapor, carbon dioxide, plenty of carbon dioxide, you have
sulfur and nitrogen, plus the trace gases, the noble gases that don't react so much,
the argon and the neon, you have a little bit of methane, a little bit of carbon monoxide
and hydrogen.
Now what we were taught in school, probably when you took biology, you were taught the
primordial atmosphere consisted of hydrogen, ammonia, methane, water and hydrogen sulfide,
which are the most reduced forms of the biological elements, nitrogen, carbon, hydrogen and sulfur,
or oxygen and sulfur.
This has to be revised a little bit because under those conditions that we now know to
be present, there could not be much ammonia or methane, they would have been further metabolized,
but so we add nitrogen instead of ammonia and we add carbon dioxide instead of methane,
and the UV light will be breaking down some of the water vapor into a little bit of oxygen,
but as soon as any oxygen will be made, it will react with minerals in the crust of the
earth and be pulled out of the atmosphere, and the hydrogen that was left would also
leave via the kinetic energy in insufficient gravity.
But the most important thing is that this was in a reducing atmosphere, no oxygen, or
less than one part per million oxygen, very low oxygen, and it seems like that's a requirement
for life to have a reason.
Now there's lots of theories on the origin of life, it's been discussed for as long
as people have been around, they've discussed origins, and you remember also from your biology
about theories of spontaneous generation and life from non-life that were discussed prior
to people like Pasteur who showed that this was not possible.
We had Darwin talk about the warm little pond which got sunlight, which had some organic
chemicals on which life could arise from there.
We had the experiments of people like Miller and Ure and Fox, which took the elements expected
of the primordial atmosphere, put electrical sparks in, and got organic compounds out of
it.
We also have hypotheses where these organic compounds could line up on community clay,
this is clay along the beach, that would act as a place for to catalyze reactions among
these compounds.
The Chile start hypothesis, which if you had the snowball earth and a frozen seas, would
protect the ocean from UV light and allow the chemicals to react and form life.
A radioactive beach hypothesis, this is radioactive chemicals along the shoreline producing the
heat necessary to provide the energy for this.
I mentioned meteorites being able to provide organic compounds.
More recently, they only were discovered in the 70s, some hydrothermal vents, deep sea
vents, when these deep sea submersibles started exploring the sea bottom, and they found these
areas where obvious venting was coming from the sea floor, and lo and behold, there were
things living there, way out of the sunlight, at 100 atmospheres of pressure, at temperatures
approaching 200 degrees C, and amazing, we call those extremophiles, that is organisms
that live in extreme environments.
These were suggested to people like Gunter Wachteschauser, that life might have originated
there, making use of the iron and sulfur minerals as catalysts.
The black smokers had sulfide, they were very close to the magma and very hot, the white
smokers a little further away, a little cooler, a little more alkaline, and there was hydrogen
available to get energy from, and the idea that hydrogen metabolism may have been the
first energy available for life to arise, and of course any or all of these might be
contributing, that is a multiple genesis hypothesis.
Now once you had life, part of the chemical process using getting energy from hydrogen
and methane and carbon dioxide produced oxygen as a byproduct, so this is, in a reducing
anoxic environment, oxygen being released as a waste product is a toxic product.
So as the environment gathered more and more oxygen, there would be adaptations to make
use of this toxic waste product in a positive way.
Before oxygen could accumulate, it had to react with all of the reduced iron that was
floating around in the oceans.
The oceans were filled with a soluble form of reduced iron, ferrous iron, and as the
oxygen came into the environment, it would react with the iron, oxidize it, and this
is, well, this is rust.
So you had to rust all of the iron in the ocean, and that iron doesn't, it's not dissolved,
it sinks, and so these thick bands of, red bands of rust accumulated at the floor of
the oceans, we call these banded iron formations, and it allows us to pinpoint fairly accurately
when the oxygen was produced and when the oxygen was accumulating in the environment.
We know, and this is a banded iron, example of a banded iron formation from the American
Museum of Natural History in New York, but there's an example in our Natural History
Museum, it used to be out front, I don't know where it is now, but it used to be right
out front door as you walked in every day.
So this indicates prodigious amounts of oxygen being generated during this three billion
years ago to two and a half billion years ago.
These banded iron formations are about two and a half billion years old in the middle
on average, and at the end of this period of time we come to very close to our current
atmosphere, which is an oxidizing atmosphere, with one-fifth of it being oxygen, most of
the rest being nitrogen, a little bit of carbon dioxide, and there are trace noble gases.
Where did that oxidizing event come from?
We call it the great oxidizing event, GOE, and the best guess here is the evolution
of cyanobacteria, so these are bacteria, single cell animals, which we used to call blue-green
algae when we were growing up, but they're not algae, they're bacteria, and they kind
of look like this.
This is a picture of cyanobacterium.
They grow in these mats, these are current mats that are available in Western Australia,
and those are layer upon layer of cyanobacterial mats producing oxygen.
These also, these cells, these single cell bacteria became the precursors of the chloroplast,
which is the organelle in plants that does photosynthesis and gives us oxygen today,
so that's the precursor of all plants.
What happens then, the history of oxygen on Earth winds up this way, very low amounts
for the first two billion years, the great oxidizing event occurs, but notice that this
is a log scale, this is one percent of the current atmospheric level, one percent of
that would be 0.2 percent of oxygen in the atmosphere, not 20 percent, so 20 percent
is what we have now, this is a much, still a very small amount, so for two billion years
oxygen was a very low level, and this is a time when mitochondria started to produce
multicellular animals, and we will talk about the more current time period for oxygen in
part three, but right now I'd like to just summarize part one here and then stop for
some questions, and the basic points that I've mentioned are that single cell prokaryotes
arise about four billion years ago in the absence of oxygen, and then cyanobacteria begin
to add oxygen resulting in the great oxidation event, 2.5 billion years ago as the environment
shifts from no oxygen to some oxygen.
One of the earlier slides you showed the meteorites and one of the chirality, what's the Italian
there?
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, in the organic compounds that we use, the sugars, the amino acids, some
of them are asymmetric, that is they have a left handed form and a right handed form,
and the biology tends to use one or the other, in the carbohydrates it's mostly the D form,
the right hand form, and amino acids tends to be the L form, what happened, the chemically
they're exactly the same, so how did we get to choose one over the other, because biologically
you can only use one because enzymes are like a glove in a hand, you can't put a left
hand glove on a right hand.
And it turns out that in the meteorites there's a chiral preference as well, it indicates
that possibly we get the preference from the delivery of these compounds from space.
Because you can look, they've examined meteorites for example in Antarctica, in a sterile environment,
and then they analyze them and they find that they have organic compounds.
Is it fair to say that the low oxygen level in early days was basically until the ferrous
iron got used up and became from abundant trace levels and at that point the oxygen
began, it would seem to be that for the species present to survive you had to remove oxygen
somehow, and that transition not only in the percent oxygen would be a great evolutionary
driver to things that could tolerate oxygen.
Absolutely, rise of oxygen gives you the rise of diversity and multicellularity, the iron
had to go, but also the iron reacts with, I mean sorry, the oxygen reacts with the carbon
compounds as well, it's carbonates and things like that.
So as the, and oxidations of the minerals in the rocks, these all get buried, but there's
a cycle as they rise and get weathered that gets released back into the atmosphere, so
there's a long term cycle there as well.
And later on, when the iron is gone, there still is a reaction with all the carbon because
the animals take the carbon and make carbon dioxide out of it by burning it with oxygen,
so there's a balance between oxygen utilization and plants making the oxygen.
And you had very large amounts of carbon containing organisms to allow oxygen to build up to large
levels.
If you get to the last slide or two, you'll see what I mean by that.
Thank you for joining us.
You've been watching Dr. Joe Lamana discussing the origin of life and prokaryotic cells, those
lacking at distinct nucleus.
For more information on the Origins Science Scholars Program, please visit the institute's
website at origins.case.edu.
In the next part of the talk, Dr. Lamana discusses the origin of mitochondria and of eukaryotic
cells, those with nuclei.
Now back to the talk.
This is the, this is probably, this is the heart of the talk, this is the origin of mitochondria.
Mitochondria are the cells engine that's where all cells, all eukaryote cells mean they
have a nucleus.
All multicellular organisms are eukaryotic.
All animals, all plants, all fungi are all organisms that have mitochondria.
And the mitochondria that they have are all related.
That's why we know that this event occurred only once and we all have the same related
mitochondria.
So let's move along.
All cells need energy to function.
All cells use the same organelle.
That's the mitochondria.
And the kind of the currency, the energy currency of the biology is adenosine triphosphate,
ATP.
It has a high energy phosphate on the third one and enzymes that can take that phosphate
off also get a lot of energy from it and ATP becomes ADP, diphosphate from triphosphate
and you get a lot of energy from it.
And the mitochondria takes the ADP, makes ATP for us.
And it looks something like this, kind of looks like a bacterium and that was obvious
to the people who first saw them.
It's double membrane organism, like a bacterial cell, and it's got its own genetic material
in it as well as the ability to make its own proteins, got ribosomes and the ability to
make its own proteins.
I'll talk more about how this works a little bit later in part three.
But in most typical eukaryotic cells have the nucleus, which is number two here, followed
by number five, which is a lot of the protein making machinery, this is Golgi apparatus.
But here's our friend, the mitochondrion, which is providing the energy for all the
work done by the eukaryotic cells.
And eukaryotic cells are about 10 times bigger than bacteria, because bacteria about the
same size as mitochondria.
So you get an idea of the size orientation.
They were originally seen by histologists who were, these are just barely at the edge
of visibility in a light level microscope.
And people like Altman thought they looked like bacteria.
It wasn't sure whether they were bacteria, but they looked like bacteria.
He referred to them as bioblasts.
Here they were named mitochondria from the Greek, which means thread-like granules, because
as Benda looked at it, he saw that they were connected with little bulges on them, looked
like a thread that had granules along it.
And it was known from biological dyes that they were associated with living cells.
You couldn't stain them if the cell was dead.
If the cell was alive, they took up this dye.
And because of that, it was suggested that they were involved in the oxygen respiration,
that is, the utilization of oxygen to make energy.
And it was really confirmed after World War II by a lender who wrote the classic textbook
on biochemistry that, indeed, this is the organelle that makes ATP from oxygen and substrate.
There's a whole story involved in the electron transport chain that's maybe for another time.
Now in the mid-60s, Lynn Margulis proposed that these mitochondria not only looked like
bacteria, but they must have come from, they must be bacteria.
And so she proposed the bacterial origin of mitochondria and was able to publish her
paper in the Journal of Theoretical Biology in 1967 using her married name.
She was married to Carl Sagan.
So Lynn Sagan published this.
It was rejected in 14 journals before it was published in the Journal of Theoretical Biology
because it was a crazy idea of mitochondria coming from bacteria.
But they look like bacteria.
They have the same genetic base pair distribution.
New karyotic cells have more of the AT base pair than the CG, but bacterial and mitochondrial
DNA have equal amounts of those pairs.
They have no histones.
They don't fold up.
They have a different ribosome to make protein from.
And in every case, the bacterial and the mitochondrial are identical.
So we have come to understand that Lynn Margulis was indeed correct and mitochondria started
out as bacteria.
And the idea was an archaea, a protea, it's another prokaryote, but not a bacterium, an
archaea.
It's a different domain of life, had different characteristics, engulfed a proteobacterium.
The proteobacterium was able to resist the digestive attempts of the archaea.
And then a symbiotic relationship occurred.
They had different metabolic processes that turned out to be synergistic.
This may or may not have happened quite a few times, but at least one time it worked
so well that it dominated life from then on.
So you have the generation of the first eukaryote cell.
And it required a nucleus to occur to sequester the DNA from the host cell so that it wouldn't
mix up too badly with the DNA from the bacterium.
But a lot of eukaryote DNA comes from bacterial sources.
Just on the DNA differences, a nuclear DNA made with base pairs, coils and then coils
again and then the coils coil and the coils coil again, and it's covered with histones
that keep it from just generating all kinds of mRNA until it's needed.
Whereas bacterial cells like this E. coli have these plasmids, these kind of circles of DNA
that are same as mitochondria.
Now the nuclear DNA in each cell, human cell, there's about 10 feet of DNA if you stretch
it out in each cell.
So you took all your DNA and stretched out end to end.
You could go back and forth to the moon 70 times.
That's a lot of DNA coiled up very tightly in each cell.
On the other hand, and there's only one copy per cell.
In mitochondria, mitochondria have smaller genomes, only 13 genes.
Those bacteria that became mitochondria have lost a lot of their genes.
And there's 5 to 10 copies, these plasmids, in each mitochondrian.
And there's multiple mitochondria, maybe hundreds per cell.
So there's a lot of copies of the mitochondrial genome that mitochondria can divide independently.
And the copies of the DNA can be reproduced fairly quickly compared to the nuclear DNA.
So as I say, the mitochondrial genome, it's kind of a circular plasmid type DNA, and it
has 13 to 20 genes that are the minimum required for the mitochondria to control certain of
its functions locally.
The reason it does it is that sometimes the mitochondria can be very far from the cell
nucleus.
Imagine a nerve cell where the nucleus is in the spinal cord and the axon goes all the
way down to the big toe.
That's a long distance away from the nucleus if you depend upon the nucleus to be making
the proteins you need.
And also to be able to respond to local energy demand, you need local control.
So the significance of mitochondrial DNA is we get all our mitochondria from our mothers.
The egg has the mitochondria, the sperm uses all the mitochondria it has, its energy to
get to the egg, but only one set of mitochondria are left.
And we can use that evidence to look at, by looking at rates of mitochondrial mutation,
to predict when the first human mitochondria appeared.
And that would have been in our maternal line, so we call that first human eve, and we think
maybe it was 170,000 years ago, although there's a lot of speculation, there's a lot of work
that goes into this.
It's not a done story by any means.
And also mitochondria help control what we call apoptosis.
This is a Greek word that refers to things like where the leaves fall off the trees in
the autumn.
It's a programmed cell death, or it's like a cell suicide, and this is triggered when
the energy capacity or the energy system, the mitochondria, gets so damaged that they
can no longer provide energy for the cell, then they trigger the death of the cell so
that it can be phagocytized and doesn't gum up the work, so to speak.
And it's also very important to study the mitochondrial DNA as we get towards understanding
mitochondrial aging.
And Nick Lane, who is a good scientist and also a good writer, this is an interesting
book on the subject, if you're interested, called Power Sex and Suicide, and it's all
about mitochondria.
And he's pointing out that the fact that life occurred almost immediately when it was
available in its single cell form was not that remarkable, but multicellularity depended
upon a unique event, and that is a synergistic endosymbiosis to have it occurred.
Once it occurred, it only happened that once, while mitochondria are related.
We think it comes from purple bacteria.
These have a chlorophyll-like substance, they have different colors in them, they can't
live with oxygen, they use sulfur for their energy system.
And the other side of it is the archaea, these are what would be called the pioneer
organism in the iron sulfur world theory.
These are methane, these are methanogens, meaning they make methane, they get their
energy from CO2 and hydrogen, but the problem is hydrogen is scarce, so finding sources
of hydrogen is crucial for these cells.
They're not bacteria and they're not eukaryotes, they have a different cell membrane, it's
polysaccharitic, and they can go anywhere because they make their own energy from light
or from chemical processes.
These are some of the places where they occur.
These are the black smokers, they're black because they have sulfur compounds, they exist
near magma in the deep ocean trenches, this is where the continents are pulling apart,
the plates are moving apart, magma heats the water, spews all kinds of minerals here, it's
very rich in minerals, there's no oxygen but there's plenty of other sources of chemical
energy and of course you have thermal energy.
And if you look at the one on the right, there's tube worms and what are called squat
lobsters, I don't know, but these are deep sea vents located maybe at two and three kilometers
depth, so a hundred atmospheres pressure where the water maybe four or five hundred
degrees in the case of the black smoker, it's still liquid because of the pressure, and
it's a very acidic environment, that was for the black smokers, I just said most of this.
The first one was discovered in 1977 as these underwater submarines started looking at mapping
the seabed as a source of the iron and nickel, the reduced forms and chemosynthetic bacteria
live in these, this one didn't come up, there it is, the white smoker, these were discovered
only in 2000, these are a little further away from the trench so the water is cooler, these
are steam that's bubbling up through the rock, instead of big holes they're from little
porous labyrinthine tubes which produce lots of surface area for chemical reactions to
occur and they're more alkaline than acidic and it's thought that these, the life that's
here represents some of the organisms that we're familiar with, lots of barium, calcium,
silicon, they make serpentinite, this is a compound of iron and magnesium and barium
and calcium that has green, looks like green snakes running through it, today you can find
these type of archaea in places like Yellowstone National Park, Yellowstone National Park,
this is one of the geysers, it's a hot spring and it shows the steam coming out of the center
of it here, yeah, but all along the side this color, the orange color is coming from the algae,
the bacteria and the archaea and these are like, again like the purple bacteria, these are
carotenoids and bacterial chlorophylls and the colors change with the temperature and the
seasons and so sometimes they're more purple or green and sometimes more orange depends on the
conditions, very very colorful, so basically in part two what we have is we have the event
that occurred, we have the last eukaryotic common ancestor that is the eukaryote cell that joined
an archaea with a proteobacterium that became the precursor cell of all eukaryotes going towards
the future and all these, there are three domains of life, the bacterial domain, the archaean domain
and the eukaryote domain and the eukaryote domain produces plants, animals, fungi and all life
from eukaryote domain has mitochondria that allows them to take advantage of the changes in the
environment that we're occurring and to grow into multicellular organisms and animals, so I would
stop here and take some questions about mitochondrial origins. What has to happen to the bacteria? One
thing it has to be able to resist being digested is food by the archaean engulfer and then it has to
keep from poisoning the genes of the archaean, remember the archaean engulfer doesn't have a
nucleus and so its genes are floating around and now when the bacterial releases their genes they
get mixed up and most of the time that's going to be disastrous and so a lot of those engulfments
that would normally have occurred are going to be worthless, damaging rather than productive, so it
had to be a very tricky event that occurred that allowed the bacteria to first survive and then
figure out how to keep its DNA from getting too mixed up with the other cells DNA. Have scientists
now been able to do this in a laboratory setting put an archaean and a proteal bacteria together?
Actually that has been seen in nature and in the lab they haven't made mitochondria but there are
examples of symbiotic endosymbiotic organisms existing today. Could you make a comment about
the variation in the structure of mitochondria of one species compared to another and this refers
again to this question of mitochondrial eave you know and whether you know you can have a continuous
feed of mitochondria from other species into another. Mitochondria are more similar than they are
different. The genes that encode the local proteins and also a lot of the proteins that come from the
nucleus those genes can vary but the proteins that they're producing are identical so almost all
mitochondria are just mitochondria. Now there's local changes that can change them to a certain
extent but they have about the they all have the cytochrome chain the electron transport chain
they have about the same density of energy production the same sizes they're they're more
similar than than people are similar to each other mitochondria from all different organisms.
By looking at the ultra structure picture of a mitochondrian you couldn't tell where it came
when they do investigation like for my sister's a brother we share the same mitochondria right
you got from your mother yes from my mother right so
when you go back to eave right and we go back to all these various things that the
you know anthropologists find at the natural history museum those those humans do they have
the same mitochondria or that hundred and seventy thousand year thing is set in stone and you cannot
so every once in a while there would be a mutation that would change one of the base pairs
and might not affect the protein too much it might be in a non-coding area just like in the
nuclear uh uh genome so you can watch that you you can look at that going backwards you get the
types uh and and you could follow the changes in in the populations of mitochondria going back
you could see how often the change occurs and then you could predict how far back the first one had
to be uh for this particular lineage. We hope you've been enjoying the origin science scholars
program with Dr. Joe Lamana. Dr. Lamana is a Janet M and Joseph S Silver Professor for the
study of brain sciences at Case Western Reserve University. In the second part of our talk we
learned how early bacteria were taken up by prokaryotic cells and eventually became the cellular
powerhouses we know as mitochondria. In our final segment Dr. Lamana will discuss the role of oxygen
and mitochondria in the evolution of multicellular organisms. Now back to our talk. All right let's move
to uh part three then and uh this involves uh it's a little jumpy here it's got the role of
mitochondria so we got some examples of how mitochondria participate and the role of oxygen
as the mitochondrial partner in in evolution and in extreme examples of energy consumption.
So here's our mitochondrion again and the what we're going to talk about is to show
how the mitochondrion can go about generating energy in a in a very
uh uh outline form that I think it will make it uh understandable. Basically what the mitochondrion
does is it takes the hydrogen that we get from eating food and it burns it with oxygen that we
get from breathing it in from the atmosphere and when you burn the hydrogen with the oxygen
you get a tremendous amount of energy from that uh and that energy then gets transferred into
ATP molecules that the cells can then use to do the work of the cell. So the first step is getting
the hydrogen that's done through uh the uh tca tricarboxylic acid cycle that was this that was
worked out by Hans Krebs, Sir Hans Krebs in Oxford and sometimes called the Krebs cycle
and I'm showing Sir Hans in a in a standard biochemistry joke of Hans Krebs riding a cycle
so it could be Hans Krebs cycle uh it's required of all biochemists I think to make that joke
but basically the hydrogen from sugar comes in it's converted through this cycle of compounds
and enzymes and the hydrogen is transferred to the mitochondrion and this is where the
carbon dioxide comes from so in changing getting the hydrogen from the food the carbon dioxide
is pulled off the molecules so we breathe out the carbon dioxide and the hydrogen is passed
on to the mitochondrion and then here's where the magic occurs we have a number of compartments
in the mitochondrion so let me spend just a few minutes with this diagram it's a it's two membranes
two membranes an outer membrane that's here number two is the outer membrane and an inner membrane
and that means that there's then two spaces that are important there's the intermembrane space
between the inner and outer membrane and then there's the space that is completely
surrounded by the inner membrane we call this the matrix and it's in the matrix that the
Krebs cycle is working to make the hydrogen available and that the cytochrome chain which is
a number of these proteins lined up one after another the job that they do is to separate
the electron from the proton because hydrogen is a proton and electron and so the hydrogen
proton goes out into the intermembrane space and the electron goes passed on to the next
member of the cytochrome chain at the end of that chain is a molecule called cytochrome oxidase
it looks very similar to hemoglobin it has a pocket that oxygen can bind to
and the oxygen binds in that pocket of the cytochrome oxidase the electrons come streaming down and
when four reach it it turns the oxygen into water it reduces the oxygen to water and so
as you have oxygen there it pulls the electrons through and as it pulls the electrons through
the hydrogen is pumped out what good is that well because you have now a big difference between
the amount of hydrogen in the intermembrane space and almost none in the matrix that hydrogen
creates a concentration gradient and it comes pouring in through this very specialized pour
which is an ATP synthase and as it comes down the energy in that gradient is used to make ATP
from ADP and that's magic this is in reality each mitochondrion acts as a hydrogen fuel cell
if you're familiar with hydrogen batteries and you know how much energy you can get out of it
you can run a tesla from hydrogen batteries essentially right so this is the same idea
that is hydrogen is separated into electrons that flow through the electric circuit
and then the protons are used to or the electrons as they flow through are you are drawn away
by the oxygen to make water and you have your fuel cell your battery your hydrogen battery
okay so what's the advantage suppose you just burn sugar in the case of without oxygen so no
oxygen this is just sugar being used to make some energy you get two ATP for an amount of sugar
say and if you're a bacterium or a penicillin mold or something like that you could do just
about what a mold can do not much although they do a good job on that bread lactic acid is the
endpoint and this is you know if you exercise strongly you get into an oxygen debt and you
build up lactic acid well you know that that you can't keep running you need to stop and get oxygen
to replace the energy the burning the sugar with oxygen gives you almost 20 times as much
ATP as you get from running it without oxygen it's a huge energy advantage 20 times the amount of
energy and this allows the cell to do a lot more than a prokaryote can do without the oxygen burning
ability i have that little marshmallow in there just to remind me to give you an example of the
amount of energy and sugar when you burn it if you've you've you've burned your marshmallows over
your campfires it catches fire and it burns pretty well there's a lot of energy and sugar when you
burn it with a with oxygen of course the cell takes it in small pieces and turns that into ATP rather
than let it burn like that and nature takes the mitochondria and it puts it where it needs to be
inside the cell this is another example of of how a the different cells
evolve their different structures in order to do the function that they're required and provide
the energy to do that function so this is a mitochondrion that sits inside a muscle cell
those striations and top and bottom are the are the muscle fibers that are going to use the energy
produced by the mitochondrion and each mitochondrion essentially produces the same pretty much the
same amount of energy it has about the same components so you if you look at the volume of
mitochondria you can get a pretty good idea of the ability of the cell to generate you know how
much energy you can generate and i have a couple of examples here that i think are pretty impressive
on the left you have a muscle from a mako shark and it's these are muscle fibers that are cut in
cross-section they're going in and out of the board and right next to each one of them are these
mitochondria so these are mitochondria these the muscle cell this is the mitochondria very close
and a lot of volume so you have essentially looks like pretty much the similar amount of volume in
mitochondria producing the energy as you have in the muscle cells that are producing the work
this might be similar to thinking about an electric car that has half the weight of it is batteries
in order to do what it has to do the other and so this is a shark muscle so it's a cartilaginous fish
but on the other side we have a mammalian tissue it's a heart muscle cardiac muscle
happens to be from a mouse but it's pretty much similar here these are the the lines of the muscle
so those are the ones that are pulling apart and going together and these are all mitochondria
sit in the middle of these fibers of the heart this is the nucleus of the heart muscle here's
a pile of mitochondria cardiac muscle about 40 percent of the volume is mitochondria that's about
and there's a maybe half of it or a little more maybe is the is the striated muscle
but the ratio is is pretty pretty good in brain tissue for example that ratio is about 10 percent
of that volume is mitochondrial so it shows you the difference in the energy requirements
brain versus heart now this is probably my my favorite one this is a hummingbird flight muscle
hummingbird that beats 300 times a second and can stop and hover in the air and these uh this is
really impressive these are capillaries and here's the mitochondria between the capillaries
is a nucleus of a cell and there's the muscle cells here you have more mitochondria than you have
muscle that makes sense if you think about it right and here's a close-up on the capillary
it's a cell in the middle of that capillary and it's filled surrounded by mitochondria
here's what's using oxygen what's producing the ATP here's the muscle thin strand of muscle
completely surrounded by uh mitochondria so it's it's pretty impressive and you can understand how
the hummingbird can accomplish what it does how the shark can accomplish what it was how the heart
can accomplish what it has to do for for that length of time that you that you needed to work
all right so let's go move on a little bit now and talk about the multicellular organisms
in a way it's a little backward but what I did is I showed you what the capabilities
of the system is once you can provide the energy and here's how it impacts things like
uh uh uh evolution if you're an organism and you're working at the substrate level
that's making lactate say without having the advantage of making oxygen your energy providing
system is uh only about 10 efficient it's not much 10 that means if you had a predator come along
and want to take advantage of the energy that you have and it grabs you and it's 10 efficient now
it becomes 1 percent 10 percent of 10 percent is 1 percent and that's not a that's not a good deal
it costs more to do the engulfing and the digesting than you get out of it so there's
very little predation at the level of single cell organisms that are prokaryotic but with
oxidative phosphorylation that allows you to use oxygen to generate energy you're around 40 percent
efficient now the first person in the chain gets grabbed by the next person it's 40 percent of 40
percent and then 40 percent 40 percent 40 percent and you could develop a chain at least six
layers deep before you run below one percent of the energy supply left that means that predators
now have an advantage can gain an advantage in their competition with other organisms and
the bigger the cell then the better the predator so predation tends to produce larger and larger
cells or organisms and prey doesn't sit around waiting to be preyed on it does the same
strategy and starts getting bigger for protection so when once you have this efficiency in the chain
then you have the ability to really stimulate growth and diversity and development
so why didn't bacteria get larger they had two billion years before the event that made
mitochondria and that's because the way prokaryotes work their energy producing system
those that prokaryot bacterial cell that went to become the mitochondria
was still making energy based upon its own surface area and if it got bigger its energy
requirements would grow with the volume by the cube but its ability to make energy would only grow
by the square root of the surface area that's not a good strategy but once you put the
mitochondria inside the cell you can add mitochondria you really could add them and then
your energy production capacity will grow with the volume of the cell but your utilization for
most cells can be or is related to the surface area that's a much more favorable relationship
so bacteria we're not going to be able to get anywhere with a 10 percent energy efficiency
and they couldn't grow larger anyway because of surface volume considerations
and bacteria are very successful in their niche but it's a simple solution and it's not going to
get complex they work very well and the successful bacteria are the ones that can divide fastest
and that means you can't have a lot of genes because that takes time to reproduce your genes
so the smaller the number of genes you have the faster you can reproduce and the more successful
you are so the prokaryote philosophy the prokaryote strategy keeps the cells simple and small
and successful but simple and small until you've got mitochondria you can't get complexity
now let's look at the more modern part of the oxygen curve in the last minute or so
and this represents oxygen variations that we know closer to our own time
this is half a half a billion years this is from essentially the Cambrian explosion of life
on to present day and if you plot in the yellow curve there oxygen levels you see it's not constant
it varies up and down and what we now know from this up and down is that the rates of evolutionary
diversity and the die off in the extinctions are related in a great measure to the oxygen
history so that at times when oxygen is rising you have increase in diversity taking advantage of
the everything that oxygen can give you in terms of energy from the mitochondria but when oxygen
becomes limiting then the inefficient forms die off there's one particular there's a lot of information
here but i want to focus on this one here this peak this is when oxygen reached about 35 percent
in the atmosphere remember today it's 21 percent there was 35 percent that's as much it's a maximum
because any more than that and the the forest would burn and you wouldn't be producing more oxygen
so there's a limit and that's it right oh okay so
at that time you had a higher density in the atmosphere because that was all extra oxygen
and you allowed the gigantic insects and flying insects and that the only thing i had left to try
to get through is just to give you some idea of what the human body does and we produce about 85
watts of energy about a good strong light bulb and we use about the 150 balloons worth of air
per day and we produce a half liter of water from metabolism every day and the mitochondria in our
body make essentially a hundred pounds of ATP every day by cycling ADP that's about half the
body's weight of ATP cycling and that's that's the strength of the mitochondria and with that i will
let's just summarize what we said and i'll say thanks and ask for final questions
the origin science scholars lectures are presented by case west and reserve universities
institute for the science of origins with the assistance of the seagull lifelong learning program
the college of arts and sciences and media vision for more information on the origin science scholars
program including a full video archive please visit the institute's website at origins.case.edu
