The science cares about you no matter whether you love science or hate science.
As people come to understand the power of it, everyone's going to care.
What we can do if we can change the laws of physics is something we can't even conceive of.
While many things stagnate, the unforgivable thing that's stagnated,
the singular unforgivable thing is our understanding of the most basic notion of who we are.
If we are going to, every time there's a border dispute, go to a thermonuclear standoff.
It's just Russian roulette with smaller and smaller numbers of empty chambers.
These are the precursors of genocide, make no mistake.
You're friendly college students with blue hair chanting from the river to the sea
or talking about the deaths of people.
People will hear that and they'll say,
Oh my God, Eric, you're spreading distrust and fear.
I'm a pastor.
Shoot the messenger all you want.
All right.
All right.
Welcome back.
Welcome back.
Hello, my fellow CCP member.
CCP member is male, but I sponsor money.
It's fucking sweet, bro.
What's up, comrade?
What's up, comrades?
That's right.
Okay, let's get into it.
Let's jump straight in.
Let's give a little background on the on the subject of today's episode.
Sure.
Big favorite of mine.
Mr. Eric Weinstein, Los Angeles, Los Angeles born a mathematician specializing in mathematical physics.
Also an economist, a commentator, gained prominence as a managing director of teal capital.
Investment firm founded by Peter teal, who we mentioned a few times already.
Additionally, he's known for his involvement in the intellectual dark web.
And he's been featured on various podcasts and platforms discussing topics,
ranging from economics and science to culture and politics.
So where does your introduction to Mr. Eric Weinstein start?
Random short clips from Joe Rogan experience.
That's for one.
Secondly, he made a lot of interesting comments, including the, you know, in in those podcasts,
including the one that we watched with Clint about Chris Williamson about, you know, the virus.
Yeah, that was I found out that was very interesting.
Overall, like also he started the proto, proto.
A podcast, right?
But I think that's no longer available.
Yeah, it's defunct.
It's just on hold.
It's been on hold for a while.
The portal, the portal, the portal.
Yeah, they they stopped.
I mean, they him, he stopped doing it just as the epidemic was gathering speed because
Brett was his brother, Brett Weinstein.
He was running his mouth a lot.
I think he was actually the biggest advocates for the lot for the dangers of, you know,
against the response of the for the pandemic.
And he got not canceled, but he kind of his channel got demonetized.
So Eric stopped.
I think he only did 20 or 30 episodes.
Have you seen any?
Oh, no, I haven't.
But I just know they exist.
Yeah, it's it's still on.
You can still see it.
It's less than 30 episodes.
Very good podcast, maybe even the best one I've ever seen.
Right.
Great guests, the usual bunch and some new faces that I haven't seen anywhere else.
It's movie directors, sports personalities, porn stars.
Oh, nice.
Riley Reid.
Oh, she she was on there and Riley Reid was a she's fairly new, right?
Or is she like our cheaped milk status already?
She she's she's young.
I know that she's not a mouth yet.
Don't ask me how I know.
But I'm familiar with her work.
Nice.
Yeah, me as well.
I think I first saw him on on on Rogan and on the Rubin report.
They were podcast.
I think he was the first time I saw he was there on with Peterson.
I think it's the first time I saw Peterson listening to somebody like giving them their full attention.
Who is this guy?
And then later on, I saw him on on Lex.
He's been on Lex like five, four, five times now.
That's where I really got into him and recently on Chris Williams and podcast.
Very, very good.
Very excellent, excellent conversations.
I like the fact that, you know, how we introduced him.
We introduced him in a style as if like he's right here with us.
Of course, he's you know, Eric, we all good.
Yeah, I was like, he doesn't want people to know that he come to China.
Anyways, that's a so what's a what's a dark?
Internet, internet, the intellectual dark web, intellectual dark web.
Okay.
Intellectual dark web was first jokingly coined by Weinstein himself in the mid 2010s.
But the term became popular after after an article opinion piece was published in the
New York Times by staff by correction by then staff editor Barry Weiss in the New York
Times titled meet the renegades of the intellectual dark web.
So the the term itself, it's, it's supposed to describe the group of intellectuals or
commentators that oppose ideas such as identity politics, political correctness and cancel
culture in higher education and news media across Western countries.
They are just famous for discussing ideas that are outside mainstream mainstream discourse.
So who do you know from the intellectual dark web?
Can you guess who's in it?
I would say like, I don't know if anybody I don't know for sure if somebody's in it,
but I can guess like, I mean, it's not like a real club.
It was just a group of a group of people.
I probably think like Chijic is probably in it.
No.
No, not Chijic.
All right.
Jordan Peterson.
Peterson is Sam Harrison, Sam Harris, right?
The Weinstein Brothers, the Weinstein Brothers, Ben Shapiro, Douglas Murray, Douglas Murray
are a few of these.
So the entire podcast podcast.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Exactly.
There's Christina Hoff summers.
I think she's a philosopher slash author.
Like I said, they were, they had in common what they were against, but some internal
and external factors, mainly the 2016 presidential U.S. presidential election and the COVID again,
correction, the response to the COVID-19 epidemic are said to have caused some internal fractures
within the group.
And some other stuff, because you have on one side, you have Sam Harris, who's a big
atheist in the same group with Peterson, who's a, you know, basically a Christian.
Basically a full blown Christian right now.
And I think they also, I think COVID was one of the breaking points for them, especially
with Sam Harris.
He really distanced himself from the Weinstein Brothers, from Brett mainly and criticized
him a lot him and both him and Rogan for what they did during the pandemic.
And also they disagree, I think on free speech as well, on the levels of free speech, you
have the Weinstein Brothers who are not like free speech absolutists where you have Rogan
and let's say, especially Ben Shapiro, who really are.
So there's like a lot of, I mean, the gang fell apart.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
They got popularized like that.
And if you think about it for the past, I would say the past five to eight years.
I think Joe Rogan put it very beautifully.
It's like we need to stop called mainstream media, mainstream media because they're not
big anymore.
They're corporate media right now.
Like everybody legacy media, the legacy media.
Exactly.
Now, more people are interested in what's going on on the internet and on the TV or
on the newspaper, on the magazines,
but for the past eight to five to eight years,
we see all these intellectuals,
they became like celebrities,
like they became like rock stars.
You know, they can go on tours,
they sell out stadiums and theaters to give out speech.
I think that's generally a good thing.
I would say it's like nothing against Taylor Swift
or Ariana Grande, but it's like, you know,
I know they make good music,
but at the same times,
like there are very important people
that are spreading these like very important ideas,
but they need, they finally gain that necessary,
you know, attention from the general public.
So I think it's a good thing overall.
And by the way, it's a,
since we touched on the COVID a lot, you know,
Eric Dina, Chris Williamson podcast, like he,
I think he was the first person that I heard
that brought up that the US sponsored
that the COVID research in Wuhan lab and then,
and he was asking the questions, like, did we started it?
Like, you know, that was the first person
that I heard like, you know,
a proper intellectual talking about that.
So yeah, that's a, that's another thing.
Yeah, like we did on that episode,
we did on the podcast.
I think you said it right that time,
like there's a hunger in the general public,
like you said a hunger for insights.
So yeah, they definitely provided that,
that this collective,
but I heard Rogan at one point saying,
talking disparagingly about it, you know,
it seemed like they were, when you,
when you say this IDW intellectual dark web,
it seemed like there were like some group
of superheroes or something.
Because that, that New York times piece that came out,
there was like, I saw like some,
some scanned versions on it online,
like a spread, they did this photo shoot really dramatic.
All of them like singled out,
like posing in front of some mysterious backdrops.
It's a nighttime with the stars in the nature desert.
It's, it's for, it's theoretical.
Yeah, very, very theatrical.
Yeah, but they fell apart even though I, like I said,
that the biggest one was Sam Harris distancing himself
due to the, because a lot of them supported Trump,
even though like we don't support Trump,
but you know, the lesser of two evils and paraphrasing.
So because of that, and because of COVID,
Brett and his wife, they have that dark horse podcast.
And during the pandemic,
they had, I think like bi-weekly episodes
for like a year and a half.
I mean, the podcast is still on,
but their whole content was putting down the,
I mean, the response to the pandemic should be told.
Both of them, I think by trade are evolutionary biologists.
So they kind of know what they're talking about in a way.
So what were they suggesting?
Like, you know, stop quarantining people.
Like stop.
Stop quarantining people.
Stop the lockdown.
The thing with the masks,
be upfront about the origins of COVID enough
with the lockdown, don't get vaccinated
because it's gonna produce some bad responses.
Right.
Lots of stuff.
Like really contrary.
And I'm not saying I'm not a doctor or a scientist.
There's some, obviously, there must be some truth, you know,
in what they said, I think they were proven right.
But at the time, I don't think they were helping
with the whole thing.
So they got demonetized very quick.
You know, two things about intellectuals.
The first of all, it's really difficult for them to form
sort of some sort of alliances, you know,
on every single aspect of it.
Exactly.
You know, because they're so smart, you know,
they look at everything issue by issue.
You know, when you are like that,
you became a very unreliable ally, right?
So that's an idea that I think Chris Williamson
first brought up.
At least that's the first time I heard it.
And the secondly is that because they value their thoughts
and truth a little bit too much.
So in a crisis like that, I'm pretty sure everybody,
the majority of them said whatever they feel like to say
for the betterment of the general public,
but the general public is not gonna take that
in a way that they hope they will take.
So, you know, I would understand like why they got
demonetized and why, you know, a lot of people seeing them
as like, you know, public enemies
or whatever intellectual enemies on that front, you know,
there's definitely a price you should pay
when you are that smart.
So yeah, there's a, but what I thought about the, you know,
this group of people, I think that, you know,
when I was doing a little bit of research on, you know,
all these podcast intellectuals, right?
The people that go on podcasts regularly,
they, you know, doing shows or,
they aren't necessarily the most welcome figures
in the academia.
That's what I found out.
You know, like a lot of people in the academia,
they are-
Like exiled from academia?
Yeah.
A lot of them that they're, you know, like,
I think Eric, one thing, one thing he talked about,
like he, something that happened between him and Harvard,
you know, a bread, obviously.
Jordan Peterson lost his tenure, like in lessons,
like all that shit.
Like, and then there were group,
the majority of the academia, like, you know,
the key opinion that they have is like,
they are famous for, they have this,
they gain the glamour by tackling some very controversial
issues, but when it comes down to
doing research in their field, they're like,
they're not that, you know, far head or whatever.
So there is definitely an idea of the renegades
versus the establishment.
It's weird that they were all united by one of the things
that they were united behind is, you know,
cancel culture within higher education.
And most, if not all of them ended up being exiled
from academia.
Exiled, exactly.
Maybe not,
what's his name?
The atheist, the new atheist, what's his name?
Didn't my-
Dawkins?
That's an old-
No, no, no.
Sam Harris, yeah.
Sam Harris, Sam Harris.
And I think I saw something,
do you remember this was just like before Trump,
maybe like a year or maybe the same year
that this term started gathering some speed,
this intellectual dark web?
Do you remember that interview that Sam Harris,
I think it was Bill Maher with Ben Affleck?
Have you seen that?
Oh yeah, I've seen it.
Like Ben Affleck went Batman mode on it.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, that was at that time.
He was a Muslim question.
Right, he was like,
I think he was accusing a lot of guys
on their shows like being Islamic phobic, you know?
Yeah, I know that.
What about it?
I think I just remembered that
because you know, that started at the same time as this.
Yeah, it's weird that they all got thrown together
in this-
I think a perfect counter example
would be Andrew Schuberman.
Like I don't think he's part of the dark web, right?
No, he's not, but I wouldn't be surprised if he ends up.
I mean, we can put him in the same pot with Gorgons.
There's probably a new batch of renegades.
We can call him intellectuals,
but like improvement gurus.
The all the information I found about Andrew
is overwhelmingly positive.
Like both from the general public,
like how many we have the Andrew Schuberman husband now
and also from the academia.
Like he's a very solid researcher.
But at the same time, like he's very smart
that he never talked about any controversial issues.
And people are,
I know there are a lot of people are very eager
to sort of construct a trap for him
so that he will accidentally say something
that he wasn't planning on saying
so we can take him down or put him in one of those categories.
But so far, the guy's been smart.
Like he's been on top of his game.
So it just shows you he's like, yeah, that's a thing.
They bring you up and then they put you down.
Exactly.
I told you, I think he's,
we're gonna see him come out as a closeted Christian.
Like big time.
Right.
Do you feel like, you know, I got this feeling,
I don't know what you feel about it.
And I feel like Eric Weinstein
is just one of those smartest people on the planet
that his resume doesn't feel real to me.
Like I understand like you started off your academic career
with mathematics
and that's basically the universal language of science
so we can tap into all the fields.
I understand that.
But to become a theoretical physicist,
a mathematical physicist and economist at the same time,
that just like for me, it would be like Andrew Huberman
was a neurologist,
but at the same time, he's also a economist.
Like what, you know what I mean?
You should, the first episode of the portal
is Weinstein interviewing Peter Thiel.
That's the interview where I heard that
when you subtract all the screens,
where's the 99.
He brought a similar point in the Chris Williamson podcast.
You should look at that.
It's a great, great conversation.
He was, he was canceled as well by the left for being,
you know, accused of all these things,
you know, bigot and Nazi, even though he's a gay
and in the open gay, I mean, gay, homosexual,
but they put him down.
They found a way to put him down.
I mean, I don't think he cares.
He has the fuck you money.
So, and the credentials.
So I don't really think he's bothered too much about it.
Speaking of science, how did you,
how was your, what's your experience with physics
during your formative study years?
It was a, it was a mess.
Like I, the years I was there,
I think that the string theorists were doing the last push.
You know, that's when you see Brian Gray
and all those cock-cool.
Mitchell cock-cool.
Mitchell cock-cool.
Like all these professors, they were doing like
a lot of documentaries about string theories.
They were going on TED talks.
And then back then I was like, you know,
I thought it was just try to promote science.
But now I thought about it.
I think that definitely did it to gather more attention
and also try to grab more funds.
It was a mess because I remembered,
I talked with a lot of my schoolmates
from the physics department and they're not buying,
it was never part of the formal, you know,
education curriculum where like, you know,
you study general relativity and quantum physics
and then you have to learn a string theory.
It was a never, it was more of a thought experiment
for a lot of people.
Like they never took it very seriously.
Okay, I want to talk about that.
But what I meant, how did you,
did you have physics during your,
in high school here in China or?
Oh yeah, like since middle school.
Did you do well?
Yeah, pretty, pretty okay.
Man, I barely passed physics.
Really?
I clawed my way through high school in physics.
I had like all like these social sciences and languages.
History, geography, everything.
I was like a grade A student,
but like math and physics, barely a D.
I mean the equivalent,
a Serbian equivalent of a D.
I seriously, I crawled my way through those classes.
I mean, I was just,
I was thinking today if my professors
from high school and university could see me now
about to talk about string theory,
I would love to see their reaction.
Right, that's amazing.
It's like I had a,
I would say like a high school physics for me
was really tough.
Like I didn't do that well.
Like when I was in middle school, I did pretty okay.
But high school, the Chinese high school physics
is just full of like these pretty nuanced
and unnecessarily complicated problems
that you have to solve.
And then there's nothing interesting in there.
College, I think the Americans,
they don't teach that hard.
At least for public undergraduate studies,
but I always had an interest in the ideas in physics,
but I just don't want to turn myself into a physicist.
Like I feel like that's really, really, really stressful.
But yeah, like, but like things told to those guys,
like everybody was, you know, it's very cultivating, you know?
Do you think that we are like live amount
like 11 fucking strings around us like all the time?
That's crazy.
So I was, he always, Weinstein always talks about string theory.
Every time he shows up on a podcast or a lecture
or something.
So I've been rewatching and trying to figure out
what he's saying.
He's basically saying that string theory doesn't work
neither technically nor in the approach of its physicists.
So the point that he's trying to make,
the way I understood it,
is that string theorists are very arrogant
in their approach in the way that they don't,
they don't want to recognize
that there might be something else outside their field.
And he says that this approach of theirs
is unscientific and analytical
because they refuse to admit that they might be wrong.
And like you said, despite all this money spent,
brain power and time invested
during the last half a century,
the field hasn't produced any tangible results
outside of some theoretical stuff,
nothing that's applicable in the real world.
That's how I understood it.
I watched, I used to watch a lot of like
these scientific documentaries like the Neil,
Neil deGrasse Tyson?
Neil deGrasse Tyson, like I need to repeat a name
a hundred times so I can memorize it.
Also alongside with Tarke Clarkson,
Carlson, like-
Kelly Clarkson?
Chris Tarke or whatever.
But anyway, so I watched a lot of these documentaries
and what I found out was that
their starting point is definitely very, very interesting.
So you have 11 universal constants,
like the constant for gravity or whatever.
And then it's like maybe that's,
one constant represents the dimensions
or we have 11 dimensions at the very macroscopic level.
And I'm like, yeah, at a quantum level,
it's just these strings reverberate
at a very specific frequency
and I'll create a constant.
I'm like, all right, cool, we'll understand that.
That's very interesting.
But then again, if you look at how string theory
square off in front of other really dominant
physics theories, right?
Like the general relativity, the quantum mechanics,
like it was way, way, way lower.
I don't think that Einstein started the relativity theory,
the theory of relativity like off of the imaginary,
imagination at that level.
And then compared to string theory,
and then the other two were like really,
really well grounded, you can use it.
I think that GPS use that,
the general theory of relativity
and then the quantum mechanics were used
creating quantum computers now.
But like, even though they make a breakthrough,
like exactly like you said,
what are we gonna do with it?
Make a fucking quantum violin,
all of the fucking strings or whatever?
Yeah, he's saying that they basically took the spotlight
away within physics from theoretical physics
all the way to just purely on string theory.
And they're not asking these big questions,
ideas of the universe, whether or not we can traverse it,
leave the planet, find new sources of energy,
become a multi-plan, multi-solar civilization
or something like that.
That's what I find interesting about him.
When he talks about, I think I heard him,
when he talks about Einstein,
he said that this whole idea,
I'm not sure if this is Einstein's concept,
so that's what I, but this space time.
Is this Einstein's space time?
That he said this numerous times,
he says space time, it's a map, it's not a territory.
And that we are, that's we,
that scientists, physicists are shackled by this.
They're not thinking outside the box,
what might be outside of that.
I really like how he phrased that.
Right, I just, it always amazed me to,
you remember who was that guy's name
that he constantly mentioned,
like the most feared character, you know?
I don't know, but I know who you mean.
He's just retiring now.
Yeah, he's part of that whole string theory,
like bandwagon, right?
Yeah, he's the Godfather.
Right, and I feel like there is a,
there is a sense of urgency among physicists.
Like, you know, we haven't progressed any further
after the discovery of, you know,
what Einstein discovered and also the quantum physics.
And then they feel this sense of urgency
and then the string theorists are just, you know,
according to Eric, it's like they exactly,
like you said, they waste a lot of resource
and funding and spotlight and attention
on a concept that's probably not gonna lead us to anywhere.
But at the same time, I always feel like, you know,
maybe for him, this is very, very important,
a very, you know, potent issue.
But for us, like, you know, we don't understand how much.
It's like we really, really, really hope to see
that maybe, you know, the conventional physicists
can make some sort of breakthrough
and then just like use actual signs to be done,
like these string theorists, like as they claim,
like in the end, like we can move on for this.
But like when I was listening to the podcast,
I'm like, yeah, I understand that you are not happy
about this, but how's that gonna relate it
to my mortgage, man?
Like, you know, I really wish I could know.
Okay, but he thinks he thinks big.
He thinks. Yeah, he definitely.
Very, very, very, very big.
I don't know when I think about physics,
I'm like Oppenheimer, the Manhattan Project,
the atom bomb, and that's it.
Like you said, I know GPS systems,
they function on some, they came from physics, right?
All right, yeah.
What else?
I think that they found that like hard evidence
on the astronauts in the International Space Stations,
like how slow, how much like there are times.
Time dilation.
Time dilation.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Gave us a solid, good movie called Interstellar,
that's for sure.
Yeah, some physicists worked on that.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
The rendering of that black hole,
like I think it took them like months
to render the black hole like that.
And then it was the most accurate depiction
of what a black hole really looks like.
Apparently Oppenheimer, he was the first one
to propose the existence of black holes.
Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
Yeah, you were absolutely right.
I was shocked when I was watching Oppenheimer
and he said like,
I'll check it.
There's a small comment.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But like most people sort of give Stephen Hawking
a little bit too much credit on the whole black hole thing,
but like Hawking discovered a Hawking radiation,
which is also important.
Like he basically said like there,
maybe we can get some information
out of the black hole and it's not completely black.
And then he actually,
we found evidence about that.
Black holes can evaporate,
but yeah, Oppenheimer was definitely the first guy.
I would say that he was one of the group of scientists
who went that far and started to think
that maybe we can find an object that dense
in a universe that you can stop spacetime,
which is a weird thing to say if you think about it.
It's super weird.
It breaks my mind every time I try to think about it.
Last few nights, I've been trying to listen
to some physics podcasts.
It's fascinating, but as soon as I catch on
to something they're talking about
and start thinking about it,
the conversation just moves on away from me.
By the time I get back, I'm already lost.
It's like weightlifting for a brain sort of.
I mean, the most I know about physics
is from the Big Bang Theory.
Yeah.
So one of the, I guess not one of the,
one of the the most famous,
most notable idea that Weinstein has is geometric unity.
That it's a, how do you say?
It's a theoretical framework that he introduced
in this mathematical physics.
So from what I understand, he is trying to,
this idea of geometric unity,
he's trying to merge Einstein's theory
of general relativity,
which explains gravity on a large scale, right?
With, like you said, with particle behavior,
which deals with quantum mechanics,
which deals with particle behavior on a small scale.
And so far, this theory has been met
with a little bit of skepticism, but also interest.
And he's still working on it.
I don't know if you remember,
this was like the previous time Weinstein was on Rogan.
He presented this idea.
Anyone can see it, it's on pull that up Jamie.com.
But it's, I mean, it's serious science.
I'm not gonna sit here and pretend
like I know what he's talking about,
but he's trying to, I think he sees himself in this theory
that he can make another breakthrough
and walk in the footsteps maybe of Weinstein.
So I guess that's what he's trying to do.
I'm like, you know,
to give a new map.
Exactly.
I think that the vibe I'm getting
when he was talking about this
in the Chris Williamson podcast was that,
you know, that's why for me,
like Brian Cox was still my favorite physicist.
Are you sure it's Brian Cox?
Brian Cox.
I've heard you say this now a few times.
Is it Cox?
Yes, it is Cox.
Is that the guy who's always smiling?
Yeah.
C.O.X.
Oh, okay.
C.O.X.
You know, like how else do you want to pronounce it?
I also watched a few times, a physicist also,
he was also on the podcast circuit, Brian Keating.
There are a lot of Brian's in there.
He's a colleague of Weinstein's,
very, very cool guy, very interesting.
But I don't, I hope that he can make some like contribution,
but I would say that just based on his tone
and all he described it,
like all these big ass problems
that he's tackling with right now.
You know, one of my professors told me,
it's like in academia,
rarely you can find a area
where you can build an entire building upon.
Most people are just trying to add one additional brick
to the pre-existing building at a time
and then you would make the building as tall as possible.
When he was talking like that,
it really gives people the feeling
that he found this new territory where you can,
you know, there's a bright future ahead of this,
but I was kind of skeptical.
I know that for sure,
his theory might be very brilliant,
may make some really good contribution towards this,
but I had the same,
and I'm pretty happy for the fact
that he was pretty passionate about this,
but the thing I wanna say is that,
don't expect that we can go to fucking Mars
in two seconds in the next year or something.
It's gonna take a colossal amount of effort.
Yeah, but he's saying like, okay, we went to the moon,
we can go to Mars,
maybe one of the moons of Jupiter,
and then what, like game over.
So we probably do need somebody who's thinking
that maybe it's not him,
but I think maybe what he's trying to argue
that the physics community should encourage
outside the box thinkers and support them,
because maybe these breakthroughs
will come from one of these people who think like this.
Then those who are indoctrinated into the field of string tier
and just following the footsteps of those who can't be.
Exactly, exactly.
You need a lot, like a thousand bodies
to basically form the foundation
of just one significant breakthrough.
And if you look at Einstein,
he wasn't, he didn't came out of nowhere.
He didn't come out of nowhere.
Like he's breakthroughs also built upon
like at least Newton's idea about gravity and all that.
And then before him,
I would say like the most common understanding
about gravity was that gravity was a sort of like a field,
like an electronic magnetic field.
And then Einstein was basically saying like,
probably it's not, it's something different.
You know, so I'm definitely glad to see
that he's still working on this problem.
It's like, because I know a lot of people have quit.
I think that a lot of string theorists,
you know, who bought into this,
a lot of them were once upon a time
trying to solve this thing.
Like they want to put their effort in,
but it's just so damn difficult.
And then they sort of, you know,
if you think about it,
string theory was originally also a thinking
also after the box idea.
Fringe, yeah.
Yeah, so it's like.
But yeah, like when you look at those old movies
and those old books, you know, this is not the future.
We were, I'm not gonna say promised,
but that we all envisioned, you know,
like Teal said, when you subtract all the screens,
we're still living in 1970s.
We haven't really made anything except these things.
Yeah, exactly.
This is the furthest we've, we haven't sent.
I think a man hasn't been on the moon since 1972
was the last manned moon mission.
And, you know, this, the late mid sixties,
we started this age of space exploration
and then just withered out.
Nothing happened.
If your mask didn't reboot it,
I mean, NASA basically clothed, you know,
we're sending their astronauts to Russia to go to space.
Yeah, there is a.
What I'm trying to say, there's no,
it seems like there's no imagination in science.
There is no imagination.
And I feel like there was just,
science just went through a huge period of
like self-indulged in depression, in a sense.
Yeah, it's like, I know that NASA made a lot of,
you know, NASA actually made a lot of progress
in terms of, you know, we had a first picture
of the black hole in 2016.
That was huge.
The detection of the gravitational waves,
that's also huge.
But we were just at that, I would say,
it's like the darkness before the down type of time
where, you know, everything seems so hopeless
and boring that, you know,
and every problem seems so urgent to solve
and everybody's having this huge amount of stress
on their shoulders.
Yeah, we just need to get through that, but.
When I, we talked about this ad nauseam,
it's my new word.
The three body problem.
I mean, the ideas in those books are out there.
Yeah.
Fascinating.
That's physics, right?
Really, really interesting.
The show is coming out next month, the Netflix version.
I saw the trailer.
I think they're doing all three books at the same time
based on the trailer.
I think so too.
I think there were some elements from the other two books
and they also brought it in.
Like, I don't know if that's a good idea.
Maybe from a narrative point of view,
they want to set up some kind of cliffhangers.
Like, you know, sometimes the TV shows does that,
like show you something that wait down in the future
and then bring back the story afterwards.
Could be.
Yeah.
Okay, so let's connect all these two things,
physics and the three body problem.
For the past four years now,
I think ever since he stopped doing the portal podcast,
Weinstein has dedicated himself
in investing the UFO phenomena.
He has interacted with various experts in this field.
And after four years,
he says he remains skeptical about the existence
of UFOs themselves.
But that's...
Just skeptical?
Yeah, pessimistic skeptical.
You know, they actually exist,
but he points out there's like concrete evidence
that points to existence of decades-long
secret government programs
that are shrouded in like UFO secrecy.
And he says that these programs
could actually might be just the front
for testing new weapons
or conducting retrieval missions behind enemy lines
or experimenting with aerospace technology.
And he said, even though he didn't see any concrete evidence,
it's the only area,
because you know, he's outspoken on all topics
where he can't provide like a single explanation
what's going on.
And what is weird about it, and he mentioned it,
and I also believe this is very weird,
that you have in the United States,
for example, for the last two years,
you have these whistleblowers
and all this news coming out.
And the idea that the United States
have lost control of their airspace
has reached the highest level of US Congress
and all these officials.
And they are entertaining this idea.
So either, like he said, bringing the scientists,
debunk this in an afternoon, or sending the military.
So which one is it?
And they're not doing anything.
It's like now wrapped up in all this bureaucracy
and they made the aliens now kind of boring, you know?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
But something is going on there.
There is a, that's actually a very strange thing.
Like, did you ever watch one of those Congress hearings
about that?
Yes, I did, yeah, I watched the David Grosh one, yeah.
Do you feel like it's so fucking surreal?
It's uber bizarre.
It's uber bizarre, right?
It's like, it feel, to me,
it's one of those like dreamlike sequences
that happened in these couple of years
as everything is so fucking over the top.
You know, any, those people that showed up at the hearings
claiming that they worked with the government,
they worked for the government,
they had actual aliens, somebody contact with the aliens.
And if you watch these people from a different setting,
you probably think that guy is probably fucking,
you know, he's out there, like he's delusional,
like he's crazy.
And then you have a per people talking like that
in front of some ultra serious Congress people.
And then it's just these two elements combined together.
I'm like, y'all really don't have anything better to do
right now, like, wow.
It's unreal, it's literally unreal.
Like, like you said, it's like brought up to a serious level
that this, at this level is just,
it doesn't make any sense.
Like he said, like every time,
because he really went deep into this,
he met with all these people.
And he says, every time people say like,
these things are defying the laws of physics.
He says, okay, how do you know they're defying
the laws of physics?
He's like, well, we can see like, okay,
if they're defying the laws of physics,
give me a physicist to tell me that.
And upon his investigation,
he found out there are no physicists working on this.
He says, if anyone's gonna debunk it,
it's gonna be the physicist.
They're gonna debunk it.
Like I said, in an afternoon,
they're gonna say, okay.
That was like 15 minutes conversation.
15 minutes, yeah.
He said, I'm not even in it
and I'm like the only physicist.
But to entertain the idea,
I like when he made this interesting observation.
He said, if you take like this kind of thing,
this, let's say UFO cover up,
if it was real, how he know it's not real,
how he knows it's not real.
Let's say this would be a Manhattan type project
in terms of scale.
And he says like, take the NSA,
National Security Agency, for example.
Like it was secret for a long time.
Now they know, now we all know that it exists.
These people deal with numbers there, right?
They're also mathematicians.
So he said, you would go to,
you would see a whole generation of students
in the United States that got their PhDs for this.
You would check the whole,
like that year who graduated.
You would see that all these students are missing.
You would find their addresses.
You will see they're all working in the same city.
Then you would know there's like an operation going on there.
They're working on something.
And he says, he was looking into,
he says, if aliens exist,
there are like three different areas of physics,
which would require people from there to work on this.
And he did the math.
He did his homework and his nobody is missing.
So there's no like real big project going on.
You would be surprised about like how open
or non secretive the American academia really is.
It's like, and also Chinese academia in some regards.
I think the China past that period of time
where like we need to locked up 5,000 physicists
and high school students, college students,
because we need a nuclear bomb.
That's what we did in the sixties.
Exactly like you said,
a whole generation of college physics students disappeared
and it went shipped into that gunswil province.
And then next thing you know,
we had a big mushroom cloud and they were figured out.
Oh yeah, that's how they went.
But no, like we passed that.
Like I admit a lot of,
I basically know some people that are working
some of the very sensitive industry.
And then they can talk about it's like,
yeah, we're making somethings.
That's technically not internationally legal.
You know, and then in the U.S.
and then they talk about like,
oh, I'm working with the co-fusion project here
or I'm working with the NASA or something like it.
They're very open.
There is not that much of a secret to, you know,
attach to them.
And then what's funny about this whole ADIAN thing is that
if there is actual ADIAN, so like on the planet,
U.S. wouldn't be the only group of,
or the only country that knows about this.
You know, like everybody's watching.
It would have to be a global cover up.
Exactly.
It's like, everybody has to cover it up.
Like for what?
You know what I mean?
What's so potentially catastrophic that?
When you look at the failure,
the global failure in dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic,
if they couldn't control that,
how would they be able to cover up the existence
of extraterrestrial life?
Yeah, it just doesn't make any sense, man.
There's like ADIAN's question.
Like the idea that some civilization figured out
how to do interstellar travel and visiting us, you know,
we're basically in terms of civilization,
we're pre-kindergarten.
Like, what for?
Like, what's so valuable on the planet?
And then I heard somebody like, you know,
one of those people that witnessed on a congress hearing
is like, ah, they came here for the water.
Like seriously, water?
It's too over.
It's a movie plot.
Exactly, it's like water.
Like y'all figured out how to travel the universe
and then you don't know how to combine hydrogen
and oxygen to go.
But he did say that we made some cool observations.
He said like, if we, like when we humans studied,
for example, orcas, which are like the smartest beings
next to us in the food chain, I guess,
like how do we approach them?
You know, we observed them, we build,
how do you say, what's the opposite of natural?
Artificial habitats for them, we studied them,
we hide from them.
You know, maybe somebody, if they are here,
why would they show themselves?
He made also a very cool observation about,
you know, the Sentinel Islands.
Sentinel, yeah, islands south of India.
That island with like a few hundreds of inhabitants
that killed everyone who showed up there
in the last few hundred years.
Basically the Indian government,
because the island belongs to India,
have put it like, not like a protection around it,
nobody's allowed to go there.
They're basically living in the Stone Age there.
So for them, but like the whole world is studying them,
but they're not aware of the existence
of even India, let alone the continents.
So he's saying like, maybe we are like the Sentinel Islands
inhabitants and the aliens are like India.
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
So how would we even know?
Yeah, I could be mad.
We assume that they would want to communicate with us.
And there's always this thing in the UFO lore
that all these visitations started
after we detonated the nuclear weapons.
That's where all this activity like started.
So maybe, I don't know, I want to believe.
Part of me believes, but if it's really like a cover-up,
I think like Musk would be the first one to,
I mean, he has satellites going around here.
He would know, he would say something.
Right, I think that there is a,
there are definitely, I've read this,
and these aren't really like conspiracy theory or anything,
but there are like discoveries in astrology.
Astrophysics, yeah, astrology.
Or, you know, just physics in general
that we figured out that maybe there's some...
Astrophysics?
Astrophysics. Astrology is something different.
Yeah, the wrong word, man.
That's a MBTI shit.
Anyway, so there were some discoveries
that implied that maybe we're being watched
by some other civilization.
You know, there was a book before,
we talked about this before the three body problem,
like how they found out that the aliens are watching
was that they conduct the experiment with no observer.
And according to quantum mechanics,
you know, when you don't have observer,
they behave like waves.
And then they found out, it's like,
why are these particles behaving like particles?
Somebody's watching.
And then that set up the actual stage
for what happened during the three body problems.
Like, oh yeah, there are aliens watching us.
But there are discoveries like that.
The author didn't make it happen out of the blue.
But I would say that I wanna believe that,
you know, some other galaxies that they discovered
a lot of things that we just aren't capable
of even contemplate yet.
And they may be watching us.
And it's so amazing to think about it.
Like, you know, because we know that, you know,
at least maybe like tens of a thousand light years
around us, there is no civilization found.
We have found zero evidence.
So which means that if there's a civilization watching us,
that's like, you know, millions or even more than that,
like thousands of millions of light years away.
They're watching us as like,
what they're watching like dinosaurs right now.
Oh, okay.
You know, they're like, oh, these are dinosaurs.
Like, but if imagine a civilization
that can watch us live,
that they're also watching this podcast
for some reason, like these two idiots
are talking about us right now.
Hey, let's go.
Mom, come on, come on.
They're breaking the code.
Yeah, yeah, but that means that they've figured out
a space time to such level
they can literally see into the future in a HD,
you know, in a 4K definition, basically.
That's crazy.
Yeah, but okay, at the end of the day,
we're always applying our understanding of science
that they operate on the same basis.
Yeah.
The best alien movie I've found.
Number one.
Mars Attacks.
Mars Attacks.
No, fifth elements, man.
Fifth elements.
I thought that was pretty damn good movie.
In terms of space opera is like, yeah.
And arrival, like arrival and annihilation,
these two films are, you know,
like the aliens won't behave like us.
And arrival, they just like, yo, we can't even talk.
You know, we, our language are so complex.
Like, give it up, man.
Like, go away.
Arrival is out there.
Definitely the best one out there.
Yeah, exactly.
But for guilty pleasure, fifth element, you know.
Yeah, it's a good one.
It's, I mean, 90s schlock, but it's a good movie.
It's good.
And also, you know, back to the Eric,
what he was saying is like, I was so surprised
like an actual scientist that went that far too.
Yeah, he gave it some legitimacy
by him going into the field and investigating.
That's what I liked.
I was hoping he's going to come.
I was like, oh, Weinstein is on Rogan.
Let's go.
Disclosure is coming.
He's going to say something.
And then he's like, nah, there is no real evidence.
But if he had one point he said,
if the aliens were here,
I would be the only person to understand
how they got to here.
Yeah, I remember that.
I'm like, wow, that's a,
wow, that's American confidence right there, man.
Like, okay, let's continue.
What did I want to say?
Yeah.
What Weinstein has one of these ideas
of also one of the things I like about him,
the idea he calls it,
he always makes up these terms,
the idea of managed reality.
And by that, he means that those
in the highest positions of power
are actively deceiving the general public
regarding the most crucial aspects of society.
And by that, biology, science, economics, politics,
journalism, global warming,
anything you can come up with.
So, and again, he has these analogies,
which I really love about him.
He really paints a picture.
He likened this situation as a,
he said this on Chris's podcast, the last one,
as a tanker that flipped over on a highway.
It's burning, the chemicals are coming out,
there are dead bodies left and right.
The police or the government is standing there
and saying, nothing to see here, just move along.
And I guess by that,
That's a powerful example.
It's a powerful example, it is, it is.
And there's a lot of, like for us,
there's a lot of evidence that points to the contrary.
And, but people are being encouraged to ignore the truth
and to not only that,
but also to put down those who dare to question things,
branding them, grifters, charlatans, conspiracy theorists.
And we've seen that a lot in the last 10 years, I think.
Yeah, that's a, I'm glad that he brought it up
because for one, where we're at,
that's a freaking perfect example of what's going on
during the COVID three years,
why we're still doing those tests and all that.
But it's everywhere, isn't it?
Is it not?
It's not, no, it is everywhere.
It's like, especially in the West, right?
What do you think that, in your opinion,
it's like, give us an example,
like where you feel like your reality is being managed
and you found out it's actually managed,
reality is not real?
Like back home, there's an open secret
that our government has been stealing the elections
for the last 10 years.
Everyone you ask, nobody is voting for them.
And every time the elections come around,
they win the elections.
So that's for one.
In terms of, I mean, we operate,
we deal with very existential problems back home,
but what's going on in the West
has started spilling over all over the planet.
So like biology, for example,
what they're saying now about men and women,
they're rewriting history, global warming,
it's happening, it's not happening.
You have the money, you have the funds,
get a group of scientists, make a consensus, sit down,
is it happening or is it not happening?
Why do we have to debate this all over and over again?
There's a lot of these topics that we are constantly debating,
is it or is it not?
Right, right, sure.
Same as with these aliens, okay, now I'm going out there,
you know, it doesn't really affect me,
but like example from back home would be this.
I think that the, how am I gonna put this?
So you have basically a mega industry on the planet
that their entire profit came from
making people arguing against each other.
That's why, you know, racism is a great example.
I think that America could have solved racism
a long time ago, but they didn't.
It's not because the Americans are full of like neo-Nazis
that just believe that there are white superiority
or all that bullshit, it's because when you have people
that are debating on the national television,
you got views, you can sell advertisement,
it's like solving the issue will basically say
that you can no longer make money in that way.
And it's very similar to the wars, you know, conflicts,
you know what I mean is like the,
I had this opinion on, you know,
we probably make more money by threatening,
threatening the fucking island of unification
than actually unify with them.
You know, like Americans at the same time,
it's like, but definitely more profitable
that they keep spreading fear about like, you know,
what we're gonna do, what the rush is gonna do.
That's why it's like, we never solve anything.
The same thing goes with the climate change, you know.
You, do you feel it's actually kind of strange
that the moment of Paris, you know,
China and United States signed a Paris Accord
to combat climate change, almost the next day
we became the evilest country on the planet.
Like we actually wanna do some solid policy change
to promote green energy, renewable energy.
You look at a Chinese street right now,
it's like how many electronic cars,
it's way more than any advanced economy on the planet.
Yeah, people tend to think outside of China,
that China is this big polluter.
I mean, truth be told, you have a lot of factories
and all this stuff, but when I travel China,
I see these wind turbines everywhere.
Like you said, electric cars left and right,
more so than outside of China, so much more.
We, they never talked about like in the, you know,
2015, 2016 when we shut down all those like really,
we call it the industrialization basically.
We need to shut down a lot of those old ass factories
so we can stop the pollution at the same time.
We wanna cut back on our production capabilities
because we're making goods that's so cheap
that nobody is making or making money out of it.
So, and then there were so much employment
that the Chinese economy had to suffer through that.
There's a reason that right now,
if you order food on the internet,
like it will be delivered in the fucking 10 minutes.
It's because all these people, they're working on this
and they can't find jobs in traditional
and manufacturer sectors, right?
So, you know, like when somebody actually tried
to solve it, all of a sudden,
because you were ending the debate,
like in China, global warming is not a freaking debate.
You know, and then you can't make money off of debates
and arguing each other and then just like bringing
out new perspectives and whatnot.
And people hate you for that.
Like people will literally hate you for that.
Like I think that the manager reality either,
I think that it's not like, you know, how Eric described it,
you know, there's just huge powerful people.
They just try to, you know, push us away from the truth
and then, you know, like turn us into mindless pigs,
whatever.
I think that the powerful people just want to make us feel
confused all the time, you know, that's why.
Like that's why a lot of people buy in propaganda.
It's because it's easier to understand.
And then if you don't listen to propagandas
and you really want to pursue like what's real
and what's actually in the real, like your brain
will burn out like on a daily basis
and nobody wants that, you know what I mean?
I do.
I don't think they are like some evil doers
who have this new world government, you know,
one world government, this apocalyptic ideas of the future,
these big conspiracy theorists,
but they're just sowing division
and they're reaping the profits
because division is they're monetizing our division.
We are divided on every single issue.
We are, I mean, all at the end of the day,
also citizens of the world
and we all participate in these conversations
and every single question we are divided.
And when you, this thing you mentioned,
the global warming and this, I think this is also part
of this Western self-righteous liberalism.
Putin said it best, like you guys in the West,
you have already industrialized,
you've arrived in the future.
It's like, tell Asian countries or African countries
who are just starting the process
of industrializing their nations to go green, like FU.
Yeah, exactly.
Like the African, like lithium mine, that's a perfect example.
It's like in order for us to drive electronic cars,
like how many Africans lives are being sacrificed
on a fucking ritualistic level, you know,
just to make sure that we have enough material
to build a car batteries.
Like this is hypocritical, man.
Hypocritical, they're all tweeting in the West
from their phones, let's go green.
This dash, hashtag, that, but somebody is dying
in Africa mining that coal belt or whatever it is in,
you know, buy a Starbucks coffee, tax,
I don't know, half a dollar goes to this cause
and then you feel good about yourself.
You can go and protest and whatnot.
But also the thing you asked me about,
where do I see this playing out, this managed reality?
Also with the news, I think most, I see it there.
There are, there's no, I mean, journalistic integrity,
like what, journalistic, what went out the window?
I mean, it's obvious when you go,
like you can go on these apps like Telegram
and you know, these dark web apps
and you can see news that you can't see on legacy media,
not even legacy that you can maybe even see
on Twitter or Facebook or YouTube.
Like we are, I do believe, I don't think,
and I personally don't think Eric was implying
that they're like these evil doers that are controlling,
but we are being deceived or at least we are being
conditioned or trained not to think,
not to question too much.
There's a lot of things that are happening that are absurd.
I think that's the main point.
Yeah.
You know, don't ask question.
There's nothing, just move along, you know.
Just move along while somebody is profiting.
I personally feel like, you know, for one,
the legacy media, the news are just so freaking
narrative-driven, which is something that Eric also talked
about, the narrative-driven media
and also the narrative-driven academics.
It's like you have this built-in story
that you wanna promote or you wanna spread
and then you find evidence that fits
that particular narrative.
For one, the legacy media is definitely,
I still have subscriptions to some pretty major news media,
like New York Times.
I just read the title.
I don't wanna read the freaking commentary on that.
It's like absolutely garbage.
And then you have the underground news.
And underground news sometimes is like so fucking
mind-boggling, stupid, conspiracy, theory-filled,
you know, successful.
Have you heard of ground news?
Yeah, I'm using it.
Are you using it?
Yeah.
Is it good?
It's a little bit overwhelming.
It gets a little bit repetitive
because they try to, it's not a news agency,
but it's sort of like a combinator.
You know, you combine all the news agency,
what he said, what he said together
and you make your own calls.
Be very careful of what you set up,
you're interested in it.
Cause like I accidentally set an election
and my entire front page is all about like fucking election.
I don't really care about this anymore,
but in terms of bias,
they have a bias meter on it.
So you can tell us like, okay, this is-
Who's reporting more?
Okay.
And this managed reality.
Also we talked about it last time
about the war in Ukraine.
That seems like a very managed picture
of what's really going on.
Obviously being sold a narrative.
Very obviously.
I think that, like I said last time,
it's like there's no way that according to the West,
if Russia has lost that much manpower,
it's still going.
Like there's no way.
It's not China that we were talking about.
Like Russia doesn't have a lot of people, right?
So yeah, there's a-
During the Chris Williamson podcast,
maybe you know something about this.
He was talking about some CPI question.
Right.
Yeah.
The Eric was attacking how the brew of liver statistics
manipulate a CPI number.
What does it stand for?
Consumer?
Consumer price index.
What it represents is that it take a basket of goods
and services that you will,
an average consumer would consume,
and take a look at the price level,
and then compare this price level after a period of time,
and then see like the percentage rise or decrease.
So if it's a positive number,
it means it's inflation,
and the negative number is the deflation.
That's how I learned from my college years.
And what Eric basically said is that they created
a inflation number to fit a specific political interest.
And I found that,
man, it's so hard to believe that.
It's really difficult to believe that.
Because if that's the case,
you will see that CPI doesn't correlate
with other economic indicators,
unless they fix like everything, right?
And I would say in terms of number fixing,
like the Americans are not as good as us.
Like we can make our economic scoresheet like box score
like perfect, right?
But I don't think that he,
I don't know what he meant that he said like,
the CPI number is wrong.
You know, like that's the part is like,
he didn't elaborate on this.
He didn't give out his own understanding about it.
Like what he thought should be the right formula.
He just said like the Federal Reserve
and then there was just, you know,
this star chamber people,
they're just fixing all these numbers.
I'm like, all right, cool.
Speaking of Federal Reserve and money,
and again, going back a little bit,
if you don't mind to this managed reality thing.
Like when people mention UBI,
this Universal Basic Income,
and how much poverty we have in the world today,
when people talk about that, you know,
it's met with like, you guys are utopians, you know,
this is like next level socialism,
you know, that this is not gonna happen.
But when you look at like when these,
we talked about the financial,
you know, the crashes that happened in 2007
and now at the beginning of this decade.
And every time this happens,
like I know it happened in Europe,
especially in the United States,
every time they build them out,
they print trillions of dollars every single time.
So what I'm trying to say,
like how do they have money for this all the time,
but they don't have money to fix
like these real world problems
that we all, you know, suffer from?
Yeah, the idea of printing money,
that's from, that's a Keyesian economic approach.
Like that's what the United States did.
What economic approach?
So I forgot his first name,
but his last name is Kane's.
He's a very famous economist
in during the Great Depression.
Stateside?
I think he's from UK, he's from UK.
Like UK were, same thing as Eric said,
like UK people should feel more proud.
Like they did something pretty amazing.
But in economics back then, they had this, you know,
they had this blind belief, this credility,
of, you know, if you let the free market run,
it will solve all the problems itself.
So you don't have to interfere.
The government doesn't have to do anything.
And that's basically fundamental belief
of all the right wing people,
like who believe in the smaller government
because the market will sell for the sell file.
But during the Great Depression,
we found out that no, the market won't sell.
Like there's market failure, you know,
like there are, you can produce so much goods
to the point that nobody's consuming
and it created deflation.
And deflation is very, very dangerous
to modern economy, like to any country.
Like we think the Zimbabwe is bad
because they had a hyperinflation.
So did we?
Yeah, yeah, so.
So did we?
Yeah, but if you compare that to what happened in Japan,
the longevity of the crisis, it's like hyperinflation,
it's relatively easy to stop,
but like deflation, you can't really stop it.
So they're afraid of that.
So that's why they're printing money.
But contrary to a lot of people's belief
that they're just printing cash out there,
what they're believing is that if you increase people's
spending and then just lower the interest rate,
you will, it will stimulus the economy
and then make it back to, you know,
if you give people more money,
they will like to spend on something.
And then, you know, it's stabilized the price level.
What you don't wanna see is that you're sitting
on a bunch of cash and its value is actually increasing.
That's what deflation means.
It's actually very horrible.
Like that's what China is going through right now.
So if like every day,
like me and my wife, we talked about this,
it's like every time we see a nice restaurant
and a very expensive,
we are not going to spend money to that restaurant.
We're just gonna wait it out
until like eventually that restaurant has zero customers,
it will drop down some discount
and then we'll just go eat there.
But in terms of the restaurant's,
from the restaurant's perspective,
it's absolutely horrible.
So deflation is definitely more scarier.
It's much scarier than the inflation.
That's why they print money all the time.
Like I don't agree on,
but the thing I don't agree is that
I'm all for you bailed out the banks,
but you still need to hold those bankers accountable
afterwards.
Like we solve your problem now,
here's somebody who got to go to jail.
Like whatever you guys did was wrong.
It was a fraud.
Like what happened in 2007?
It was just-
I think like two people went to jail maybe.
Yeah, it's just two or three people went to jail
and all these bankers,
they walk off with all these like big ass bonuses.
I thought that was absolutely wrong.
Like that set us example so bad that,
you know, now I thought about it,
I think the America lost,
I would say 60% of its credibility internationally,
based solely based on how they reacted in the 2007.
And then now we're just dealing
with the repercussions really.
Like everything on the planet is like,
if you think about it,
it's just dealing with the repercussions of 2007.
It has such a strong ripples in the history
that it's just like, you know,
I think that was probably one of the reasons
to why all these elites want to make us stupid
and don't think about this.
Cause like how are you going to get away with this, man?
Like seriously, like you have all these money
all these people that made so much money illegally
and they can walk away from this.
And then you call it a moral hazard.
I'm like, bro, like, look,
if there's a famine and the people on the streets
are eating each other,
like because they have to survive,
like I would want to call that a moral hazard.
You got a group of the most well-educated people
on the fucking planet made some conscious decision
to exploit people.
That's not a moral hazard.
It's not just illegal.
That's like,
you know.
So speaking of Eric verdict,
verdict, what's your opinion of him overall?
I'm going to pull Eric card.
Like, what do you think?
Nice. Okay.
Well, the most frequent criticism I've heard of him
is that he holds a very high opinion of himself.
On several podcasts, I've heard him say,
I've heard him mention that within his own family,
there are like two or three Nobel winning ideas.
I've even heard him entertain thoughts
of running the government by himself.
People say that he talks in circles,
that he has an answer for everything.
I also once, the only thing I think they might,
they didn't really, I'm nitpicking here,
but since we're talking,
the way he responded to comments made by Tim Dillon,
which was, which were obviously intended as a joke.
Remember that?
Tim Dillon said like, you know,
people always say Eric Weinstein is, you know, so smart.
What has he ever invented?
What did he ever do, you know?
And he was a guest on Rogan after that,
and he really kind of embarrassed himself in his reaction.
He went hard on Tim Dillon, right?
Yeah, he really took it seriously, took it to heart.
But disregarding all of that, similar to Peterson,
what I, the thing I like the most about Weinstein
is his sense of urgency when he talks about
these critical issues over time,
particularly the failure of institutions.
That's what I really like.
I also, I highly, I told you this many times,
I highly admire his eloquence, his intellect,
his ability to not only to talk about,
but also to communicate these big ideas.
In terms of this physics stuff and science,
I think he really has a visionary mind.
He's consistently thinking outside the box on all topics.
And his passion for physics has brought up,
has sparked an interest in me.
Like I told you, I've been watching these physics podcasts
even though I don't understand anything, but...
It's so intriguing though.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
They all have like amazing visuals all the time.
They do.
I think he will be well remembered in history,
even if nothing comes off of this geometric unity.
I think, you know, people like him are needed.
I don't think, I mean, he pulled away when he was kind of getting
not too big, but too loud in his criticisms of many things.
So I admire him for that as well.
And from where I'm sitting is just my subjective point of view.
I'm nobody to talk on this, but from where I'm sitting,
he, to me, he seems like one of the smartest people
in the world.
I think that I agree with you.
Like, do you feel like personally that he's, you know,
he really thinks we're very high off of himself?
Do you got an impression from him?
I do, but do you think like if Einstein was alive today
and he went...
Bro, that would be amazing.
We see Einstein on the podcast.
If we had the opportunity to see hours and hours
of Einstein talking, we can only see,
I think maybe there's only a few short videos of Einstein.
There's, you know, books and articles, but I'm pretty sure
we would say he's full of himself.
Yeah.
How can you not be?
Exactly.
I feel like it's a necessary flaw to have.
Yeah.
Expose yourself like that in the public.
All the artists, sorry for interrupting.
When we look at all these, that we had the opportunity,
now we have recordings and now in the modern age
of these artists, like musicians,
and they're all full of themselves.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I think one goes with the other.
I was, I had the same impression.
And also I think that kind of contradicts
to what he said about the exclusivity,
the necessary exclusivity of academia.
I think that what exactly are you doing right now
is attracting a lot of unqualified people to the academia.
You know, academia for me always has been this kind
behind the door, like very secretive type of,
you know, society.
It requires a lot of intellect
and a lot of time and effort to set a step into this.
It's not that, you know,
but at the same time, it's like,
I feel like he set a lot of good examples
on how we should approach various,
very controversial issues.
Like I was summing it up with this one thing
that he talked about.
It's about the gender issue.
And he didn't go as like, you know,
oh, there are only two gender issues.
Yes, yes.
He actually find a very solid middle ground.
It's like the nature before binary gender setups
like male and female, like we're good,
but they are all liars.
You don't want those all liars to feel
unloved and excluded from a society.
I'm like, that's such a solid point.
I think everybody can write it behind that.
How difficult is it to come
towards a common understanding on that level?
It's not difficult to understand.
We know that there are some people who are in a,
they have, you know, they're the borderline problems.
Like, you know, they're neither male or female, like.
Asexual.
Asexual, like we know they exist.
You know, we know that somebody has gendered.
Dysphoria.
Dysphoria.
So like the way he, the way he elaborate his ideas
on that particular issue is just such amazing.
With understanding and compassion.
With understanding and compassion.
And also he didn't compromise his scientific understanding
about the issue.
You know, he didn't go ultra like, you know,
Jordan Peterson on Chris Williamson's ass.
Like, I wish like, at least on that aspect,
I definitely hope that more, you know, intellectuals
or scientists can be more Eric.
Like we can, we can handle.
Like if you were just like appear to be a very egoistic,
like, yeah, we, yeah, sure.
Why not?
You know, I feel like Kanye West already set the bar,
like really, really, really,
appropriate so far as to accept those figures.
But anyways, all right, man.
All right.
That was solid, man.
Always.
Nice.
