Hi, everyone. Welcome to Reason with Science. I'm your host, Jigendra. This episode is with
Michael Levin and Nick Lane. Mike is a professor in the biology department at Tufts University,
where he studies the role of bioelectric signals in regulating development and regeneration in
animals. Nick is a professor of evolutionary biochemistry at University College London.
His work is focused on the fundamental processes that underlie the origin and evolution of life.
In this conversation, we talk about major transitions and key innovations in biology,
information in biological systems, bioelectricity, emergence of eukaryotes, and importance of
bioelectric signals to create artificial life. Enjoy the conversation, share, and subscribe
to support the podcast. Thank you for listening. Hi, Mike and hi, Nick. Welcome back. Hi. Thank you.
Hey, thanks for having me. Yeah, so, I mean, the kind of theme that I had in my mind is kind of
like talk about emergence of life. But of course, I don't want to ask you to define life because I
know your response. Both of you have been standing on this kind of response that life
is a continuum. So we can kind of take it from there. But when we think of emergence of life,
there is certainly a kind of transition we can think of. It's a transition of chemistry to biology.
And both of the frameworks that you guys are studying, I mean, the origin of life or developmental
biology, both of them, they are kind of this example of this transition. So let's take that
big picture view. How do you look at this continuum? How we can think of that continuum
depending upon a bacteria or a mold or a planaria living in a pond? So let's start with Nick.
Okay. I mean, you say a transition from chemistry to life. And I think both Mike and I would
probably emphasize electrochemistry or at least is borderline physics really in terms of what
we're talking about. And so the key, I suppose, in my mind is not a single moment where you
switch from one thing into another one. Even when you introduce information, there isn't a
single moment. But there's a process. And that process is partly over time and it's partly
structured. And the thing that I like most, I think, about the kind of environments I talk
about for the origin of life, which are mostly hydrothermal systems. But the nice thing about
those systems is really that they have a structure which is cell like. And they can template cells
that in effect can grow within them. And when I say cell like, the key attribute in my own mind
to cells is the charge on the membrane. It's really that that defines the cell from its environment
and which coordinates everything that's happening inside the cell. And so at the origin of life,
you have effectively a structure with charges on barriers that are cell like structures.
And it gives you this as a setup from the very beginning. And then there's lots of
interesting questions that we haven't really answered yet. But how does charge organize
things? It certainly does. But to what extent and in what ways?
Mike? Yeah, I think what I'd like to do is take, I mean, I agree with everything Nick just said,
but I will maybe take one step back and kind of talk about this question of physics versus
chemistry versus biology. I've come more and more to the view that what we're really talking about
in almost all of these problems has to be cashed out with respect to an observer. So to me,
the question of whether something is physics, or is it chemistry, or is it biology, or is it
psychology, or is it what you know, what is it to me, right? Is it should be specified relative
to an observer who chooses a particular lens? So one experience that I often have is that
I'll describe some amazing thing that the biological systems do and people say, wow,
this is super cool. And then if I happen to have the mechanism for it, I will say, here's the
mechanism. And then people say, oh, well, well, that's just physics. Well, that's not memory.
I can see how that works. That's not memory. That's just physics. And so there's this amazing
kind of moving of the goalposts that basically all of the interesting stuff, right? The cognition,
intelligence, memory, decision making, problem solving, meaning, all of these things,
the minute you show some sort of a mechanism underneath, then some people say, wow, that's
not that wasn't it at all. What I really mean is this other thing, this is just physics, right?
So what I prefer is this idea that you have a set of different tools that you can bring to
bear, and you can take anything and look at it and say, well, that's physics. And guess what
you'll see? You'll see physics. You bring your voltmeter, right? If you bring your ruler and your
way scale and stuff like that, guess what you'll see? You'll see physics. And if you bring other
kinds of tools that are conceptual tools that are better suited to recognize agency, so maybe you
bring something that recognizes virtual governors or it recognizes a decision making or something,
well, then maybe you'll find that and maybe you won't. So it's an empirical process, right?
So that's kind of my view on this. I think anything can be seen as just physics and many things
can also be seen as something much more and looked at at a higher level.
Yeah. I mean, actually the origin of life is kind of an exemplar of exactly that because there are
people who come from completely different disciplines in terms of training. So coming
as a physicist or as a chemist or as a geologist or as a cosmologist or a biologist and so on.
And you realize when you try to talk to people with a very different background that you don't
share the same language. And however much you try to be a scientist, you find that you're conditioned
and you have some blinkers on which make you see the problem with that toolkit. And half of the
problem that I have in working on the origin of life is to try and dismantle my own toolkit and
replace it with, well, just try to be a scientist. Just try to bring all these things together because
it is a question in all of those disciplines. And that's just the beginning of life. And once
we get into life, it just becomes more sophisticated and more of a problem. It's just that you can
see it really clearly at the origin of life. Yeah. Yeah. I think the, I mean, of course, it's,
it can also be the psychology itself that we like to categorize stuff. You know,
it's really this concept of categorical thinking itself. But let's not go into the psychology
right now. But maybe we can kind of replace the emergence of life, like kind of idea to
emergence of complexity, because certainly integration does happen. Stealing a word from
Nick Lane's, when we were chatting last time, you use this word of integration rather than
reductionist approach. So when we think of this integration of some sort of simpler molecules,
then we are, we are kind of talking about this biological system. So let's probably kind of
talk about the properties of biological systems. So what can be those, you know, or what are the
key innovations which enable, you know, life forms? Sorry, did you say, Mike?
Yeah. Well, I'll, okay, I'll pick, I'll pick just one thing, which is, which is what Nick
already mentioned, which is resting potential. And the thing that one, one interesting thing
about resting potential is that in many ways, it's a coarse grained sort of higher level entity,
because it's just, it's different if, if, if you are a mechanism that keys off of resting potential,
it is not the same as keying off of potassium concentration or sodium concentration or chloride
concentration, right? It's this, it's this slightly higher level thing. And so, so if, if you're, in,
in fact, it's one of these things like many other things in, in, in cognitive science, if,
if you want to be a micro reductionist, you might say, well, there's no such thing. You might say,
right? If you're sort of a Laplacian, the demon kind of creature, right? You might say,
there's no resting potential. What there is, is there's some sodiums and there's some
potassiums. And, you know, those are like, those are your low level kind of bedrock. But,
but what's cool about resting potential is one of many things is that it's one of the first steps
up that I think life does in generalizing coarse graining, getting good at noticing large scale
control elements that are not reducible down to individual details, right? And while all of these,
of course, the resting potential is, is, is of course a consequence of the various ions you have,
the fact that you can have the same resting potential from different concentration of ions,
right? As long as you change them out correctly, right? So, so you can, you can vary the low level
details and still get the same resting potential. And conversely, you can get different resting
potentials with exactly the same genetics, for example, with the same ion channels because
they could be open or closed. So you get this interesting bow tie kind of architecture where
there's this like functional node in the middle where things sort of feed into it and then multiple,
multiplicities come out of it. But it itself is the super interesting node from the perspective
of information theory control and all of that. So, Nick, before you respond to that, I will add
another point here. So, I mean, because the mainstream view is that the key innovation is the
genome, right? So let's, let's, let's kind of get it out of the way already and kind of already
mentioned it, why, you know, the, the information is not genome itself, but why we are talking about
the resting potential. I mean, I don't think that either of us would want to be pigeonholed as kind
of anti genome. It's just that it's not, the genome is not the only thing that's going on.
And as soon as, you know, as soon as Mike is talking about generating effectively a single
parameter, which is the resting potential, which could be multiple different ions, which is going
to require multiple different pumps in the membrane, but they're pumping against the pressure,
which is pushing back against them. So there is, there is a unified entity, which is,
which is the resting potential, which, which is kind of integrating everything.
And the trouble, I think with only seeing life as a genome is, is it tends to insist that the
genome invents cells as well and invent structure and space and charge and all of these other things.
And it really doesn't, it, it, it's capable of generating them, but it never really makes a
membrane. Membranes come from other membranes. The spatial setting of the cell is, you know,
it comes from other cells. And then people say, well, there's a chicken and egg problem at the
origin of life. Where does the cell come from? Well, you know, if you've got a cell shaped hole
and cells, you know, think, you know, it's not difficult actually to make a bilayer membrane
surrounding an aqueous space, that's a cell like structure. It's not a difficult thing to do.
But as soon as you've got that, then information has some meaning and genes begin to have some
meaning. But, but there's still, they need, they need, there's got to be some higher level of
integration for just to use the word meaning. Otherwise, everything's, you know, a bit and
they don't relate to each other. So I think that is why charge is so important. One way that I
like to think of it is if you have, I mean, I like to think of individual cells in part because I
work on them and in part because they're just easier for me to grasp the whole central nervous
system is just too big and complicated for me to really comprehend. But if you think about a single
cell and you think about the amount of biochemistry that's going on inside it, there's, you know,
there's a billion reactions a second going on in a bacterial cell. And a lot of them are repeat
things. So you could imagine there may be 10,000 Krebs cycles all spinning at the same time.
And they're all plugged into the membrane. And so the rate at which they spin and the
direction in which they spin is going to depend on this larger factor, which is the membrane
potential of the bacterium. So, you know, to pump against that potential requires a certain force.
And that force is coming from the environment that you're in. Do you have the substrate to
power the pumping? Or did you run out? Or was there any oxygen there or whatever? So it's
immediately giving you a kind of a feed in of what the environment is that you're in. And then a
feedback, which is, you know, which is integrating all these, all these 10,000 different cycles going
around every second. How do they all know what the other one is doing? How do you integrate all of
that into the behavior of a cell which is capable of kind of coordinating all of this? So you need
that higher level property. And I think that's where it's coming from.
So I think the hardware software analogy goes well here. Can we use that analogy to explain
this integration? What do you think, Mike? Yeah, I think that's a very good lens on all of these
things because we know that when we look at the genome, what do we see? We don't see any of the
large scale kinds of things that you might be interested in. How many eyes, what kind of legs,
and does it have legs? You don't see any of that. What you see is protein sequences. So the micro
level hardware that every cell gets to have. Now, as Nick points out, the context and the rest of
the cell is critical. Otherwise, this stuff means nothing. And then all of the actual large scale
features, the behavior is then the result of the physiology, literally the software. So in a
very simplistic analogy, you're looking at a typical computer. Sure, it's important that you have to
write silicon and copper and all of that. Yes, you need all that stuff. But after that, all the
action is in the software, all the actions in the algorithm. It's in the electrical physiology of
what this thing does. And I think it's no accident that our information technology and the way our
brains work and the non-neural bioelectricity, all of them use these electrical networks. They're
just a really powerful tool for processing information. And that's what the, again, as Nick
said, not to take anything away. You need certain hardware. So you need the genome to give you
certain things. But you don't get the membrane from the genome. You don't get the cytoskeleton
structure. You get the proteins, but you don't get the structure that it templates on the previous
cytoskeleton. All of these physiological things are over and above the genetic hardware.
Yeah. And I think it's quite interesting, the only, because I think about a lot of work that
we are doing in evolutionary biology, for example, where we just compare genomes and try to understand
the extinct species, et cetera. So then how much we can rely on that kind of information? I mean,
of course, we are getting to know more about the hardware then. What about the software?
Are there ways to do it or go there? I mean, you mentioned extinct species, but this is one of
the most important things about paleontology is the only way you know what a dinosaur looked like
is from finding a fossil of it. Most of the variety of life over the last 600 million years or so of
animals alone, the only way we know what they looked like. I mean, in principle, we could do it from
the genome in the end, but in practice, we're a long way from being able to do that now.
And I don't know if we could ever do it in principle if we didn't have examples of the kind
of thing to compare it with. So I think we're quite shockingly ignorant about how this system
works from a genome level at the moment. And I think part of it is exactly what Mike was saying,
we're forgetting the software, we're looking at the hardware only, and we're not thinking about
how is this working as a unified system as an organism with physiology? And what makes that
physiology operated at a higher level to just the hardware that generates it?
Yeah, you know, this business of predicting, you're absolutely right. One of the things
that I show in some of my talks is here's a baby axolotl, it's a salamander, and they have little
legs, you know, the babies have legs. And here's a tadpole of a frog, Xenopus, they don't have legs.
And so in our lab, we make a frog a lot. 50% axolotl, 50% frog. Now you get a frog a lot.
So now I ask a simple question, you have the genome of the axolotl fully sequenced,
you've got the genome of the frog fully sequenced, is the frog a lot of going to have legs or not?
They have absolutely no idea. There's no way to tell, we have no way to tell. And if that's not
bad enough, like Nick was saying, if you don't actually have something to compare a genome to,
we don't know what the frog of the axolotl would look like either. We have no ability right now
to look at a genome and say, ah, yes, this thing has six legs and whatever, no, you have no ability
to do that other than comparing it to other ones that you've had. And not to mention all of the
scenarios in which, and we've shown many and other people have shown many scenarios in which
the genetic information literally misleads you because if there's interventions at the physiology
level, that tends to win. And so we have many examples where there's oncogenic mutations,
but no cancer, there are developmental mutations, but there's no defect because we've
intervened at the physiological level. Or we have worms that have the heads belonging to another
species of flatworm that's 150 million years distant and you sequence that genome, you will
not get the right answer about what the head of that animal looks like. You just won't get the
right answer. So both are important, but it's not all about the genome for sure.
Yeah, so let's kind of talk a little bit more about the software. So is it only about bioelectricity?
Maybe first you can introduce a little bit about what is bioelectricity and how we go about it.
Mike, do you want to go ahead? Sure. Okay, so where I take up, so to answer the second part,
I don't think it's only bioelectricity because there are some interesting, for example, recently
we and Richard Watson and some other people before that found, for example, that very simple
things like gene regulatory networks or pathways, it can be a protein pathway,
they actually have a kind of plasticity where they can do many different kinds of learning.
So you can do, they can do habituation, anticipation, associative learning,
we're just in the dynamical systems sense without any rewiring. So even chemical pathways can do
some of this. So some of this cognitive stuff goes all the way down. But what I really like about
bioelectricity and where I take it up is sort of after I sort of assume the cell is there and
everything is there. So Nick covers the earlier stuff, I kind of just assume it's all there.
And after that, what we see is this remarkable thing that because cells have the ability to
generate arresting potential using ion channels and pumps in the membrane,
and they have these little electrical synapses known as gap junctions, which allow them to share
their state with their neighbors. And both the channels and the gap junctions can themselves
be voltage sensitive. So now what you have is a voltage gated ion conductance, which is
basically a transistor that gives you a kind of historicity, it gives you feedback loops memory
right there, right, right, right, you know, right there. And when you connect, when these cells
connect with each other into electrical networks, you get some of the same phenomena we see in the
brain, just on a slower time scale. So these are not millisecond, these are hours, you know,
on the scale of hours. But there's all kinds of amazing information processing that these
networks can do that allow them to pursue larger goals. So I love the evolutionary
electrochemistry and the metabolic because I think these are the very first kinds of spaces in which
living systems solve problems, right, metabolic space, bioelectric space like that. But after that,
they can when they join into these electrical networks, now they can solve problems in anatomical
morpho space, they can do things like remember what the correct shape is, figure out do we have
the correct shape, what needs to be done, all of that. And then later on, you get a brain and now
you can you can operate in three dimensional behavioral space and linguistic space when it
was what else. So that's, you know, that's my story of electricity is this like transistor
like ability of cells to join into networks and compute after that. And can we reduce it to
to molecular level? Yes, I think we can. But I don't know that we have the ability to do it yet.
I mean, I tend to think in terms of mitochondria and how they're going to communicate, for example,
just take a really simple thing. There's two ways of seeing this apoptosis controlled cell death.
The mitochondria involved in that and loss of membrane potential is part of what's happening.
Also, whether mitochondria get targeted to be broken down or not. No one's ever quite got what's
happening. And it's partly because the mitochondria have two membranes and the outer membrane
is not electrically charged or at least not very much if it is at all. Whereas the inner
membrane has got a pretty high potential on it. But the proteins that are targeting the
mitochondria without a membrane potential are targeting the outer membrane. And there are protein
complexes that join the two up. And it's possible that it can work that way. But it's also possible
that there's electrical signaling across those distances. And I think it's likely that there
is. But then the question becomes, well, if it's simply an electrostatic potential,
then it falls off very quickly because it decays with the square root of the distance.
So it's not going to signal very far. Whereas electromagnetic fields potentially could signal
much further. But that requires a very specific morphology to be able to work at all. And there's
an interesting and difficult question about, well, just what could they do? How can they interact with
the hardware? And there are ways that they can undoubtedly. But is it strong enough? Can we
measure it? Do we have the facilities to get it all easy? So I think it does work at the molecular
level. And I think over very short distances. So for example, with the ATP synthase, there's a
beautiful work from Wayne Frash recently showing, I don't know, the C ring, which is basically
a rotating motor protein that sits in the inner membrane of the mitochondria. And there's in
ourselves as eight subunits in this ring and a proton binds on and it just kind of moves around.
So it needs each proton that binds on, it needs to move for eight subunits to turn in the complete
circle, that would be about 37 degrees or something like that. So the binding of the proton moves the
whole ring around by about 37 degrees. And how does it do that? Nobody has ever quite figured
it out, but it's been known for decades that the actual electrical potential on the membrane does
quite a lot of that work. And he's shown quite recently that actually, with just the proton,
it moves about 11 degrees. And with the electrical potential as well, that takes it another 25
degrees or something of that order of rotation. So it's this local electrostatic charge,
which is driving that. So over short distances, it's really beautifully demonstrated that
you need the charge on the membrane for this to work. But over longer distances,
if you're dealing with perhaps a few micrometers or something, then I would be surprised if
electrostatic charges alone were doing that. They certainly are at the plasma membrane in
terms of connections between cells and having the same charge across effectively wider expanses.
But the mitochondria are interesting in that sense as well in that the Christie are
closed very often and separate from each other. And so you can have different membrane
potentials in different Christie in the same mitochondria. You can have individual mitochondria
or you can have a network that all join together. There's so much subtlety in all of this.
And to underpin all of that, nobody has ever successfully measured the membrane potential
of mitochondria accurately. And the reason for that is if you simply use a microelectrode and you
insert it into the matrix of the mitochondria, into the middle of the mitochondria, what you'll
measure, and this is work going back decades from a guy called Tedeschi, but other people have come
to the same conclusion. You get about 10 or 20 millivolts, it's not much, somewhat less than the
plasma membrane. All of the calculations, all of the change in pH, all the chemiosmotic hypothesis
is saying it should be 150 to 200 millivolts. So where's that difference coming from? It's partly
that way we're using voltage sensitive dyes to accumulate and it's very difficult to calibrate
them. And it's partly that we now know the structure of the mitochondria is different.
They are closed Christi. So what you're measuring with the microelectrode is the difference between
the matrix space and the cytosol. And what we really want to measure is the difference between
the matrix space and the Christi space. And no one's really ever managed to get anything into
that Christi space, which is capable of reporting back on the charge there. So it's definitely
working at the molecular level for sure. It depends a lot on the actual structure, which only in the
last few years with super resolution microscopy and cryo tomography and things like that are we
able to really get a handle on exactly what is the structure of mitochondria and exactly
how do these spaces relate to each other and so on. And no one's ever measured it properly.
So it's kind of glaring ignorance again at the heart of all of this, but until we can measure
these things accurately and understand how they change over short periods of time, which maybe
seconds or minutes, I would think, then, you know, there's got to be a certain amount of
hand waving about it. But to think that it's not the right place to look is, I think, to
miss the most important things in science now. And this is totally not my area. So maybe this
is a dumb idea. But any chance that one could make a synthetic one that was big enough where
would that change everything if you sort of made one that was already, you know,
sort of basically synthetically try to make that, that, you know, a big mitochondria around some
sort of engineered electrodes that were already where you needed them to be and sort of assemble
the thing around them. Any chance somebody could build something like that? Or would that be totally
not informative? It would be a fun thing to try and do. I think it would be difficult because the
I think what you tend to build around it would be something in the structure of a sphere or
something along those lines. And what we're actually dealing with. I mean, there are again,
there are stunning structures to the Christie membranes. We tend to just see them as a wavy line
in the textbook. But they're stunningly structured. But sometimes you get amazing kind of arrays of
triangular shapes and things. You see some of, you know, they're doing bionegetics. But
in what world are they doing that? There definitely there's nothing in known bionegetics that says
why they have triangular shaped Christie. We just have no idea.
So for you, metabolism is like central to bioelectricity.
I think the two are connected and are integrated that way. I think they have been from the very
beginning because to my mind, you know, for any form of selection to work, you have to have growth.
You have to have cells which are duplicating themselves. And then you have some form of
selection, either they do it slowly or they would quickly or they survive longer or they,
you know, but you have different outcomes. As soon as you've got cells, you don't have to have
genes in those cells. You just have to have cells which are capable of doubling. And if you're
starting as life does on Earth with CO2, then the point of having the electrical membrane
potential is in effect to get CO2 to react with hydrogen. They don't, they're not particularly
reactive. They don't particularly want to react together. And cells today effectively
use the charge on the membrane to force them to react. And those charges make sense at the
origin of life because what you have, as Peter Mitchell actually said in 1957,
the inside and the outside of a cell, if you like, are two equivalent phases separated and
linked by the membrane that's between them. And those phases are not the same in terms of
their ionic composition or anything else. They cannot be. One is the living cell and the other
one is the outside world. And that necessarily generates charges on those membranes and those
charges necessarily organize things. So, you know, however much you, you know, it's just there. You
cannot avoid it. You will have a charge on a membrane and that charge on the membrane does
something useful, even in a purely prebiotic world, which is to say it will make carbon dioxide
react with hydrogen to make organic molecules inside this cell-like thing, which has now
got more organic molecules inside, which would include more membrane molecules and everything
else. And so it can grow. So the whole thing from the very beginning, way before we had genes,
is driven by charge and structure. Yeah, Richard. The late Richard Borgans had this, made this
interesting point where he said that as soon as, so super early on, as soon as you have a membrane
that segregates some goodies inside the organism versus outside, you're likely to have a charge
imbalance. And then if you get injured, so let's say the membrane gets perforated,
you immediately get a free vector to the side of the damage because of the short circuit of the
electric field. And you get that for free. That's a free gift from physics. You don't need a genome.
You don't need pathways. You don't need any of that. Immediately,
you know where the damage was. So if you have some sort of electrosensitive subunit as occurs in
wound healing and whatnot, it just, the physics tells you where to go to plug up the damage and
so on. So I'm guessing there are many of these things that are just, so these free gifts that
we get from chemistry and physics and then evolution exploits those in different ways.
So since you already mentioned evolution, let's talk about it. So how
these kinds of systems will evolve? Nick? I mean, I think, as I say, for bacterial cells,
for single cells, the membrane is what divides them from the outside world. And there's no way,
you know, how does it know what's happening outside? Well, things impinge on the membrane
and cross that membrane. And the cell with its biochemistry has to figure out, what does that
mean? And what am I going to do? Should I swim that way? Or should I swim this way? Or how am I
going to behave in response to this? So there's never, it doesn't know that there's an oil slick
over there or whatever it may be, but it's picked up something and it needs to make a decision as
a cell, what it's going to do next. So I quite like the ideas from Carl Friston on this, who
talks about a Markov blanket in the cell membrane as being a Markov blanket. And effectively, it's
translating between the language of the outside world and the language of biochemistry inside.
And that language of biochemistry inside is trying to find this low energy state in effect,
which is its homeostatic preferred place to be. I'm not sure I convey very well what he has to
say on this, but the way I interpret it or understand it is, well, if you're in a bad
environment, then, you know, your proteins start to unravel and denature. And that's actually a
higher energy state and not a place you want to be. And if you move over there and your proteins
start renaturing again, then that's a better place to be. But you still need to integrate all of,
you know, you've taken a statistical sampling of the outside world, you've got a correlation that
says this happened, therefore do that. But you take multiple samples of this through multiple
receptors and they're conflicting. Some of them say go over there, some of them say go over there.
So how do you integrate all that information and make a decision about what to do?
And that's where the plasma, the cell membrane, the plasma membrane, if you like,
begins to integrate all that information. If you're, you know, if the problem is that
you're poisoned and your substrates don't work, then your membrane potential is going to fall.
If your membrane potential falls, then you move over there sharpish. So, you know, it provides
you with information on your state in the world as a single entity. And I like to think of that as
the simplest possible imaginable form of the stream of consciousness, which is to say is
integrating real time information about your state in relation to the world in terms of am I good
or am I not good? Really, that's the simplest, simplest thing. Do I, do I go there? Do I,
do I stay here? What, you know, it's, it's, it's, that seems to me to be a fundamental
decision for a living cell to make, which is based entirely on its need to survive in the world and
which is integrated by the membrane and in effect by electrical charge on the membrane as you
integrating that information. Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's, that's a really good point. Chris Fields
talks about this kind of thing in bacteria as a, as an early form of metacognition,
because if you imagine you're a bacterial cell in some sort of gradient,
yeah, you can measure the actual molecule that you're interested in. But for example, it might
be poisonous. It might, there might be a poisonous version of it. And so what you might also want
to have in some bacteria have this is a way of measuring indirectly, instead of tracking the
thing you really want to track, what they track is your own metabolism. So, so, right? So, so it's,
it's a kind of a self monitoring loop, basically a simple example of metacognition, where you,
where, where you say, okay, I'm not going to worry about the details of, of what it is I'm
trying to metabolize. It was just, how are we doing? Are we like, you know, and, and, and that
gives you, there's some trade offs there, but it gives you this, this incredible power of
coarse graining over all kinds of details to have a large scale variable to deal with, right? And,
and maybe metabolic state and memory potential is a fantastic example of that. And I think
getting back to the evolution question, one, one sort of hypothesis I would, I will put out there
is that the fact that we have these metabolic needs and the fact that you don't have all the time
in the world to process every possible scenario because you're going to fall apart and be eaten
is really, I think a key driver of intelligence for the following reason. If you are a creature
that does not have these constraints, it doesn't have metabolic needs. For example,
like a modern AI, which is plugged into the wallet as all the energy it needs, it never has to worry
about getting, getting any energy. If you're a biologically, a biological agent that arose
in evolution under these constraints that you are constantly under this metabolic pressure,
one of the things you cannot afford to do is to be a micro reductionist, meaning that I'm going to
track all the micro states in my environment. You do not have time to, to try to be a Laplacian
demon. You did, there's just no time for that. Instead, there's great pressure to become really
good at coarse graining the world into chunks that you can, you can large scale affordances,
observables, control knobs, and, and pay attention to those and, and completely sort of abstract what's
underneath. So that pressure to, to, to, to cut up the, the, all the details into higher level
things that you're going to represent, like my metabolism, my resting potential, right?
These higher level things means that all of the, the ability to generalize, the ability to
abstract from, from individual instances to general rules and general observations. And
even dare, dare I say, for advanced organisms like us, the ability to tell stories about agents
doing things, in other words, to have an agential view on the world. In other words, in, right?
In, in, in modern humans to have a view of free will as an, I am a thing that does things and
there's a, there's a, there's a tiger and tigers and you know, our agents that do things and so on.
All of that has, I think, its origin all the way at the beginning, the first agential models were
made by, by microbes who had to adopt that stance. They had to adopt an agential stance in order to
survive in real metabolic, under metabolic constraints. And I think what evolution did after
that was scale it up to creatures that can then verbalize it that like us, I've got, you know,
I've got free will in this and that, but, but all of this goes all the way back to the beginning to
the necessity to make models of large scale variables, doing things, being important control
knobs. If my voltage is off, if my metabolism is off, I need to change my voltage. I'm not talking
about this sodium ion versus that sodium ion. I'm talking about getting my voltage fixed up.
And that's, you know, that I think is a driver of, of a ratchet for, for intelligence.
I mean, a couple of things. One, one thing about voltage and bacteria, there's a guy called Ken
Nielsen who for years has been culturing bacteria on electrodes. And the thing is that lots of
bacteria is, it's always proved impossible to culture them in a pure culture, which is to say
just those bacteria are nothing else. And the reason is basically that they, you know, they dump
their electrons onto their neighbor, which is the back, you know, another bacterial cell of a
different species, let's say, which wants those electrons. And so it's a, it's a synthrophy,
they're effectively living alongside each other. But the way to kind of escape from that is you,
you give them an electrode and you set that member, the potential, the electrical potential
electrode till let's say minus 300 millivolts or something like that. And they, you know,
they either dump their electrons onto that or they take their electrons from that.
But then they'll grow on that surface at that, at that voltage. And if you switch the voltage to
say minus 304 millivolts, you get a different bacterial population growing there. And you
change it by another three or four millivolts and you get a different and you can effectively
grow all of these pure cultures of bacteria by just shifting the voltage by just a few millivolts.
It's extra, it's exquisitely sensitive. The way that they, so again, it's how all this works at
the level of cells, I don't really know, but the voltage then in your environment and the way in
which you're, you know, where you're offloading your electrons and where you're gaining your
electrons from is, it's fundamental to how cells grow. But coming back to evolution again,
bacteria are using their membrane as the interface to the world. But then we have
eukaryotic cells that have internalized mitochondria. And they start using the plasma
membrane for something different. And they can be now much more interesting in what you do with
your plasma membrane. You don't have to be using it for energetics all the time. You can be using
it for much more interesting and subtle things, including changing shape and becoming a phagocyte
or beating silly or whatever it may be. But now the, this kind of simple idea that your metabolism
is directly plugged into your membrane and gives you an immediate integrated feedback on your state
in the world becomes much more complicated because a lot of your metabolism is happening in the
mitochondria. You may have got scores of mitochondria. They may all be doing different
things depending on where they are in the cell. And the cell now has a kind of, you know, a bigger
problem of how do I integrate all this extra information about how I'm doing in the environment?
And it seems to me almost necessary to bring it. I mean, you could imagine that it could all work
by, you know, phosphorylating everything. But I find it very hard to buy. I find it much easier to
imagine that either we've got networks, but more likely we're simply signaling electrically
between different mitochondria and between mitochondria and the cell membrane so that the
cell is integrating its state still electrically, but in a more subtle and sophisticated way.
So, you know, this is a big, I would say a big challenge at the origin of eukaryotic cell. How
do you, you know, rewire yourself to work as instead of being a consortium of cells that have
their own independence, but now some of them are inside, how do you kind of rewire so you act as
an entity, as an individual organism at the level of the cell with all of these things inside, all
of which are metabolizing potentially in different ways. So there's a problem with integration there.
And then you have the next level, which is you become multicellular, and then you've got another
problem with integration. So you're kind of taking up the, you're adjusting up the hardware required
to keep a signal, which is intelligible. And by the time you got into a central nervous system,
it's enormously complex, of course. I mean, that's what my next question was. So first of all,
the eukaryogenesis that you mentioned, it's again, like your argument that it happened
after two billion years. So this is also quite exciting that, you know, or interesting that
for two billion years bacteria were surviving somehow. And then with this certain transition
where to unicellular, they come together. Yeah. I mean, that's not really my argument so much
as that's an observation, which is to say there are, I mean, molecular clocks, which would not
to be believed very heartily for deep evolutionary history. But they're putting eukaryotes at one
and a half to two billion years ago, that kind of time. And eukaryotes all clearly share the
same cell structures. They clearly share a common ancestor, unless convergent evolution has an
astonishing power to regenerate exactly the same cell structures, but that's hard to buy.
And before that, there's plenty of evidence for bacteria going back to practically four
billion years ago. And there's plenty of evidence for all the big nutrient cycles,
iron cycle, carbon cycle, oxygen, sulfur, nitrogen and so on. So there's plenty of evidence
that there were bacteria throughout this whole time. So there is an issue with this apparently
unique origin of eukaryotic cells. Now it's quite possible that there were hundreds or thousands
of origins of complex cells and they all just disappeared without trace. But it's also possible
that that wasn't the case and that there are structural constraints on bacteria which relate
to having a charge on their membrane, which effectively say it's not easy to internalize
all of this stuff. It's a big, big structural change. It's not easy to get inside one. And when
you get inside it, you've got your own vested interests and chances are it will go wrong.
But I'm pointing to this electrical wiring issue. It's not just about integrating your
biochemistry. It's also about how do I reintegrate my wiring as an individual cell as an organism?
You look at, I think we both show the same video occasionally, Mike, of it's a ciliate.
I forget which one it is, but it's feeding this astonishing control. That's the one, yes.
It's astonishing control that it has. And you think, is it really detecting concentration
gradients of molecules or is it picking up on something electrical to do that? How does it know
that there's something right there and right there in the space of seconds or less than seconds?
Yeah. One fun thing that there's a cool paper by Min Zhao and colleagues where
he shows that there are cells, I think maybe keratocytes or something,
that crawl in a particular direction in an electric field. So they have very robust
electrotaxis. But if you actually cut up the cell into pieces, the pieces, the fragments,
crawl in the opposite direction. So it's a great example of, I think Richard Watson
says it this way that the point of holes is to get the parts to do things they wouldn't
normally do. And this is like a cool example of that because all the parts want to go that way,
the whole, the collective goes that way. And it's a very active electrosensitive process.
Fascinating. So maybe let's talk about multicellularity because I think that's,
so I mean, Mike is using this core screen kind of analogy or metaphor and
Nick is using integration. I don't know if they are different. I think it's probably
both. No, I think it amounts to the same thing. Yeah. So let's talk about multicellularity that,
and then interestingly, I mean, of course, nowadays we talk about biofilm, bacterial
biofilms that it happens also in bacteria, etc. But what is the difference between bacterial
biofilms and a multicellular organism like anything, any animal, we can talk about plant,
fungi, etc. Right. I mean, there's a simple answer to that, which is that they're all composed of
different cells, different genetically very different to each other. And the point about
pretty much all, well, all metazoans, all animals, all plants, they've all been through a single cell
stage and we're all basically clonal. So our genome is the same. So there are multicellular
bacteria. So filamentous cyanobacteria, they have two different cell types. So the nitrogen
fixing cells, the heterocysts and the photosynthetic cells. So it's not that it's not possible for
bacteria to do that. But they don't do much of it. Whereas a biofilm is, you know, is deep
cooperation between different types of cell. But the whole of evolutionary biology and pretty
much all the experiments on things like slime moles, which come together as genetically different
cells and then cooperate to build a stalk, for example, for distributing spores. Cheating is
a real issue that they never tend to generate greater complexity than something like a stalk,
because the cheats always win in the end, because they're genetically distinct to each other. So
I think, you know, mainstream evolutionary biology would just say animals are clonal.
And that restricts the amount of fighting that goes on between cells. And I don't see any reason
to argue with that. I think the reason that eukaryotic cells make animals and plants much
more readily is that we have much larger genomes and we can have much, much larger genomes because
we have mitochondria and much better energy generation, if you like, than bacteria. And
that means you can switch genes on and off in different tissues. And if you're switching genes
on and off in different tissues, then you're shifting not only the hardware, but also all
the electrical properties of different tissues as well. So the more the coarse-graining can be
then shifted as well. Whereas if you've got different types of bacterial cell, all of which
have got their own agenda, the idea of having a kind of network of cells which are generating a common
a common kind of electrical phase that they're in, becomes at least a lot more problematic,
I would say. Is that your take, Mike, or would you see it differently?
So yeah, it's a super interesting topic. First of all, about the bacteria stuff and you may want
to have him on. So if you haven't already, so Goral Soelle from UCSD who studies bacterial
biofilms and the way they coordinate using bioelectricity to make sure that everybody
gets fed and the population and all this kind of stuff. So there may be, and it's not my thing,
so you should talk to him. But I think there's some very interesting cooperativity stuff going
on there. What I think might be fun is being a kind of a spoil sport that I am. I want to poke,
and I don't disagree with this idea that of course going through this bottleneck is important
evolutionarily. But I just want to bring up a few examples that kind of poke some holes into
this story because I think they're worth getting to the bottom of a couple of things.
The first thing is that despite our largely genetic homogeneity inside our bodies, cells and
organs compete with each other. So for example, during development, there's really a strong
competition between all kinds of organs. And we have computational models of this and farmers
and other scientists have been publishing this stuff for a really long time. There's actually a
lot of competition and struggle. And the classical biologist Rue called this, he had a long
monograph called the struggle of the parts, where he talks about all of the ways that the pieces of
an embryo and of an organism are actually fighting each other for all kinds of stuff, even though
they have similar genetics. The other thing I want to talk about is how similar really the
genetics are. So in humans, Doug Brash tells me that there are about 100,000 mutations per skin
cell in normal skin. This is not cancer. This is normal skin, 100,000 mutations per cell.
So and people like I think Walsh at the Harvard Medical School is finding mutations
in the brain and in human neurons. So there's actually apparently there's a ton of genetic
variability and where it really reaches its kind of ultimate expression, I think this is one of the
most interesting stories, planaria are mixoploid. I mean, it's a certain species, every cell has
a different number of chromosomes. The genome is an unbelievable mess. And yet these are the
animals with the most regenerative ability, the cancer resistance immortal, as far as we can tell.
And it's kind of an amazing scandal that the animal with the best anatomical control, immortality
and regeneration is also the one with the most messy genome, right? The every cell. And so this
used to drive me completely crazy, this idea. Well, first of all, why does nobody talk about
this? We never hear about this, you know, in a standard develop isn't a standard biology kind
of curriculum. What they tell you is well, the genome is what sets your anatomy. So who would
expect the relationship to be backwards? It doesn't make any sense. Recently, literally in the last
few months, I think we've got kind of a handle on this story. And so I think we now have an
understanding of what's going on there. And if you want, I can talk about it. But
Yes, please. So imagine this. Typically, the way people simulate evolution is you've got some sort
of genotype, the genome codes for some sort of phenotype, and then selection. So you do your
mutation on the genotype, and you do your selection on the phenotype. What's often missing is that,
and this goes back to the initial conversation, that physiological layer in between, because the
genotypes actually don't almost never code directly for the phenotype. What they code for
is properties of some sort of physiological system where the software is going to determine the
phenotype. So we did some simulations, and we created this thing. It's extremely simple. It's
just that the genome is just a set of numbers, and they start off all mixed up. And the phenotype,
what you select for is making sure the numbers are all in nice order from zero to 100, let's say.
So this is the developmental equivalent of having a body axis, of having a primary axis
with your tail over here and your head over here and everything in the right order in between.
So if you just have genotype and phenotype, of course, a standard genetic algorithm will
eventually, and if you look at the fitness over time curve, it's this, you will, of course,
it will sort all the numbers and you will get your sort of embryo. That works fine. However,
now let's do something interesting. Let's put in, and this is the work of Shrisha Lakshwin
in my lab, a student, an undergrad actually. What we did was we put in a developmental
phase where, yeah, you've got your genome, but much like with real evolution, the cells aren't
passive, dumb material. They actually have a little bit of, they have their own agenda, right? And
during that process from being a genome to being an adult that you get selected on,
they have some time to do things. Cells are not a blank slate material, right? They always,
you know, they're always doing something. And so imagine if you put in just a little bit,
just a tiny bit of what we call competency on the cells, and the competency just works like
this. You look at your neighbor, and if they have an identity, a number that's way different from
yours, it stresses you out. You don't like it. And so during that developmental process, and this
is very developmentally, this is very much a fact that when you put two things together where
their positional information is too far off, that's how you get regeneration. They will both
generate things in between to separate themselves and put in, so if you put a five next to a 10,
they will generate the six, seven, eight inside, right? In between them. So you give cells just
a tiny ability for that competency just to look at their neighbors and maybe crawl around a little
bit to try and reduce their stress level. What happens then is that when an individual comes
up for evaluation of fitness, and they look pretty good, the numbers are kind of pretty sorted,
evolution doesn't know, selection doesn't know whether it looks good because the genome was
amazing, or it looks good because the genome was actually so-so, but everything sort of crawled
around. So what that means is that the genome now has a hard time selecting on the genotype. The
selection cannot see the defects of the genotype. So it has a really hard time making any progress
on improving the structural genome, but what it can do is put all its effort in improving
the competency. So in the next generation, what you get are individuals that are slightly more
competent. Now, this makes the problem worse because they're slightly more competent. It's even
harder to know what their genome was like because they look really great. Who knows what their genome
was like. And so you end up with this positive feedback loop where the minute you admit that
you're dealing not with a passive material, but with cells that can make some decisions locally,
you immediately get into this arms race where the effort starts going into increasing that
competency, not fixing the genotype. And so in the end, if you let it run all the way, now of
course, there are some other factors that can sort of dampen that runaway feedback loop,
but if you let it run all the way, what you get are exactly planaria. You get organisms that are
really good at making a good organism, no matter what the genome looks like. All the effort goes
into the algorithm. Very little pressure is left to keep a clean genome. The genomes look like hell,
but the organisms look amazing because all of the effort have gone into the mechanisms that allow
them to build what they need to build, even though the hardware is all over the place. And so what I
think happened in planaria, I think this went all the way up. And in other organisms like us,
and other other creatures, it sort of stopped halfway. There are other things that sort of
dampen it down. So we can kind of do that, but not as good, not as well as planaria. And it also
explains why it's such a weird thing. Any other animal, any other multicellular creature, you can
call a stock center and you can get a strain of abnormal mutants. So you can get flies with
pearly wings and mice with crooked tails and albinos. And planaria, there is no such thing as a
strain of abnormal planaria other than our two headed form. And those are not genetic. Those
are not genetic. And there's never been a planarian mutant line. Isn't that weird? Why not? And also
for now, I would say for about 30 years, maybe more, people have been trying to make transgenic
planaria and it's never worked. It just doesn't work. Why does it not work? And why do we not
have strains? I think because the algorithm is such that it basically ignores most of the genome,
not all of it, of course, because you still need the competency machinery. But the competency is
such that it can tolerate massive degrees of errors in the genome and it expects to. That's
why because of this runaway, you know, sort of runaway ratchet. So I think it is true,
like you said, I think, of course, we go through a bottleneck and we do share genetically much
more so than the bacteria. But I think there's a lot more play in that system, you know, I think
potentially we're not actually sharing all the DNA and even, right? And even when we do, I think,
and I think, I think Grohl would say that the bioelectrics actually is a really good way to
crank up cooperativity when you don't share genetics. I'm putting words in his mouth, I don't
know, but I think that's what his work says to me. Yeah. I mean, one, sorry, just one quick
thing on the biofilms before coming around to that. I mean, one question that I had at the back
of my mind is there's a lot of bacteria, for example, growing on, let's say, a rusty iron surface,
and they're, they're effectively putting their electrons onto the, onto the iron and dissolving
the rusty iron, and they're using it effectively as oxygen as an electron acceptor. And there's
been a question for a long time, okay, the bacteria that are touching the surface, no problem.
They just dump their electrons straight onto it, no problem. The ones which are up here somewhere,
not actually touching that surface at all. And there were all kinds of questions about
electron shuttles, quinones, external quinones that wasn't really clear quite what they were
doing. The implication was that they were somehow swimming down here, putting the electrons on,
and then swimming back again. And you think, well, how's a quinone going to do that?
And it seems much more likely that actually what they're doing is just dumping it on the next cell.
And that next cell dumps it on the one underneath. And so you end up with, yes, a, you know,
charge running straight through this entire colony. And it becomes in effect altruistic,
although all the individual cells were behaving selfishly and simply dumping their electrons
on their nearest neighbor. And to some extent, this is a little bit what you're saying about a
multi-cell plenarium where they're not genetically so similar, but they're freaked out by their neighbor,
which is doing something different. So they are responding to this by trying to put something
in the way, or presumably by fixing the charge in some way locally. So I don't really quite see
how this works. But how long can it last before the hardware itself breaks down sufficiently
that they can't tell that their neighboring cell is not like them or freaky? Or, you know,
they've got to be able to detect it. They've got to have some awareness of what's next to them.
You're able to do that. And presumably if your genome is completely riddled,
you must lose your ability to do that at some point. So here's what I'll say. I mean,
the thing we know for sure is that they've been around for 300 million years, 400 million years,
and going strong, no sign of any breakdown. But the other thing, and this is totally
unpublished, so treat this with every possible grain of salt. But I'll just sort of tell you,
we had a project a few years ago where we cultured plenaria in mutagens. So the stuff that you would
dip a zebrafish embryo in for a short period of time to make mutants, we cultured them in that
stuff for like a year. And what we saw was that the particular animals that were in the mutagen
would have some freaky sort of defects. But then you cut them into pieces, and after that,
you just get lines of absolutely normal plenaria after that. So I don't know. I assume there must
be some kind of limit, I think you're right. But I don't think we're anywhere near having reached
it, I think. And we're going to, this is something that we're actually investigating actively now
is just like, what's the limit of this? Like, how far can we really trash the genome before,
in an organism like this before there's a problem? Boy, I don't know.
How small a piece can you cut for it to regenerate the entire thing? I mean, are you down to just
a few cells more than that? It's more than a few cells. The record is something like 275,
and this was Thomas and Morgan in early 1900s. And maybe you could maybe now with antibiotics and
so on, we could do better, you know, even more single cells don't work. It's very hard. You
can't get a full plenarian out of one cell, but you know, little tiny chunks work.
So you need the context of the cells around you to have some kind of...
And I don't know if that's for a boring reason, meaning that the surface area to volume ratio
was too large and it loses all the goodies, that would be maybe like a mechanical reason.
Or if it's a deep reason, like the information on building a plenarian is a holographic kind of
storage. And if you don't have enough, it's just too fuzzy. You can't recover what you need, right?
I don't know which it is. But there is an interesting story that relates to what you
were just talking about, which suggests that these kind of electrical transfers
can override genetic, I'm just now thinking about this, can override genetic
dysrelatedness and potentiate cooperativity. And the story goes like this, in tadpoles,
we can inject a human K-RAS mutation, which is a nasty oncogenic mutation.
You inject it, those cells, they become a tumor, they invade the embryo, it's just, you know,
bad seed. What you can do is simultaneously co-inject an ion channel that forces the cells
to a voltage at which they will stay electrically connected to their neighbors.
And if you do that, even though the genetics has been, basically, there's a very, very powerful
hardware level mutation, the oncogene is blazing, it doesn't get destroyed or anything,
we can see it, we can see the protein is still there. But the cells don't make a tumor,
they cooperate, they continue to cooperate and they build nice skin and muscle and whatever.
And this just, you know, it dovetails with the story that we have about
gap junctions potentiating individuals into collectives where it wipes, it tends to
wipe that individuality on an informational level. You know, if you and I are connected
with a gap junctional signal and your memories and my memories, molecules are sort of floating
back and forth, we have no idea whose memory belongs to whom, right? And we become, you and I
become a we in the sense that we now have one shared pool of metabolic memories, everything,
it's very hard to keep identity. And so I think what you described in the bacteria is really
interesting. And the meta zone version of that is gap junctions, where you use that electrical
network to overcome differences in genetics and kind of potentiate the cooperativity.
I'm amazed that this hasn't caught on more. I mean, maybe you're in different circles to me,
but that when I talk to cancer people, not very many of them are thinking in these terms,
even though it's been known for a long time that if you transfer the nucleus of a cancer cell into a
non cancer cell, then it, you know, it doesn't become it doesn't become cancerous. It doesn't
become carcinogenic. It's not the nucleus, the cytoplasm, which is, which is, which is doing the
thing. And so many mutations that you see oncogenic mutations in a tumor, you see the same mutations,
you know, next to the tumor and elsewhere in the body. So it's, it's very much the context
they're setting on. I was talking to, there's a woman at King's College in London, who I
met recently, Jodie Rosenblatt. And she, she was working on epithelium. And this interesting
question that you have cells which are, which are producing, dividing and producing new cells,
and those new cells are growing towards each other. And they get to a place where they're
effectively pressing up against each other. And there are various mechanoreceptors.
And some of them pop out, but which ones pop out? And on what basis do they pop out? And the way
that she described all of this, I said, you should look at the chart on these cells. And I
mentioned your work to her. And, and, and she's, she's, she's been checking and, and it all works
on charge. There, there's a, I forget which way around it is, but I'm pretty sure they,
if they lose the membrane potential, they, they, they pop out. So it's, it seems ripe to explain
a lot of things which are, it's probably not only that, as you said earlier on, the mechanoreception
and your proximity to other cells, there's going to be other things going on as well. But
it's this balance. It must be a very fine balance. Yeah. It's allowing you to know
you're the odd one out. Off you go. Yeah. Yeah. It's, it's a different, it's a different
perspective on this whole problem because traditionally you would have like a, like,
for example, game theory approaches where you would say, well, the cancer cells are more selfish.
And that way they do this or that. I actually don't think they're any more selfish at all.
I think what it is is their selves are smaller. So what happens is if you have, if you're in
good gap junctional electrical connection, you are plugged into a network that yourself,
meaning the border between you and the outside world and tumors of the goals that you're going
to maintain, the internal milieu, all of these things is huge. You know, you might be a whole
hand or you might be a liver or a kidney, you know, it makes, it makes this large thing.
These oncogenes, one of the things they do is they cause gap junctional closure,
they cause depolarization and gap junctional closure. And as soon as you're a cell that
basically partially or completely disconnects from that network, now you're the border of
yourself is tiny. That's it. It's just this now. And at that, it's just the size of a single cell.
And at that point, you roll back to the kinds of goals that single cell creatures can pursue,
which is proliferation and migration to where life is good. And so now to you,
the rest of the animal is just external environment, right? The rest of the body is just outside
world for you because you're in amoeba. You're in amoeba now. And so that boundary between
self and world, one of the things that these electrical connections do is they inflate it,
right? During evolution of multicellularity, that boundary gets inflated so that now we
are a liver. It's not I'm a liver cell, we are a liver. Whereas, and it acts collectively to solve
large scale problems in morphogenetic spaces. As soon as you disconnect from that, you're back to
amoeba style where everything around you is just potentially a threat, potentially genetically
unrelated to you, all these things. And then of course you do whatever you can, which is
metastasized basically. There was some work some years ago now from a guy called Neil Blackstone
in Illinois. And he had been working on colonial, I forget what, but basically colonies. And a lot
there, they're forming effectively a multicellular organism is a colony rather than strictly
multicellular, but the gap is quite close. But they, the conditions that they're subject to
depends on where you are in the colony, or you are the edge in which case you've got a higher
oxygen concentration surrounding you, or are you in the middle in which case you're in hypoxic
conditions? Where do you put your flagella, the cells that differentiate into flagella and the
whole colony can paddle itself around then? Well, they're the ones on the outside that have got
plenty of oxygen. Which ones become the stem cells and the gametes for the next generation?
Well, they're the ones that are in the middle, which are effectively oxygen deprived. And so
just the structure of a blob immediately gives you a difference between the outside and the inside
and the likelihood of cells. And I remember reading that and the whole thing worked on
redox signaling. And of course, I like the idea of redox chemistry. And I looked into is there
something about mammalian development that works on redox signaling. And I didn't really find anything
very much that led through. And then I thought later on, well, this is a kind of a very hard
wiring, but every organ will be subjected to the same thing. You need to override that. You need
to have a better system of organizing it if you wish to become any more complicated than a blob.
And that's where I think the bioelectric feels the beginning to come in, is you've got a level
of organization that says where the same, where together, we're not quite an individual,
we're in this grouping here. But coming back to planaria, you cut it into a lump of 250,
270 cells, whatever it may be. I'm wondering about how do you prevent your genome becoming
completely trashed? And I suppose part of the answer would be, well, if you're not every cell
is going to get equally trashed, and not every bit of tissue is going to get equally trashed.
So if you would just slice it up into little bits, some bits would have a better genome
than others. They would have some level of genomic integrity, at least at a functional level,
not necessarily in terms of they've all got neat chromosomes, but they're capable of generating
the hardware which is required to regenerate the whole planarium. So there's a kind of a bottle
neck just in the pieces. And those pieces have to be large enough that they're able to reestablish
the bioelectric fields and know their own morphology. It has to be big enough that it
can reestablish a planarium. If it's one cell, it's got no idea what its neighbor is, so it
wouldn't do it. But that, I think from a point of view of kind of more conventional genetics,
you'd say there was some kind of bottleneck in cutting the planarium up and the smaller bits
that will lead to damage will be the ones most likely to regenerate.
Yeah. Well, the thing is they all regenerate. All of them do.
I mean, it's right. I think you would want to say something like that, but A, every piece
regenerates, and B, every mutation that doesn't kill the cell that it's in gets propagated. So
there are these stem cells. There's about 30% of the animal disease, neoblast. So when they get hit
with a mutation, anything that doesn't kill that stem cell, it now propagates when the thing divides
itself in half. It becomes sort of amplified in the next generation, which is why they look
like hell, the genetics look like hell. And so you would think that there's a limit to this,
but I think the pressure of having a nice clean genome is way low for these guys.
Just they've gone to the point. Steve Frank gave me a cool analogy to this. Did you know I
didn't know about this when I heard about this that, you know, I'm rate arrays in computers,
right, where you have a instead of one disc, you have like six discs, and there's a system which
does a parody thing so that so so apparently ever since rate arrays became a thing, the quality
of the media has gone down because there's no because the pressure on having a good disc is
down because that doesn't matter that much. You've got a rate array. And so and so right. So
so there's this feedback loop where the better your software for correcting errors, the less
pressure there is on the media to be to be reliable. But once you go there, it's hard to
write. It's a ratchet because once you can't suddenly say, well, I'm taking my rate array
off. Well, now you can't because you're because your media is crap now. So yeah, I mean, I some
of the stuff I do is on is on mitochondrial DNA, which is generally said to be at least evolving
about 10 times faster than the nuclear genes. There's not that much of it. It's quite small.
And it always comes in effect in colonies. So there may be several hundred thousand copies
in a single site. And so how does quality control work? And in the case of the mitochondria,
there definitely is quality control, even though it's evolving and mutating pretty quickly.
And again, you have a lot of differences in mitochondrial sequences between different
tissues and mutations accumulating as we age and so on, though probably not fast enough to
drive aging as a process. And again, there's a lot that can be done with
some form of bottlenecking in the broadest sense, which is to say,
you need I mean, the way the way that it seems to work with the mitochondria in the germline
is that there are groups of cells, clumps of cells, germline cysts, they're called in the female
germline. And they group together and they form cytoplasmic connections between them. And they
transfer mitochondria as well as Golgi apparatus and RNAs and things into the, it's not necessarily
the central cell, but a cell in the middle of this network. And that effectively accumulates
mitochondria in what's called the mitochondrial cloud sometimes, the Balbiani body. And there's
an interesting question then, you're bringing all this DNA together from separate sources.
What's going on? We've just gone through rounds of segregation during early germline development
where you produce something like six or seven million Ugonia, the very earliest germ cells
which are dividing by mitosis. And then we start fusing them together and transferring material
between them. We did a simulation study trying to work out, well, what would be the expected rate
of mutation accumulation? And can we compare it with mutations, mitochondria mutations in human
populations? What is the known incidence of mitochondrial diseases? And can we predict that?
And it turned out that if you had some level of selection on mitochondrial function,
which is to say the simplest way to see it will be membrane potential. If you can generate,
if you can, as a single mitochondrion with a bit of mitochondrial DNA, if you can generate a
membrane potential, you can go over there. If you can't do it, you stay here. So it's at the level
of the software, that's where the judgment is going on, but you're throwing out the hardware,
which is not very good, which is not very good in the sense of not able to generate the membrane
potential. And then you accumulate all the ones which are capable of generating a decent membrane
potential in what's now the primordial oocyte, and then amplify that up and it becomes, if it
matures, it becomes the oocyte. And that selection on the function as they're pulled together was
able to predict moderately accurately the actual incidence of mitochondrial diseases. So it's
not that you're avoiding mutations so much as you're able to kind of, despite the fact you've
always got large populations, you're able to kind of select on some level of function. I've
got no idea if there's anything like that happening in planaria, that there's some level that these
cells are capable of generating enough of a field that it's got the right tuning to regenerate.
I mean, you're saying everything can, but presumably there must be some point where it
collapses. Yeah. Well, I mean, so that's super interesting. One of the things we're going to
be looking for when we reprise this experiment of keeping them in mutagens and all that,
the prediction that I would make consistent with what you just said is that the one thing you can't
do is trash all of your ion channels. And we know that they're sensitive to that,
because we can make two-headed worms and worms that look like all kinds of crazy stuff. That's
very easy by targeting these capture agents. So one interesting hypothesis that comes out of
what you just said is that there is a selection step, which is make whatever mutations you want,
but if you lose the ability to be electrically, and I'm not sure if it's just keeping a certain
v-mem or maybe reacting, maybe it's a second order thing, I don't know, we'll see.
As long as you hold on to that, everything else is good to go. So that's a really interesting
idea. I love that idea that there's a minimal electrical competency that you get tested for,
and that that's your bottleneck. Yeah. I may ping you offline later for some references to this
thing in my country, because I think that's actually super interesting. Yeah. And I think also,
we can kind of talk about the, because there has to be some sort of plasticity threshold
of the genetics level. And I mean, that begs the question. I mean, first of all, can we understand
just by the genome, which organism, which species is it, et cetera? And how much plasticity can we
allow in the hardware? Yeah. I don't know. People say things like developmental constraints,
you can only make certain things with a certain genome. I am not sure of that at all. I think that
in my head, I have this challenge that I think what we should be aiming for is this thing I call
the anatomical compiler. And I think we ought to be able to do is in the future is sit down in front
of a computer and draw the plant or animal that you want, whatever it is. I don't care what it is.
It's a seven legged frog with a propeller on top, but you know, anything you like,
right? Like anything you want. And if we knew what we were doing, this thing would compile
that description down into a set of stimuli that would get a standard set of cells to build whatever.
Now, you're not going to make things that disobey gravity. You're not going to make things that
have a copper armature for a motor. That's fine. But biologically, possible shapes, whatever they
are, you should be able to make. And I bet, I don't know if we'll live to see this thing, but
I would bet that it's possible. And from the plasticity that I see, even before we really
understand anything about how collectives of cells make decisions, but I think we already
have examples that I think are telling you that this standard thing we see in development
is just one of a huge space of possible things it can do. So if I had to put money down right now,
I would say that I think almost any allowable geometric shape could be made if we understood
how to communicate with cellular collectives. Sorry, go ahead. What do you think it is that's
tending to produce the same shape repeatedly? So here's my hypothesis on all of this.
I think that evolution does not counter to expectation. I think evolution generally
does not take the past literally. In other words, it does not over train on prior examples. In
machine learning, you have this notion of over training when the thing memorizes the past examples
instead of generalizing from them. And there may be organisms like that. Maybe C. elegans is like
that. I don't know. But generally, I think what evolution does is instead of producing a specific
solution to a specific environment, I think it generally makes problem solving machines. And
the reason I think it does that is because the environment, both the individual cell environment
and the overall environment is so uncertain that maybe we had creatures way at the beginning
that really were just suitable for one kind of environment. I think those are all gone now.
I think anything that we see now, our systems, what evolution gives us is a system that can
behave adaptively in a huge range of circumstances, not because we've seen those
circumstances before and now you've got built in abilities to handle them, although in some cases
they may. But what we're making is hardware that's a problem solver in a wide domain. And we have a
bunch of examples of that where we challenge living things with conditions that they've never
seen before. And they're fine. They do novel things that are completely unexpected. And so
I think what evolution does is produce hardware that under normal circumstances reliably does one
thing. But that's not the only thing it can do. It's sort of like I always envision you get this
calculator and you buy a thousand of them from a factory and you turn them all on and they
all say zero. You say, wow, this thing is incredibly reliable. Yeah, under those conditions,
they'll all say zero. That's not the only thing it can do. And with appropriate inputs and
appropriate other scenarios, it'll do all kinds of stuff. And you'll never know if all you're
watching is the standard. That's why I like synthetic morphology and I like challenging
things with all kinds of weird scenarios. I'll give you a couple of examples. Here's an example.
Take planarium and you put them in a solution of barium. Barium is a non-specific potassium
channel blocker. So all their potassium channels stop working. Their heads are full of neurons
and other things that like to transfer potassium. So their heads explode literally overnight.
Their heads explode. Well, you take those remaining bodies and you leave them in the barium. In fact,
you refresh the barium every couple of days. Within two weeks, they regrow a new head. The new
head doesn't care about barium at all. No problem. So we said, well, that's bizarre. How could that be?
So we took the original heads. We took the barium adapted heads. We did a really knowing that the
answer might not be transcriptional, but this is the tool we have. So basically what we did was
we just asked, what's different in the gene expression between the barium adapted heads and
the control heads? A very small number of genes different. And so imagine now. And so now here's
the trick. Plenarium never see barium in the wild. There's no barium out in the wild. There's no
evolutionary pressure to know what to do when you're poisoned by barium. That doesn't exist.
Imagine you're in this nuclear reactor control room. The genes are all the knobs. You've got
20,000 different knobs. You're hit with this physiological stressor. The thing's melting
down. It's going to explode. You don't have time to randomly try different knobs. You don't have
time for gradient descent. These are not bacteria that cells don't turn over all that fast. So you
can't just randomly mutate and see who survives and then they rebuild the head. There's no time for
that. The cells don't grow that fast. Within a very short period of time, this thing navigates the
whatever 20,000 dimensional space of gene expression to zero in on about a dozen transcripts that will
solve your physiological problem. Now, how in the heck does it know? For a completely new
stressor like this, how does it know which ones those are? So you can think about it. So we don't
know the answer to this. But one thing that it might be able to do is, okay, I've never seen
barium before, but I have seen epileptic seizures before. And so maybe the excitotoxicity of having
your neurons die from abnormal potassium flux is somewhat similar. So what you really have is
you have the ability to generalize. So this is a system that, in any other, if we had a robot
that did this, this would be generalization and learning of the highest degree, right? This is
like, I haven't seen this before, but I've seen something else. And I bet it's similar enough
to this that I can try this out, right? So that's one example. Another example is the xenobots.
So we take some skin from frog embryos. They replicate themselves with kinematic self-replication.
They run around, collect other skin cells, put them into a little ball and now you get your next
There's never been any xenobots in the wild. There's never been pressure to be a good xenobot.
There's no other animal does kinematic self-replication. So I think life is capable of
huge number of a variety of things that solve problems that go beyond the narrow default that
we see. I mean, just coming back to the barium issue and the generalization, I mean, there's
lots of, there was a bacterium dinococcus radiodurans, which is astonishing the radiation
resistance and grows on the inside of nuclear power stations and can survive in outer space
and all kinds of things like that. They sometimes call it, I think, colon the bacterium. And
the question is, well, how does it actually do that? And it's largely exposure to other types
of stress. So for example, dehydration stress generates pretty much the same kind of internal
metabolic problems that radiation does. And so in some sense, I would see it as your metabolism
is stressed in a particular way. It doesn't matter if it's barium or something else,
which is stressing it as an epileptic fit, which is stressing it in that way, excited toxicity
or whatever. There's a particular type of stress that the cell is experiencing in its
metabolism. And there's a physiological response to deal with that, which might be to express a
different iron pump on the membrane, which doesn't do potassium, but does sodium instead.
Or I don't know what do I do, but there'll be a physiological response that you could have to
that, which is in effect generalizing from the stress to the metabolism internally, rather than
being able to identify what the external problem is. I completely agree with that. So that's one
policy for handling the unknown. And I think that's exactly right. I think that
multi-scale architecture where you have the genetics and you have the physiology and then
you have anatomy and so on, it becomes like a neural network, not in the neural aspect,
but in the information processing aspect that generalizes for the same reason that
the connection is to networks generalize in machine learning. It's an inherent property
of these networks that they can do stuff like that. Every layer sort of generalizes to the
categories of the layer before it. And so that's why I think it's just an inherent structure.
Not to also forget that now we see that even pathways can learn. So they have
some ability to learn from experience and so on. So I think that's why I'm so sanguine on
being able to build anything for themselves. And where are or how these memories are stored?
I mean, Mike can probably answer that, but just one story to insert before he does.
There was a lady, she died recently at the age of 96 at UCL called Ursula Mitvok and she worked
on sex determination for a long time. And she was very interested in- Oh, she died?
Yes, you're familiar with Ursula's work. I know her, yeah. I didn't know she passed. I knew she was
quite old, yeah. Yeah, she was extraordinarily active until really only a couple of years ago.
I wrote an obituary of her. I really admired her work. I'll send it to you.
But she linked it to growth rates because there's all these different types of
chromosomal sex determination and X and Y chromosomes are only a part of it. There'd be
multiple origins of different types of X and Y chromosome birds and many other things have got
ZW chromosomes where it's the other way around that the male is the homogometic sex with two of
the same chromosomes. And then there's temperature dependent sex determination and she had linked
the whole lot to growth rates. And effectively what the Y chromosome is doing is activating
some growth factors that say, you know, go ahead and grow quickly. And there's some interesting
questions in my own mind about mitochondrial inheritance and when you are allowed to grow
quickly and when it's best not to grow quickly, which may. So this earliest distinction between
a male embryo developing a female is just size. Males grow faster early on, not necessarily
throughout the entire development, but grow faster earlier. And then she called attention to
stuchomaphodides who I think there's maybe a different term now, but effectively have an ovary
on one side and a testis on the other side. And it's not random which side it's on. The testis is
usually, you know, 70% of the time is on the right hand side and the ovary on the left hand side.
And there are slight differences in growth rates between the right hand side
and the left hand side at that early stage. Measurable differences, measurable, you know,
with a weighing scales or a ruler practically, that level of detection. And so, you know,
talking about developmental plasticity, what are you going to develop an ovary or a testis?
It's a pretty constrained developmental plasticity in relation to some of the things you're
talking about. But still, it's determined not just genetically. And there are all kinds of
interesting, you know, there are mice with mutations in particular genes that will lead
to a sex change, which have got nothing to do with the Y chromosome or with the
SLY gene or anything like that is able to overwrite the SLY gene simply by increasing the growth rate
of the embryo or decreasing it and becoming female instead of male. So there are these other,
in terms of what do you develop into and how much developmental plasticity is there,
factors like growth rates can play a major role. Exactly how and how common that is, I don't know,
but, you know, this whole idea that temperature dependent sex determination in amphibians and
so on, basically doing the same thing as the chromosome shows all this possibility of overwriting
things we think we know the answer to. We think the answer lies in a gene which says you're going
to become male, you're going to become female. And there's all of these, you know, intersexual
states, in fact, and mostly it's this or that. But there's a scope in the middle is what she
called, I think, I forget the term that she had for it, but it's basically a threshold
dichotomy, I think was the phrase that she used. So the genes tend to push you into one state or
the other state, but there's quite a lot of flex between the two. Yeah, amazing.
Yeah, so I can talk a little bit about the bioelectric memories that override the genetics,
but I want to go first, even just more basic than that. So here's the kind of, to me,
the most stunning thing. Imagine a single amniote embryo, let's say an amniote embryo,
so a bird or human or something. It's a flat blasted disk like this, about 50,000 cells.
So you look at an early stage, so you look at this thing, you say, well, there's an embryo,
and you might ask yourself, well, what are we counting when we say there's one embryo?
I mean, most of the time there's one embryo, but one thing you can do is you can, and I did this
as a grad student in ducks and chicken eggs, you can take a little needle and you can put a scratch
or multiple scratches through that blasted term. And this is a method discovered by this guy,
Lutz, in the 40s. So you put a couple of scratches in. And then what happens is that each region of
that blasted term for a while until it heals up, doesn't feel the other regions and self-organizes
into an embryo. And then when it heals up, you've got conjoined twins or triplets or whatever.
So now, so there's a couple of interesting things that come out of this. First of all,
what you're counting when you say it's an embryo is how many distinct locally aligned
collectives are there that are all working on one project? And usually there's one, and that project
is getting to a particular area of morphospace building the right kind of embryo. But there
doesn't have to be one. There could be anywhere from zero to probably 10 or so, I would guess.
And that number is absolutely not genetically determined. You don't know how many embryos
are in this thing until the physiology has had it say. And then you will find out maybe it's
typically one, but it doesn't have to be one. How many are in there is a funny kind of thing,
because it will self-organize, right? It doesn't, you don't know that there's one.
And what I like about this is that aside from the fact that it's just like this thing that's
totally not determined, again, what evolution has given us is a machine that generates
coordinated selves. It doesn't give us one coordinated self. It gives us a machine that
can generate these coordinated selves. And if you leave it alone, it'll give you one. If you
cut it in half, it'll give you two. And you can sort of, you know, you can have your pick.
It's a little bit, I think, linked to the same question in cognitive science. If I
show you a brain and you don't know what a human is, and I say to you, hey, look at this thing,
how many intelligences you're supposed to fit in there? You have no clue. We don't have any way
of estimating, you know, the number of intelligences per square, you know, per cubic inch of material,
like we don't know. But typically with typical humans, you say, well, that's one. That's, you
know, my friend, my friend, Joe. But actually, we know from split brain patients, from dissociative
disorders, that there's all kinds of potential individuals in there, right? And then, you know,
sort of think there's one. But so, so again, that, and again, not genetically determined,
it's all about inputs in history and, and, and learning and, and, you know, experiences and
who knows what else. So, so this, there's some very basic and fundamental stuff that
isn't genetic, because the genetics doesn't lay down the final answer, it generates, it gives you
a machine that will then generate these things in various, you know, in various orders. And in
planaria, so what we've done in, in planaria is just this, if you look down in, onto a planarian
using this voltage sensitive dye, you see a pattern, the voltage pattern, we've sort of
learned to decode it, we can tell when it says build one head versus two. The basic question was,
hey, how do you know how many heads you should have as a planarian? Yes. How would you know,
right? The assumption is, well, what else would it be? It's a, you know, it's a genetically
determined, it's one, what else would it be? Well, so, so what happens is, so, so what happens is,
there's a, there's a, there's a single, there's an electrical gradient that normally specifies
one head, one tail. Well, we use some ion channel drugs, and we, we changed that to say two heads,
and no genetic changes. So just a brief, what 48 hour physiological stimulus,
and then that, that animal will then, if you injure it, will then make two headed animals.
Now a couple of interesting things. That two headed pattern is read out from a one headed host. In
other words, it's not a pattern of what you have now. It doesn't reflect your current anatomy.
It's a, it's a counterfactual memory. It's a representation of what you will do if you get
injured in the future. So it's like a, it's like an early version of, of this kind of mental time
travel that brains are very good at, right? Imagining things that aren't true right now.
No, no genetic changes. And the amazing thing is that if you take these two headed animals and
you cut them further, they will continue to generate two headed worms forever, even though
there's nothing genetically wrong with any of them. So the question of, of right, the question of
what determines the number of heads in the planarian is kind of subtle. On the one hand,
you can sort of say it's DNA because if you didn't have the ion channels, none of this would be
happening. So okay, we need the hardware. We know that. But also it is the case that the exact same
hardware is perfectly happy making one head, two heads, heads from a different species, weird,
spiky cylinders that we've made that don't look anything like planaria. That same hardware is
perfectly happy making all of that stuff. And where, and the information is in the,
at least part of that, the important part of that information is in this, in this steady
state bio electrical gradient that is basically the software to the genetically specified hardware.
Yeah. And then you can see it, you can see it, you can rewrite it and it totally dominates the
default, you know, the default state. Have you managed to do the same kind of thing in,
say, tadpoles or other animals in planaria? Yeah, yeah. So in tadpoles, so this is what
we've done. We've made tadpole faces that look like other species of frogs. We've made tadpole
tails that look like zebrafish. And we've made frogs regenerate legs the way salamanders regenerate
legs. And, and we're currently all from, from the ion channels from modulating the expression of
ion channels, ion channels or neurotransmitters, which are often the downstream, you know, the
basically much like in the nervous system, the, the way that the electric circuit propagates its
decisions down is through movement of neurotransmitters, which then turn genes on and off,
which then do other stuff. So, so sometimes you can skip it, you can skip the, the, the top layer
and do the, and do the neurotransmitter thing. So we've done it that way too. But yeah, that's
basically, that's basically it. So we've done it, we've done it. And, and, and we know this works
in mammals because human channelopathies. So you've got human humans who have either taken drugs
that affect ion channels. So there's a bunch of ion channel drugs or teratogens.
They will have the same craniofacial defects as we see, for example, in, in, in a frog.
Same thing. How much of, of evolution is actually geared to restricting
the scope for phenotypic plasticity, do you think? I mean, it seems as if less in the case of
plenaria, more in the case of mammals, let's say, still the scope is there. But I suppose if what
you want to do is generally produce an organism that looks the same as its parents, then there must
be really strong selection pressure on the order in which especially ion channels are being expressed.
I mean, that's true. There certainly are stereotypical patterns of expression. I
I'm not sure. I'm not sure if the pressure is to produce the same thing that your parents were,
or if it's to produce something that's successful. And, you know, like, I, I don't know.
I mean, the fact that most animals do look like their parents implies that there's been selection
pressure to produce the same thing, despite the huge potential scope for doing something completely
different. They look like them under the same conditions. So, so people like the people who
work in plants will tell you that depending on depending on the the way you where you plant
that seed, you're going to get things that don't look anything like the like like the parents,
right? And I think I think in animals, it's, you know, sort of less that. But yeah, I don't know.
I don't know if the pressure is for consistency, or if the pressure is for some other kind of
second order parameter, like if, if the environment is what we've seen before,
don't do anything different, just do the exact same thing. But, but if circumstance does change,
you've got all these other tools that you can deploy. We will have, I'm, I'm, I don't, I don't,
I don't like to talk about stuff that isn't published and peer reviewed, because then it's
just, you know, me telling stories. But I think in the next six months or so, you're going to see
a couple of, we're going to have a couple of papers come out that address this, this issue
that look at gene expression in xenobots compared to normal embryos. And xenobots made from other
cells that are not frog and have nothing to do with frog embryos. I think the plasticity is,
is enormous. I don't think we've been able to, we've even scratched the surface of all this.
I mean, when we are thinking of plasticity, I always also admire this idea of ploidy, for
example. So you mentioned that plenaria mix up mixed ploids, then there are, I mean, we can talk
about plants itself, we know that they change their ploidy. So how much that has to do, or do
you think that this can be also a factor? I don't know much about it, but, but, but I will tell
you my favorite ploidy story that I think bears on this. So salamanders, you can, there's a little
little tube that goes to the kidneys, the kidney tubule. If you take a cross section through
this kidney tubule, what you see is typically eight or 10 cells working together to make this
nice kidney tubule. Okay. If you can, if now one thing you can do is you can make these,
you can make these nudes that are multiple ploidy. So you can make four n, six n, eight n nudes,
right? So the first amazing thing is that you can, you can double or triple the amount of genetic
material. I don't care. Fine. You still get the same nudes. So, so that's kind of, you know, all,
that speaks to my same point is that it doesn't really assume. So, so embryogenesis does not
assume how many copies of your genetic material you have. So that's the first thing. The second
thing is as you increase the ploidy, the cells get physically bigger and bigger. Okay. Yes.
When the cells get bigger and bigger, the salamander stays exactly the same. How can it be?
Because fewer and fewer of the larger cells are being used to make the various organs.
So you can't count on how many copies of the genes you have. You can't count on what how many,
what your cell size is. If you're, if you're even a human embryo, we can cut you into four pieces
and you get four quadruplets. You can't even count on how many cells you have. Now the ploidy
story is, so you really, really just assume you have to, as a proper embryo, you have to assume
you don't know much going in. Who knows what things are going to be like and you still have
to be able to do the right thing. Now, now here's the ploidy, the rest of the ploidy story. So
when you make eight n nudes, the cells get so enormous that there's not room for more than
one cell to make a tubule. What do they do? A single cell bends around itself like this,
leaving a hole in the middle, which, which gives you the tubule. Now that, okay. So, so the thing,
the thing that's crazy about that is that now that's a completely different molecular mechanism
instead of cell to cell communication, which you need to make the tubule, you are now using
cytoskeletal bending to, to, to, to drag yourself into this crazy shape. So what I love, right?
It's amazing. And so, so what I love about this is that it's a good example of top down causation,
meaning that what you've got is in the service of this anatomical feature, different molecular
mechanisms get called up and we're seeing something like this in some of our not yet published stuff
in, in, in the Xenobots too, different molecular mechanisms get called up to do their thing to
achieve this, this sort of higher level outcome. So, you know, that's, so I think, yeah, I think
ploidy is, is a, is a fantastic example of this. Because if you can't count, if you can't, if you
don't assume how many copies of your instructions you're going to have, you don't assume how big
your cells are, you don't assume how many of them you have, you better have rock solid morphogenetic
control to get the job done despite all of that. And, and salamanders do, which is why they're so
regenerative, but they're not in the not as good as planaria, but they're pretty darn good. They
regenerate all kinds of organs. So I mean, under, underpinning all of that, this cell volume
and, and, and ploidy, it's not just ploidy, it's, it's genome is the total amount of DNA in the
nucleus. So it's the nuclear volume. There is a very tight correlation between nuclear volumes
and cell volume, which used to be known as the C value paradox, which is to say the cells,
mostly amoeba have some enormous genomes, you know, thousands of times larger than the human genome.
Why it's, you know, this whole idea of junk DNA, what are they putting in there?
A large amount of it is that you have a large cell, you have a large nucleus and you fill that
nucleus with DNA and ploidy forces you to have a larger, higher ploidy forces you to have a larger
nucleus, which forces you to have a larger cell. And that forces you to be resourceful in terms of
you want to make a tube, you do it from a single cell instead of 14 cells or what it used to be.
So there's, and I don't think there's ever been a good explanation for why a large cell would
have a large nucleus. There, there are ideas out there. But they often relate to the ratio
between the number of ribosomes and the number of nuclear pore complexes and this kind of thing.
None of them are particularly persuasive. I don't think we have a good explanation for why a large
cell should have a large nucleus. And yet it's able to force all of these changes on you.
Yeah, so since we are running out of time, I mean, maybe I can throw in like one last topic and
probably, I believe that probably both of you would kind of like to discuss about it.
So, so when you mentioned about neurotransmitters, which is like one level down kind of regulation,
let's talk about anesthesia, because I think that's also something which is one level down,
regulates it, I don't know how much of the work is done on some sort of, you know, simpler scales.
But okay, I mean, let's, well, you can anesthetize single cells, critters,
planaria and things like that. Yeah. I mean, I discussed in the last chapter of the book,
some of the work from Luca Turin, showing, showing that anesthetics
affects electron transfer to oxygen. And we've been doing some work on that just recently.
We've not published any of it yet. We've not gone very far at all. So I won't say much,
but we've basically, we also find that it's lower oxygen rate of consumption of oxygen.
And, and depending on the context in which you give them affects the membrane potential.
Now, to try and distinguish between just the mitochondria making ATP and that ATP being used
to control the plasma membrane, iron pump, for example, and ATP is in the membrane.
Obviously, if you don't have as much ATP, that pump is not going to work as well. And so,
you know, this is not a causal link between mitochondrial function and consciousness.
All it says is that underpinning this energy consuming process, which is consciousness,
energy matters, which is a statement of the obvious, I suppose. But there's also a possibility
that there are direct fields involved that you're influencing the electromagnetic fields
generated potentially by mitochondria. And then there can be direct interactions with
the plasma membrane field that way. That's a much more exciting possibility to my mind.
But very, very difficult to distinguish between how do you change the field in the measurable
way while maintaining ATP synthesis at the same level, which is a tricky thing,
a tricky mechanistic thing to do. But we're trying to get at that. I mean, I think this is,
this is perhaps one of the one of the biggest questions in science now is what actually
is going on in the in the wiring of consciousness, if you like, and I'm certain fields are involved.
But but how exactly I'm not so sure.
Yeah, so it's really interesting. You might enjoy, I've got this, this book from this guy,
JC Bose, B-O-S-E. And I can send you a PDF of it. He's an Indian guy from over 100 years ago that
was doing a bunch of physiology and he, and he started anesthetizing animal tissues and using
electrophysiology to monitor what happens. And then he did the plants, right? And then eventually,
a metal bar. So, so he's got this, he's got this book called response in the living and non-living,
where, you know, maybe so, so, so I don't know the mechanisms that underlie any of that. But,
but there could be, if it's, if it's, if it's the kind of thing you're talking about, I could easily
see why he would be seeing effects like this in in in organic substrates as well.
Yeah, I tend to draw a line at life, which is to say what I was talking about at the beginning
about bacteria using the, the, the fields on the membrane as a means of integrating the metabolism
of the cell. And I would see then the central nervous system as some kind of an amplification and
formal subtle and complex, of course, but, but, but, but still somehow linked to the
integration of information through, through linking your metabolic state at a cellular level,
and then at a network level and so on. Whether you need fields to be involved in that, I don't know,
but we can measure changes in the EEG. And I don't think we have an absolutely clear idea of
exactly what is generating the EEG at a subcellular level. Is it, is it just a plasma membrane,
the axonal membranes that are depolarizing or mitochondria playing a role in that as well.
So that's an area I'm fascinated by, but it's difficult to get at.
Yeah, so in the, like, I think, if we think of the same about the same topic,
interesting thing is so about the synthetic cells or synthetic life in general, like all the work
which is going on there, I mean, from the engineering perspective, right? That's also
kind of kind of let's say crucial in a way, or it is focused on the information centric view,
right? Like people are trying to put together again, some sort of genomes, some sort of genes,
transcription, translation, of course, they have membrane in. But my question, or maybe briefly,
if you can just explain your view, so how important would be this kind of bioelectric or
kind of this software that we have discussed today for to create those kind of synthetic systems?
Maybe one word answer, all all importance. I don't think you're going to do it without
100. Yeah, 100. Like, how or is it possible to kind of, you know, I don't know, do it without
the information part without the hardware? I think you can only go so far without genes at all.
How far? I don't know. I mean, you know, the plenarium is a very good example there. You can
you can stramble your genome, but presumably you can't completely collapse your genome.
When I think about it the other way up with the origin of life, how do, where does information
come from in biology? And I'm fairly persuaded now from our own experiments, but other people's
work around the world as well in the last five, six, seven years, a lot of a lot of metabolism
is spontaneously self-organizing. You start with CO2 and hydrogen and you get Krebs cycle
intermediates, you get amino acids, the same ones that we we have in metabolism. You get
nucleotides that way as well. We've not done them all yet, but we've done some and other people
have done others. And, you know, this idea then of a spontaneously self-organizing metabolism
that starts with CO2 and hydrogen and gives you all the monomers and eventually polymers.
By no means is any of this proved, but five or six years ago it would have been complete
hand-waving and now there's some experimental backing for quite a lot of it. And you think,
okay, well, it's going to make trace amounts of things like nucleotides. How can it reliably
make more nucleotides and get better at making copies of itself in the absence of genes or any
information? And the answer is, well, positive feedback loops will allow you to kind of feed off
the environment and off yourself to get better at making copies of yourself, but you're only ever
going to do, you're going to keep repeating the same network under the same conditions.
If you change the conditions, you might get a different network. It may or may not function,
but under this set of conditions, you will keep recovering that same network
until you introduce genes and information into it. And you can enter into that world,
you can introduce random sequences of RNA and they will have directly or indirectly some effect
on the rates of cell growth and flux of metabolism. Even just introducing a piece of RNA is actually
going to change the metabolic rate because you're now polymerizing nucleotides. So you're pulling
nucleotides out of solution and you pull metabolism through faster. So even making a completely random
piece of RNA makes you better at doing what you were doing before than if you hadn't done that.
So there's this kind of interesting insights into what is information in biology? Where is it
coming from? And what it seems to be allowing is effectively plasticity, which is to say you've
got this hardwired proto metabolism, which is basically thermodynamics and kinetics. And it's,
you know, you will go on recovering exactly the same thing. What genes allow you to do is just
change it a bit and allow a different outcome. And that outcome can be reliably inherited.
And by the time we're getting into networks of cells, then it's interesting because what I'm
taking from what Mike has been saying is that the genes are becoming almost buried again. And
it's the network of the cells which are generating higher level properties, which are forcing them
to behave in a similar way in a similar setting and a potentially completely different way
in a different setting. So there's this interplay all along between the kind of the hard wiring and
the plasticity and the information, which means different things in different contexts,
but allows the plasticity really. Yeah, so that's fascinating. And so with that, thank you so much
guys. Thank you for doing this. This was completely fun. I mean, I think the kind of ideas that we
have explored, it was amazing. So thank you so much. Thanks very much. Yeah, thanks for doing this.
Yes, thank you. That's been great fun. Yes, thank you. Talk soon everybody. Bye now.
