Checking L1 How Perspectives Influence Us.txt in cognetics/Abnormal Psychology/
 The lecture discusses the historical development of psychiatry and psychology and their current state as interrelated yet distinct fields. Biological approaches have dominated psychiatry, leading to an overemphasis on medication treatment for psychological disorders. This can result in inadequate care for individuals who need psychotherapy, such as those with schizophrenia or depression caused by environmental factors. On the other hand, purely psychological approaches may neglect biological factors that contribute to mental health issues. The lecture also touches upon thorny mind-body-soul issues regarding sickness and sin, asking if we can hold accountable individuals who have a biologically vulnerable family history and childhood abuse for their actions. In this case, the person described an incident at length in which he had essentially tortured a close relative of his by brandishing a knife over them for about an hour, making all kinds of horrible threats that none of them he carried out but were pretty real threats. The man who came into my office was not there out of his own free will entirely, but he was a man who was a sociopath with minimal sense of conscience, minimal sense of right and wrong, a very manipulative guy, and in fact had some manipulative intentions with me as well at that time in coming in. So here's the guy. He was in some trouble with the law, and his lawyer said if you go see a shrink, they'll go off more easy on you. I mean that was why he was there. But he also did want some help sort of. But this wasn't the kind of guy who was going to come to a mental health professional and say doc listen, I got no conscience. Will you help me? This guy described an incident at length in which he had essentially tortured a close relative of his by brandishing a knife over him for about an hour, making all kinds of horrible threats that none of them he carried out but were pretty real threats. Now can we hold accountable individuals who have biologically vulnerable family histories and childhood abuse for their actions? In this case, the person was not psychotic. He clearly knew what he was doing. He wanted me to sign a statement saying that he had come to therapy and that I was going to see him in therapy and all of that. Here's the problem. This man had been severely abused as a child by his father. He had a family history of schizophrenia, and we do know that there is a higher incidence of sociopathy or rates of being sociopaths among relatives of schizophrenics. Again I should say with all these things, that's not to say if you have a schizophrenic relative, therefore you're going to be schizophrenic or a sociopath. But in any case, there was a higher rate... So biologically, there may well have been a vulnerability in his family that contributed to him being a sociopath. We know he was beaten badly as a child, which could certainly contribute to him being a sociopath. Can we hold accountable for individuals who have biologically vulnerable family histories and childhood abuse for their actions? In this case, the person was not psychotic. He clearly knew what he was doing. He wanted me to sign a statement saying that he had come to therapy and that I was going to see him in therapy and all of that. Here's the problem. This man had been severely abused as a child by his father. He had a family history of schizophrenia, and we do know that there is a higher incidence of sociopathy or rates of being sociopaths among relatives of schizophrenics. Again I should say with all these things, that's not to say if you have a schizophrenic relative, therefore you're going to be schizophrenic or a sociopath. But in any case, there was a higher rate... So biologically, there may well have been a vulnerability in his family that contributed to him being a sociopath. We know he was beaten badly as a child, which could certainly contribute to him being a sociopath. Can we hold accountable for individuals who have biologically vulnerable family histories and childhood abuse for their actions

Checking 00 Professor Introduction of Albert Einstein.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 Professor Don Howard is a renowned philosopher specializing in the Philosophy of Science, currently serving as Director of Notre Dame's Graduate Program in History and Philosophy of Science. He holds degrees from Michigan State University's Honors College and Lyman Briggs College, Boston University, and the University of Kentucky. Professor Howard has served at the University of Kentucky for nearly two decades before joining the faculty at the University of Notre Dame.

He has contributed significantly to Einstein studies, serving as an assistant editor and a contributing editor for the collected papers of Albert Einstein,

Checking 01 The Precocious Young Einstein.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 02 The Development of the Young Physicist.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 03 The Birth of the Quantum Hypothesis.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 04 Background to Special Relativity.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 05 Essentials of Special Relativity.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 06 From Bern to Berlin.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 07 Background to General Relativity.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 08 Essentials of General Relativity.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 09 From Berlin to Princeton.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 10 Philosophical Challenge of the New Physics.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 11 Einstein's Philosophy of Science.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 12 Zionism, Pacifism, and Internationalism.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 13 Einstein the Inventor and Musician.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 14 On the Road to the New Quantum Mechanics.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 15 Quantum Mechanics and Controversy.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 16 Einstein in Princeton -- The Lonely Quest.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 17 Is Quantum Mechanics Complete.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 18 The Expanding Universe.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 19 Einstein and the Bomb -- Science Politicized.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 20 From the Manhattan Project to the Cold War.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 21 A Lifelong Commitment to Social Justice.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 22 Cosmic Religion and Jewish Identity.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 23 Einstein and Modernity.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking 24 The Sage of Princeton -- Einstein the Icon.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking playlist.m3u in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
Checking L1 How Perspectives Influence Us.txt in cognetics/Abnormal Psychology/
 In the field of mental health, there is a growing trend towards biological explanations and treatments, which can be beneficial in certain cases but also problematic as it may lead to an over-reliance on medication and neglect of talk therapy. The reasons for this shift include financial incentives for practitioners and drug companies, and the ease of administering medications compared to talk therapy. However, there are complex issues surrounding the concept of sickness versus sin, particularly when considering cases like a sociopath who had minimal sense of conscience or a man with a family history of schizophrenia. In these cases, it may be possible to explain behavior biologically but also raises questions about accountability and free will. These thorny issues will be further addressed in the next lecture on psychoanalytic approaches to personality and abnormal psychology.

Checking 00 Professor Introduction of Albert Einstein.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 Professor Don Howard is a renowned scholar in Philosophy, specializing in the Philosophy of Science, and currently serves as Director of Notre Dame's Graduate Program in History and Philosophy of Science. He earned his B.S.C. in Physical Science from Michigan State University and Ph.D. in Philosophy with a specialization in the Philosophy of Science from Boston University. Professor Howard has served at various academic institutions, including the University of Kentucky where he was the chair for the Department of Philosophy.

He has contributed significantly to Einstein studies, serving as an assistant editor and a contributing editor for the collected papers of Albert Einstein, and co-founding the Einstein Study Series, which comprises eleven volumes on Einstein and related topics. Professor Howard has been recognized with several prestigious fellowships and awards, including the Society of Fellows in the Humanities at Columbia University, a University Research Professorship by the University of Kentucky, Fellowship of the Center for Einstein Studies at Boston University, Riley Fellow in Notre Dame's Riley Center for Science, Technology and Values, Faculty Fellow in Notre Dame's Nanovik Institute for European Studies, and Fellowship of the American Physical Society.

The course guidebook provided with these lectures includes detailed outlines, a timeline, glossary, biographical notes, and a bibliography to aid understanding and review. To maximize learning from this course, it is suggested to follow or review the lecture outlines before or after each lecture.

Checking 01 The Precocious Young Einstein.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 Albert Einstein was born in Ulm, Germany on March 14, 1879, to Jewish parents. He attended primary school in Aargau, Switzerland and later the Luitpold Gymnasium in Munich. In 1895, he left school to travel with his family, eventually settling in Italy. The following year, Einstein graduated from the Cantonal School of Aarau in Switzerland. At this time, he was a precocious but perhaps insecure adolescent who had developed an intense hatred of German militarism. This would later lead him to renounce his citizenship in the German state of Württemberg at age 16. Einstein's year in Aarau was significant for his development as a physicist, as it was during this time that he developed his first serious thought experiment on the nature of light and its relationship to the speed of an observer moving at the speed of light. This thought experiment would play a crucial role in Einstein's development of the theory of relativity.

Checking 02 The Development of the Young Physicist.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 Albert Einstein spent his early professional years (1902-1905) in Bern, Switzerland, where he worked as a clerk at the Swiss Federal Patent Office. During this time, he published five groundbreaking papers that revolutionized physics in the areas of quantum mechanics and relativity. His intellectual growth was nourished by his involvement with the Olympia Academy, a group of intellectuals who met regularly to discuss scientific and philosophical topics. His personal life during this period was also significant; he married Mileva Marić (Malava) in 1903 and had two sons with her. However, their relationship became strained as Einstein's fame grew and they eventually separated in 1914 and divorced in 1919.

One of the few pieces of evidence regarding the genesis of Einstein's papers from his miracle year is a letter he wrote to Conrad Hobbich announcing the publication of one of them. The letter, which is full of characteristic wit, humorously expresses Einstein's frustration with Hobbich for not sending him his dissertation and promises to send him four papers in return, including one on radiation and the energy properties of light, which was revolutionary.

Einstein had already published five respectable papers in the Annalen der Physik before his miracle year, but he was still a clerk in a patent office when he made these groundbreaking discoveries. His brilliance, self-confidence, independence of thought, and working alone as a patent clerk were all crucial factors that enabled him to achieve this feat.

In the next few lectures, we will explore Einstein's quantum and relativity papers in more depth to understand how he transformed the classical physical worldview.

Checking 03 The Birth of the Quantum Hypothesis.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 In this lecture, we discussed Albert Einstein's revolutionary paper of 1905, where he proposed the photoelectric effect and introduced the idea of light quanta or photons, which are discrete packets of electromagnetic energy whose energy is proportional to their frequency according to E = hν. The idea was radical because it contradicted Maxwell's Electrodynamics, which described electricity and magnetism in terms of continuous fields. Despite initial doubts, Einstein's hypothesis was later accepted as a fundamental aspect of the quantum theory, and led to the realization that radiation has a dual nature: wave-like at higher frequencies and particle-like at lower ones. This duality is known as wave-particle duality, and it violates the classical principle of separability, which assumes that different parts of a system are independent of one another. This concept of entanglement became a central aspect of the quantum theory, leading to many counter-intuitive phenomena that are still being explored today. Einstein himself struggled with this idea for years, ultimately becoming a critic of the quantum theory because he found it difficult to accept its non-classical aspects.

Checking 04 Background to Special Relativity.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 The Michelson-Morley experiment revealed that the speed of light is independent of the motion of the source or observer. This result posed a problem for the then-current understanding of physics, which held that there was an absolute space and a luminiferous ether through which light waves propagated.

In 1892, Hendrik Lorentz suggested that the speed of light appears to change as a function of the motion of the observer relative to the ether. He proposed the Lorentz contraction hypothesis, according to which objects moving at high speeds contract in the direction of motion.

In 1904, H.A. Lorentz and Gilbert N. Lewis showed that by making this assumption, Maxwell's electrodynamics could be made compatible with the Michelson-Morley result without abandoning the ether. They published their findings in early 1905.

The problem of underdetermination arises when two theories make exactly the same predictions about observations, yet there is no way to choose between them based on those predictions alone. In such cases, our choice between theories may be underdetermined by the facts or empirical evidence.

Einstein's special theory of relativity, published in 1905, is a model of elegance and simplicity. Simplicity is often used by philosophers to characterize theoretical beauty. It raises the question of why a basically aesthetic property of a theory, such as simplicity, should be a mark of its truth. The answer is not straightforward, and we will discuss this problem again in later lectures. In the next lecture, we will turn to an understanding of Einstein's first truly beautiful theoretical creation: the special theory of relativity.

Checking 05 Essentials of Special Relativity.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 Albert Einstein published four groundbreaking papers in 1905. In one of these papers, he introduced his theory of special relativity, which revolutionized our understanding of space and time. According to this theory, the laws of physics are the same for all observers moving at constant velocities relative to each other. The speed of light represents an upper bound on all physical processes, and energy and mass are two different faces of one more fundamental aspect of nature.
Einstein's mathematical formulation of special relativity was given by Hermann Minkowski three years later in 1908. According to this view, the fundamental elements of space-time were not things but rather space-time events, which are just locations or points in four-dimensional space-time. Physical objects in the traditional sense were now represented as world lines in space-time.
In our next lecture, we'll turn our attention back to history and biography, following Einstein's life and career from the Patent Office in the miracle year of 1905 to his arrival nine years later in Berlin in 1914 as a distinguished full professor, a member of the most important scientific academy in the world, and at the age of just 35, the most highly regarded physicist in Germany from which he had fled twenty years before.
Thank you.

Checking 06 From Bern to Berlin.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 In this lecture, we discussed Albert Einstein's move from Zurich to Berlin in 1914, following an offer for a prestigious position at the University of Berlin and the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics. This offer was attractive not only for professional reasons but also because it provided Einstein with the opportunity to rekindle a clandestine affair with his cousin Elsa Leuenthal, who lived in Berlin. The move, however, led to the collapse of Einstein's marriage with Mileva Marić and strained his relationship with their two sons. Despite these personal challenges, Berlin provided Einstein with a newfound peace and freedom to focus on his work, as well as opportunities to engage with important political, cultural, and artistic circles. The outbreak of World War I just a few months after Einstein's arrival in Berlin was a tragic event that would have profound effects on Einstein's life and the world at large. However, this period also saw Einstein completing his most significant achievement: the general theory of relativity. This will be the subject of our next two lectures.

Checking 07 Background to General Relativity.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 The lecture discusses the thought experiments that led Albert Einstein to develop his theory of general relativity. The first thought experiment, the elevator example, illustrates the concept that gravity can be explained by acceleration. The second thought experiment involves a rotating disc, which demonstrates that space and spacetime can have curvature. These thought experiments helped Einstein realize that gravity is not a force but rather the warping of space-time due to mass and energy.

The lecture also discusses some properties of curved surfaces, such as the sum of the angles in triangles being greater than 180 degrees on a sphere and less than 180 degrees on a saddle-shaped surface. It is pointed out that these results are counterintuitive to Euclidean geometry. Additionally, it is explained that Playfair's postulate, which states that given a line and a point not lying on that line, there exists one and only one straight line parallel to the given line, does not hold true for surfaces with positive or negative curvature.

The lecture concludes by noting the importance of these thought experiments in the development of Einstein's theory of general relativity. It is emphasized that this theory explains gravity as the warping of space-time due to mass and energy, rather than a force acting between objects. The lecture encourages listeners to reflect on the concepts presented and to consider them as being inside Einstein's mind.

Checking 08 Essentials of General Relativity.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 The theory of general relativity was published by Einstein in November 1915, and it offered a new description of gravity as a curvature of spacetime caused by mass and energy. It also predicted phenomena such as the gravitational redshift and the bending of light near massive objects like the sun. The first definitive test of this prediction was performed during a total eclipse in 1919, confirming Einstein's prediction. The confirmation of general relativity was front-page news in newspapers all around the world, and it added an element of drama to the political tensions between Britain and Germany at that time. The theory was later entangled with politics in a more negative way when it was used by fascist and antisemitic forces in Germany. These events will be discussed further in the next lecture, which focuses on Einstein's 19 years in Berlin.

Checking 09 From Berlin to Princeton.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 Albert Einstein left Germany in 1933, fleeing the rise of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party. He had been offered a position at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. After a brief stay in Belgium, he settled permanently in Princeton with his wife Elsa. He was relieved to leave Europe but found life in the United States different from what he had known. In 1935, he moved into a small house on Mercer Street and remained there until his death in 1955. During this time, he continued his work as a physicist and became involved in political activism, particularly against nuclear weapons.

Checking 10 Philosophical Challenge of the New Physics.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 This lecture discusses the philosophy of science in the early 20th century, focusing on the logical empiricism movement that emerged from the work of Poincaré, Mach, and others. Logical empiricists believed in a clear separation between theory and experience, emphasizing the importance of clarity in empirical definitions and the ability for scientific theories to adapt to new data. They also argued that simplicity should be considered when choosing between empirically equivalent theories.

However, logical empiricism began to evolve into a new philosophical dogma with the introduction of the verifiability criterion of meaningfulness or verificationist principle, which asserts that only statements that are true or false based on logic or experience are meaningful. This led to the argument that non-verifiable statements, such as those in ethics, politics, art, and religion, have no cognitive meaning.

Einstein disagreed with this view and felt that logical empiricism was going too far, as it devalued areas like morality and aesthetics. In a letter to the editor of a planned volume on Carnap's work, Einstein expressed his disapproval of logical empiricism's refinements and its focus on hair-splitting rather than addressing the weaknesses of its opponents. He felt that logical empiricism had become respectable but was struggling to survive on its own merits.

Checking 11 Einstein's Philosophy of Science.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 Albert Einstein's philosophical views, particularly his rejection of traditional logic and his embrace of holism, greatly influenced his approach to science, specifically general relativity. He believed that theory choice should be guided by simplicity as a mark of truth, but he could not define exactly what simplicity meant. This intuition was rooted in his belief that arbitrary elements in theory were subjective, not objective. Einstein also held a more generous view of the relationship between theory and fact, arguing that everything is up for revision in the pursuit of the simplest theory of nature.

Einstein's philosophical studies also made him more independent-minded, which benefited his work as a physicist. As he gained prominence in the 1920s, Einstein's philosophical leanings extended beyond physics to political and humanitarian issues. These aspects of Einstein will be discussed in the next lecture.

Checking 12 Zionism, Pacifism, and Internationalism.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 Albert Einstein's pacifism was a consistent theme throughout his life, regardless of the historical context or political climate. His views on peace and war were shaped by his belief in the importance of international law and the limitations of individual nations. During the 1930s and early 1940s, stopping Hitler became Einstein's primary focus, but he always saw world government as a long-term solution to maintaining peace among nations.

In 1945, Einstein promoted Emery Reeves' book "The Anatomy of Peace," which presented a compelling argument for world government. Einstein believed that the atomic bomb demonstrated the need for a truly supranational government to control atomic energy and maintain peace in the atomic age. He continued to advocate for world government after World War II, seeing it as a necessary step towards ensuring security and promoting peace among nations.

In the United States, Einstein faced new challenges, including racism, labor struggles, and the persecutions of the McCarthy era. However, he approached these issues with the same moral outlook and clear-headed sense of his power to persuade that he had developed through his fame as a scientist.

Checking 13 Einstein the Inventor and Musician.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 Schopenhauer was a German philosopher who greatly influenced Einstein. Schopenhauer believed that the ultimate reality beyond the veil of Maya, or illusion, could be glimpsed only through aesthetic experience, particularly music. Einstein often referred to himself as someone who would probably be a musician if he were not a physicist and claimed he often thought in music and lived his daydreams in music. Schopenhauer's notion that the ultimate reality was one of unity resonated with Einstein's notion of cosmic religion, and his view on the nature of morality. The idea that music could take us beyond the veil of Maya to ultimate reality is significant because it may explain why music was so important to Einstein. When Einstein said he thinks in music, he likely meant that he visualized his thoughts in a musical way or associated them with music, similar to how he visualizes scientific problems in pictures before translating them into words.

Checking 14 On the Road to the New Quantum Mechanics.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 The lecture began by summarizing the main points from the previous one, where Albert Einstein played a pivotal role in developing the quantum revolution. However, starting from 1927, Einstein turned his back on his own creation and became the most persistent critic of quantum mechanics. This change of heart occurred as the quest to establish a fundamental framework for quantum mechanics was reaching its goal. Four great discoveries were made, four Nobel prizes awarded, all of it stimulated directly by Einstein. But then, starting in 1927, the Einstein who had done as much or more than anyone else to inaugurate the quantum revolution turned his back on it and became the most penetrating and persistent critic of quantum mechanics for the last 28 years of his life. The lecture will take up in our next lecture why Einstein had this change of heart? Why for the last 28 years of his life, he repeatedly but always respectfully clashed with Born, Born and others over the adequacy of quantum mechanics as a framework for fundamental physical theory? All that we will take up in our next lecture.
 In summary, Albert Einstein played a significant role in developing the quantum revolution, however starting in 1927, he turned his back on it and became the most persistent critic of quantum mechanics. This change of heart occurred as the quest to establish a fundamental framework for quantum mechanics was reaching its goal. Four great discoveries were made, four Nobel prizes awarded, all of it stimulated directly by Einstein. But then starting in 1927, Einstein turned his back on it and became the most persistent critic of quantum mechanics for the last 28 years of his life. The lecture will take up in our next lecture why Einstein had this change of heart? Why for the last 28 years of his life, he repeatedly but always respectfully clashed with Born, Born and others over the adequacy of quantum mechanics as a framework for fundamental physical theory?

Checking 15 Quantum Mechanics and Controversy.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 The Photon Box Thought Experiment is a thought experiment proposed by Albert Einstein during the 1930 Solvay meeting. It was designed to challenge the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, but it actually served to highlight the incompleteness of quantum mechanics and the problematic nature of entanglement. In the experiment, a box filled with photons is suspended by a spring and equipped with a shutter that can be opened to let one photon escape. The energy or time of arrival of the escaped photon could be measured at some distant location. Einstein argued that after the photon escapes, we could predict either the energy of the escaped photon or the time when it arrives, without interfering with it. However, this seems to violate the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Bohr found a flaw in Einstein's reasoning: after the photon escapes, the box is a bit lighter and rises a bit, experiencing a weaker gravitational field and causing the clock inside to speed up slightly. This effect, although minute, saves the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.

Einstein didn't propose the thought experiment to disprove the Uncertainty Principle; he had already realized that this was futile. Instead, his goal was to demonstrate the incompleteness of quantum mechanics and the problems caused by assuming the truth of entanglement. This point is further explored in the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen argument in Lecture 17. After the Solvay meeting, Einstein left Germany as a refugee from Nazism and focused his research on the quest for a unified field theory, which occupied him for the rest of his life.

Checking 16 Einstein in Princeton -- The Lonely Quest.txt in cognetics/Albert Einstein/
 In the final lecture on Albert Einstein's life and legacy, we explore his quest for a unified field theory,
a dream that still persists today in the form of string theory and other efforts to create a "theory of everything."
Einstein was a complex figure who stood apart from the mainstream physics community, both in his
pursuit of a unified field theory and in his activism on issues like nuclear disarmament and world government.
Throughout his life, Einstein maintained a sense of