Ever since I can remember, I have been interested in the concept of God.
Now this hardly makes me unusual, of course, but because I'm a scientist, I'm often around
people who think that my interest is misguided.
Now I won't speculate about the reasons why they might have that opinion, but for me there's
never been a disconnect between the pursuit of knowledge and an interest in religion and
God.
In fact, when I was a child, I liked to ask lots of questions, like any good scientist
would, and many of those questions actually had to do with God.
I wanted to know, does God exist in the first place?
And if so, is there one religion that has a perspective on God that's more right than
the others?
Is God loving or vindictive?
Does belief in God have any benefits either here on earth or somehow later on?
Well I got older and instead of going away, all of these questions actually took on new
depth, new dimensions for me.
I went to college and then ultimately on to medical school, constantly thinking about
these questions in the background.
I was always trying to learn a little bit that might enlighten me about these questions.
And as I went into my medical school career and started to understand all that I could
about the human body, I began to wonder how I might be able to use my scientific background
to address these very big questions.
Then one day it occurred to me, since religion and spirituality can have a tremendous effect
on people, there should be some physiological manifestation of that effect in the most important
organ in our body, the human brain.
People's lives are changed by faith in God.
Their habits and choices are shaped by spiritual practices like prayer and meditation.
So surely there's something happening in the brain, something that we theoretically can
measure that reflects what spirituality and religion does for us as human beings.
Now this was something of a revelation for me.
We can study the human brain, right?
Nobody doubts that.
But if we can study the human brain, then by extension we can also study how religion
and spirituality affect that brain.
And if we could somehow measure or quantify that effect, well maybe this would even tell
us something about how and why we are spiritual.
Now I have to admit that as a neuroscientist part of me just wanted to take a religious
person and stick them into one of the brain scanners I was using and see where religion
was in the brain.
But that's obviously a very simplistic way of looking at things and over the years I've
definitely come to realize that you can't just rely on brain scans to explain religion.
Even so I thought then and still think now that using brain imaging technology and other
aspects of our medical technology is a very fruitful place to start at exploration of
the relationship between spirituality and the brain.
So in 1993 I actually designed one of our first studies.
It was a small study that we conducted at my lab at the University of Pennsylvania.
The goal was to examine the brain activity while participants were engaged in a type
of Christian meditative prayer called centering prayer.
The study of centering prayer involved bringing into our lab some of the most religious people
I've ever met.
It was a group of cloistered Franciscan nuns.
Now the nuns were very pleasant to work with and were actually very supportive of the idea
of scanning their brains while they prayed.
In and of itself I found this willingness very interesting because I really didn't know
what we were going to find from the research and I wasn't sure if we might find out something
that the nuns wouldn't like.
So I had some trepidation as to whether or not we could even get people to come in to
do this study, whether we could get these nuns in to do this study, but sure enough
in they came.
They were very interested to put an intravenous catheter into their arms so that I could inject
a small amount of a radioactive material and this radioactive material would ultimately
allow me to scan their brain to determine which of the areas were more or less active
during prayer.
Now of course there are always issues with any study and particularly with the study
of religion.
To begin with we wanted to make sure that each person had enough experience doing the
centering prayer.
Centering prayer in and of itself is a very interesting contemplative practice where they
continue to concentrate and focus their mind on a particular phrase or particular prayer
that they repeatedly come back to in their mind.
Now I wanted to make sure that these nuns actually had done the prayer for some kind
of reasonable amount of time so we actually set a lower limit that they had to be doing
the practice for at least 15 years to qualify.
When the first nun came in I asked her how long have you been doing this centering prayer
practice and she just looked at me without very much expression.
She said about 57 years, you're qualified I quickly thought to myself.
So clearly we had some very good candidates, some very good subjects for our study.
But there were other problems.
In fact the next potentially problematic issue which I had never even really considered
before was that our regulations stated that in order to do a study we are required to
obtain a pregnancy test on every woman who is of child bearing potential.
After all the study actually involves giving people radioactivity and you don't want to
give radioactivity to somebody who is pregnant.
Once I pondered this for a little while I got very uncomfortable about the prospect of
actually having to ask a nun and submit a nun to a pregnancy test.
That really didn't sit very well with me and I was very nervous about the possibility of
having to do that.
But fortunately all of them were over the age of 60 years.
They were no longer of child bearing age so I dodged that very interesting regulatory
and theological bullet.
Finally I got them into the room into our lab one by one to begin their prayer sessions.
I want to explain to you a little bit about how we do this study.
As I mentioned we start out before they even do the practice by putting a small intravenous
catheter in their arm.
The reason that we do this is so that at some point we can inject a small amount of a radioactive
tracer that essentially follows blood flow as it gets up into the brain.
The way this works then is that at the moment that I do the injection it circulates in the
body, gets up into the brain and after about two or three minutes effectively gets locked
into the brain.
Now this is actually very important because it actually helps us to capture a particular
moment in time of what the brain is doing at that particular time.
For example if I was to actually inject one of you who is listening to my lecture right
now and I injected you right now, you finished listening to the lecture, maybe had something
to eat and then drove over to your local hospital to get into the scanner, the scan that we
would get would actually show me what was going on right now at the moment that you
are listening to me and all the other things that happened in between wouldn't really
matter in terms of showing what's going on in the brain.
This is very important because it helps us to capture a snapshot at a particular moment
in time and in this case the prayer.
So the way this worked was that we needed to actually compare the prayer state to some
kind of baseline state where the brain wasn't doing the prayer and we actually had them
just resting comfortably in the room and at that point I would give them the very first
dose of the radioactive material.
This then allowed me to capture a picture of what their brain was doing when it was not
doing anything in particular.
We would get that scan then they would engage in the prayer practice which they actually
did for about 45 minutes and towards the end of that practice at the peak of their practice
I would inject them again for the prayer scan.
Again part of the advantage of the intravenous catheter is that they don't feel me doing
it, it doesn't disturb their practice in any way, they just keep going through the prayer
as if nothing's changed but when I actually can bring them into the scanner I can now
see what was going on in their brain during the prayer state which is different than what
was going on when they were just at rest.
So the scans actually showed many different changes including changes in the parts of
our brain that are involved in our sense of self, our ability to focus attention and our
emotions.
For example when the nuns engage in this deep prayer they begin to lose their sense of self,
they feel more connected to God and it was interesting that the area of their brain
that helps us to establish our sense of self actually changed.
This was a very emotional experience for them and therefore the emotional areas of our brain
a part of the brain that we'll talk about later called the limbic system was actually
very activated during the practice and finally a part of our brain that's called the frontal
lobe that's located right behind the forehead actually had increased activity, this is a
part of our brain that normally helps us to focus our attention and of course the nuns
were deeply focused on the particular prayer practice.
So we saw lots of different changes going on in the brain during prayer that were different
than what we saw when the person was at rest.
Now this was very exciting to us, we were actually looking at evidence that prayer has
a measurable effect on the human brain.
This is the kind of moment that a scientist lives for and for me personally it was a moment
that both validated my interest in the spiritual brain and ignited my passion to learn much
more.
Now throughout the course we'll be returning to our study of the Franciscan nuns, we'll
also examine a number of other similar kinds of studies and we will gradually develop a
very detailed picture of what's going on in the brain when people pray, when they meditate
or even when they just plain think religious thoughts.
For now I want to use the Centering Prayer Study as a way of introducing some of the
cutting edge questions that we'll be addressing in this course because as I sifted through
the results of the scans from that first study of the nuns I found that the questions that
were raised were even more fascinating than the conclusions that we could draw from that
preliminary data.
To me that's one of the things that good scientific experiments do, as you pursue the answer to
one question the experiment actually opens your mind to a slew of great questions that
you had maybe never even thought of before.
So let's stop for a moment and reflect on the study I've just described.
If prayer causes a very specific pattern of activity in the brain, a pattern that can
be detected by our brain scanning technology, what sort of questions does that raise?
What questions would you begin asking if you were a scientist?
Well here are just a few of the questions that I began to think about.
First I'd like to know are these changes in brain activity just for the Centering Prayer
or do they apply to other practices as well, other types of prayer, other types of meditation?
And here's another question that occurs to me.
If I compare the brain scans of different individuals, can I learn anything about the
different ways in which they conceptualize their notion of God or their notion of religion?
I might even want to explore the question, what might these brain scans tell me about
the relationship between spirituality and health, particularly mental health, which
clearly has something else to do with the brain?
And you can probably think of many other questions that are just as intriguing as the ones that
I've offered.
But wait a minute, some of you are probably already wondering, are these the kind of questions
that science can actually answer in the first place?
Well true, we can use the latest and greatest medical technology to see which brain areas
are more or less active during prayer, but can that really tell us anything about the
spirituality of the person who is doing the prayer?
Or to put it more succinctly, is spirituality even a proper subject for scientific examination?
Well, I wouldn't be teaching this course if I didn't answer that question with a resounding
yes.
For me, science is all about understanding the world and understanding ourselves.
And when it comes to ourselves, few things seem more persistent and fundamental than
human spirituality and religiousness.
In fact, when you ask the question, who even cares about God, the answer seems to be pretty
much everybody.
Think about it, human beings have pursued religion from our earliest origins.
For example, if we go back in time, 70 to 100 thousand years ago, we find that Neanderthals
were burying their dead.
And not only were they burying the bodies, but in some of the graves, they included various
instruments, different tools, jewelry, and other adornments.
Why do they do this?
It suggests at least that they had some kind of belief that these dead friends were going
to go somewhere and maybe need these objects in some way.
It was not the body that departed because they could see that in front of them, but
something did, something else left, something maybe non-material or even a soul perhaps.
Now fast forward to about 30,000 years ago when people were painting detailed scenes
on cave walls in France and Southern Africa.
These scenes included some unusual figures that combined human beings and animals together.
Several scholars have suggested that these paintings actually represent mystical experiences.
After all, why and how would these people be in this cave in the first place where there
was no light, it was difficult to even breathe.
Maybe they were in there for some kind of religious or spiritual purpose and the paintings
represented the experiences that they had while they were in the cave.
And if they're right, if these scholars are right, then human beings were already capable
of very profound spiritual states 30,000 years ago.
Then roughly about 11,000 years ago, a temple was constructed at a place called Gobekli
Tepe which is in southeastern Turkey.
The temple is comprised of large circular structures with big walls made of unworked
dry stone and then there are these large T-shaped monolithic pillars that are comprised of limestone
that go up to about 10 feet high.
There are actually a bigger pair of these pillars which are placed in the center of
these circular structures.
There's also some evidence that the structure actually may have had a roof to it and perhaps
the most interesting aspect of this entire site is that there are these carved reliefs
on the pillars that include all sorts of animals.
The animals include fox, lions, cattle and also different kinds of birds, herons, ducks
and insects such as scorpions, ants and spiders and also some snakes.
There is even a small number of human looking figures as well.
Now this has been a very big find in anthropology.
This temple at Gobekli Tepe actually suggests that civilization did not precede religion
as had been previously thought but that religion preceded civilization because here was a religious
temple that was built thousands of years before the very first cities ever began to appear.
This seems to show that the cities arose around the temple rather than the other way around.
Then we have the example of the ancient Egyptians who maybe 5,000 to 6,000 years ago developed
a very rich religious mythology with many types of gods that helped them to control the world
and help them to understand death and the afterworld.
And finally when you consider the origins of the monotheistic traditions about 5,000
years ago of Judaism and Christianity and then later Islam as well as the emergence
of Buddhism and Hinduism then we begin to see that throughout time and across the globe
human beings have thought about and struggled with the notion of a spiritual realm or God.
Now at this point I want to ask you to think a little bit more like a scientist.
First of all the question should be why does all of this matter?
Sure the religious impulse is ancient, very ancient but so what?
Isn't religion just the way things get explained before science comes along?
Of course that's one way you could look at it but as a scientist you might also look at
this long history and think to yourself, hmm there's an undeniable pattern here.
Scientists exhibit a persistent tendency to believe in things like God and the afterlife
and they also believe in ideas of religion, spirituality and the soul.
But maybe there's something in the way our brains are put together, the way we're wired
that makes us well believe.
That's the sort of question that we'll be exploring in this course.
What is it about human beings that makes us believe?
And notice that I say makes us believe, not made us believe in the past tense because
after all religious belief didn't stop 5,000, 1,000 or even 100 years ago.
Now sure in the 19th century thinkers like Nietzsche told us that God was dead and many
people thought that the development of science and universal education would lead people
away from religious and spiritual ideas.
But despite those thinkers large percentages of people throughout the world still describe
themselves as religious.
Depending on the survey that you look at about 85 to 90 percent of people in the United States
believe in God and surveys of the world population usually put the percentage of religious individuals
between about 80 to 85 percent.
Even agnostics and atheists are actually defined by their beliefs about God or at least their
beliefs about a lack of God.
So we are all interested in this topic.
Almost everyone has thought about it at one point in their lives and come to some conclusion
about what belief or what non-belief to incorporate into their life.
And that's why I feel so strongly that science has to play a fundamental role in the exploration
of human spirituality.
Given the universality of the human impulse to believe, how can science really understand
our species unless it's willing to explore the spiritual brain?
Studies like the one involving the Franciscan nuns aren't scientific sideshows anymore.
They can actually help us to get at the core of what it means to be human.
And many other researchers are beginning to engage in this field.
In fact, some of the most exciting research in all of science is occurring in a new field
that some people have referred to as neurotheology.
Neurotheology is essentially the study of the relationship between the brain and spirituality.
The tools of neurotheology are some of the brain imaging techniques that we talked about
in the context of the nun study.
But it also includes other physiological measures of the brain and also of the body, such as
changes in our blood pressure, changes in heart rate, changes in hormones, or even in
the immune system's functioning.
Other tools could include studies and experiments that measure the subjective nature of the
brain.
This includes the thoughts, the feelings, and the perceptions that are a part of a person's
sense of spirituality, sense of religiousness, because we need to understand what the person
is feeling and thinking so that we can combine that or integrate that with what we can know
is going on in their biology.
We'll be returning to neurotheology in later lectures, but I wanted to introduce it here
because it is a new and expanding field of research that has certainly caught the attention
of both scientists and religious scholars, in addition to the public at large.
Moreover, we'll be employing many of the tools of neurotheology throughout this course.
So it's a term that you'll want to be familiar with.
Of course, neurotheology isn't the first attempt to describe the links between the brain and
spirituality.
In fact, the wisdom of many ancient traditions includes powerful intuitions and surprising
insights about the nature of these elusive links.
For example, Eastern religious traditions, such as Buddhism and Hinduism, have long
shown significant interest in our psychology.
Buddhist and Hindu writings have made extensive evaluations of the experience of the self,
their emotional attachment to that self, and how the human psyche can be altered through
various practices, practices like prayer and meditation.
These traditions recognize the importance of using the mind, using the brain, to help
us achieve spiritual enlightenment.
For example, Buddha is attributed the following quote,
All wrongdoing arises because of mind.
If the mind is transformed, can wrongdoing remain?
Clearly, he is recognizing the importance of the mind and how we are to be spiritually
and morally.
Similarly, in this course, we will evaluate the many ways in which the brain helps us
to be spiritual.
Ayurvedic medical practices, which were developed in India, had an emphasis on the notion of
the body's energy.
According to this tradition, the brain, the body, and the spirit are intimately interconnected
by an energy or a force that is sometimes referred to as chi.
So Ayurvedic medicine long ago incorporated a concept that we will be exploring with the
tools of modern science, namely the concept that the material brain is somehow deeply
connected to the spiritual experiences of the mind.
And in terms of the Western world, ancient religious texts, they didn't deal so much
specifically with the brain's relationship to spirituality, per se.
But the Bible, for example, does tell us a little bit.
It doesn't speak about specific body physiology or mental processes, but there are descriptions
of human beings, their frailties, and the evil actions that they commit, and this clearly
to me signifies a deep interest in human psychology.
After all, the Ten Commandments are basically a treatise on moral psychology.
The Ten Commandments specify what we are to think and how we are to behave.
But we must remember that the brain is the thing about us that makes the moral guidelines
intelligible to us, and more than this, it is the brain that drives us to behave in ways
that either satisfy or violate those intelligible guidelines.
And to some degree, these guidelines have to make sense in the context of the human brain.
What it tells us to do has to be something that our brain is capable of doing.
So in a sense, the moral psychology of the Bible leads us to a topic that will be central
to later lectures.
We will see how the capabilities and limitations of the brain relate to our spiritual beliefs
and our moral behaviors.
And of course, questions about the relationship between body and soul, brain and mind, these
have been central to Western philosophical tradition.
From Rene Descartes to Baruch Spinoza to Immanuel Kant, we have wondered whether there was something
inherent in the human mind that allowed it access to ultimate reality.
People have argued for centuries about how we can have knowledge of ultimate reality,
recognizing that such knowledge is the key to understanding the nature of the universe.
This to me is one of humanity's ultimate goals, to explore and understand how the universe
works and we must realize the critical role our mind plays in achieving this understanding.
It actually reminds me of one of my favorite stories about two monks who many centuries
ago were walking along the grounds of their monastery and they look up and they see a
flag of the monastery waving in the wind.
And they begin to argue about this.
I guess this is what monks do.
One of them said, look at how the flag is moving.
And the other one said, no, no, no, it's not the flag that moves.
It is the wind that moves.
And they argued back and forth about this for some time.
And finally, Huy Neng, who was their spiritual leader, came along and he said, gentlemen,
it is not the flag that moves.
It is not the wind that moves.
It is your mind that moves.
And with this, the two monks were struck with awe.
The purpose of this course then is to understand how and why the mind moves human beings to
be spiritual, to contemplate God and to develop and follow religions.
But just like the monks, we can wonder what creates what?
Does the brain create God or does God create the brain?
Are we biological beings who are spiritual?
Or are we spiritual beings who are biological?
Just like the monks, these are fascinating questions that we have to debate and try to
find that new integrated way of understanding our world.
And as we saw with the study of the Franciscan nuns, science is giving us new techniques
to address these great questions of human life.
Questions relating to God and the soul and the nature of human belief.
And this research is beginning to shed light on the questions regarding the relationship
between the brain and human spirituality.
No, we are not the first to consider such questions, but we now can turn to biology
and neuroscience to gain a new perspective on some very ancient questions.
We can consider the brain's many functions and processes in terms of how they relate
to spirituality.
And just like the monks, we can explore what inside of us, inside of our brain, inside
our mind, actually is moving us to be spiritual.
So let us begin our journey into the spiritual brain.
I hope that you will find it as challenging and as exciting as I do.
