The average human brain weighs about three and a half pounds.
It's roughly the size of a large head of cauliflower and resembles the color and consistency
of a generous blob of extra firm tofu, which actually explains why I don't eat tofu anymore.
But this blob of matter is moored to the walls of our skull by a bunch of small ligaments
and is protected by a thin layer of fluid which provides a cushion between the brain
and this inner surface of the skull.
Now how is it possible that this rather bland looking organ is the seat of everything that
we know to be human?
The brain is capable of generating our most profound thoughts, our most intense emotions,
and our most sacred beliefs.
And yet as neuroscience continues to explore the various parts of the brain that are active
when we engage in these processes, we still have no real understanding of how the neurons
and their connections ultimately create a thought or a sense of consciousness.
In fact there has been centuries of debate regarding the difference between the mind
and the body or in today's world between the mind and the brain.
It is always difficult to determine what exactly is the relationship between what people usually
refer to as the mind and what people refer to as the brain.
Now generally we think of the brain as the biological structure that is inside of our
head.
This includes the different neurons and cells in the brain, the chemicals or neurotransmitters
in the brain and the various electrical connections that connect the brain parts to each other.
We might add to that the connections of the brain to the sensory organs and even to the
rest of the body since the brain and the body are very intimately connected.
The mind we tend to think of as the thoughts and the feelings and experiences that we have.
But these intangible qualities of the mind must be connected somehow to the biological
stuff that's in the brain itself.
Now at the moment, science has really not been able to determine where exactly our thoughts,
our consciousness, our mind actually resides.
Is the mind equivalent to the biological processes?
Is it intimately bound to these biological processes or is it something completely different
altogether?
Now many thinkers, scientists, philosophers and theologians have created a dualistic understanding
of the mind and brain.
If we go back about a thousand years, Thomas Aquinas in his famous book, The Summa Theologica,
refers to the actus hominus and the actus humanus in differentiating the biological
from the intellectual, the part that makes us human.
René Descartes, the famous philosopher, is also famous for creating a very dualistic
approach to the mind and brain, keeping them in very separate domains.
In fact, his dualism was actually the approach that was taken by science up until the past
several years.
It really pervaded science for over 400 years, even up to the present day.
Now for the purposes of this course, we will try to restrict ourselves to the first definitions
that I offered.
The brain will be thought of as the thing in our head and the mind is going to be the
intangible ideas and experiences.
But the mind and brain must always be considered in a fully integrated way.
After all, this is what this course is all about, integrating things that don't always
go together, and certainly when we think about the mind and the brain, this will be our approach
to bring them together and to think about how they relate to each other.
So let us begin by considering the various functions of the brain.
Now one of the things that I want to say right from the outset is that the brain does a huge
number of things for us.
There are so many different functions that it has.
And we're going to focus on some very specific ones and particularly those that relate to
religious and spiritual phenomena and experiences.
So if you hear me talking about a particular part of the brain and something that it does,
we're going to try to relate that to a particular aspect of religion or spirituality, even though
that part of the brain may do a variety of other things as well.
The other approach that I like to take in terms of thinking about how the brain works
is to imagine how I would build a brain if I was going to make one.
So we can all pretend to be Dr. Frankenstein's for a moment.
How would we put this together?
And I think we would have to start from the bottom up.
We would have to think about how we can begin from the very, the bodily parts that connect
to our brain, all the way up to the central parts of our brain, and then ultimately to
the higher processes of the brain to see how they all would work, how we would want
them to work together, and ultimately how these processes would relate to different aspects
of spirituality that we're going to cover in much more detail in future lectures.
So I think that this discussion is going to be essential in terms of our future considerations
of the spiritual brain.
We all have to understand where the brain comes from, what it does, and how it works
before we can understand what the spiritual brain is all about.
So let's start building our brain from the bottom up.
To some degree, if we think about our body and how it is going to work in the context
of the brain, there needs to be some kind of on and off switch for the body.
And this is typically supplied by something called the autonomic nervous system.
It's called autonomic because it works very automatically for us.
And it's typically regarded as being comprised of two fundamental arms or two fundamental
parts.
One of them is called the arousal part.
In scientific terms, it's called the sympathetic nervous system.
I like to call it the arousal system because that's exactly what it does.
It arouses us.
It turns us on.
It's the on switch for the body.
Many of you growing up may have heard about the fight or flight response, and it's this
arousal system which is incredibly important in that fight or flight response.
It turns on when something of motivational importance happens in our environment that
we need to react to.
And as I mentioned, it happens automatically.
So if you think to a time where maybe you are driving calmly down the highway and suddenly
a car cuts you off completely and it's a near accident, before you even start to think about
what's going on.
Your body has started to react.
Your autonomic nervous system, your sympathetic nervous system kicks in and you react.
Your heart rate and your blood pressure go up before you actually even think about what's
going on.
Now if there's an on switch to the body, there's also an off switch.
And this is related to part of the autonomic nervous system called the parasympathetic
nervous system, what I sometimes refer to as the quiescent nervous system.
It calms us down.
It settles our body down.
And it's this part of the autonomic nervous system that kicks in when we're digesting
our food, when we're getting ready to go to sleep, so that we can rejuvenate our energy
stores.
In some degree, the arousal system is what expends energy to flee or to fight, for example.
And the quiescent side is what enables us to rejuvenate those energy stores.
Now normally they mutually inhibit each other.
This certainly makes sense.
If you have to flee out of a burning building, you would want your arousal system to kick
in.
It's not time for your quiescent system to come in and say, oh, it's time to lie down
and take a nap.
You've got to get out of the building, you've got to move, and you've got to move now.
On the other hand, sometimes if you are trying to go to bed and you are anxious about something
that's happening the next day, maybe a big presentation or a test or something like that,
then it's difficult to sleep.
Why?
Your quiescent system is trying to kick in, trying to get you to sleep, but your arousal
system keeps turning on and keeps you awake.
So in general, we like to see one of those sides of the autonomic nervous system turning
on while the other one turns off, but sometimes they can actually mutually excite each other.
The reason that this mutual excitation might be important will be later on when we talk
about some very important spiritual experiences which seem to invoke two different kinds of
responses.
On one hand, they seem to invoke a very powerful calming response, a feeling of blissfulness.
And yet on the other hand, sometimes describe these profound spiritual states as being incredibly
arousing and alerting.
So what's going on in these experiences?
Is it possible that both sides of the autonomic nervous system are getting involved and both
of them are turning on so that we seem to have an experience of both arousal and calming
at the same time?
These are questions that we will take on later on in the course.
So the autonomic nervous system is what ultimately connects the brain and the body so that the
brain and the body know what each other are doing and the body knows how to respond to
whatever the brain is thinking about.
But what goes on in the central parts of the brain that help to regulate that?
Well, this takes place in a part of the brain called the limbic system.
And the limbic system is a very central part of structures in the brain.
They are fundamental to how our brain works, and in fact the limbic system is a part of
other animals' nervous systems as well, as well as the autonomic nervous system.
The limbic system may be thought of as the primary emotional controller of the brain.
The limbic system is comprised of several different structures that enable us to have
these different emotional responses.
One of the first ones that we come to is a structure called the amygdala.
Some of you may have heard of the amygdala because it tends to get a lot of attention
in the neuroscientific literature.
It tends to turn on a lot, and in fact it turns on when we experience something of great
fear is one of the main reasons why it turns on.
So the amygdala kind of functions as a watchdog in the brain.
It turns on when anything of emotional importance occurs in our environment.
What's also interesting is that the amygdala occurs not only when it's something to be
feared, but something that's very positive.
So it turns out that if a lion walked into the room, we might see the amygdala lighting
up on a brain scan, and if your loved one walked into the room, you might see the amygdala
lighting up on a brain scan.
So the amygdala lights up when something important happens to us.
What are things that could be important to us?
Religion and spirituality.
So if you are engaged in a practice where something very important is about to happen,
maybe we'll start to see changes going on in the amygdala, the amygdala turning on in
response to this very important thing happening in our environment.
Another structure of the limbic system is called the hippocampus.
It's actually located a little bit behind the amygdala, and it functions to help balance
what's going on in the amygdala.
The hippocampus is kind of a diplomat of the brain.
It helps to regulate our emotional responses so that we don't become too extreme one way
or another.
The other very important aspect of how the hippocampus works is that it actually helps
to write memories down into the brain.
In fact, when people develop Alzheimer's disease, the hippocampus is one of the primary areas
that is affected first in the disease, which explains why they don't remember things.
But why is it important that our memory would be related to our emotions?
Well, think about how the brain would want to work.
Do you need to remember something that isn't really that important to you?
No.
What you want to remember are things that are important to you.
In fact, if you think about how you remember things, one of my favorite examples is to
take the events that happened on 9-11.
Almost everybody remembers what was happening in their day and where they were when they
heard about all the horrible things that were going on in 9-11.
But almost no one remembers what was going on on September 10th.
So September 10th happened, we all lived through it.
But unless it had some kind of emotional importance to you, maybe a wedding or a childbirth or
something like that, you don't remember it.
What you do remember are the days and the events that have emotional salience to you
because that's what's important for your brain.
Now think about religion and spirituality.
Are those things that are important to remember?
Well if your amygdala is turning on and your hippocampus is turning on, it's telling you
that this is something that's important and something that should be an important part
of your memory.
And that's why when we think about what we remember and how we remember and incorporate
it into our lives, the limbic system is very important for making religious and spiritual
beliefs a part of who we are as human beings.
Another structure that's also very important in our limbic system is called the hypothalamus.
This is one of the most central structures of the brain and in many ways is a master
controller of almost all the different body functions.
The hypothalamus regulates our hormone system, it regulates our thyroid, our sex hormones,
our stress hormones, so it's very, very crucial in regulating how our body reacts to the world
and how our body reacts to the brain.
In fact the hypothalamus controls which arms of the autonomic nervous system are turned
on or turned off.
So the hypothalamus is this master controller and if we think about the nature of religious
and spiritual experiences as not only affecting us emotionally, but having an effect on the
body itself as we'll discuss later on, we can see how the hypothalamus may be a key regulator
in translating the information that we are feeling about and thinking about in the higher
parts of our brain ultimately down to the body.
Now as we get to the higher parts of the brain, I want you to think about the brain as being
a great receiver.
The reason I say that is that the brain receives millions of pieces of information and ultimately
tries to create for us a very coherent rendition of what our world is all about.
So it takes what we see, what we hear, what we taste and smell and puts all of that together
so that we have some way of understanding the world, making a picture of the world.
How does it do this?
Well, it actually goes through a series of different processing steps.
When we look at how our brain works, it continues to build from the bottom up.
So let's take our visual system for a moment.
Initially the light comes in through our eyes and it actually goes to the very back parts
of the brain, a part of the brain called the occipital lobe.
In the occipital lobe, we don't perceive the pictures of what we see out there.
We see lines, shapes and colors.
But if you then go to what are called the association areas that take information from
lots of different neurons, it begins to construct for us, step by step, a very vivid picture
of what the world is all about and brings in the different images, colors and then connects
with other association areas so that it attributes a memory to whatever it is that we see in
front of us.
So for example, if a dog walks in front of us, the visual system picks up the colors
and the lines and the shapes.
It kicks that information up to the association areas that put together a picture of what
the dog actually looks like.
And then that connects with our memory areas to tell us, oh, that's a dog.
And we may have positive emotions to it.
If we've loved dogs in our lives, we may have negative emotions if we had a very negative
interaction with the dog.
So the brain works through these different multiple steps and we have what are called
association areas that bring together very complex coordinated processing of all of this
different information that comes into us from the world.
Now there's a few other association areas that I want us to also keep in mind.
These association areas are very relevant in the context of religious and spiritual experiences
and practices.
One of them is what I like to refer to as the verbal conceptual area.
Now in terms of where it's located in the brain, it's actually located between two of
the larger lobes of the brain.
The brain is divided into four basic lobes.
I've mentioned the occipital lobe in the back of the brain.
We've talked in the first lecture about the frontal lobe, which is in the front part of
the brain.
Along the side of the brain is a part of the brain called the temporal lobe and the parietal
lobe is located towards the back top part of the brain.
So this verbal conceptual area is actually somewhere between the temporal lobe and the
parietal lobe and it does just what I suggest that it does in terms of its name.
It helps us with language and it helps us with concepts, with ideas, abstract ideas.
All of these are put together so that we can begin to think about things from a language
perspective as well as a conceptual perspective.
The frontal lobe is also a kind of association area that I like to refer to as the attention
area because many brain scan studies have shown that when we focus our attention on
a particular task, whether it's driving down the street or perhaps in meditation or prayer,
the attention area is what turns on and it actually helps to coordinate our thought processes
and actually our physical behaviors by linking together what we are thinking about focusing
on in an attention way with what our body and our brain are doing.
The final association area that I want to mention is located in the parietal lobe, the
back part of the brain.
I like to refer to this area as the orientation area because what this part of the brain does
is it takes all of our sensory information and actually helps to orient our self in the
world.
So if you are going to get up out of your chair at the end of listening to my lecture
and walk out of the room and through the doorway, it's this orientation area that enables you
to do that.
Now why would this be relevant to a religious or spiritual experience?
Well we talked about this a little bit with respect to the study of the Franciscan nuns.
One of the experiences that they have is that they lose their sense of self and they feel
a sense of spacelessness and timelessness.
Well that's the case.
Maybe there's something going on in this orientation area of the brain that's changing the way
in which they actually think about themselves and we'll talk about this in more detail in
future lectures.
So we've talked about the different structures of the brain and the basic functions of what
they do but I'd like to take another step forward and think about the more complex cognitive
functions of what the brain has to offer us in terms of how it processes our world.
And I think each of these cognitive functions bears directly on various aspects of religious
or spiritual thoughts, ideas and experiences.
One of my favorite ones to think about is actually the one that helps us with numbers.
I sometimes refer to this as a quantitative function of the brain.
It's probably located in the parietal lobe, probably a little bit towards the back part
of the brain but not quite so far back as the orientation area.
And this helps us with numbers.
Now obviously it's very helpful for us to be able to look at numbers in the world but
do numbers have anything to do with religion or spirituality?
If you've read through different sacred texts you'll find numbers abound throughout these
texts.
We see for example it raining for 40 days and 40 nights in the story of Noah and the flood
or we see Moses and the Jews wandering around the desert for 40 years.
Why is 40 important?
Are there other numbers that might be important?
Maybe three for example as it relates to the Trinity and Christianity.
So we can start to see how numbers are actually given meaning and importance in large part
by the quantitative function of the brain.
Another very important part of the brain in terms of its function is the part of the brain
that helps us with what I like to refer to as binary thinking.
And this is probably also very close to that verbal conceptual area because it helps us
with different ideas.
But the reason that our binary processes are so important is they set aside opposites for
us.
Now think about religion and spirituality for a moment.
What are the opposites that we think about there?
Well, we might think about moral opposites.
What's right?
What's wrong?
What is a believer and a nonbeliever?
What are the right ways to think about God and the wrong ways to think about God?
So these different concepts are set for us by the binary process of the brain and therefore
become very important in terms of how we think about religious and spiritual ideas.
Another really important part of the brain is the causal functioning part of the brain.
This is interesting because we do perceive cause and effect in the world and there's
parts of our brain that actually are activated when we think about and see causes and effects
in the world.
In fact, there's some interesting studies that have shown that even in infants, if they're
presented with a series of conditions that don't seem to make sense causally, they stare
at that longer than if it does seem to make sense causally.
So it seems that even at a very young age, maybe three to six months of age, we have
the ability to think about things causally.
Again, if we think about this in the context of religious or spiritual ideas, we might
think about God in a causal perspective.
We might think about God as causing the universe to come into existence or causing the universe
to exist all the time.
So our causal function of the brain becomes very, very important in terms of our ideas
about God.
We have an existential function in the brain that tells us when something is real and exists
and I won't spend much time on it now, but this is a fascinating issue that comes up
later on when we talk about the nature and the experience of human reality.
Within our brain, we also have two opposing functions, one that kind of breaks things
down.
I like to refer to it as the reductionist function and one that seems to bring things
together and bind everything into a oneness.
What I like to refer to as the holistic function, when people have mystical experiences, they
describe a sense of oneness and if that's the case, how does this holistic function
actually start to play a role?
Maybe this has something to do with that orientation part of the brain in terms of how we perceive
our self and how we relate that self to the rest of the world.
We have an abstract function in the brain so that we can think about things abstractly
and this is very crucial for all the philosophical and religious and theological ideas that we
hold.
As I mentioned, we have a limbic system that enables us to have our emotions and apply those
emotions to all of these different thoughts and feelings and experiences.
But how do we know about all of these functions and how they're tied to the brain?
Well, over the past several decades, neuroscientists have developed amazing tools for peering into
the brain and we have really now begun to use these tools to study the spiritual brain
and of course this is going to be a very important part of a lot of our course is to try to understand
how we can apply these different methods for measuring the brain to look at specific religious
and spiritual ideas.
So what are the ways of measuring the brain and its function?
Well to some degree, I like to think about this in the context of subjective measures
as well as objective measures.
objective measures refer to asking people how they feel, what do they think about, how
are they understanding the experiences that they have and this is very crucial because
we need to understand better how we begin to make sense of what the person is actually
thinking or feeling.
We also have to think about physiological measures because we have to understand what
is going on in the brain itself, in the body itself and we can measure that through changes
in electrical activity in the brain, something called electroencephalography or using different
neuroimaging studies to look at activity levels in the brain, the amount of chemicals
in the brain, all of these different things are ways in which we can actually better understand
the physiological objective processes of what's going on in the brain and ultimately how they
relate to different religious and spiritual experiences.
But let's return for a moment to the subjective measures.
Now there are a lot of different ways of getting at what we understand subjectively.
We can take psychological inventories and ask people about the emotions that they have.
We can ask them whether they feel depressed, anxious and there are a lot of very elegant
ways of trying to do this.
We can measure a person's memory, a person's cognitive status, whether they are able to
focus attention and whether they are able to do different tasks better or worse.
People have also developed a variety of different spiritual scales so we can ask people how
important is religion in their lives, what kinds of spiritual experiences might they
have had and I think that this is very important for us to look at these kinds of subjective
measures so that we can begin to link them better with what we are measuring physiologically.
Now again physiologically we can look at not only what's going on in the brain itself but
what's going on in the body in terms of our autonomic function, our heart rate, our blood
pressure.
We can draw blood and measure changes in our immune system, changes in our hormones and
all of these things are important ways of trying to help us establish the link between
our spiritual selves and our biological selves.
Now in terms of the ways of specifically looking at the brain there are a few very very good
ways of trying to do that.
Electroencephalography I mentioned a few moments ago measures the electrical activity in the
brain.
It's a very good technique for looking at what's going on moment to moment but it kind
of looks at general areas of the brain and doesn't really give us an accurate determination
of where something is happening in the brain.
For that we really have to turn to imaging studies and when we look at imaging studies
we generally find the ability to look at the brain structurally or anatomically as well
as functionally.
When we look at the brain structurally it tells us something about the size of the brain,
the size of the different parts of the brain and how different parts of the brain are connected
to each other.
Which usually uses either a technique called magnetic resonance imaging or positron emission
tomography, pet imaging or single photon emission computed tomography, specked imaging.
All of these are ways of looking at the activity levels in the brain.
So for example if you're engaged in a prayer practice like our nuns the structure of their
brain didn't change in that moment but there were a lot of functional changes that were
going on.
So all of that is very important for helping us to assess what spirituality is and how
it affects the brain and ultimately the body.
So we have now laid the foundation for discussing the spiritual brain in much greater detail.
We understand the brain's basic functions and processes and we have considered how many
of the latest techniques can be used to help study the spiritual brain.
Given the information we have now reviewed on the brain and the ability to measure the
brain I'd like you to do something before we move on to the next lecture.
I'd like you to spend a few moments to think about or even to write down some of the burning
questions in your mind.
Why were you interested in learning about the spiritual brain and what research questions
do you have?
I'm always so pleased when I give a talk to people to hear all of the wonderful questions
that come about that challenge different and new ways of thinking about research questions.
So what questions would you want to answer?
Is there a specific question that you think would be a great topic for a research study?
Maybe you have a favorite practice that you do and you want to know how it relates to
your own brain function.
How can your questions be studied with these different neuroscientific techniques?
This is the topic that we will consider in the next lecture.
