With our discussion of the brain and various aspects of belief and the nature of the spiritual
brain, we have now laid the foundation for considering in more detail the important elements
of religion and spirituality. A fundamental part of religions is their elaboration in
myths, the stories that form the basis of religions. In fact, there is evidence that
our brain is a myth-making machine. But why and how does the brain make myths? That is
the subject that we will address today.
The noted anthropologist Joseph Campbell once stated, and I quote,
Since the earliest evidence of the emergence of our species, signs have been found which
indicate that mythological aims and concerns were already shaping the arts and world of
Homo sapiens.
We have always constructed myths or stories that have become incorporated into our burial
rituals, our temples, and our civilizations. So what are these stories and why are they
so important?
One of the points that I want to start out making very strongly is that myth does not
necessarily imply something that is false. So often in today's world we tend to think
about myth in that way. We might refer to the myths of dieting or we'll talk about the
myths of ancient Greece and talk about how silly they sounded. But myth in and of itself
is a very important kind of story. In fact, the word itself, myth, comes from the Greek
mythos, which translates as word. But it's not just a word, it is one that is spoken
with deep and unquestioned authority. Mythos is in turn anchored in another Greek word
called mustion, which means to close the eyes or the mouth. Karen Armstrong, the author
of the book The History of God, states that to close the eyes or the mouth roots myth
in an experience of darkness and silence. Now what might that mean? Well, if your sensory
inputs are shut down, everything that you see in here, then the myth can become the
primary focus of your brain. In other words, all of our brain's processes are brought to
bear on the myth itself, and that is ultimately what gives myths their incredible power. Now
in a similar way, if you put someone in a sensory deprivation chamber, they are going
to have much more intense sensory experiences and thought processes. And many spiritual practices
such as meditation and prayer try to eliminate the external stimuli, which appears to help
create a more powerful experience for the person who's doing the practice. So myths
are not false things, they are powerful stories that have a deep impact on who we are as human
beings. Apart from their expressive power and their emotional impact, what are myths actually
good for? What do we use them for? Primarily, we develop myths to explain our world, but
frequently we use them to help explain things that we can't readily comprehend. Questions
like why were we born only eventually to die? What happens to us when we die? What is our
place in the universe? Why is there suffering? And how was the universe made in the first
place and how long will the universe last? And perhaps most pressingly, how can we live
in this baffling, uncertain world and somehow not be afraid? Well, myths help us to understand
our universe and ourselves. According to Campbell, myths show us how to be human. They
show us what is most important and what in terms of our inner life is most deeply and
profoundly true. The power of myth lies beneath its literal interpretation in the ability
of its universal symbols and themes to connect us with the most essential parts of ourselves
in ways that, to some degree, logic and reason really can't reach. By this definition, religions
must be based in myth. After all, if they were to have anything meaningful to say to
us, myth would be the most powerful way of trying to do that. In this sense, the story
of Jesus would be a myth, even if it were literally and historically true, because the
power of the story lies underneath the historical and literal facts. Likewise, even if the extraordinary
events that myths chronicle never happen and the beings they portray never walked on the
face of the earth, the lasting myths of past cultures all contain psychological and spiritual
truths that resonate with the psyches and spirits even of people today.
But myths are not just the great stories of the past. We actually create myths all the
time to explain and understand the world. Our brain functions to generate stories about
the world. And think about this. When you get up in the morning, when you go to work,
when you think about who to vote for on a political level, all of these approaches to
life are ultimately stories that your brain puts together to tell us what to do, how to
act, what to think about, and how to feel. Now, of course, neuroscience tells us that
the brain processes everything that we think and feel about the world. One of the things
that I always remark on to my students is that brain scans show different areas lighting
up in the brain whenever anything happens to us. If we see something, hear something,
feel something, or think something, something is always going on in the brain itself. And
in fact, these processes then come together to provide for us a rendition, if you will,
of what is going on in the world around us. And I want to emphasize the word rendition
because we don't really know for sure how accurate that rendition is. It is a second
order processing of whatever is out there in the world. So therefore, if everything
we think and feel and perceive about the world is processed by the brain, how can we ever
be certain that the world is represented in our brain accurately? In fact, we're going
to see in a later lecture how problematic a time the brain really has at accurately determining
what is going on in the world around us. So the brain has a fair number of limitations
and given those brain limitations, it seems that the brain has to do the best job it can
at creating a coherent story about what it is processing, about what the world is all
about. And this story helps the brain to respond to the world in effective, adaptive, and adaptive
ways. So again, this is the basis of what these stories are trying to do for us, which
is to try to create for us a sense of what the world is all about and how to respond
to the world. But we must always remember that on a fundamental level, the entire story
our brain presents for us about the world is just a second-hand rendition of what is
actually out there. So our brain is simply trying to help us to make sense of this incredibly
complex and uncertain world. And of course, that's what all the great myths from history
actually do. They help us understand the world. They help us to understand our own place within
that world. So this is what I mean when I say that our brains, all of our brains, make
myths. We need to always make stories and construct ideas about the world because that's what
our brain does. It does the best that it can to tell us what our world is about. Now let's
return to Joseph Campbell. Remember, he said that myths are stories about things fundamental
to human beings. Myths include language so that we can transmit them to others. And myths
include ideas about spirituality, morality, and reality. Take the story of Jonah and the
whale. We all remember that famous story. Remember that he is asked to do what God wants him
to do, but decides to flee instead. And he goes onto this boat because he doesn't listen
to God. And of course, this gets him all into a lot of trouble. In fact, it actually gets
him into a great big fish. But the story tells us something about how to behave spiritually,
how to behave morally. It tells us to follow our faith and in a specific context to listen
to what God asks us to do. So myths contain emotional content, both positive and negative,
and tell us something about the importance of what our behaviors and our beliefs are
all about. The story of Jonah also contains a great amount of emotions. There is great
fear and trembling in the men who are on the ship with Jonah because of the storm around
them that they believe is caused by God's wrath, ultimately because God is angry at Jonah.
And there is also the emotional component of Jonah's realization as to how he should
behave and how he should come to follow whatever God is asking him to do.
The story about the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah is another biblical story that has
a great deal of emotional content. The immoral activities related to uncontrolled hedonism
and pleasure are what ultimately create the whole story and create God's anger at the
people who live in Sodom and Gomorrah. And of course, there is the compassionate side
of God showing through as well in sparing Lot and his family in this story. These references
to very strong emotions are an absolutely crucial aspect of what myths are all about
because it's important to make sure that whatever we understand in the concept of a myth is
something that we also feel emotionally. That's what makes us to remember exactly what's
going on and the point of that particular myth. So myths provide examples and even suggestions
with regard to future behaviors that we should implement. Now with those elements of myth
in mind, let's talk a little bit about the actual structure of how myths form and more
specifically, let's see how those different elements of myth relate to the brain's functions
and the different processes that the brain takes us through as we try to understand our
world. Now essentially, all myths can be reduced to a very simple framework, I think. First,
they focus upon a crucial existential problem, a concern that we have, perhaps the creation
of the world or how evil came about in the world. Next, myths frame that concern typically
as a pair of apparently irreconcilable opposites. It may be a hero versus a monster, god versus
human beings, life versus death or heaven versus hell. Finally, and perhaps most importantly,
myths find a way of reconciling these opposites often through the actions of gods or other
spiritual powers and somehow this bringing together of the opposites relieves our existential
concerns. The creation of these stories requires a very creative and combined interaction of
a wide variety of cognitive processes in the brain. Now you'll remember from one of my
earlier lectures that the brain has several very basic cognitive functions. We talked
about the quantitative function, the binary function, the causal function and an existential
function. Well, two of these functions tend to play a very important role in the creation
and understanding of myth. The first is the causal function and this should be no surprise
since myths are essentially about the causes of things. They're going to tell us something
about what caused the world to come into existence. They're going to tell us what things that
we do, what behaviors that we do, cause us to act in a faithful way or an unfaithful
way, a moral way or an immoral way. And therefore the causal area of the brain, this area that's
probably located somewhere around here, somewhere in the region of your parietal lobe and temporal
lobe, this is a part of the brain that's going to become very active when we engage in mythic
stories because we want to understand causality in the world. We want to understand why the
world works the way it does and if we do certain things what that will cause in the world,
it gives us a feeling of understanding and a feeling of control and this again is the
power of what myths provide us. The second cognitive process is also crucial to the myth-making
mind and that is the binary process of the brain. And remember this is a very important
area that enables us to set things up in our world in terms of basic polar opposites. So
the human brain has this wonderful ability to reduce even some of the most complicated
relationships of space and time into a simple pair of opposites. We might talk about above
and below, in and out, left and right or before and after. And interestingly, we apply the
emotional processes of our brain to each of these kinds of concepts and think about that
for a moment. Is it better to be in or better to be out? Well, from a social perspective,
we tend to want to be in. We want to be in with everyone else, not outside. Is it better
to be up high or down low? From a survival perspective, usually up high is better than
down low. So we start to understand a beneficial aspect to the myth-making process that helps
us to make these comparisons. We begin to understand the relationship of these opposites, why some
are good or bad, better or worse, and we can begin to try to reconcile how those opposites
can be brought together in a way that makes us understand our world more effectively. So
let's consider an example of a particular myth and to see how the myth-making process might
actually occur. After all, each of us creates our own myths about the world. As I mentioned, we
have myths about every aspect of our world, and in addition to the myths of our own creation,
we also embrace and rely on myths that we have learned from others. So let's explore this
universal myth-making process by weaving a story of our own. Let's imagine a very close-knit
prehistoric clan, and perhaps one of the members of this clan has just died. His body lies on a bear
skin in front of them, and as others approach him, they touch him gently, and they immediately
sense that this person who used to exist no longer exists, but was once a very warm and vital
person with personality, someone they could relate to, has suddenly become a very cold and a very
lifeless thing. The clan's chieftain is perhaps a very introspective man, and he kind of slumps
over by the campfire, and he broods upon the lifeless form that was once his very good friend.
What is it that's missing, he thinks? And how was it lost? Where has it gone? And as he watches
the crackling fire, it's really overwrought by feelings of sadness and anxiety. His mind,
it's striving for some way of understanding what's been going on. He needs to find a cause
for what has happened to his friend, but the longer he dwells upon this very unnerving puzzle of life
and death, the deeper he sinks into this very kind of feeling of existential dread.
Now, from a neurobiological perspective, this grieving chieftain is really in the grip of a very
strong arousal response of the autonomic nervous system. His heart is racing, his blood pressure is
going up, he's upset, he's worried, his amygdala is firing, he's trying to think about what's going on,
and he is frustrated in the impossibility of his logical left hemisphere structures of the brain
trying to figure out what has actually happened here. The effect of the chief's intense prolonged
brooding over this existential problem is having a profound influence on how his brain is actually working.
As his brain interprets this frustration as a sign of distress, the amygdala triggers a strong limbic fear
response and it sends off neural signals activating the arousal system so that he feels it, he thinks it,
he feels it emotionally, he feels it throughout his body. And as the chief continues to ruminate upon this
grief and fear, his arousal response just continues to grow and intensify. This pulse continues to go up,
his breath grows shallow and rapid, it begins to sweat and it begins to worry more and more.
The chief stares at the fire turning his thoughts around and around in his head and as this happens,
he notices that the fire has suddenly start to burn down and it burns down to its embers.
The fire which was once very bright and alive is now all but gone. A little bit of smoke and then soon
there will be nothing but lifeless gray ashes that can never be resurrected again into flame.
And as the last wisps of smoke rise towards the sky, he turns to the body of his fallen friend
and suddenly something starts to happen. It occurs to him that maybe his comrade's life and spirit
have vanished as completely as the flames have vanished. In fact, before he can even consciously
phrase the thoughts that he's having, he's struck by a very deep conviction deep within himself
that the very essence of his friend has actually escaped up to the heavens perhaps like smoke
and that his spirit rises from the body much like a fire rises from the wood.
This conviction begins as just one more possibility offered up by his intellectually pondering side of the brain's
abstract thought processes, most likely on the left side of the brain. But as soon as it enters into the
chieftain's consciousness, it is embraced by other parts of the brain, perhaps more on the right side,
that are involved in the holistic functioning of the brain. You remember the holistic side is trying to find
ways of bringing things together. So suddenly there is an agreement of sorts between both sides of the brain
and this causes a kind of neurological resonance that sends very positive emotional discharges racing through the
limbic system. It may stimulate the pleasure centers of the brain and particularly of the hypothalamus
and because the hypothalamus regulates that autonomic nervous system, these very strong pleasure impulses trigger
a response all the way down into the body in the form of the quiescent side, the quiescent system and the
chieftain experiences this as a very powerful surge of calmness and peacefulness. Now all of this happens
maybe in the wink of an eye. Too fast for the arousal response that triggered the chief's anxiety in the
first place. And for a very remarkable moment, both that quiescent and arousal system may be simultaneously
active. And if you remember, we talked about this in an earlier lecture where we talked about the balance
between the arousal and the calming sides of the autonomic nervous system that normally they suppress the
other, but sometimes they both come on. And this very intense feeling of arousal and calmness can be a very
strong kind of an experience. Some neurologists refer to this as the eureka response or the aha kind of moment.
And many of us have experienced that at one point or another in our lives when we're struggling with a problem
and we finally get the answer. It's a tremendous feeling of an energy rush, a feeling of ecstasy and perhaps even awe
that this answer somehow came to us. For the chieftain, he finally understands the meaning of death and life.
And in this transforming flash of insight, the chief is suddenly freed from his grief and despair. In a deeper sense,
he feels that he has been freed from the bonds of death. This insight strikes him with the force of revelation.
The experience feels vividly and palpably real to him. And in that moment, the opposites of life and death that his brain
presented to him are no longer locked in conflict. They have been mythically and perhaps mystically resolved.
And now he sees clearly the absolute truth of things. He understands that the spirits of the dead live on.
But because he feels this intensity of this experience, it actually translates as if he has discovered something that is
primally true about our world. It is more than just an idea or a thought or an explanation. It is a sense that he has experienced
some ultimate reality and meaning about the world.
While this whole story might be a little oversimplistic in terms of the origin and nature of myths, it helps us to understand
what myths are actually all about. Religious myths provide stories about how we as human beings relate to our world
and how we are supposed to relate to God. They teach us about being devoted to God and why we should behave in certain ways.
In that way, myths help to provide for us a sense of morality, a sense of how we are to interact with other people,
a sense of what we are to do in our life and how we are to treat things in our world so that we can be successful,
that we can survive and that we can feel better about ourselves and the meaning that we bring to ourselves about our lives.
So this little story about the chieftain shows the relevance of brain function in terms of helping us to create the myths.
In this chieftain, many brain processes were involved.
We talked about his very strong emotions affecting the limbic system, the very strong fear and negative emotions about death
and the very positive and very warm feelings that he had when he understood the nature of the resolution of his problem.
There was the visual stimulus of the fire and this example of how things actually work.
And there was the frustration of the brain seeking some kind of elusive cause for life and death.
There was the binary problem of life and death and how he could resolve this in some kind of holistic way.
So while it's a simple tale, our story does give us insight into the brain functions and physiological processes
that are involved in the creation of and in the response to myth.
And before we leave this entire subject of myth, I want to leave you with one other very interesting question.
What about science?
I'm a scientist and I often wonder, is science a form of myth?
Well to some degree yes and to some degree no.
Science is a myth in the sense that it tells us a story about how the world works.
There are fundamental aspects of science that are very similar to all myths.
For example, science addresses fundamental questions such as where did the world come from?
What makes the seasons change?
What makes the sun give us heat and light?
What causes earthquakes, hurricanes or volcanic eruptions?
Myths seek to answer questions like that and so of course to science.
Now the scientific method invokes opposites.
The primary opposite is the difference between the measurer, the scientist, which is us, and that which is measured, the universe.
And these come together in the form of the experiment which unites them and creates an answer that pushes us closer to fundamental knowledge of the universe.
So science feels like a myth but also differs from religious myths in that there is empirical data that is the driver for new myths.
In other words, the more we derive information and data, the more we begin to understand about our world and the more we generate new ideas, new hypotheses about how the world works.
So on some level, science does function as a myth but there are also fundamental differences between what science does and what we typically think of in the context of myths that pertain to religious or spiritual ideas.
So the primary myth of science is that the universe will reveal itself to us as the observer if we follow certain rules of observation which we often refer to as the scientific method.
Science, like other myths, has certain things that it cannot comment on.
In particular, science has difficulty telling us about things that involve the human world.
How do we improve the economy, for example? What is the best way to solve the Middle East conflict?
But just like the chieftain in our story, science tries to help us understand the world around us.
Thus, the brain makes myths in order to understand the world around us and our relationship to it.
And regardless of culture or belief system, myths often have very similar components and content.
Perhaps they are similar because the brains of all people are fundamentally similar.
But while the brain is good at understanding stories, it might be useful if there was a way to make our understanding even stronger and deeper.
This is where rituals come into play to make myths not only a cognitive experience but something which is felt deeply within us as well.
And it is this topic that we will cover in the next lecture.
