A couple of times already in this course, I've mentioned the online survey of spiritual
experiences that my research team conducted.
One of the individuals who participated in the survey reported an intense spiritual experience
that he had had while under the influence of a psychedelic drug, and here's how he
described it.
He said, a high dose experience led to a very important and spiritual feeling.
Coming up to the peak, there was a strange sense of coming home and feeling that I was
exactly where I was meant to be.
As the peak approached, words stopped having any meaning and fell out of my mouth as abstract
images that exploded and then faded away.
When words lost all meaning, thought itself melted away and left only the transcendent
nature of the experience.
The rocks, trees, the whole universe, all were permeated by a great energy that connected
us all, and there was no sense of time.
When we hear about this kind of psychedelic experience, many of us probably think about
the hippies from the 1960s or the fringe thinkers like Timothy Leary.
But in fact, there is important information to be gleaned from studying these and other
types of stimulated states from a scientific perspective.
And in this lecture, we'll look at stimulated states from a neuroscientific perspective and
we'll find out what these stimulated spiritual states have to tell us about spirituality
and the human brain.
Now there are a variety of different ways to create stimulated religious or spiritual
states.
Each of these approaches provides another piece of the puzzle towards our overall understanding
of the spiritual brain.
After all, if we can understand the mechanism by which the stimulation actually occurs,
particularly in the brain, it may tell us something about stimulated states in particular
and about religious and spiritual states more broadly.
Stimulated states may also provide some interesting information regarding the realness of these
experiences.
So let's talk a little bit about the ways of stimulating religious and spiritual experiences
and the states.
And in prayer are methods for naturally stimulating religious experiences.
And as we've described at various times in the course, we can study what happens in the
brain when people meditate or pray, how that turns on different parts of the brain, and
how that affects the experiences that they have.
I sometimes like to think about these practices as a top-down approach, because as we've discussed,
they start by activating the frontal lobes of the brain as the person focuses their attention
on a particular spiritual object.
And from there, the frontal lobes affect other parts of the brain, such as the orientation
area, the temporal lobes that help us with language and abstract thought, the thalamus,
that very central structure that regulates a lot of our sensory information, the limbic
system that regulates our emotional responses, and eventually the autonomic nervous system
that connects the brain all the way down to the body.
So by modifying the activity in the higher parts of the brain, the lower parts of the
brain and the body itself are affected by these profound practices, and the end result
are very intense spiritual or mystical experiences.
Similarly, we can study a practice like speaking in tongues, and remember that in that practice,
the brain is stimulated by the person engaging in very intense prayer or worship.
This affects the language areas of the brain, shutting down the normal language areas and
subsequently affecting the limbic areas, the emotional areas of our brain, the thalamus,
and even the basal ganglia, which are all part of our emotional responses to whatever
is going on around us.
Again, the result is a very profound spiritual state that affects many different parts of
the brain.
Now again, these might be regarded as more natural methods of stimulation.
They are stimulated, but they are stimulated from within, from within the brain itself,
without relying on any kind of external factors playing a role.
However, even many of these natural methods rely on some other type of external stimuli
as well as whatever the person is doing internally.
For example, if a person is praying in church, they might see the image of the cross, they
might hear the sounds of the organ or the people singing next to them, and they might
smell the incense burning.
These are external stimuli that can induce a variety of different sensory experiences.
And as we learned in the lecture on rituals, these different sensory stimuli form an important
part of the ritual process itself.
The stimuli trigger the amygdala to pay attention to the stimulus and mark it as something that's
very important, something that we need to pay attention to.
And when this stimulus is coupled with the rhythmic elements of the ritual, the person
experiences a profound shift in their cognition and in their emotions that ultimately surround
the importance of this entire practice and the entire event that they are now a part of.
In fact, this actually led me to one of my more recent studies.
This was a study of how visual symbols actually stimulate different parts of the brain.
The idea for this study actually originated way back when I was in medical school.
I was actually listening to a lecture.
One of the professors was talking to us about the primary visual cortex.
This is actually an area that's in the very back of the brain, a part of the brain called the
occipital lobe, and this part of the brain receives initial input from the eyes, from
the external world.
Unfortunately, it was a rather long lecture and my mind started wondering and thinking
about some of these age-old questions about religion and spirituality, these questions
I just always go back to, and I was starting to think about how we might be able to look
at them scientifically.
I was even daydreaming a bit, I'm sure, when all of a sudden I heard the professor say
something that set off a bit of a brief aha moment in my own brain.
He said that in the visual system, there are some neurons that fire only when they receive
a stimulus that appears as a horizontal line, and there are other neurons that fire only
when they receive a stimulus that appears as a vertical line.
Now, at that moment, the lecture on vision kind of cross-circuits with my thoughts about
religion.
Maybe I thought it's because of these two types of neurons that the cross becomes such
a powerful symbol.
I wondered whether the cross was an effective symbol, at least in part, because it triggered
a very strong and definitive response in the brain.
After all, if you have some neurons that fire to a horizontal line and some that fire to
a vertical line, when you put them together, they form a cross.
So I returned to listening to the lecture with a little bit more interest, hoping that
I might learn something more that would be helpful.
Unfortunately, in this particular case, it didn't happen.
But it did plant the seeds, and I really didn't kind of come back to it too much, although
every once in a while thought about it as an interesting issue over the next 15 years.
But about two years ago, I was approached by someone interested in funding a study on
the effects of religious beliefs in the brain.
We constructed a study that was designed to look at the effects of symbols on the brain
of religious and non-religious people.
Now, first I needed to do a little more background research to make sure that my basic idea was
correct.
I hypothesized that if there was something inherently powerful about certain symbols,
then the variety of religious symbols would be limited.
I actually decided to go to the Internet, and I found several different webpages that
actually listed pictures of hundreds of different religious and spiritual symbols from throughout
the world.
And you'll never guess what I found.
There's actually a lot of crosses that are used as religious symbols, and not just in
Christianity, but there were a few other types of symbols that I found fairly universal.
And that included stars and also a fair amount of circles.
But I didn't see very many squares, and there weren't very many triangles either.
I wondered, what was it about stars and crosses, but not squares and triangles that stimulated
the brain in such a way that they made good religious or spiritual symbols?
So we decided to select some of the most powerful religious symbols and compare them to non-religious
symbols.
And we also selected symbols with very positive or very negative emotional content.
So, for example, a positive religious symbol might be a cross, especially if somebody is
Christian, and a negative religious symbol might be a picture of the devil, for example.
A positive non-religious symbol was something like a smiley face, and a negative non-religious
symbol was an image of a gun.
And what we did was we scanned people's brains using functional magnetic resonance imaging,
or fMRI, while they were actually looking at the symbols.
And, in fact, we actually only showed them the symbols for a couple of seconds because
we just wanted to get their initial response.
We wanted to see if there was something going on in the primary moment that they received
this information that was going on in their brain.
Interestingly, the positive religious symbols activated the primary visual cortex, the area
my old professor was talking about, in a much more robust way than any other type of symbol.
So, it seemed that to support my hypothesis that these religious or spiritual symbols
actually stimulated the brain more.
Now, this would be a very exciting conclusion supporting the idea that certain types of
symbols are more stimulating than others.
It would also support the idea that the more powerful ones are more likely to become religious
symbols because of their effect on the primary visual system.
But there was one other very interesting possibility that crossed my mind as I was looking at this data.
And maybe because the symbols are so well known, perhaps the brain's primary visual cortex
actually changed the way that it worked.
Now, this actually would also have some very profound implications because it would mean
that our beliefs literally affect the way in which our brain perceives the world.
Now, we'll talk about this a little bit more in another lecture, but this study is a great
start in helping us to understand how religious and spiritual ideas and experiences can be
stimulated simply by a visual object.
And of course, if we can stimulate them simply by a visual object, we can begin to wonder how many
other ways that more powerful types of stimuli will actually have an impact on the brain and
create very, very intense types of religious and spiritual experiences.
Other natural practices, whether individually or in conjunction with practices such as
meditation or prayer, can also induce very profound spiritual states.
Now, for example, states of starvation, sleep deprivation, or sensory deprivation can result
in very profound experiences, especially when they are combined with meditation or prayer.
In fact, if you look at a variety of different traditions, they actually utilize these other
aspects to help the person engage in the prayer process.
We see so many times monks or nuns trying to limit the amount that they eat,
limit the amount of sleep that they have as they engage in a very intense meditation or prayer practice.
And because of that, these are the kinds of states that ultimately are the most powerful for them.
Sleep deprivation itself causes all sorts of changes in the brain, which may make it very susceptible
to unusual kinds of experiences. In fact, interestingly, after about 24 hours of sleep deprivation,
some people's brains actually function relatively normally while other people's brains are completely
out of whack. But usually by about 48 to 72 hours of sleep deprivation, almost everybody's brain
is working in a very bizarre and different way. And maybe by contributing sleep deprivation
with prayer practices, we can find people who induce very powerful kinds of spiritual experiences.
Now, sensory deprivation can also result in profound sensory experiences, ironically enough,
because the underlying brain electrical activity, the brain is just working anyway,
and even though there's nothing that's perceived from the outside world,
the brain perceives this internal stimulation as something external.
Therefore, in sensory deprivation, people can become immersed in very powerful kinds of
what almost are hallucinatory types of experiences.
Of course, many of you might be wondering about what we normally think of when we talk about
stimulated states, those that occur when the brain is affected by something external,
an external stimulant such as a drug. Now, some of the early work in this area
involve patients undergoing brain surgery. Researchers found that when certain parts of the brain
are touched with an electrode, the patient reported intense and vivid experiences
that actually could have a spiritual quality to them.
Now, you might be wondering, how do they even think about doing this?
Well, the amazing thing about the brain is that even though it is what receives all of our painful stimuli,
the brain itself actually doesn't have pain senses in it.
So you can actually do open brain surgery with the person wide awake,
and as you go in there and manipulate certain parts of the brain,
if you touch certain parts of the brain with an electrode, in that moment,
the person can describe for you what they're experiencing.
And the parts of the brain that were particularly involved in these studies were the hippocampus
and the amygdala, our old friends in the limbic system,
which are very important parts of our emotional responses as well as our memories.
And when these areas were stimulated, people reported very intense emotional states
or intense visual experiences.
Again, this isn't a surprise since these areas are very involved in both emotions and memory,
and it suggested that the direct electrical stimulation of these areas of the brain
could be involved in eliciting strong emotions and memories,
almost to the point where they actually felt that they were a spiritual kind of experience.
Now, it was this open brain surgery research that actually led a different researcher
at Laurentian University in Canada by the name of Dr. Michael Persinger
to try to stimulate the temporal lobes using a weak electromagnetic field.
Now, what he actually did was take a revamped motorcycle helmet
that he would put on the person's head and within that motorcycle helmet
he had certain electrodes that would actually induce a little bit of a magnetic field
around the temporal lobes.
And he was very interested in the temporal lobes for a variety of the reasons
that we've talked about in previous lectures.
The temporal lobes are part of the brain that actually may be involved with temporal lobe seizures,
which may relate to different types of spiritual experiences.
And as we were just talking about when the brain is actually stimulated with electrodes during surgery,
it's the hippocampus and the amygdala which are in the temporal lobe
that may be involved in helping to elicit these kinds of states and these kinds of experiences.
So Persinger's work actually revealed that when people had stimulation from this electromagnetic field
of the temporal lobes, they would report a variety of different experiences.
One of the most prominent ones was something that was referred to as a sensed presence.
In other words, they became aware of the proximity of some kind of unseen entity.
The experience may feel like there's another person in the room or sometimes perhaps even God,
but usually it was some kind of comforting being, some kind of comforting entity for that individual.
Persinger's apparatus also apparently has been able to help induce other types of experiences.
In fact, in an article in Wired Magazine, we see the description of a person who had an experience like this.
The individual said that during the 35-minute experiment,
I felt a distinct sense of being withdrawn from the envelope of my body and set adrift in an infinite existential emptiness.
Occasionally, I surfaced to an alpha state where I sort of know where I am, but not quite.
This feeling is like being reinserted into my body.
Then there's a separation again of body and soul, and I happily allow myself to drift back to oblivion.
Of course, we also have to consider whether this kind of experience is really spiritual or is only something that is spiritual-like.
This may be a very important distinction since we need to know how these different types of experiences,
especially those that are stimulated, are related to each other.
We also need to know how those kinds of stimulated experiences may be similar or different to those experienced during meditation and prayer,
or perhaps things that just happen naturally to individuals that are part of their belief systems.
But at a minimum, I think personger's work certainly supports the importance of the temporal lobes and particularly the limbic structures
as being very involved in religious and spiritual experiences.
Let's now turn to see how different types of drugs can actually affect the physiology of the brain
and how they may or may not induce different kinds of experiences that may be considered to be spiritual or religious.
We talked a little bit about this in the last lecture because one of the things that to me is very exciting about this kind of research
is that it tells us a lot about the neurotransmitters because we can look at where these drugs go in the brain
to see how they affect the neurotransmitter systems in the brain.
Now, drugs, for example, like LSD and psilocybin and even cocaine have been known to produce spiritual-like states.
And as I said, we have known before that these compounds affect certain neurotransmitters,
so LSD is known to affect the serotonin system of the brain.
It actually floods the brain with an increase in serotonin,
and this increased serotonin may partly or even wholly be responsible for triggering the intense experiences
via its impact on the amygdala and the hippocampus.
Because again, we know that if we stimulate these structures
and we know that they can be stimulated very intensely by serotonin,
they may elicit the same kind of visual experiences that are spiritual-like
that we talked about when people actually used an electrode to stimulate these parts of the brain.
We've also previously discussed how cocaine affects the dopamine system.
Basically, it does this by causing a substantial increase in dopamine levels, particularly in the basal ganglia.
I've mentioned the basal ganglia a couple of times.
This is an area that's very closely linked to the limbic system
and is very involved in strong emotions like euphoric feelings that are related to drugs like cocaine.
Brain imaging studies have actually shown how an increase in dopamine is directly related to the euphoria obtained by taking cocaine.
Another drug, peyote, is used in American Indian religious practices,
and evidence suggests that it may have been used for almost 5,000 years.
It is known to bind to the serotonin receptors,
and because of that, it actually works somewhat similarly to LSD,
but again, it is not totally clear why stimulating these serotonin receptors would result in such a powerful hallucinatory effect.
Now, shamanic traditions often use a variety of different psychotropic agents
that all appear to result in some type of altered state of consciousness.
In fact, one description of being on these kinds of mushrooms is the following.
I felt as if death was very close, and I started seeing the world and universe how it truly was.
I felt tremendous love for my lover and every living thing that I had ever seen.
Everything seemed to have a connected force of energy.
Now, given all of these anecdotes of the powerful experiences that people have when they ingest or take in these different drugs,
this led to a very interesting study by some scientists at Johns Hopkins University.
They wanted to try to study the subjective nature of the experiences from this kind of a drug in a much more systematic way,
and in particular, they focused on the hallucinogenic drug psilocybin.
Psilocybin in the form of mushrooms has been used for centuries, possibly even millennia,
and it's typically been used in cultures in a very structured manner for creating some kind of spiritual or religious state,
and therefore for a religious or spiritual purpose.
Now, in the research study at Johns Hopkins, and of course we can even start by the issue of
it's amazing that they even got this study done in the first place,
given all of the ethical and regulatory issues that they had to face,
but they were able to do it, they were able to set it up in such a way where subjects were given one of two drugs.
One of them was psilocybin, the other one was methylphenidate,
which is a very common drug that's used for attention deficit disorder.
They gave these drugs in a random order and asked these individuals to tell them what they felt.
Now, again, psilocybin is known to act on the serotonin nervous system, particularly in the limbic areas,
so these researchers were very interested in trying to see what kinds of emotions were actually perceived and felt by these subjects.
The subjects were carefully monitored and they described a variety of different kinds of experiences.
Some of them were terrifying, some of them were incredibly peaceful, some of them were amazing,
some people said they were incredible spiritual experiences,
and almost all of them had some kind of transformation as the result of these experiences.
Even two months later, the subjects tended to rate the psilocybin experience as having substantial personal meaning and spiritual significance
and attributed to the experiences a sustained positive change in attitudes and behaviors for that individual.
Now, it was also interesting that a fair number of the subjects who were involved in this study and had very amazing experiences said
they really didn't want to do this again.
They said that because as powerful as the experience was, they felt like it was almost too strong
and they were concerned of what would happen to them if they underwent this kind of experience again.
Now, this study is certainly very interesting but raises a variety of questions about the use of and the study of these kinds of drug induced experiences.
For example, one of the benefits of these kinds of studies is that these drugs are easy to use.
Of course, a lot of times they're illegal to use, so there's a lot of regulatory and ethical questions that have to be addressed,
but if you look at their effect, you can see that they have a relatively rapid response.
You can control the timing of it, you know when it's going to turn on, you know when it's going to happen,
and you can very clearly evaluate the effect of that drug.
Now, of course, one of the other things which is also important is the context within which the drug is given,
and that may have a lot to do with the kind of experience that the person has.
The big disadvantages of using drugs, of course, is their uncontrollability.
You don't know exactly what kind of experience they're going to have,
and it could be very positive, it could be very negative,
and the bigger issue, of course, is how it could be misused,
how people could wind up becoming addicted to these drugs,
and therefore, even though the research is fascinating,
we have to be very cautious about saying that this is a common kind of study that should be done,
or something that should be explored by all people.
So what do all of these different stimulated states tell us?
Well, the biology of religious and spiritual states is very complex,
and as we have seen, it seems to involve many different brain regions and many different neurotransmitters.
So trying to get at how these different states can be stimulated could be very important
for telling us exactly how the brain is involved in these spiritual states.
But do these stimulated states also tell us something about the causal nature of these experiences?
Well, in the Western scientific paradigm, we might argue that if we give a drug,
and the person has an experience, then the drug caused the experience.
But is this the fully correct conclusion?
In 1815, the romantic poet William Wordsworth cautioned against the tyranny of the eye
and unwillingness to believe that which cannot be seen.
Other senses, Wordsworth suggested, are just as valid.
So as we close this lecture on stimulated religious or spiritual states,
I'd like us to consider the concept of what is real and what is not.
Is a religious or spiritual vision something real if you are the only person who perceives it?
More importantly, in the context of this lecture, should we consider these stimulated experiences
to be real if they are produced by something external to the brain,
even though the experience is only going on inside?
Perhaps this raises a larger question.
What is real and what is not?
How do we define reality?
Can we verify what we see as being real?
And how do we assess something which is in fact real?
Is it something that we imagine, something that we comprehend, or is it emotional?
I'll be addressing this later in this lecture and also throughout the rest of this course,
since it is perhaps one of the most important philosophical questions that this field of study confronts.
But let us return to our discussion of stimulated states which can be extremely intense and transformative.
They are not, however, experiences that can be verified intersubjectively.
In other words, they really can't be verified by anyone other than the individual who experiences them.
Does this make them any less valuable or valid?
It would seem that it depends on your point of view.
Again, if you take the Western scientific view, these stimulated states are just that.
They're stimulated.
They do not reflect a real experience of the world,
but rather an experience colored by the effects of some kind of external agent such as an electrical probe or a drug.
But what would a spiritual person say?
A spiritual person, maybe a shaman, would maybe argue something very different.
They might say that the use of such agents are actually a way of opening up a door into the spiritual realm.
He might say, for example, that the mushroom allows the brain to see the world
or to see the spiritual realm as it actually is.
So if a shaman takes a mushroom to induce a spiritual state,
he does not feel that even though it is caused by the mushroom, it is, in fact, a false state.
The analogy I sometimes like to talk about is wearing glasses.
This is something that I do.
Many of you might, when I wake up in the morning, it's a very blurry world.
And I put my glasses on and I can see the world clearly.
That changes the way in which my brain responds to the world.
But does that mean that now that I have my glasses on,
that my brain is seeing the world in a false way or merely in a more accurate way?
And can we apply this analogy to different drug or other types of induced states
that may actually allow the brain to see reality in a different way,
but not necessarily an inaccurate one?
So induced states help us to gain a deeper understanding of the underlying biology
of religious and spiritual states.
But they may raise even more interesting questions about the meaning and the realness of these states.
And this leads us to some fascinating issues that pertain to beliefs
and beliefs about reality and even the brain.
Topics that we will consider in future lectures.
