A patient is rushed into an emergency room.
An oxygen mask is placed over his mouth and he's given an IV.
The surgery begins immediately, the patient's appendix is ruptured.
At some point during the procedure, however, the patient goes into full cardiac arrest.
His vital signs disappear, he has no pulse, no heartbeat, no breathing.
The patient is clinically dead.
However, the team of doctors and nurses continue trying desperately to resuscitate the man
and by a medical miracle, the patient's heart finally begins to beat.
The patient has from a medical standpoint been brought back to life.
After this ordeal, when the patient finally wakes up a couple days later, he's asked
if he had had any memory of the entire experience and this is what he says.
He said, at first, I had the sense of hovering over my body.
I was watching the doctors working frantically around me.
Amazingly, I felt quite calm and then I experienced a sense of moving down a dark void
and arriving at what appeared as a gate made of brilliant light.
Beside the gate was a tall column of light and it had a consciousness in it.
I assumed it to be an angel at the gates of heaven.
But he refused to let me go through to the other side and I was very angry.
Telepathically, he said that I had to return to life, but I didn't want to.
And then it felt like I was being dragged back and as I got closer to being conscious,
I began to hear the people talking and feel the pain coming back into my body.
Now, what this patient has described is a near-death experience or what we sometimes
refer to using the abbreviation NDE.
To a researcher like myself, there are many fascinating aspects to the NDE.
And personally, the one that I find most remarkable is the fact that so many NDEs simply transform
the people who experience them.
People come away from an NDE with a radically altered set of beliefs about themselves,
about meaning in life, about their relationships, about everything.
And as a brain scientist, I have to wonder how does this happen in an instant?
Well, I'm going to come back to the transformative nature of the near-death experience later
in the lecture.
But let's start by examining a little bit of the core components of the NDE.
Basically, we can probably break these NDEs down to about three different categories of
common components.
What the person sees, what they hear, and what they experience.
When people have an NDE, what do they typically describe as what they see?
Typically, people talk about light, a being of light, or entering into some kind of realm
of light, although typically the realm of light is entered into only by about 10 or
15 percent of people.
Another thing that they talk about seeing is a dark tunnel, just like our patient talked
about, this dark void that he traveled through.
And interestingly, a lot of people also describe, like our patient, a kind of out-of-body experience
where they see the things that are going on around their dead body.
They can see the doctors and the nurses or whoever is trying to help them out and resuscitate
them, doing all kinds of things around them.
They may even see their actual body lying there on the table.
People also can hear things.
Sometimes they hear kind of an annoying noise, it's kind of like a buzzing sound, and occasionally
people say that they hear the most beautiful music that they have ever seen, ever heard.
Now they also experience a lot of different things that go through a relatively defined
progression throughout the entire process of the NDE.
Now at the start of the NDE, frequently people actually hear the news of their death.
They hear somebody say, my gosh, this person's heart stopped.
The other thing that they may experience right away is a kind of very quick review of their
life's events.
That's the classic notion of your life flashing before you, well that really does happen.
Most people, when they are in an NDE, they actually meet other people who have died.
In fact, sometimes the person who's having the NDE didn't even know that that person
died.
To some degree, they have a clarity of thought.
They feel like they are seeing things clearly, things are slowing down, they feel calm.
So it's a very powerful but very clear kind of experience for them.
One of the more interesting elements, which we'll talk about a little bit later, are what
are sometimes referred to as anomalous experiences.
And this can happen often at the beginning, but perhaps at any time during a near-death
experience where things that don't seem to go along with the way we normally think about
science actually happen.
Now about halfway through a near-death experience, sometimes people will reach some kind of border.
This is a very important border for them because it tends to be the border between going forward
to full death and coming back into life.
And sometimes they meet others.
I mentioned already that sometimes they meet people who have died, but sometimes they just
meet other beings, so to speak.
They're not even sure what they are, or even if they're other human beings, but the sense
of some kind of presence that is there, and they meet this other presence.
Towards the end of the experience, there is this sense of coming back.
They actually often have this decision point that occurs, either something or someone telling
them to go back, or they have this notion that it's time for me to go back.
And then finally, they have great feelings of peace, calmness, and a sense of indescribability
of the entire experience.
So when do near-death experiences occur?
Well, obviously, as the name states, near-death.
They are typically described in states of cardiac arrest when their heart stops, drowning,
car accidents, or suicide attempts is a variety of different examples.
But interestingly, near-death experiences have also been reported at times of life-threatening
situations.
In fact, some of the earliest reports were of survivors of avalanches, and they actually
hadn't died, but they had these kinds of very unusual experiences that were eventually
called near-death experiences.
Researchers have thought, well, gee, there are lots of different ways that a person can
die is there a relationship between the type of death and the likelihood of the person having
a near-death experience.
There have been a few studies that have suggested that when people are administered certain
drugs, either by the person who maybe is trying to kill themselves in a suicide attempt, or
perhaps by doctors who are trying to save their life, this may actually lessen the likelihood
or the chance of them having a near-death experience.
On the other hand, as we talked about in the last lecture, there are a variety of different
hallucinogenic drugs that can produce experiences that have characteristics of near-death experiences.
However, these drug experiences tend to be more heavily based upon the sensory elements,
the intense visions, beautiful colors, seeing other beings.
These are certainly part of the near-death experience, but the near-death experience also
appears to have some other elements that are not typically found with the drug-induced
states, such as the life review, or that notion that it's time to go back.
Furthermore, many of the near-death experiences result in very powerful consequences for the
individual in terms of how they think about death and life.
These are not quite as common when you think about drug-induced states.
Now the description I've given so far makes it sound like most of these near-death experiences
are actually pretty positive, and a lot of the literature actually supports that.
But there are some examples of negative experiences.
In fact, if we go back in time, we find that some of the medieval accounts actually describe
some really horrific kinds of experiences.
A scholar named Carol Zaleski wrote in a book called Other World Journeys about these
fiendish tortures, dismemberments, the tearing and burning of flesh, and a whole bunch of
other assorted horrors that occurred in people who underwent these near-death experiences
before they ultimately moved on to some kind of beautiful light, some type of heavenly glory.
For example, in a story called The Vision of Burantis, there's a description of a near-death
experience of a seventh-century monk.
This monk was in the grip of a very severe illness, and Burantis, the monk, envisions
these terrifying demons who try to grab him, and they try to grab him by the throat in order
to take him towards hell.
Now what's very interesting, at least about the story, is that other monks who were caring
for him at the time actually saw him trying to remove or to move his hands towards his
throat almost as if he was trying to protect himself.
So there's a lot of information about the subjective nature of the experiences that
people have when they have an NDE.
Oftentimes, they are positive, but they can be negative.
And of course, all of this brings us to the question that lies at the heart of this entire
course, which is, but what about their biology?
What's going on in the person's body and brain during the near-death experience?
And does that tell us something about the nature of these experiences?
The first issue, of course, is how do we study the near-death experience in some kind of way
that we can actually learn something about what's going on in the brain?
Now obviously, there's a lot of problems with studying a person's brain when they are in
a near-death state.
First of all, the person's unresponsive, so there's no way of even knowing what the person
is feeling or when it is happening.
If somebody has their heart stopped for 20 minutes, we don't know if they had the near-death
experience at the beginning of that or at the end of that.
And of course, even if you find something interesting going in the brain, how can you
even ask the person what it might be related to?
There's no way to do that.
Of course, one of the biggest problems in studying near-death experiences is that you
never know when they're going to happen.
Typically you hear about them after the fact.
There's also no real good way to do a brain scan on somebody who's near-death.
In fact, if you think back to some of the studies that we've talked about in terms of
spectimaging and petimaging, it requires us to inject a radioactive tracer into their
bloodstream that gets up into the brain.
And if they don't have any blood flow, then that tracer isn't going to get there.
There's going to be no way of actually measuring what's happening in the brain itself.
Can we envision some other way of trying to get at that actual near-death state?
Well, some of you may remember back a movie called Flatliners, explored an interesting
premise about trying to actually induce death in people.
And in fact, in the movie, a group of medical students used different medications to literally
kill their colleagues, at least temporarily, in order to see what kind of experiences
they might have.
As the movie goes on, they allow their friends to stay dead for longer and longer periods
of time, and this rather eerie idea is certainly something that would be fascinating to try,
but most likely would have a great deal of difficulty flying past any kind of institutional
review board's ethics committee.
So is there another way to do this?
Researchers are always pretty resourceful, and maybe we could think about situations,
environments in which a near-death experience is more likely to occur.
Maybe environments such as an emergency room, a trauma bay, for example, or an operating
suite in which people are going to undergo life-threatening operations.
These might be good possibilities, good targets for us to think about to try to find when people
have near-death experiences and what goes on in their brain.
But even though a near-death experience may be more likely to occur in one of these locations,
again, since the person is near-death and is unresponsive to you, you never really know
what they're doing when they're doing it.
And even if there was some way to get at some aspect of the brain's function, maybe some
kind of brain scan or maybe an electrical study of the brain, an EEG study, you don't
really know which patterns of activity would correlate with the experience itself.
So we can only make some guesses and inferences based on how we know what the brain does,
what we know is happening during a near-death state, and what people have described for
us after the fact.
So these guesses, even though they're guesses, might be actually pretty educated guesses.
And they may actually give us some fairly good information about what might be going
on during this near-death state.
Now with this in mind, there are many theories about the origin of the NDE.
For example, some people have thought that it really is the effect of some kind of drug
or at least some endogenous, some type of neurotransmitter occurring in the brain itself.
But the problem with that hypothesis is that a lot of people aren't taking drugs or aren't
given drugs.
And it seems a little unlikely that the internal neurotransmitter releases would be so strong
to be able to create such an experience.
Other people have suggested that hypoxia, a loss of oxygen in the brain, may be responsible
for this kind of an experience.
Basically, the idea is that as oxygen is gone away from the brain, as the brain is
deprived of oxygen, it begins to shut down.
And in shutting down, much like your computer shuts down in a very specific way, your brain
shuts down and shuts down along the lines where you generate this kind of an experience.
In fact, one of the thoughts that I always had was when we think about this one element
of the experience, the tunnel, maybe this has something to do with how their visual
system shuts down, that it's the periphery of the visual system that shuts down first,
leaving only the central aspects of our visual system.
And that can create a sense of tunnel vision, which may be related to the experience.
Others have suggested that very strong autonomic nervous system activity lies at the heart
of the near-death experience.
Make some sense.
After all, if you're near-death, your autonomic nervous system is going to be going pretty
crazy at that moment.
It's an extraordinarily stressful moment for the body, and your arousal system is going
to be turned onto its maximum.
And as we've talked about before with regard to rituals, we may actually see that type
of autonomic activity creating all kinds of changes going on in the brain.
But again, unfortunately, not everybody is in that kind of a state.
If you're a religious person, you might say, well, I know the answer is very obvious.
The near-death experience is literally the soul leaving the body.
It's the experience of the soul migrating out of the body down some pathway towards
heaven or hell, depending on the circumstance, and that that is actually the experience that
the person has.
Now, unfortunately, no explanation appears to answer all of the aspects of the near-death
experience.
And also, no explanation has actually been able to describe the long-term effects of
the near-death experience.
So let's return to that.
This to me, again, is one of the more interesting aspects of the near-death experience from
a brain perspective.
How is it that this moment in a person's life can be so life-changing and so transformative?
A large number of NDE accounts can be found on the website of the International Association
for Near-Death Studies.
It's an excellent resource if you're interested in getting more information about near-death
experiences.
One person in reflecting back on her NDE said this, looking back over the years, the
experience has changed me tremendously.
I usually feel a wonderful inner peace almost all the time, and I lack a fear of death.
I enjoy life and feel life gets better with each passing year.
I feel a longing to go home, and not infrequently I am jealous of those people who pass on.
Another person who had been in a serious car accident said this, I only remember light
and darkness and strong feelings while I was unconscious.
What is really significant about the experience is that I became a markedly changed person
immediately afterward.
I became profoundly concerned about other people and humanity as a whole.
And that change has directed my whole life.
I lost my fear of death and pretty much all fear whatsoever.
So we can see by these two descriptions that people no longer fear death, they have a new
way of looking at life and relationships, and it truly transforms who they are.
When people are asked about their religious or spiritual attitudes, we also get some interesting
answers.
People sometimes say that they are more spiritual, but sometimes they actually feel less religious.
When asked to explain this in a little bit more detail, what they sometimes say is that
the experience was really too powerful or too big to be fit into any particular religious
tradition.
So how do we understand all of this from a neuroscientific perspective?
Normally when we think about how the brain changes, and if we think back to our lecture
on spiritual development, the brain changes slowly over time.
It changes over the course of an entire life span as we go from childhood to adolescence
to adulthood.
But somehow in a flash of an instant during the near-death experience, the person changes
everything about themselves.
How does this happen?
How can we think about this happening from a brain perspective?
Well, I think one of the things that we have to look at is how we understand the brain's
ability to change.
And maybe we're not always so correct in thinking that it takes time, but of course how we actually
understand this kind of change occurring is something that may have a profound impact
on the nature of the near-death experience as well as the ability of our brain and how
it works.
Now many people who have had near-death experiences will say things like, I don't think there
is a God.
I know there's a God.
But one individual that we know actually described the experience as being bigger than religion
and it made her feel as if religion was not sufficient to help encapsulate the near-death
experience in its entirety.
Of course there are some interesting people who have not been moved to a religious or
spiritual conclusion as the result of their near-death experience.
In fact, my research team spoke to an atheist who described the experience as being very
positive and in many similar ways as those people who do feel spiritual afterwards.
But the atheist said to us, it was an amazing experience to feel while my brain was dying.
For her, it was a purely material experience.
So again, what do we make of this?
What's going on?
Was it really the same kind of experience?
Or was the atheist's brain not primed for that kind of interpretation?
And these are questions that we have to think about going forward in terms of how we try
to understand the nature of spirituality and how these kinds of powerful experiences
like the near-death experience actually have an impact on spirituality.
But in the end, one of the most amazing aspects of the near-death experience are the anomalous
experiences.
People describe out-of-body states in which they not only feel like they float outside
their body, but actually can see what's going on around them.
In fact, the common report is that they are up in the corner of the room looking down
on everything that's going on around them.
Some people have actually reported going into different rooms in the hospital and seeing
what's going on in there.
And you'll hear some interesting anecdotes about an individual who could see what another
patient looked like or what was going on with another patient.
One person from our online survey of people's spiritual experiences described a near-death
experience during a poisoning.
She said, the first thing I remember was being above my body on the table and seeing everything
that happened in the room.
I could see the doctors talking with the nurses and see them using the resuscitation equipment.
Then I sort of drifted up to the ceiling and went through it.
I was then in a tunnel of light.
And as I moved through this tunnel of light, two robed beings with faces that seemed etched
in light came toward me.
They somehow communicated to me that it was not my time and I was to return to my body.
I thought, no, I don't want to go back.
They communicated that I must as it was the best thing that I needed to do.
Other anomalous experiences occur when people describe a meeting with others who have died.
What's interesting is that sometimes when they see this person who's died, they don't
actually know that the person was dead.
Now, I'll take this very interesting example that I found on the Internet.
It describes a four-year-old boy who had almost drowned and he had been revived after about
15 minutes of not breathing.
The four-year-old boy apparently spoke about going to the other side in a similar way as
other people who have had near-death experiences.
At first, no one really thought much about it until he made a comment that in this experience
he met his brother.
Now this was a very odd kind of statement because this child was an only child and only
later was it found out that the child's mother had actually had an abortion when she was
much younger, one that she had never told anyone about.
Now as a scientist, my first thought about such a story is that, well, this has got to
be fictional.
I mean, this can't be a real thing.
But there are many researchers who have received similar types of stories in which the person
who's having the near-death experience meets a deceased individual, especially one that
they don't know is actually dead.
So as a researcher, what should we do with these kinds of stories, with these kinds of
anecdotes?
Do we just laugh them off?
Do we try to confirm them in some way?
And again, even if we went to the person and said, is this, in fact, did you really have
this experience?
Take this boy for a minute.
How do we know that that really meant that he was seeing this deceased brother?
Maybe it was just some strange coincidence that he hallucinated that he had a brother.
Maybe he always wanted to have a brother.
And in this state, he hallucinated that he had one.
So in short, how can we test anomalous experiences?
Well, a group of researchers have started a study that had been an attempt to confirm
or refute at least some of these kinds of anomalous experiences.
And it goes back a little bit to what we talked about earlier in the lecture about where would
be a good place to do this study.
Well, they started with emergency rooms.
And they went to an emergency room hospital beds that what they would do is that they
would put pictures up, usually on some kind of shelf that was above where the beds were.
So that if somebody was wheeled into the room and they were in a near death state, they
would never be able to see this picture.
It would be up too high, be facing actually the ceiling.
But theoretically, if somebody described the experience of floating out of their body and
going up to the ceiling, would they potentially see this picture?
And they made these pictures kind of unusual pictures, maybe a picture of like the Eiffel
Tower, for example, something to be out of place with the hope that if they go back and
talk to individuals who have been in a near death state, if they find somebody who's had
a near death experience, they can say, did you see anything?
And if they say, yes, I happened to see a picture of the Eiffel Tower, I don't understand
why, that could be pretty interesting.
Now there are no results from this study yet, but they could be extraordinarily important.
In fact, such a study truly fascinates me as a scientist and someone who studies the
spiritual realm since it has paradigm shifting implications.
If we could find some kind of decisive evidence that a person's awareness or consciousness
can somehow leave their body, that implies that something about us is more than simply
material.
Now our consciousness, our mind, soul, or spirit, whatever we want to call it, is able
to leave the material body, leave the brain, and experience the world in a different way
than science currently believes to be possible.
Of course it would probably raise far more questions than it answers.
After all, even if it turns out to be the case that people can see these pictures, how
is such a process possible?
How does the material and the non-material relate to each other in some kind of functional
way?
Is there really a soul?
Or is this effect related to the nature of human consciousness?
This might imply that consciousness itself is able to extend beyond the brain and maybe
even exist independently in the world alongside matter.
Certainly these are fascinating possibilities, but we're going to have to wait for the data.
We do have a lingering fascination with near-death experiences though.
We're interested in understanding what happens next.
We're interested in trying to understand if something exists beyond this life.
So what do we know about NDEs from a biological, psychological, or cultural basis?
Well we know that they frequently share a set of core components, and that these appear
to be related to very specific brain types of processes.
Processes like vision, emotions, and memory.
And they often have life-changing consequences.
We've also seen that the near-death experience can radically change a person's belief.
But what we don't know is whether these newfound beliefs are truly new, or if they were somehow
always in their brain, somehow always within them, and that the near-death experience simply
helped the person find a new way to access them.
In other words, are the new beliefs merely revisions and refinements of the beliefs that
they already held?
Or has the brain literally been rewired by the experience and hence changed the person's
belief system permanently?
These questions require a thorough evaluation of the near-death experience from a neuroscientific
perspective in spite of the challenges that lie ahead.
And maybe, if we discover some truth to the anomalous experiences that people describe,
we might find ourselves facing a radical shift in our understanding of the material world,
of science, consciousness, and maybe even...
