In our last lecture, we saw that the various functions of the human brain, such as the
causal function and the holistic function, shape our ideas about the spiritual realm.
We are now prepared to look at two very specific religious ideas, that of revelation and salvation.
Our goal today is to examine the way that the brain is involved in helping us to understand
these two very important religious concepts.
Now I've chosen to focus on revelation and salvation because these two concepts are fundamental
to the teachings of a wide range of religious traditions, both ancient and modern, eastern
and western.
So let's start as we often do with some definitions.
Revelation is the experience of receiving important information through either active
or passive communication with a supernatural or divine entity.
Salvation is the deliverance of the soul from sin and its consequences.
They may also be called deliverance or redemption from sin, which implies that, like revelation,
salvation is experienced as being given by God.
We'll return to salvation later in the lecture, but first let's focus on revelation.
How might science approach the experience and claims of revelation?
Well, this seems like a rather big question, so maybe we can try to simplify it into some
constituent parts.
If revelation is a way of receiving information from God, we can start by asking, well, how
does the brain receive information from anything?
Maybe like another person.
Well, we know that there are parts of the brain that help us to comprehend what another
person is saying to us.
This is that verbal conceptual area that we have spoken about in earlier lectures, probably
located in the region between the temporal lobe and the parietal lobe along the side
of the brain.
So, when someone is talking to us, we hear the words, connect the words to our memory
system, and ultimately use our abstract brain processes to make sense of what is actually
being said.
But we can apply a similar scientific approach to revelation experiences.
What do people hear when they receive a revelation, and how do they actually comprehend it?
One of the most impressive biblical descriptions of a revelation occurs in the book of Ezekiel,
where we read,
A whirlwind came out of the north, a great cloud, and a fire enfolding itself, and a
brightness was about it, and out of the midst thereof as the color of amber out of the midst
of the fire.
Also out of the midst thereof came the likeness of four living creatures, and this was their
appearance.
They had the likeness of a man, and everyone had four faces, and everyone had four wings,
and the spirit entered into me when he spake unto me, and set me upon my feet, that I heard
him that spake unto me.
Now, assuming that the experience actually happened to Ezekiel, how might we think about
Ezekiel's experience from a brain perspective?
First, it appears that the sensory system, particularly vision, factors in very prominently.
Note how unusual the visual imagery is, however.
Apparently, this strangeness denotes to Ezekiel that something important, or even supernatural,
is occurring.
He also seems to have a very visceral feeling of God entering his body, entering himself,
so the areas of the brain that are involved with our body's sensations, such as vibration,
heat, and even the position of our body, they may have been involved as well, so that the
body actually felt different.
Finally, there is language and comprehension going on.
The parts of the brain involved in the understanding of abstract concepts and language appear to
play a role.
So you can see how we might begin to understand this experience from a totally new perspective.
And please remember, it does not diminish the potential religious import of this event,
but it gives us something very new to think about.
And this possible neurobiological understanding may be useful for comparing this experience
to others, including even those in the present day.
So let's actually talk a little bit about the different ways in which revelation is experienced.
Well, one pathway is revelation through verbal experience.
A notion that God is actually perceived to communicate directly with the human being
by exchanging verbal content.
Orthodox Judaism and traditional Christianity generally hold that the first five books of
Moses were dictated by God in such a fashion.
But remember that our brain has the verbal abilities in its temporal lobe, and thus language
is one of the most effective ways for human beings to come to understand anything.
It would make sense then that our brain would be built in such a way so that it could receive
religious or spiritual information in a verbal manner.
That's the way that we understand things and receive information so effectively wouldn't
it also happen in a religious or spiritual context.
Another path would be nonverbal revelation in which the person perceives something about
God but it is not based in language.
Maybe it's based more upon the brain's perceptions and abstract thought processes, but it is not
specifically perceived in any kind of language.
This is an interesting way that revelation can occur from the brain perspective since
we know that human beings can also derive meaning and understanding from nonverbal communication.
In fact studies show that much of how we communicate with other people is through nonverbal cues.
We look at someone's face or body posture and glean a lot of information about them.
Are they being honest with us?
Are they telling us something that they really believe in?
The brain is designed to pick up on all this kind of information and in fact it might be
that nonverbal forms of communication are even more important at times than the verbal
forms.
And think back to our discussion about rituals.
The rhythms, music and actions of rituals are a crucial part of creating meaning for
us so the brain can certainly derive knowledge in very nonverbal ways and revelation would
theoretically be no exception to that process.
What about other ways of revelation?
Well Aristotelian scholars of the medieval period espoused another way of receiving divine
information.
They held that revelation was the discovery of absolute truths about God through logical
philosophical inquiry.
In this way the brain's rational thought processes were considered to be the means towards revelation.
It was through our rational self that we could actually obtain knowledge and ideas
about God.
Where do our rational thought processes come from?
Well we know that there are the parts of the brain that think about causality, abstraction,
how we compare different objects and different ideas to each other in such a way that we
can deduce new ideas.
So this overall mechanism could be another possible way in which revelation can occur.
Researchers such as the philosopher Baruch Spinoza suggested that God reveals himself
through creation and thus we can learn about religion and God by observing nature itself.
To some degree the use of our brain through scientific inquiry through the study of physics,
cosmology and other fields of science would be the basis of revelation.
In other words the ability to see causality in the world, to explore the world through
questioning and to use the reductionist processes of the brain may not merely be the way in
which we perform science but for the religious individual may also be the way in which we
receive information from and about God.
Ultimately regardless of how a person might think revelation occurs if we consider revelation
in the context of the brain we would likely conclude that revelation is the ability of
the human brain to receive and be changed by a spiritual message.
But when we take a scientific and particularly a neuroscientific perspective on revelation
we also uncover some very interesting questions.
For example what limitations might the brain actually place on the kind of information
that human beings can receive?
How is the brain altered both through the revelation experience itself and then in the
transforming aftermath of that experience?
Several scholars have stressed that revelation occurs all the time by various mechanisms.
One scholar Avery Dulles put it, a comprehensive doctrine of revelation cannot limit itself
to God's self-disclosure in biblical times.
It must deal with God's active presence to the world today.
If this is the case from a religious perspective then the brain must also be involved because
it's something that happens today as well.
Of course revelation really is something that is supposedly more of a religious event than
something which is neurologically oriented but still the brain must interpret whatever
information it perceives about God's active presence in the world and somehow make sense
of that.
And the neuroscientific perspective provides insights into issues pertaining to revelation
that may have been previously only the domain of religion and theology.
So for example, Christian theology has sometimes described a difference between communicable
and incommunicable attributes of God.
If human beings can only have access to communicable attributes of God then are there certain specific
limitations that our brain places on us in terms of what we can actually perceive and
understand.
Communicable attributes are usually related to those things that human beings really do
have the ability to perceive themselves.
These include things like mercy, justice, wrath and anger and love.
And from the neuroscientific perspective we can understand and study the biological underpinnings
of these attributes.
We can look at the emotional system of the brain and see how it interacts with our abstract
thought processes as we engage in our own feelings of mercy or justice, anger or love.
But what about the incommunicable attributes of God?
Usually these include concepts such as omnipotence, the sense that God is eternal, infinite,
God is all-knowing or omniscient and God is everywhere omnipresent.
Now these are certainly things that human beings simply are not.
But if we begin to apply this combination of neuroscience and religion in the topic
of neurotheology we can take a very different kind of perspective.
Neurotheology may actually offer an explanation as to how we can even have a notion not only
of the communicable but the incommunicable concepts and attributes of God.
Of course we can't fully understand them because we aren't omniscient and omnipresent.
But the brain does have some elements of these characteristics.
We have some knowledge so we can kind of understand what omniscience is about.
We have some idea of time and hence we can understand a little bit about what eternalness
is about.
And we have some power, we have some control over the universe and therefore we have some
notion of what omnipotence is about.
But while the human brain cannot truly grasp the extent of these attributes, a neurotheological
perspective would argue that we must be partially able to understand them at least and so far
as the brain can provide a taste of what these attributes are so that we can at least abstractly
conceptualize what they mean.
Now we have already considered in previous lectures how the brain can use its processes
such as the holistic process, binary and causal processes to help us interpret the world around
us.
But then God or religious information can only be considered in these particular ways
such as through our senses, emotions and those thought processes.
But if that is the case then their theoretically should be a limited number of neurological
avenues by which the human brain can experience revelation.
It is likely that revelation is different for each individual's brain and hence each
individual but how they engage it is probably limited by what their brain can do.
Dr. Monica Helwig stated that what God reveals is received or seen according to our present
capacity.
That capacity is shaped by our individual human maturity and by the maturity of our society
and its culture and language.
The important point here is that revelation should be considered an individual experience
that's perceived by the individual brain and that it depends on our capabilities.
It depends on what that brain can do that enables that revelation to occur.
Another scholar stated quite clearly that the medium of revelation therefore is human
experience.
The revelation of God to man takes place in human experience.
Now together these two quotes imply that the brain must play a fundamental role in
revelation experiences and that its capabilities and limitations have an impact on the nature
and type of these revelation experiences.
Let us consider a few theoretical examples.
If an individual has a revelation that God is the cause of all things we would expect
that the causal process of the brain is what is involved in enabling that experience.
But the causal process may also restrict the experience.
For example we typically apply causality to physical objects.
For example we understand how one object causes a different object to start to move
or we understand it in the context of science but we don't tend to observe causality in
a non-physical way.
So this might create a problem, an actual problematic duality in which we can't really
understand how a non-material thing such as God can affect a material thing.
But is this really a real problem or just our brain doing the best that it can in interpreting
a revelation kind of experience?
And what about our emotions?
Many experiences of revelation contain strong emotional content, feelings of awe or absolute
joy.
Are these the typical emotional processes of the human brain?
In fact perhaps the importance of these experiences are recognized because they are labeled by
these very very strong emotions.
It's those emotions that tell us this is something that is different than our everyday
reality.
It's something that we must pay attention to, maybe that it's something that has some
kind of origin beyond the material world, it's supernatural.
Others have also commented on the importance of emotions and the limitations of rational
thought processes when it comes to revelation.
For example the Sufi mystic Ibn al-Arabi stated, God deposited within man knowledge of all
things, then prevented him from perceiving what he had deposited within him.
This is one of the divine mysteries which reason denies and considers totally impossible.
In this example it is suggested that reason is not something that we can use to fully
understand religion in God.
Reason can help us to understand the problem but it can't help us fully resolve it.
Of course this frustration can cause strong emotional experiences as well, emotions that
contribute to the overall experience of what revelation is all about.
Now once revelation has occurred the individual must then determine how to respond to that
revelation.
In fact according to the Catholic Church the appropriate response to revelation is faith
in which quote, man completely submits his intellect and his will to God end quote.
But how does this happen?
Well one consider a theological mechanism but there also has to be a biological one.
If the intellect and the will arise from the many brain functions that we've talked about
then surrendering them should entail a manner by which these functions are shut off or at
least to some degree reconfigured.
Well there's actually some evidence about several studies which show how the brain can
shut down certain functions particularly in a religious or spiritual context.
Remember our discussion of the speaking and tongue study where we did brain scans which
showed that the frontal lobes actually decreased in activity because they felt that they had
surrendered their will during the process of speaking in tongues.
By surrendering their will they actually reduced the willful areas of the brain in the frontal
lobe.
Now what's particularly interesting about the experience of speaking in tongues in this
context is that those people who do the practice actually seem to derive some new meaning about
different problems in their life.
It is to some degree a form of revelation in which knowledge either spiritual or sometimes
practical is obtained by the individual.
Now of course the bigger question is still whether this knowledge comes from God or is
derived from the unusual functioning of the brain in which new ways of thinking about
things are created.
Maybe there are different ways in which the brain starts to connect with itself that allows
people to think about things in very creative ways.
Well revelation experiences are clearly important in terms of how the person derives knowledge
about their religious or spiritual beliefs but does receiving this knowledge help the
individual or even humanity as a whole gain salvation of some type?
Does it change us?
Does it transform us in a very different kind of way?
Now with that question in mind let's turn to the second of our two fundamental religious
concepts in this lecture that of salvation.
Depending on the religious tradition salvation is considered to be caused either by the free
will and grace of a deity specifically in the theistic traditions God or by personal
responsibility and self effort sometimes in the monotheistic traditions but more particularly
in the yogic traditions of India.
Now religions also emphasize the necessity to some degree of both personal effort through
repentance and asceticism as well as divine action through God's grace.
The concept of salvation as the phenomenon of being saved by divine agency belongs mostly
to Christianity Judaism and Islam the major monotheistic traditions.
But there are analogous concepts within the Indian religions such as nirvana are actually
they're not exact equivalents to the concept of salvation and that they don't specifically
depend on the divine agency per se however almost all religions speak of a way of saving
the person or saving the person's soul.
Here is a very interesting salvation story from one of the participants of our online
survey of spiritual experiences.
I was kneeling praying and not knowing how to pray but trying nonetheless.
I felt like I was talking to a stranger suddenly my extended arms began to feel heavy like
pins and needles crawling up my arm.
I felt myself beginning to cry my heart was very heavy as if a hero of heroes were wielding
a sword inside of me and fighting his way to my soul.
That's exactly what was happening I was baptized in the spirit that night I was ready to learn
what this power was and who this power was from somehow even then I knew this was going
to be the most exciting journey of my life.
In this story the person has an experience in which they feel that their entire life
has been changed.
They now understand God and their own spirituality in a much deeper way than ever before.
But how do we assess this experience from a neuroscientific perspective?
Well the author Ernest Velia suggested three aspects that are important to consider in
assessing the experience of salvation.
These three aspects are number one the resources needed for attaining salvation, number two
the actual way of getting saved and three the meaning of being saved.
These aspects are actually quite similar to scientific approaches to a variety of mechanistic
questions.
We often need to understand what is needed for a given physical phenomena, the mechanism
by which it happens and how we can understand the meaning of it.
So let us see what happens when we apply neuroscience to these three aspects.
What are the resources necessary for attaining salvation?
Well I would think that the brain has got to be one of those resources for salvation
to occur the brain has to comprehend what is needed.
It has to understand how to go about helping the person obtain the necessary resources,
the behaviors, the emotional attitude, whatever they need to feel, it is the brain that allows
them to do this.
It allows them to feel sorrow for the sins they have committed.
It allows them to understand certain doctrines that need to be followed.
Access to these resources is also clearly supported then by the brain processes themselves.
What are the ways of getting saved?
Well the brain helps us to understand what practices we must do.
What beliefs we must hold and what experiences we must have in order to be saved.
And if we are to have to do something such as behave in a particular way or to do a practice
such as prayer or meditation, it is the brain that helps us to do it as we have described
in detail in previous lectures.
It engages our body and our brain in a certain process that results in a powerful experience.
Now finally what is the meaning of being saved?
Well here the brain again is crucial since it is the brain that helps us to derive the
meaning from all of our thoughts, feelings and experiences.
So the brain has to use its cognitive processes to establish meaning.
How do we do this?
Again we go back to our causal, abstract, emotional processes and in the context of salvation
the meaning is compared to the overall understanding of the spiritual tradition and its doctrines
and goals.
And importantly the brain must somehow be able to identify salvation as something truly
remarkable and beyond the normal part of our experiences.
In addition to applying the neuroscientific perspective to a general model of salvation
like Valleys, we can also apply our perspective to the teachings of some specific faith traditions.
For example the churches of Christ generally teach that the process of salvation involves
four key steps which we can also consider from a brain perspective.
First one must be properly taught and hear.
But hearing and learning require the brain.
Require the brain to make meaning of what we hear.
Our verbal conceptual areas help us to do that.
But we have also seen how problematic our perceptions are and how problematic our understanding
of language can be.
So can we use this information to help more clearly determine what we are perceiving and
how accurately we are perceiving it.
Second one must believe or have faith.
Now faith is interesting in terms of the brain.
Clearly the brain is a myth-making machine and I've also argued that it's a belief-making
machine.
So the brain certainly appears up for the job to create beliefs via its various brain functions.
Third one must repent which means turning from one's former lifestyle and choosing
to embrace God's ways.
Now here is a behavioral change that needs to be made.
The brain is being asked to change the way it functions and to adopt a more spiritual
path.
This sounds related to the topic of spiritual development that we heard earlier in the course
and neuroplasticity in terms of how the brain can change itself.
If we are going to go down a new path, how does the brain do it?
Are there new connections that are formed or are existing ones changed?
We are actually in the process of developing studies to evaluate the changes in brain function
that relate to transformative experiences because such research may actually shed light
on the biological correlates of this kind of a process.
And fourth one must remain faithful until death.
Then the topic of spiritual development arises in terms of how the brain creates a stable
system of beliefs about the world and about God as its neural connections become solidified.
Learning more about how neural connections remain stable or change could be valuable
in better understanding how transformations lead to a new state of being for the individual.
We might even begin to wonder how often a person can even have a transformation.
We can ask the question, can you be saved more than once?
Can you be saved three times?
But what about the part of salvation that comes from the outside of our brain?
The catechism of the Catholic Church specifies that salvation comes from God alone.
But it also states that we receive this salvation and must have faith in God and Jesus Christ
in order to obtain salvation.
So again, I would argue that the brain still must help us to develop an abstract notion
of what salvation is, why it is important, and how we are to obtain it.
Even if it originates outside of the brain, it is the brain that helps us to process what
we are receiving, what we are understanding, and trying to incorporate that salvation process
into who we are.
Maybe we could conceive of a research study in which we actually evaluate some subjects
who believe that they have been saved and compare them to those people who say that
they have not been saved or have no such belief.
While such a study would certainly address the religious issues, excuse me, while such
a study would certainly not address the religious issues per se, it would be fascinating to
know if there is something biologically distinctive going on in the people who believe that they
have been saved.
And if so, what does it look like?
In Eastern traditions such as Buddhism or Sikhism, salvation appears to come from ending
the cycle of suffering, ending the cycle of death and rebirth by attaining liberation
and enlightenment.
This occurs through intense contemplation and meditation and by moving one's life toward
a detachment from the body and the physical world.
As we have seen throughout this course, though, neuroscience can provide fascinating data
and insights into the mechanism of meditation.
Meditation and related contemplative practices appear to have a dramatic impact on the brain's
functioning both during meditation and after.
This data supports the notion that meditation practices result in a unique pattern of brain
function and create an enduring response in the brain itself.
So it certainly seems conceivable that meditation can lead to a transformation of the person
and one that is probably mediated in some way by the brain itself.
The study of neurotheology can be of great help in understanding these different approaches
toward salvation and determine which methods appear to be most conducive from an integrated
physiological and theological perspective.
Finally, we might consider the ways in which the brain limits what types of revelation
and salvation experiences human beings can have.
And what I mean here is that if we have certain types of senses, then we are limited by those
senses.
We cannot pick up a revelation that is transmitted in radio waves because our brain doesn't perceive
radio waves.
And if we're supposed to meditate or pray as part of our process for achieving salvation,
then we have to do this in a way that is consistent with the functions of the brain and the body.
The brain cannot go without sleep for too long, so salvation cannot require a process
in which people have to go without sleep for weeks on end.
So whatever revelation or salvation a person experiences, some part of it has to be comprehensible
to the brain, perhaps in language, emotions, but comprehensible nonetheless.
So the brain appears to be an essential element in the religious experiences of revelation
and salvation.
In addition, their religious and spiritual meanings are important to us such that the
experiences are not just experiences, but require our senses, our thoughts and our emotions,
essentially what our brain provides for us.
And throughout our newfound abilities to study the brain, it would seem that we could ask
and answer a lot of fascinating questions about how and why human beings experience
revelation and salvation.
Ultimately, the brain must combine these experiences into a belief and then into behaviors, behaviors
that are related to a whole different way of thinking.
But the brain also may limit what elements and types of spiritual experiences we can
actually have.
So knowledge of the brain and its functions can lead us to an important new perspective
on these very powerful spiritual experiences.
