Every major religious tradition prescribes a set of behaviors.
In the Quran, for example, the covenant is kept by one, remembering one's obligations
towards others, two, abstaining from yielding to the desires of the lower self, and three,
maintaining a constant remembrance of the divine and seeking to reflect his attributes.
In the Hebrew Bible, we have the Ten Commandments, which provide a remarkably compact and enduring
foundation for human conduct, both in relation to God and also in relation to our fellow
human beings.
And Christians look to the teachings of Jesus and especially to his Sermon on the Mount
for the principles that guide their actions.
Now as a scientist, I'm fascinated by these and other great systems of behavior, and in
particular, I'm intrigued by the possibility that neuroscience might shed some light on
the reasons why these systems have proved to be so durable throughout human history.
In the preceding lectures, we explored the ways that various structures and functions
of the brain relate to the creation and the maintenance of religious ideas.
And today I'd like to turn from ideas to behavior itself.
Is there something about the way that the brain works that actually predisposes us
to acknowledge the rightness and wrongness of various behaviors, especially of those behaviors
that are either prescribed or prohibited by religious authority?
Now of course, even before the emergence of neuroscience, people were grappling with
the relationship between our moral aspirations and our physical or animal nature.
We talked about in an earlier lecture, St. Thomas Aquinas, in his Summa Theologica, where
he engages the issue of the human biology and the mind.
He distinguishes between the actus hominus and the actus humanus, and he talks a lot
about how those two pieces of ourselves, that higher part, that spiritual self, perhaps
the non-material self, relates to the biology of who we are and how those two interact with
regard to our thoughts and our behaviors.
Similarly, the Jewish mystical perspective of the Kabbalah posits the nefesh, the animal
part, the ruach, the spirit that helps distinguish between good and evil, and the neshama, which
is the higher soul, but is related to our intellect.
Now how might cognitive neuroscience deal with these concepts as they relate to the
brain?
I'm intrigued by a lot of the recent studies that have been done that have tried to understand
that non-material part of who we are.
When we talk about our ideas, our thoughts, our moral reasoning, all of these are part
of that spiritual part of ourselves, that intellectual part, and that ultimately has
an impact on the biological part and our behavioral part.
Now we might actually ponder not just what goes on scientifically, but let's take a historical
perspective for a moment.
In the 16th century, Desiderius Erasmus argued that the human being is the center of creation
and that the measure of God's goodness in the world is that God created a world in which
to allow human beings to develop naturally.
So for Erasmus, he insisted on a role for the human will and personal responsibility,
our personal behaviors, as well as God's grace in achieving salvation.
Martin Luther, on the other hand, was considerably less optimistic about the human potential
for good in terms of our behaviors.
Martin Luther argued that grace alone provided salvation for human beings.
Fundamentally, this debate centered around the ability of the human person to choose
between behaviors that are good or bad and try to steer us in a direction as to how we
achieve salvation.
Now it would be very interesting, I think, to consider how these two scholars, these
two people arguing in this debate, Luther and Erasmus, might have responded to the current
neuroscience research regarding the nature of moral reasoning and the identification
of parts of the brain that appear to function as the seat of the will.
These studies have actually had a very dramatic impact on philosophical ideas because it tells
us something about how we engage these concepts and how we turn them into our behaviors.
But how will we actually behave based on these ideas?
It would be very interesting to see whether they would take this information in some way
and use it to either support or refute the other's ideas about human moral behavior and
its ultimate importance in attaining salvation.
Now clearly, it's too late for neuroscience to have an impact on their particular debate.
But what about us?
In scientific research, tell us anything at all about human behaviors and particularly
those that might actually have an impact on religious and theological discourse.
Well, that's a pretty big question.
It would be helpful to perhaps narrow the range of our discussion somewhat, so I'm going
to focus on several behaviors that are very crucial to almost every religious tradition.
The three behaviors that I'm going to focus on are altruism, empathy, and forgiveness.
Now let's find out a little bit about what scientific research has had to tell us about
these different behaviors.
First let's take a look at altruism.
Now in one very interesting study using functional magnetic resonance imaging, or fMRI, they
did scans of 20 different students where they were performed while they were looking at
different pictures that were designed to either elicit feelings of compassion or feelings
of pride in the test subject.
What these researchers found was that the compassion induction was associated with the
activation of the midbrain, that very central part of the brain, that actually is a region
that's activated when we feel pain and particularly when we perceive pain in others.
This area has also been implicated in parental nurturance behaviors, how parents take care
of their children.
So it may be that this type of compassionate feeling is an important part of the altruistic
response, that we will behave altruistically because the parts of our brain that perceive
someone else as struggling and needing help elicits this internal response that essentially
compels us to act in an altruistic way.
Another study involved 22 students who were asked to imagine helping someone by easing
their pain.
And the fMRI data showed that easing the pain of another was associated with an increase
of activity in a very central structure called the basal ganglia.
Now you may remember that this is a part of the brain, it's connected to the limbic system
and is very involved in the reward pathways of the brain.
It also happens to be strongly stimulated by dopamine.
Now when you combine these two studies, what they seem to be showing is that the basis
of altruism may have a lot to do with the areas of the brain that perceive pain and
the emotional areas of the brain that help us to perceive another suffering.
In fact it's interesting to note that research studies with brain scans have actually shown
that the perception of physical pain activates the same areas of the brain as emotional pain.
And it makes sense then that these areas of the brain may ultimately motivate us towards
altruistic behaviors.
Now another study showed that giving a particular molecule called oxytocin drives what they
call a tend and defend response.
And specifically what that does is it promotes trust and cooperation within a group of people.
And it also though may create a sense of cohesion but may sometimes create somewhat of a feeling
of aggression towards competing other groups.
Now this is a very interesting study because oxytocin is a hormone that is released naturally
in our body and it's released at very interesting times.
It appears to be very important in helping us to establish intense loving relationships
with another.
For example it happens to be released in very high quantities in a woman at the moment of
birth and throughout the process of nursing infants.
In fact it is believed to contribute greatly to the bond form between the mother and her infant.
It is also released in both men and women during sexual orgasm.
Again this is a moment of very intense bonding.
The role of oxytocin has also been studied in other animal species and there's a fascinating
set of studies that have been done that have looked at two very related species.
They're these little rodent creatures called prairie voles.
What's interesting is that one of these species is incredibly monogamous.
They find their mate and they mate for life.
The other species, very similar kind of voles, looks the same but they actually never settle
down.
They're very promiscuous, they never bond with each other.
Which one do you think has more oxytocin receptors in their brain?
Well if you said it was the species that forms intense monogamous relationships you would
be right.
So we can see that oxytocin, this chemical, it's actually a kind of neurotransmitter is
important in creating loving bonds which support behaviors that ultimately lead to very intimate
relationships and eventually to altruistic behaviors.
The notion that a woman will give her life for her child.
This notion of altruism is something that is perhaps fundamental to human thought and
behavior and these studies are starting to tell us about the biological processes, the
physiological processes that are going on in our brain.
So we're starting to better understand the nature of how we establish our bonds with
others and how we create these different kinds of altruistic behaviors.
In addition to what we are learning about altruism brain science is also turning up
some very interesting results relating to the feeling of empathy.
For example, an FMRI study that was conducted in 2010 by researchers at Northwestern University
showed that empathy for members of your group, the in-group, is actually narrowly distinct
from the feeling of empathy for humankind in general.
Now in this interesting study it involved 28 individuals, half of whom were African American
and the other half were Caucasian.
The participants in the study showed a greater response in two areas of the brain, one called
the anterior cingulate cortex and the other the insula when they were observing the suffering
of others.
Now what do these areas do?
The anterior cingulate is located between the frontal lobes and the limbic system.
One way to think about what it does is that it functions to some degree as a fulcrum between
our cognitive control of our emotions and our emotions.
So as we've talked about in the past, the emotions may respond, somebody insults us
and our emotions want to punch them in the mouth.
But our frontal lobe says no, no, no, let's try to find a better way of doing this.
And that interaction occurs via the functioning of the anterior cingulate, that area that
balances between the frontal lobe and the limbic system.
The insula is also a very interesting structure which is located between the limbic system
and other parts of the cortex, the higher parts of the brain.
The insula is believed to be a very important structure in how we perceive emotions, how
we feel the actual emotions and how we think about them.
So this clearly indicates that empathy for humankind in general activates these emotional
areas of the brain and particularly those areas that help us to regulate our emotional
responses and to feel our emotional responses.
But in the study of the African American individuals, they found that they actually had an increase
of activity in the larger parts of the frontal lobe when they were observing suffering of
members of their own social group.
So it suggests that the frontal lobe, another structure, becomes part of this sense of empathy
for their own group, which is a little bit different than when people are looking at
humanity in general.
Moreover, neuronal activity within the frontal lobe in response to pain expressed by either
members of the person's group or members of another group was actually part of a greater
response to empathy and altruistic motivation for the person's in-group, for their own group.
The results of this particular study suggested that the brain processes associated with creating
our sense of self actually underlie an extraordinary empathy and altruistic motivation for members
of our own social group.
Again, what we're seeing is this very profound sense of connectedness, empathy and understanding
that motivates behaviors that are deeply tied into the religious concepts that are often
taught as part of religious traditions.
Yet another study suggested that inferring the emotional state of someone who is not
like us relies upon the same neural structures as having empathy for someone who is similar
to us.
In particular, the parts of our brain that are responsible for perceiving the emotions
in our self are important for developing empathy for those who are similar to us and those
who are different from us.
It is just that empathy for those who are dissimilar to us requires additional frontal
lobe function in order to make those kinds of empathic inferences.
So ultimately what the brain research shows is that it is easier to have empathy for those
who you know and feel similar to, but you can have empathy for others.
Now this is a very interesting finding.
In fact, it gives us a new scientific, a neuroscientific basis for understanding a moral precept
that is crucial to many religious traditions, namely that you should love your enemies as
well as your friends.
And here's something else that we're learning from the research.
While empathy to some degree is an inherent human trait, it can also be affected by the
frontal lobes and other cognitive processes.
In other words, at least theoretically, empathy can be learned.
And this of course has very important implications for religious concepts since religions ask
us to be altruistic and try to promote feelings of altruism, empathy, and behaviors that are
related to them as part of their doctrines.
So that means that we actually can change our brain.
We can actually alter the functions of our frontal lobes and our emotional systems so
that we can feel more empathy and ultimately more compassion for others.
Now so far we've been talking about altruism and empathy, but there is a third behavior
which in many ways is even more fundamental to some of the great religious traditions
of the world.
And that behavior is one of forgiveness.
So let us turn to forgiveness now and look at how various cognitive processes play out
in this very complex and very human kind of behavior.
Now we talked a little bit in a prior lecture about the rudiments of forgiveness, but I
want to spend a lot more time right now because forgiveness is a very complex kind of human
behavior.
And I call it complex because it includes so many intellectual, emotional, and behavior
elements.
It includes altruism, love, cognition, and feelings of empathy.
But if we look at the entire process of forgiveness from a neuroscientific perspective, we can
identify certain core components that make this complexity a bit more intelligible.
Now let's think about the forgiveness process and what happens.
Well the first thing that has to happen in the forgiveness process is that you have to
have something that happens to you that requires forgiveness to be given.
We might refer to this as the injury to the self.
Now perceiving an injury to the self appears to require four distinct elements that all
are rooted in neurobiological functioning.
You need to have a sense of self.
The idea here is that if you don't have a sense of yourself, then you don't have any
way of relating what exactly is going on that might injure that self.
Now to some degree you also have an expanded sense of self, the idea that you feel things
to you stronger than how you understand what other people feel.
You have to have the ability to evaluate the behavior of others as being injurious or beneficial
and you have to have a memory of this event in order to link that injury to the offending
person so that you can actually go ahead and forgive them.
So let us look at each of these elements in more detail and how they relate to very specific
brain processes.
Well the sense of the self derives from the brain's ability to perceive the self.
Remember that our brain takes in sensory perceptions about the world.
Some of them come in from the outside world and they tell us where our self is in relation
to that world.
That's that parietal lobe, that area in the back of our brain that gives us our orientation
of our self.
But other parts of the parietal lobe and other parts of our body give us an awareness of
our self, of our body itself.
And we can feel our emotions, we can reflect on who we are as a person, we have a self
that reflects on the self and we have emotional values that we apply to this sense of self.
So we feel who we are, we know who we are and we have an emotional attachment to who
we are.
Now all of that also contributes to an expanded sense of our self.
This is where we sometimes run into problems.
So the issue is that we feel everything that we feel and we feel it's stronger than how
we can ever empathize with somebody else's feeling.
So our limbic system, our parietal lobe, our sensory awareness of the things that are
going on in our own body help us to make us feel our self and to some degree we necessarily
protect our self above all other things.
To some degree this is what our brain is designed to do.
We must protect ourselves and therefore we must be extra careful about the things that
are going on around us.
So we have within our brain the ability to perceive our self but when we actually experience
some kind of injury or hurt the brain has the ability to not only feel it but to some
degree to feel it very strongly because we need to know how to respond to it.
Now how does the brain actually perceive this injury or self?
Where does that come from?
Well in the brain we also have the ability to perceive relationships between our self
and other things in the world, between a given individual and the people who are in their
group.
There's actually a type of balance that's maintained in this group and if we think about
the areas of our brain that might be involved in this we might think about our binary system
that distinguishes our self from others and tells us a little bit about how they relate
to each other.
We have the abstract ability to bring that together to understand what that relationship
is and the ordering, the balance that we have, the equilibrium that we have with other people
can actually be both vertical as well as horizontal.
Now what do I mean by that?
Well if you work for somebody you have a vertical kind of relationship.
You have a boss that's working with you, you're working for them and therefore they're
allowed to do certain things to you that perhaps somebody who works underneath you or perhaps
a friend isn't allowed to do.
But we understand that, our abstract processes of our brain understand what that relationship
is and understand that there is a limit to what other people can do to us irrespective
of that vertical ordering.
So we understand the sense of equilibrium across all people as well as people who are
theoretically above us or below us in the overall social order.
So to some degree we are all at least at one level equal, at least in the sense that we're
all human beings and therefore we're not allowed to abuse other people irrespective of our
station in life.
Now this equilibrium which our abstract processes and our emotional processes hold for us so
that we understand can then be changed in either a positive or negative way.
If there's a positive change, the change is in favor of our overall sense of well-being.
Usually it happens because the person compliments us, does something kind to us and ultimately
we feel that we have actually been taken out of that balance, out of that equilibrium
by in some sense being placed higher than the other person.
And sometimes we actually respond by trying to do something nice for them.
The old, if you scratch my back, I'll scratch yours.
A negative change is an injury or an insult that ultimately makes us feel badly about
ourselves because we recognize that that equilibrium has now shifted so that we are
now lower than we were.
And now we have to decide ultimately how to respond to that particular injury.
So the notion of injury can apply to both the individuals and how we relate to each
other as well as the group as a whole and perhaps even other things.
So for example, this actually can apply to a kind of self-world equilibrium, a self-world
balance, or a relationship between our self and God as one other example.
Now once this balance or equilibrium has been negatively altered, the processes of forgiveness
or sometimes revenge can begin to occur.
Now revenge itself is actually a little bit easier to understand than forgiveness.
It's in the Bible, the Lex Talianus, an eye for an eye.
And in fact, this idea exists in virtually all cultures and all religious and spiritual
traditions.
In fact, it's sometimes used to actually justify violence and hatred in a religious context
because if somebody does something wrong to us, then we can go and do something wrong
to them.
But an individual that begins to feel this way still has to decide as to whether there
may be another alternative.
Is there something that they can do other than revenge?
Can they actually turn to some aspect of forgiveness and we'll talk about how that happens in
just a moment.
But one of the other important elements of what forgiveness is all about is that you
have to be able to use your memory processes and your causal process of the brain to be
able to establish the sequence of events that led to the injury so that you know who to
get revenge on or ultimately who to forgive.
But after all, if you can't remember who did the injury to you, then you don't know
who to seek revenge on or you don't know who ultimately to forgive in terms of the perpetrator
of that injury.
Now forgiveness is ultimately the first swearing of resentment and revenge.
Ultimately the forgiveness process involves a lot of different brain processes.
It involves causal reasoning because you've established what the causal problem was, the
injury was and now you have to re-establish how you will now relate to that individual.
You have the binary function which sets you up with that other individual and now has
to rectify the problem, the situation.
Your quantitative functions get involved because they're telling you what's better than or
worse than other ways of thinking or trying to resolve that problem in terms of are you
better than or have you been injured by the other person?
And you have the holistic processes that ultimately are going to be brought in to try to rework
that sense of equilibrium in a way that helps to establish the overall sense of self in
the context of that injury.
So again, you can utilize the causal process.
You can look at the binary function as all of these different ways of trying to understand
what the injury was, the nature of it, perhaps the moral basis of whether you need to forgive
or not and how you can try to re-establish that balance which is so important in the
forgiveness process.
In fact, the abstract function itself helps us to kind of bring that to a conclusion by
manipulating all of the different religious, spiritual, moral and even legal concepts in
a way that we can restructure in our own mind the nature of the injury that occurred and
how it is finally resolved.
And I mentioned that the holistic function is probably a crucial part of finally reunifying
that balance, reunifying you with the other individual so that you can feel better about
this new equilibrium and feel better about the forgiveness process.
This ultimately leads to very powerful emotional responses that are part of the forgiveness
process that make the forgiveness process one of the most important ones in most of
our religious traditions.
So it is not a surprise then that empathy, altruism and forgiveness are associated with
brain functions.
The results from different brain scant studies that we've been looking at provide some insight
into the specific emotional and cognitive processes that are involved.
Significantly, the studies support the notion that we can change our brain and our thoughts
and behaviors.
And if religions promote such positive behaviors, it can become integrated in the brain's functions
more effectively.
It can change the neural connections in our brain.
Thus neuroscience does seem to be able to make a very real contribution to religious
and theological discourse.
In addition to showing the neurophysiological conditions that make behaviors like altruism
and forgiveness possible, the research also offers evidence that religion can play an
important role in shaping a more empathic and less antagonistic world.
