By the end of the nineteenth century, religion and God were supposedly dead, or going to
be very soon.
There was the education of the masses with the notion that as people learned more, they
wouldn't need this archaic concept of God.
There was also the higher criticism of the Judeo-Christian scriptures.
And ultimately, with the scientific method, many people thought that we were going to
learn so much about how the world works that we simply were not going to need God and religion
anymore.
But despite the supposed end of religion more than a hundred years ago, religion in many
ways is experiencing a resurgence in so many different arenas, including in the context
of integrating science with traditional belief systems.
Now of course, many traditional religions are still maintaining their strength.
The numbers show that about 80 to 85 percent of people in the world identify with some
type of religious belief system.
And in the United States, large percentages of people believe in heaven and hell, angels
and God.
In fact, the recent poll indicated that about 81 percent of Americans believe in heaven,
while approximately 75 percent believe in angels.
So religions are clearly doing fairly well.
They're very adaptive.
They find ways of continuing to bring in new people into their ranks.
And it's also interesting because religion has tried to adapt to the developments of
technology and society.
There's a growing interest in the relationship between science and religion.
In fact, traditional religions are generally very intrigued by what science has to say about
our world.
And specifically, it tends to, when science actually supports religious practices, that
can be very beneficial from a religious or spiritual perspective.
But of course, traditional religions are also a bit careful about how science handles
religion and what the ultimate conclusions of science may be and whether they will be
in contradistinction to what religious and spiritual beliefs actually say about our world.
So I would say that in general, most religious traditions are supportive of the dialogue
between science and religion.
They may want to utilize the information to help to prove their views.
For example, I have actually been asked at various times by different groups to actually
help to do a brain scan to prove that their belief system is really the best or most true.
Now I try to explain to them how our brain scans work and the types of implications that
we can obtain from those scans.
But nonetheless, they're still interested in trying to prove one belief system or another
as being more right.
Religious groups might also be interested to see if the brain information can help to
improve spirituality or the liturgy that has developed around their religion.
For example, in the past, liturgy and ritual was probably based upon doctrine to some degree,
but also to some extent trial and error.
A clergyman might try a different song or a different prayer in some kind of way and
observe the reaction of the participants.
I always have in my mind the notion that they may have tried a new song and then afterwards
waited to see what the response was.
The people come up to them and say, that was an amazing song.
That made me feel really spiritual.
Or did the people come up and say, boy, I don't understand why you did that song.
I didn't get that at all.
And then from there, they began to develop a new liturgy either dependent on that song
or not based on how people responded to us.
But of course, this is not a very systematic approach, the kind of systematic approach that
we're trying to develop throughout this course.
So we may find ways of using science, some way of investigating these questions that
can help to determine practices that do work better depending on the goal.
For example, if an entire liturgy is comprised of music, prayers and stories, we might consider
a study that could show us how effective each element actually is.
What if some of the music turns out to be not very helpful?
Maybe it even interferes with the liturgy.
And by doing a research study that asks that kind of a question of the participants, we
might be able to do a better job than simply relying on the few people that come up afterwards.
Maybe we could find out truly what are the, quote unquote, active ingredients of that
particular ritual or that particular liturgy.
Now in today's world, we often find people stating that they are spiritual but not religious.
And of course, there are a number of groups and movements that support this overall approach.
Some of these are referred to as new age ideologies, but there is a tremendous variability in their
beliefs and some of them actually go back thousands of years.
Now many of these ideologies have some common elements.
For example, they generally like things to kind of work out well.
They usually put a very positive spin on things, including the intersection between science
and religion.
Just like traditional religions, they might be interested in proving that some of their
ideological concepts, maybe some of their practices and the various ideas they have
about consciousness or even psychic types of phenomena are real and accurate.
In addition to these spiritually oriented interests in science and religion, science
itself is taking a renewed interest in the topic.
Of course, that's what we're here for in this course to see how science can take a
new look at spirituality and religion.
Now while science certainly has had a strong cadre of materialists, there is increasing
interest in how science may be used to help better understand religion.
And this has led to much of the research studies we have discussed throughout this course.
The overall perspective is that science is interested in studying humanity.
And since religion and spirituality is such an important part of humanity, it would certainly
make sense for science to actively pursue this topic.
Now some scientists are merely interested in seeing how far science can actually go
and what happens when it bumps up against some of the doctrines and ideas of religion.
Scientists exploring these so-called boundary issues include scientists looking at fields
such as quantum mechanics, cosmology, or even neuroscience.
And they recognize the possible importance of spiritual concepts.
So for example, a cosmologist who is interested in understanding the origins of the universe
may actually want to think a little bit about what religious and spiritual traditions have
told us about that.
It might tell us something about where the universe comes from and how we can understand
it perhaps in a very holistic way that can ultimately be incorporated back into how we
think about things scientifically.
In fact, a leading cosmologist at NASA named Robert Jastrow for many years quipped regarding
the scientific theories about the origin of the universe.
He said that for the scientist who has lived by his faith in the power of reason, the cosmological
story ends like a bad dream.
He has scaled the mountains of ignorance, he is about to conquer the highest peak, and
as he pulls himself over the final rock, he is greeted by a band of theologians who had
been sitting there for centuries.
Now what he means by this is that as the cosmologist keeps trying to understand the origins of
the universe, he may come across theological and philosophical ideas about the origin of
the universe that go back thousands of years.
Now of course, in my field of medicine, there is also a growing interest in the study of
spirituality and religion.
Take for example, Francis Collins, who is the current director of the National Institutes
of Health.
He was the head of the Human Genome Project, but wrote in his book, The Language of God,
how he came to realize that the human genome and the human person are simply too amazing
not to have been created by a god.
Now this same interest in religion is reflected in the biomedical literature where a growing
number of research articles on the interplay between faith and human physiology has continued
to increase.
In fact, it has increased dramatically over the past 25 years.
And among nurses and doctors and other healthcare providers, I certainly see a growing realization
that we need to incorporate in some way spirituality into patient care.
We have come to understand that spirituality is such an important part of so many people's
lives that to ignore that part of them, we really aren't going to do the best job that
we can of helping to heal them.
But how do we do that?
How do we engage this part of a person in appropriate ways to help them benefit their
health?
And of course, others are concerned about this very issue, about how the appropriate use
of religion actually occurs in healthcare.
Is it appropriate for doctors to pray with patients or to pray for patients?
One of the things that I always tell the medical students who I teach is that almost every
one of them is going to be asked by one of their patients at some point to pray with them.
What do they do?
How should they respond?
Well, science hasn't really answered this question yet.
And therefore, science needs to be able to look at these questions, look at these issues,
and try to figure out the best way to understand how we incorporate religious and spiritual
ideas into our sense of healthcare.
So in all these divergent areas, there is a persistent and intense interest in religion
and also the intersection between science and religion.
Now this needs to be handled very carefully, but it's also very intriguing.
After all, this leads, at least in my mind, to a very important conclusion.
Religion is made of some pretty tenacious stuff.
It still holds on in spite of all these other swirling issues all around it and in spite
of the idea that religion was going to go away, it hangs on.
But what do we do?
How do we make sense of the tenacity of religion?
What is it about religion that affects us so profoundly?
Well, as a neuroscientist, I have to come back to the brain.
I think it must affect the brain and the mind in some kind of very powerful, very profound
way that helps us to understand the tenacity of religion.
As we've noted before, to some degree, as we start to think about the brain and its
relationship to religion and spirituality, we also have to think about the relationship
between the brain and the mind.
Now, in general, what I've tried to do is define the brain as the organ that's inside
of our head.
It's comprised of the different lobes, the frontal lobe, the temporal lobe, the limbic
system, our emotional system, the different neurons that are all connected to each other,
and those chemicals, the neurotransmitters that help all the different parts of the brain
communicate with each other.
The mind is the more ethereal parts, the thoughts, the feelings, and perceptions.
Now, we typically regard them, at least from a neuroscientific perspective, as arising
from the function of the brain.
And as we have described in prior lectures, many of the specific structures and functions
of the brain help us to create all of these different functions.
But when we get down to it, it seems that the brain ultimately has two very basic functions
or goals.
So we've talked about all these different ways in which the brain works, but it seems
to come together into these two very fundamental things that the brain does for us.
And those two things I would refer to as a mechanism of self-maintenance and a mechanism
of self-transcendence.
So let's talk about what these two very basic functions of the brain are all about.
The self-maintenance function of the brain is very broad.
It incorporates all of the things that our brain does to help us survive.
Now this includes some very basic functions like eating, drinking, mating, and simply
navigating through this very complex and sometimes threatening world in which we live.
The brain helps us to develop morals, a sense of family, community, and society that are
all part of how we are able to survive.
The brain also helps us to avoid dangers.
Remember how our autonomic nervous system that arouses a part of that autonomic nervous
system that helps us with what we call the fight or flight response.
It tells us when we need to run, when we need to avoid things.
And as we learn about our environment, the cognitive aspects of our brain tell us what
things to eat, what things not to eat, to avoid going too close to the edge of a cliff.
So it helps us to survive.
Now to some degree, these are also very similar to the adaptive advantages that we have spoken
about in a prior lecture about how religion may actually be helpful from an adaptive perspective
and how that may relate to the brain's ability to be adaptive.
But ultimately, the spiritual brain may actually help us to survive by helping the brain to
engage this self-maintenance aspect of itself.
Now we've actually explored this in even more detail when we considered the relationship
between religion and both physical health and mental health.
In general, the results have shown that religion is beneficial to both our physical and mental
health.
In this way, religion helps to support this very primary brain function of self-maintenance.
Remember when we talked about the various physiological benefits of religious practices,
the idea that it helps to lower stress levels, improve our feelings of anxiety, and teach
us ways of dealing with the world, help us with ways of coping with the world, and if
all of that comes together to help improve our mental well-being, to help increase our
overall lifespan and reduce the risk of different disorders, different diseases as we talked
about, then we can see how potentially important religion could be as a way of helping the
brain in its goal of self-maintenance.
So if we think about the brain, it is certainly wired to favor behaviors and beliefs that
help the human organism to maintain itself, and again, religion seems to offer a range
of benefits that mesh very well with this overall self-maintenance function.
But as I mentioned, self-maintenance is only part of the story because clearly an organism
that doesn't merely maintain a steady state but can adapt is extremely important.
In fact, an organism that remains only in some kind of unalterable state or condition
is probably not going to survive in a very changing environment.
People change, people change all the time, and as a result, the brain must have the ability
to change and adapt as well.
And this brings us to the second function that I mentioned a moment ago, that of self-transcendence.
Now to some extent, I would argue that this is actually part of self-maintenance since
presumably an adaptable brain will help be able to handle the many vagaries of the world
much more effectively.
The brain needs to be able to change.
It needs to be able to adapt and adjust to whatever is happening in our environment so
that we function as effectively as possible.
And of course, self-transcendence refers to the brain's ability to actually do this.
Think about how the adaptability of the brain is prevalent throughout your life.
You are still the same person you were when you were three years old, when you were fifteen
years old, when you were twenty-seven years old.
And as much as we are still the same person, we are clearly different.
As we grow up and go through our lives, we have to learn new ideas and new behaviors.
Otherwise, we would always act like three-year-olds.
And of course, some of us like to do that from time to time.
But we have to think about ways of developing and adapting so that we are constantly changing
to our environment.
And of course, as we go through our lives, we meet new people and we continue to develop
as a person.
We hear new ideas, we come up with new thoughts, and all of this is very important.
Now from a physiological perspective, how does the brain maintain this sense of self-identity
even as it processes and adapts to all of the changes in human life?
Well, this is the self-transcendence part of the brain that we are talking about.
The brain has the ability to change itself by rewiring the connections enough between
the neurons and possibly even changing the functions of the neurons in a process that
is frequently referred to as neuroplasticity.
If you think back to our lecture on beliefs, when we talked about this, we talked about
how the brain can actually strengthen or weaken different connections based on what
we're doing.
The more we use a certain pathway, the more we come back to a particular belief, the
stronger those connections become.
And the less we use a particular idea or the less we think about something, the weaker
those connections become.
Now this is very important because we have a certain degree of stability.
Within the connections of the brain, there is a certain degree to which they maintain
themselves so that we are always our self.
And this allows us to be who we are throughout our entire life.
But the brain also has the flexibility, the variability, and changeability so that we
can transcend ourselves from one moment of life to the next.
And of course, if evolution has anything to say about this overall process, we should
theoretically transcend towards something that is even more adaptive the next time,
if not actually better.
The issue is, of course, that we don't always know what is adaptive.
The brain keeps trying new things, new ideas, new beliefs, and new behaviors, hoping to
always come up with something that works a little bit better.
Through learning, by talking to others as to what works, and through our own personal
trial and error, the brain begins to figure out the best ways to manage itself throughout
our lives.
But it is important to realize that based on all of this, the brain is more interested
in adaptability and surviving rather than actual accuracy.
And this will be a very crucial point for us to come back to when we expand on this
in the last lecture.
So the brain has the goal of helping us to transcend ourselves from one moment of life
to the next.
But are there certain aspects of human life that support this function?
Are there certain human beliefs and practices that can help the brain change in an effective
manner?
It seems that religion may be a very powerful source for this self-transcendent activity.
Think about how religion might aid the brain in its self-transcendent promoting function.
Well, the primary tenet of most religions is to better ourselves.
Religions generally provide a system of morals, a set of practices and behaviors, and a set
of beliefs that we are supposed to strive towards.
This means, of course, that religion is providing a framework for change.
Of course, this is a little different than what sometimes people think about when they
think about religion.
They often think about religion as being this very static thing.
You have to believe one kind of way.
But what most evidence shows is that religion is all about change.
It's all about how we become better and continue to adapt within ourselves and within our
brain.
Now, as the brain ponders how and why to change in the future, these religious traditions
tell human beings to try to be more kind, to be more charitable, and to strive to be
good.
Religions also provide specific rites of passage, including birth rituals, childhood rituals,
growing up rituals, for example, marriage rituals, adult rituals, and ultimately death
rituals.
Religions appear to realize the process of change that human beings experience throughout
their lives.
And to some degree, religions help to put this change into context.
They give it a certain degree of meaning so that we can understand what the change is
all about, not fear the change, and in many ways, embrace that change.
Finally, there are certain religious and spiritual experiences that might be the pinnacle of self-transcendence.
These mystical experiences, which we will discuss in detail in the next lecture, are
a powerful source of the self-transcending itself.
The experience is frequently perceived as the person changing into an entirely new state
of being.
In the Judeo-Christian traditions, we might call it a feeling of salvation.
In Buddhism and Hinduism, we might call it enlightenment.
But as we have discussed throughout this course, these experiences are also associated with
neurophysiological processes.
So let us reflect on the potential neurophysiological processes that might be involved.
To some degree, we have to keep in mind that much of this neurophysiological description
is somewhat speculative, since it is almost impossible to know when someone is actually
going to have this kind of transcendent or mystical experience.
When they're going to have it and how they're going to have it, we simply don't know.
And of course, part of the problem from a scientific perspective is that even if somebody
was having it, I can't tap them on the shoulder and ask them how they're doing.
Where are you right now in your transcendent experience?
That would completely disrupt their entire experience.
But based on the information that we have talked about so far in our course, we can
infer a lot based upon the studies of practices such as meditation and prayer that are known
to be able to help to induce these kinds of mystical states.
Now, from the bottom up, we might start with the autonomic nervous system.
Mystical states appear to be associated with very profound changes in the autonomic nervous
system.
They are experienced as having either a tremendous sense of calmness and blissfulness, which
would be part of that quiescent side of the autonomic nervous system.
Or they might be associated with an intense feeling of arousal.
And of course, the sympathetic or arousal part of our autonomic nervous system may be
an important part in mediating that kind of response.
In fact, sometimes people have a little bit of both, as we'll talk about later on.
And it may have something to do with both arms of the autonomic nervous system being
involved.
These experiences are also incredibly powerful emotionally.
And we've talked a lot throughout this course about the limbic system and how it generates
different kinds of emotions.
So if somebody has this incredible, powerful feeling of love or immense joy, what's going
on in the amygdala?
Maybe it's lighting up like crazy because it's such a powerful emotion.
Maybe they have an incredible feeling of fear and awe, which also lights up the amygdala
and tells our brain to pay attention to this unbelievable experience that we're having.
And remember that one of the other areas that seems to be very importantly involved in practices
such as meditation and prayer is the parietal lobe, that part of our brain that helps us
to orient our self and to create a sense for our self.
We know that in these practices, there sometimes is a decrease of activity in this area, which
we think is associated with the progressive sense of losing the sense of self, a sense
of oneness.
And there's a lot of evidence that during these practices, as this neuronal information
is blocked from reaching that orientation part of the brain, the person begins to engage
a kind of unitary experience.
And in fact, this structure, which normally helps us to create our sense of self, if it
truly is blocked from having all of the sensory information coming into it, we may completely
lose our sense of self during the experience.
And we might actually think about how this loss of the sense of self actually affects
the way the person feels connected to or at one with God or some ultimate reality for
them.
And if this is the case, there may actually be some kind of continuum.
Maybe we would refer to it as a unitary continuum along which different transcendent states
occur.
So there may be an increasing feeling of oneness, connectedness, and unity that the person feels
as there are progressive changes going on in this orientation part of the brain.
And there may even be a state, which we might refer to as absolute unity, in which the individual
completely loses their sense of self, feels that everything is incorporated into a total
sense of oneness.
And in fact, such a mystical state may reflect the ultimate in self-transcendence.
So with this overall discussion in mind, we can begin to understand why God won't go
away.
The answer may lie in the functions of the brain itself.
After all, the brain functions in specific ways towards self-maintenance and self-transcendence.
And religion seems to provide a very powerful mechanism to accomplish these goals.
As we've discussed through the idea of how religion and spirituality provide ways of
helping us to survive and adapt and helping the brain change and go through its entire
life, it's helping with these goals.
Thus, the functions of religion map very well onto the functions of the brain.
And because of this, the brain is likely to hold onto religious beliefs and ideas very
strongly, irrespective of whether they are actually accurate or right.
And we must come to the conclusion then that unless the brain undergoes some fundamental
change in the way it works and what it does for us and what its goals are, it would seem
that religion and God are not going to go away for a very, very long time.
