These lectures are part of the Great Courses.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website at thegreatcourses.com and imagine how much you could learn if you
spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lectures are university professors carefully selected by the Great Courses and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled Analysis and Critique, How to Engage and Write About Anything.
The lecture is Dorsey Armstrong.
Professor Armstrong is Associate Professor of English and Medieval Literature at Purdue
University.
She received her A.B. in English and Creative Writing from Stanford University in 1993 and
her Ph.D. in Medieval Literature from Duke University in 1999.
She specializes in Middle English Language and Literature, Arthurian Literature, Anglo-Saxon
Language and Literature, and Gender and Feminist Studies.
Dr. Armstrong is the author of Gender and the Chevalric Community in Mallory's Mort
d'Artour published in 2003 and Sir Thomas Mallory's Mort d'Artour, a new modern English
translation based on the Winchester manuscript published in 2009.
Currently, she is Editor-in-Chief of the Academic Journal, Arthuriana, and she is at work on
a critical study of geography in the late medieval Arthurian legend.
The course guidebook that comes with these lectures includes writing exercises and a
bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to review these materials before
or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 – How to Write About Anything
Hello and welcome.
I'm Dorsey Armstrong and I teach English at Purdue University.
I want to begin this course on how to become a better reader and writer with a story about
my own experience with writing.
When I was applying to college, what seems like many, many years ago now, I was particularly
worried about the essay part of the application.
I slaved over this thing for weeks and because this was before computers were really common,
I had made several photocopies, believe it or not, of the page of the application that
said, using the space below, write an essay on topic X.
I then wrote rough drafts and I practiced trying to get them to fit in the space allotted
for the essay.
I checked spelling, I checked my paragraph structure, I made sure there was nothing offensive
in my essay and that it showed how great an asset I would be to my first choice school.
And here's the thing.
I did a ton of work on that essay and today I cannot for the life of me tell you what
it was about.
In short, it was boring.
It was perfect but it was safe and I doubt that it would have made much of an impact
on the admissions committee.
Two nights before I had to get the application in the mail, I realized that this was really
bothering me so I sat down and I wrote another essay and this one I remember.
It was about a life changing experience I had as a junior in high school when I was
selected to participate in this week long creative writing program.
And in that essay I wrote about how the week spent living in the barracks of a former military
base on one of the San Juan Islands was the first time I really felt like a writer and
the first time I thought that this was something I could maybe do, maybe even for a career.
And I remember I talked about the other angst-ridden teenagers who were there with me.
I think there were like 15 of us total and I talked about how different we all were and
how much I really liked that because at the time I felt like everyone at my high school
was so much the same.
So I wrote a draft that night, I went to sleep and the next day got up early, proofed it
and then I rolled one of the last copy sheets of that essay page into the typewriter, this
tells you how old I am, typewriter not computer, and I typed it up.
Then very carefully I taped it over the original essay and I attached a note and in that note
I explained what had happened, that I had had my essay done for a long time but I just
didn't really think it was me.
So I had written another one that I liked better and I hoped that it was okay, that
I was taping this sheet over the one below it and of course I was really careful to tape
all around the edges because I didn't want them to think that I was trying to sneak
two essays in for the price of one.
And I wouldn't be telling this story of course if it wasn't true that I got in.
Now I don't know how much the essay mattered and I don't know if the admissions officer
thought I was trying to pull a fast one or if he or she read both essays but I am sure
of one thing and that is that the second essay I wrote and the one I wanted them to see was
more engaging and more interesting than my first boringly perfect and perfectly boring
attempt.
If you are taking this course then you are someone who cares about good writing, both
how to appreciate it and how to produce it.
Over the next 24 lectures we'll explore several different strategies that will help you learn
to read and think critically by examining important works from several major genres
of writing and will also give you the tools to learn to use the reading methods and critical
thinking skills developed by studying these genres in order to be able to write more
effectively for any occasion, any situation, any goal that you might have.
I say this a lot to my students.
Great writers are always great readers.
So in this course we are going to spend a lot of time learning how to be active engaged
readers and you are going to find out that this will help you to become an effective
and persuasive writer.
In this first lecture we'll examine the layout and basic premises of the course but let's
jump right in and take an example of a piece of writing and consider how or why it doesn't
really work.
Now this is something that is going to happen a lot during this course, my reading a quote
and asking you to think about it.
So I want you to start practicing what I call active listening skills right away.
Really pay close attention to language, to the word choice, the tone of the piece and
try to determine what you find interesting or awkward from the very first words I read.
So here's the first passage of writing I want you to consider.
They had but one last remaining night together so they embraced each other as tightly as
that two flavor entwined string cheese that is orange and yellowish white, the orange
probably being a bland cheddar and the white mozzarella although it could possibly be provolone
or just plain American as it really doesn't taste distinctly dissimilar from the orange
yet they would have you believe it does by coloring it differently.
Okay so on hearing this what are your first impressions?
Well I hope that your first reaction is something like that is terrible writing or that's ridiculous
or even that is really funny because this is deliberately bad writing.
It's the 2003 winning entry from the annual Boer-Litten Bad Writing Contest.
Now this is a contest one that I particularly love that draws thousands of entries every
year from people who are trying to write the worst imaginary opening of a novel ever.
The idea for the contest springs from the writings of Edward Boer-Litten who was this
19th century British writer who was really popular in his day but today most critics
think his work is really overly dramatic and sensationalist.
And he's the writer who penned the cliched lines that you probably have heard even if
you didn't know Boer-Litten had written them.
These are the lines, it was a dark and stormy night, the rain fell in torrents, except at
occasional intervals when it was checked by a violent gust of wind which swept up the
streets for it is in London that our scene lies.
Rattling along the housetops and fiercely agitating the scanty flame of the lamps that
struggled against the darkness.
Now you might be asking what is wrong with this piece of writing?
What indeed?
Probably many of you had an instinctively negative reaction to both Boer-Litten's dark
and stormy night opening and the winning entry in the Boer-Litten Contest but you couldn't
necessarily put your finger on why that was besides perhaps thinking that a sentence that
begins in describing a final embrace should not then move to a detailed discussion of
different types of stringed cheese.
In other words, most of us could recognize bad writing but apart from deliberately bad
pieces like the contest winner, we'd usually become hard pressed to always explain why
the writing is bad and what could be done to make it better.
This course aims to help you both understand and recognize what makes writing good or bad
and then to use that knowledge to produce strong and effective writing of your own.
Let's consider a very different piece of writing and this is a piece that's meant to persuade
someone of something.
So consider this following piece which is a short note written from a teenage girl to
her mother.
Mom, I need a raise in my allowance.
I only get ten dollars a week and everyone else in my class gets at least twelve dollars
a week some get fifteen.
I know we don't have a lot of money but I am tired of being the only girl in my class
with last year's genes that makes the whole family look bad.
If you give me a higher allowance, I promise I'll never miss my curfew again.
Jane.
Okay, so what's wrong with this example?
I'm guessing that probably a lot of you are thinking, well, there's quite a lot wrong
with it.
First of all, there's the tone.
The letter writer is asking for something but her tone is really demanding and from
the start this obviously is going to make her chances of getting what she wants slim.
She's already put her audience on the defensive and in a position that's going to be hostile
to any request that she might be making.
Second, there's her argument.
She claims she needs more money so she can keep up with the style and economic status
of her peers at school.
Her argument that everyone gets more for an allowance is weak because she doesn't support
this statement with any evidence and these statements also seem to suggest really a fundamental
lack of understanding of her audience who is unlikely to be swayed by the but everyone
else is doing it approach.
Her statement at the end that she'll never be late for her curfew again is equally offensive
to her intended audience and that in that it suggests that should she not get the allowance
raise she's asking for, she's going to deliberately ignore or break the rules of the household.
And finally, although you can't necessarily tell just from hearing the note read aloud,
her writing style is full of grammatical and mechanical errors and this suggests sloppiness
on her part and thereby a lack of respect for her audience.
If she doesn't even care enough to try to avoid a run on sentence, why should her mother
who is her audience believe that she'll behave with anything resembling responsibility or
respect?
Okay, so now consider this revised version of the letter which makes the same plea and
uses the same pieces of evidence but it does it a whole lot better.
Dear mom, I'm writing to ask if you would please consider raising my allowance from
ten dollars to twelve dollars a week.
Although I recognize that finances are tight, I believe that the extra two dollars a week
is a manageable amount and I believe I have proved over the last six months that I am
a responsible saver and spender.
I have asked Kayla, Emma and Mary what they get for allowance.
Kayla and Emma get twelve dollars a week and Mary gets fifteen.
Thus, I feel that twelve dollars is a reasonable request.
As you know, I very often use my own money to pay for lunch at school and I've proved
myself to be very responsible, not having been late for curfew even one time in the
last six months.
Thus, I feel that I deserve the two dollar per week increase.
Thank you for considering my request.
What's different this time?
Well first of all, the requester knows that this is exactly what she's doing.
She's making a request of someone who can deny it or agree to it.
The writer in the second example also has gathered together some compelling evidence
which supports her position.
She offers evidence of her good behavior, her plan for the extra money, which is going
to do with it.
And then she gives specific examples of people who receive the same or more for allowance.
She acknowledges that funds are tight, but she gives an example of how she is responsible
with money and how she uses her allowance for more than what we might think of as mere
frivolities.
So her letter is well written with a humble and respectful tone.
Her mother may still say no, chances are this is what's going to happen, but she is much
more likely to consider the request seriously than she would otherwise or in the case of
the first letter I read to you.
Now the first unit of this course explains in greater depth some of what we just did
in comparing these two examples.
We'll explore what the elements of successful writing are and how they depend on insightful
reading or careful research and rigorous analytical thinking.
Successful writing requires us to develop active analytical reading strategies as opposed
to passive receptive reading habits.
So just think about those two terms side by side.
Active reading and passive reception, you're going to want to sort of file those terms
away over the course of the rest of this lecture series.
By examining excerpts from several novels and short stories, including the work of Jane
Austen, one of my personal favorites, Herman Melville, Edgar Allen Poe, and some other
more contemporary writers, we'll learn how passive reading turns us into simple receivers
or whatever a text has to offer.
And that can be just raw data, empirical information, maybe emotional pleasure.
But by contrast, active and insightful reading empowers us to more effectively evaluate and
interpret the meaning of what we read.
And I strongly believe this makes us better writers in the process.
For example, consider this passage from near the beginning of Geraldine Brooks' marvelous
book, People of the Book.
Quote, when I put my hand on the glass, the cold seeped through.
It was supposed to be spring.
Even in a small garden by the bank's entrance, crocuses were blooming.
But it had snowed earlier that morning, and the bowl of each small flower brimmed with
a foam of snowflakes, like tiny cups of cappuccino.
At least the snow made the light in the room even and bright, perfect working light, if
only I could get to work.
So the image of flowers in the snow looking like tiny cups of cappuccino is what grabs
our attention here.
It's an image that's all the more powerful because obviously cappuccino has associations
with warmth and heat, but the image is conveyed through the most unlikely, and if I can make
a little joke here, literally polar opposite means, and this would be snow.
Snow is hot, snow is cold, and it's the contrast that grabs our attention.
We'll examine several other examples of arresting images, word choices, etc. in the lectures
to come, and we'll explore also how our recognition and understanding of their power can translate
positively into our own writing.
Successful writing requires us to develop an effective and I think most importantly
distinctive voice.
You have to sound like yourself.
A persona on paper that is both strong and flexible is really what you need to try and
create.
We'll analyze the work of several well-known writers such as Ernest Hemingway, Ralph Waldo
Emerson, Henry David Thoreau, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Henry James, the list goes on and on, plus
we'll also talk about some more recent essays to learn how they create and develop their
voices.
We're also going to study how these writers shift and modify their voices in response
to changing circumstances or contexts, and how one writer often produces compelling writing
in response to the work of another.
So let's examine how one writer makes use of the words of another writer.
Here's a passage from Virginia Woolf's A Room of One Zone, which many of you may already
be familiar with.
And the passage begins, quote, any woman born with a great gift in the 16th century would
certainly have gone crazed, shot herself, or ended her days in some lonely cottage outside
the village, half witch, half wizard, feared, and mocked at.
For it needs little skill and psychology to be sure that a highly gifted girl who had
tried to use her gift for poetry would have been so thwarted and hindered by contrary
instincts that she must have lost her health and sanity to a certainty.
That is the quote from Woolf.
And in this important work, Woolf makes the claim that there are so few great women writers
because they've historically lacked the means and the time to produce great works of literature.
One essayist and critic Alice Walker famously appropriated the words of Woolf to make a
further point in her groundbreaking essay, In Search of Our Mother's Gardens.
In her piece, Walker expands on Woolf's argument to suggest that it's not just women who have
lacked these resources, but women of color in particular.
And here she takes Woolf's own words and then she inserts her own as a kind of comment.
So she's really cleverly using the power of Woolf's rhetoric both to make her own point
as well as simultaneously criticizing Woolf's view to make a further point, which is that
she believes Woolf omitted or ignored women of color in her really important seminal work.
So where Woolf describes a woman born with a great gift in the 16th century, Walker writes
insert 18th century, insert black woman, insert born or made a slave.
Where Woolf argues that such a gifted woman surely would have been, quote, thwarted and
hindered by contrary instincts, Walker tells us to add the words, quote, chains, guns,
the lash, the ownership of one's body by someone else, submission to an alien religion, end
quote.
Here Walker deliberately and explicitly takes Woolf's words, her voice, and transforms
it to make a point of her own to feel in a gap that she felt that Woolf had neglected
in her work.
So how do the words of a late 19th, early 20th century British woman change when they're
appropriated and transformed by a 20th century African American woman?
What does Walker's response reveal about the assumptions made by Woolf as well as the
thinking of her intended audience given the context of the day?
What does it mean for Walker to even engage in such an exercise in the first place?
Asking questions like these will be something we do throughout this course and pretty soon
you'll begin to grasp that what makes it possible to really engage with a piece of writing,
to really understand and get inside it is not simply coming up with answers to questions
about the piece, but it's actually understanding what kinds of questions need to be asked in
the first place.
Successful writing requires us to know our readers and as the examples I just mentioned
suggest, Walker felt that she needed to address a neglected potential element of Woolf's audience.
Learning to accurately gauge the demands of an audience is one of the gravest mistakes
a writer can make.
We'll look at several examples of how authors anticipate, meet, or even shape their reader's
expectations, and in this instance mysteries and detective stories are especially useful
in figuring out this author-reader dynamic and how it does or doesn't work.
So we'll spend some time studying classic examples of mystery and detective fiction.
How many of us have reached the end of a mystery novel and been irritated because the solution
seemed to come out of left field or was too obvious from the beginning or just didn't
make any sense?
If you've ever felt disappointed at the end of a mystery novel, first of all, you're not
alone, I'm right there with you.
But second of all, you can learn a powerful lesson about not underestimating your audience
and respecting their intelligence and their willingness to suspend their disbelief.
In addition to working on identifying the important aspects that we need to consider
if we're thinking about our audience, we'll examine the characteristics of powerful persuasive
prose to show you how to adapt and incorporate these strategies into your own writing and
make your argument stronger.
Among the major literary genres, the essay is perhaps the richest and most varied resource
for studying how you can go about making a good argument.
And we're going to study three classic essays from the English and American traditions that
demonstrate effective strategies for starting, organizing, supporting, and finally concluding
an argument.
One of these essays is Jonathan Swift's A Modest Proposal, which is subtitled, quote,
for preventing the children of poor people in Ireland from being a burden to their parents
or country and for making them beneficial to the public.
And this essay also includes the following lines, quote,
I have been assured by a very knowing American of my acquaintance in London that a young,
healthy child, well-nourished, is at a year old a most delicious, nourishing, and wholesome
food, whether stewed, roasted, baked, or boiled.
And I make no doubt that it will equally serve in a fricassee or a ragu.
All right.
What's the first thing that comes to mind?
Besides the horrific image of parents cannibalizing their children?
Well, certainly it's the sheer ludicrousness of this idea.
And it's the ludicrousness of the idea presented in such a formal, rational tone.
And this combination is meant to provoke an extreme reaction.
This is a kind of satirical writing that by its exaggeration and the use of provocative
statements and ideas, is really meant to provoke the reader into a state of outrage.
In this case, Swift's essay is writing against many very offensive and elitist suggestions
that circulated in his day for how to deal with the poor people in Ireland.
He's saying, essentially, if you're going to suggest ideas as offensive as X or Y or
Z, well, let's just go all the way and cook the children up and serve them for dinner.
In part, the argument is so persuasive because it carefully adheres to accepted standards
of essay writing as it makes this totally ridiculous argument.
In addition to strong arguments, successful writing may require the use of what we call
figurative language.
And these would be metaphors, analogies, symbols, and also the skillful management of diction
and syntax.
These are all key features of poetry.
So what we're going to do to try and understand these terms and ideas is study the diverse
examples that poetry can provide from making use of figurative language, as well as multiple
examples that offers of how attention to word choice and word order can dramatically increase
the power and flexibility of your writing.
Consider the contrast, for example, between the Greek poet Homer, who described the ocean
as the wine-dark sea.
And then several centuries later, the Irish poet James Joyce describes a large body of
saltwater as the snot-green sea.
OK, so obviously, the two phrases have wildly different associations.
A wine-dark sea might suggest, say, civilization, calm, warmth, festivity, and a whole range
of other positive associations.
Joyce's word choice deliberately borrows from Homer only to then transform that phrase
into something radically different and with radically different associations.
Snot-green sea gives us the associations of illness, cold, discomfort, bleakness.
It's not happy or positive or festive.
His image is all the stronger in that he conjures up the classic illusion and then replaces
it with one that contrasts so strongly and so negatively.
Writing intended for oral presentation, like a speech or a conference paper or a wedding
toast, provides a unique set of challenges.
In particular, these involve issues of tone and timing.
Successful playwrights have a lot to teach us about these issues, and in this unit of
the course, we'll study several examples that can help us strengthen and sharpen writing
that's meant to be read aloud to an audience.
One of the most famous lines ever spoken aloud, to be or not to be, that is the question.
The opening line from Hamlet's famous soliloquy in the Shakespeare play of the same name,
derives much of its power from the fact that it is spoken.
It's not written on the page to be read silently.
Generations of Shakespearean actors have managed to convey to an audience their particular
interpretation of the Prince of Denmark and many aspects of his personality simply in
the way in which that line and those that follow right after that line are delivered.
So is he angry, frustrated, melancholy?
It depends on how the actor delivers the line and how we interpret it.
Writing, when it's done well, is never just words on a page.
Good writing invites interaction.
The reader engages with the words, interacts with the language and the ideas of the author.
Maybe it's a relationship that's not the kind we're used to when we think of the word relationship,
but it's no less personal or powerful simply because one of the parties is no longer there
or maybe even is long dead.
This is important to keep in mind, whether you're crafting an online personal profile,
writing a professional bio blurb or a job application letter, the challenges of creating
a written self-portrait that will help you achieve your goals can be really daunting.
You might be asking, well, what details of my life should be included?
What experiences and qualities should I highlight?
What approaches would be most effective?
What should I leave out?
For example, which opening of an autobiographical account do you find more engaging?
Here's the first one.
I was born in mid-December in Long Beach, California, the eldest child of my parents.
Okay, that opening is fine.
It sets the stage.
It gives basic information, but it's not particularly engaging.
How about instead, on the night I was born, the hospital lost power in the middle of my
mother's delivery.
I came into the world by the glow of emergency backup generator lights while my father sat
in the near dark waiting room without even a war movie to watch on TV.
The second, although autobiography, reads more like a story.
It supplies details and even a little drama to get the reader interested.
While the writing of autobiography requires only that you mine your own past for information,
very often persuasive writing will demand that you do a little outside research and
that you cite that research appropriately.
We're going to devote considerable time to how to conduct research and how to edit and
revise your writing.
The most important thing here is that practice is really the key.
But not just practicing writing first drafts, but learning how to edit and revise and rewrite.
In other words, using your first draft to help you get to a polished and engaging final
draft.
To help you with this, I've crafted special writing exercises for each lecture and you'll
find these in your guidebook.
I'll refer to these from time to time in the lectures themselves.
If you don't have a chance to do the exercises, that's okay.
You'll still be able to pick up the main points from listening to our discussion of them.
But I encourage you to at least read them over and think about them if you can.
In the exercises for this first lecture, I'm going to give you three passages of writing
and I'm going to ask you to try and figure out what makes them quote-in-quote good writing.
It can be as simple as identifying a word or image that's particularly interesting to
you or something that just sounds really nice.
As we continue on in this course, you will gain increased ability to recognize what makes
good writing and how to produce powerful writing yourself.
In our next lecture, we'll explore in greater depth what it means to be an insightful reader.
