As we discussed in our last lecture, a piece of writing has essentially three lives.
When we read it for the first time, knowing nothing about it, when we think about it,
selecting on the text and what we notice the first time through, and the third life
is when or if we reread it again, this time knowing what we already have read and considered.
It's helpful to keep this in mind as you are considering your own writing, be it a
short story or a poem or an essay for a class or a job letter.
Your own writing might have several lives and you should keep this in mind as you write.
There will be a first impression of your writing, its first life, and what you hope
for is that there will be at least a second life, that someone will stop to think and
reflect on what it is that you have to say.
And very likely there may be a third life when that person rereads your writing.
But it's always possible that your audience has only the time or inclination to read your
piece of writing once, so you have to make that one time really count.
One of the basics of engaging with writing is either an author or a reader is to understand
the genre or type of writing it is, and in this lecture we're going to explore the basics
of what I like to call genre definition.
And awareness of conventions of style, of subject matter, and how other elements fit
with a piece's perceived genre can help you become more keenly attuned to your own writing
and help you to pay attention to considerations like the expectations of your audience.
Now I told you in the first lecture that great writers are great readers.
In this lecture we're going to see how you can pick up tools for good writing from poets,
from dramatists, from writers of other kinds of texts, even if you yourself never intend
to write a poem or a play.
For example, if a reader thinks she's sitting down to read a mystery novel, turns to the
first page and encounters a series of sonnets, you can imagine that she's probably going
to be very disappointed.
Even if they are the most beautifully poetic, exquisitely crafted and cleverly executed
sonnets ever to have been written, the reader is going to be unlikely to notice and probably
unwilling to expend any sort of effort in engaging with them.
And this is because her expectations had been geared towards something very different.
And when those expectations aren't met, when they're dashed, her frame of mind is not
necessarily positively welcoming to this new and unexpected form of writing.
So today we're going to focus on learning to recognize different genres and the elements
that are most frequently associated with particular genres.
And we're going to talk also about how you could make the most of utilizing a particular
genre's conventions.
We're going to focus on five major types of writing, and that's prose, poetry, drama,
essay, and autobiography.
We're going to explore the major or most prominent features of each and then learn how understanding
and recognizing these features and their differences can make us better readers and
then, of course, make us better writers.
So let's consider the two following examples of writing and see if you can tell me to what
genre they belong.
The first is short, but you can get enough from these few lines to make a guess, I'm
sure.
The soul selects her own society and then shuts the door to her divine majority, present
no more.
Okay, so what have we got there?
Well, you can tell probably right away that this is a poem.
What are your clues?
Well, first of all, there's the rhyme scheme and there's the patterning there.
So this one's pretty obvious and pretty easy to figure out.
Let's consider another example.
Quote, Juliet, what man art thou that thus be screened in night so stumblest on my counsel?
Romeo, by a name I know not how to tell thee who I am.
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself because it is an enemy to thee.
But I, it written, I would tear the word.
Even if you have never studied the work of William Shakespeare, most of us are familiar
with the names Romeo and Juliet and know that they are characters in a famous play.
Now, it's true that many dramas contain long speeches by a single character, something
that we call a monologue.
But another major clue that this is a piece of drama is the movement between the speakers
with none of the indicators that we might normally find in, say, for example, a short
story or a novel.
If this dramatic exchange were part of a piece of prose writing, it would most likely be
accompanied by cues like said Juliet or shaking his head sadly, Romeo said, etc., etc.
So those two examples are pretty easy to figure out if we're considering genre.
One is poetry.
One is drama.
But now let's consider three examples of prose writing and see if you can identify which
is fiction, which is essay, and which is autobiography.
Here's the first passage.
When Arabella awoke, she could see through the crack in the curtains that the sun was
just starting to rise.
Early as it was, she could hear sounds of stirring in other parts of the house and knew
she could not afford the luxury of falling back asleep.
This example is fairly easy to guess.
It's fiction.
Our clues here are the use of the third person, which is a common convention of fiction, and
the use of a narratorial voice that is, to a certain degree, what we would call omniscient.
The voice of the person describing the scene can see what the character Arabella is doing
and can tell also what she is feeling, that she would like to fall back asleep, but she
knows that she can't.
Now here's the second passage I want you to consider.
Most everyone you might ask would be willing to volunteer an hour or so a week to a worthy
cause.
Very few people, however, have any idea how to turn their good intentions into action.
As I outline below, the Helping Hands program can provide information on how to get involved
with community activities and can easily be incorporated into the curriculum of most elementary
and secondary schools.
Now this is quite clearly some form of essay, the formal tone, the argumentative approach,
and here I mean argumentative in that the writer is making a claim and is purporting
to support it with the sentences that follow.
All of this suggests that this piece of writing is a persuasive essay of some type.
And now here's the third passage I want you to consider.
I was born in a small town on the California coast.
My earliest childhood memories are of the smell of salt air and the golden hues of the
sand and the foothills which came down to meet it.
By process of elimination, this third passage would quite obviously seem to be autobiography.
Other clues, of course, are the use of the first person speaker, the I, and also where
this text begins with the birthplace of the speaker slash writer.
All of this signals autobiography, although many of you are probably thinking right now
of pieces of prose fiction that you've read which begin with the birth of a character
and make use of this first person speaking voice.
These examples are fairly obvious, but now I'd like you to consider three more examples
which are a little trickier and which also help to demonstrate the potential for overlap
among these genres of prose writing.
Here's the first passage.
A long time ago, when all the grandfathers and grandmothers of today were little boys
and little girls or very small babies or perhaps not even born, Pa and Ma and Mary
and Laura and baby Carrie left their little house in the big woods of Wisconsin.
Unless you are already familiar with these writers or these pieces of writing that I'm
going to be reading to you in just a moment in addition to this one, this task becomes
a little more difficult.
Now, this first example comes from the beloved children's classic Little House in the Big
Woods by Laura Ingalls Wilder.
Supposedly, this book and those that follow it in the series are all in account of Wilder's
childhood growing up as a pioneer girl.
So your first answer might be, well, this is autobiography even though it's written
as if it were a piece of fiction, a novel.
However, those who have studied the life of Laura Ingalls Wilder have determined that
she's changed a lot in the account of her life growing up on the frontier of the United
States.
Many episodes of her life have been left out.
The names of many characters are changed, events that were separate get combined into
one or the timeline is shifted in the interest of the plot.
So this means that today her books are usually characterized as historical fiction rather
than autobiography.
Many of you might be thinking at this moment that to one degree or another all autobiography
is historical fiction.
No one can accurately remember every conversation, every event of his or her life.
And probably plenty of people who write autobiographies alter the past either on purpose or by accident
because their memories are a little faulty.
It's a slippery slope trying to decide where something crosses the line and ceases to become
autobiography and becomes fiction instead.
In the case of Laura Ingalls Wilder, she certainly used her autobiographical life experiences
to write these books and in its broadest strokes most of what she describes most likely happened.
For example, we know she did live through a very difficult winter with her family, that
her sister Mary went blind and she became a school teacher.
None of these events are made up out of whole cloth, so to speak.
At the same time, while her autobiography is the foundation of the fabric of these stories,
she's fictionalized quite a bit, so we don't put her writing in the category of autobiography,
but we classify it rather as a kind of fiction.
Now let's consider another passage of writing.
When I wrote the following pages, or rather the bulk of them, I lived alone in the woods
a mile from any neighbor in a house which I had built myself on the shore of Walden
Pond in Concord, Massachusetts, and earned my living by the labor of my hands only.
This passage is from Henry David Thoreau's essay, Walden, in which he used his own experiences
during the time he lived at Walden Pond to argue for a return to a simpler, more self-reliant
style of living than what he thought was the norm in America at the time.
So obviously, although there are elements here of autobiography, the use of I, the reference
to personal experience, meaning the time he lived at Walden, this piece is more in the
genre of the essay.
And that's because his main purpose here is to make an argument about a particular kind
of lifestyle, and his own autobiographical experience can be used to support his argument.
The fact that this is so, one might say, is really incidental to that argument.
At the same time, however, we should keep in mind that what Thoreau's essay proves is
how powerful one's own experience can be when trying to make a particular claim or argument.
So both this piece and the passage from Little House and the Big Woods make use of autobiographical
writing, but neither one really is, strictly speaking, autobiography.
All right, now let's consider a third passage of prose writing.
Dear son, I have ever had pleasure in obtaining any little anecdotes of my ancestors.
You may remember the inquiries I made among the remains of my relations when you were with
me in England and the journey I undertook for that purpose.
It may be equally agreeable to you to know the circumstances of my life, many of which
you are yet unacquainted with.
I sit down to write them for you.
This passage, well, couched as a letter from a father to a son, is in fact the opening
of the autobiography of Benjamin Franklin.
In this excerpt, he says quite clearly that he means to relate the events of his life,
but the conceit or what we might call the premise of his piece is that it's a personal
letter.
He is therefore constructed a specific audience, and in this case it happens to be his son,
to which he is supposedly writing.
This premise or conceit allows him to speak a certain way, to make certain references
and illusions that might otherwise be a little stilted or awkward.
With the fiction of the letter in place, other people reading this piece are drawn in, in
the sense that there is something exciting, thrilling, or maybe even a little illicit
about reading what is characterized as personal correspondence.
So if we have to try and briefly define each of these genres, what will we say?
Well, we might say that poetry is a form of writing that uses language in unexpected or
unconventional ways, by rhyming, by use of rhythm, or simply by patterning the language
in non-conventional forms, and we're going to talk a lot more about this in the lecture
that's devoted entirely to poetry.
The simplest way to define drama is to call it something that's performed in front of
an audience, and again, in the lecture on drama we'll discuss the genre's conventions
in greater depth, but some things to keep in mind are that with drama you have to rely
wholly on what you see and hear as a member of the audience to make sense of the story.
What the characters say and how they say it are what we use to determine state of mind,
the relationships between the characters, acting on the stage, and the plot of the drama
that's unfolding in front of us.
We also, in the case of drama, have to suspend our disbelief, and imagine that somehow we're
looking through what's often called the fourth wall, and probably a lot of you have heard
this term before, and this fourth wall is some imaginary invisible divider that separates
the audience from the actors on stage.
Now, some edgier dramas purposefully break the fourth wall, and you might have characters
step out of their role and directly address the audience, which is a clever move that
it once acknowledges the particular convention of drama in the fourth wall while overturning
that convention in rather delightful fashion at the same time.
Arguably prose fiction is the genre of writing that's going to be most familiar to most of
us.
Novels, short stories, that kind of writing, other works that tell some sort of story,
they're found everywhere.
Within the genre of fiction alone, we have all sorts of what we could call subgenres,
mystery, thriller, romance, historical fiction, science fiction, fantasy.
The list goes on and on.
I could probably spend the rest of this lecture just listing the number of subgenres within
the category of fiction.
The essay is quite easy to define in terms of its broadest strokes.
It's a piece of writing that seeks to persuade and inform to support a particular position,
for example.
So, that's also easily defined, just like fiction, poetry, and drama.
Autobiography is quite simply the story of a life told by the person who's lived it,
and the essay, as I've said before, has as its aim the desire to prove a point, make
a claim, persuade an audience of a point of view, or particular argumentative position,
and very often autobiography and essay overlap to some degree.
And as we've seen, all of these genres can overlap with one another in interesting and
provocative ways.
And what I want you to understand in today's lecture is how recognizing where these genres
diverge from each other, how they can overlap, and how those overlaps can be productive or
interesting can make you a more interesting and effective writer.
So, let's consider how knowledge of the conventions of these various genres can be used to enhance
something as mundane as a protest letter written to the local city council about something,
let's say, as commonplace as a leash law for dogs.
So, let's consider the following example of a letter.
Dear city council, I am writing to ask that you consider establishing an off-leash area
of the park for local dogs.
Many other communities have designated off-leash areas for the pets of citizens, and these
are usually carefully monitored and have strict rules about interaction between animals and
cleaning up after them.
This would be a positive thing for both the dogs and their owners.
Thank you for considering this request.
All right, that letter, it's fine as it is, but let's consider how we might punch it up
a bit to make it a more persuasive request.
First, let's think about the conventions of poetry and how we could maybe use them to
grab your reader's attention.
So first of all, what's this letter about?
Well, it's about dogs and doing something nice for them, so perhaps we could find a more
interesting choice of words to refer to these animals, since they're the main focus of the
letter.
What if we began the letter with something like, it's not for nothing that dogs are
often referred to as man's best friend.
These furry, four-legged friends provide companionship and love to their owners.
Here, we have a reference to the somewhat cliched, but very, very familiar line about
a dog being man's best friend, and then we have another little poetic flourish in the
alliterative phrase, furry, four-legged friends.
What other genres could we borrow from in order to enhance this letter?
Well, obviously, certainly the essay is on call here.
This letter is indeed a type of essay, since it's trying to make an argumentative claim,
it's trying to persuade someone to do something.
In an essay, you want to use argumentation to persuade the audience to come around to
your way of thinking.
So we've engaged with elements of essay from the beginning when we're talking about this
letter, and we're using poetry in addition to try and advance the goal of this letter.
What else could we use?
Well, autobiography, for one, seems to be obvious, as the writer of this letter would
most likely not be in favor of doing something nice for dogs if he or she did not have some
positive experience with dogs him or herself.
So perhaps there could be a line that goes something like, as a dog owner for many years
and having lived in many different communities, I've seen firsthand how off-leash areas and
parks are beneficial to dogs and provide members of the community.
Even those who are not dog owners themselves a chance to enjoy watching these friendliest
of animals romp, play, and interact with one another, something like that.
Now this is a fairly effective use of autobiography that's directly relevant to the issue at hand,
and so it works to engage and persuade the audience of this letter, and in this case
that audience is the city council.
Now we've discussed how elements of the genres of essay, poetry, and autobiography can be
used to make this a more engaging and effective piece of writing, but what about drama and
fiction?
Can we bring those in?
Well, we certainly could, but one thing we always need to consider as we work toward
becoming engaging and effective writers is that you can have too much of a good thing.
For example, you could add an imagined dialogue between the owner and his dog.
It could be something like having the dog say, oh, please, please, please, please, please,
could I run and play in this beautiful park?
Owner.
I would love to let you, but the law says I have to keep you on the leash.
Dog.
But it makes me so happy to run free, and you have trained me not to jump on other people
or dogs, and I know that you always pick up after me.
Owner.
I know, buddy.
I'm sorry that the city council members are such jerks.
Okay, so what does the above dramatic exchange have going for it?
Well, it's definitely attention grabbing in that apparently this dog can talk.
Not only that, this dog can lay out in two sentences why he should be allowed to be off
the leash at least briefly.
So the argument is clear, succinct, and meant to play on our emotions.
The emotional appeal can be a powerful one, and this is what the writer is going for here.
What's the drawback?
Well, certainly some of the audience might find this approach a little odd and off-putting,
and certainly no one likes to be told even if it is in an imagined dramatic dialogue between
a person and a dog that your policy makes you a jerk.
Nobody wants to hear that you've put something into place that makes people think of you
so negatively.
Would employing conventions of fiction work better in this example?
Maybe.
The dramatic exchange could be rewritten to read more like a story in which the owner
of the dog looks at his pet and imagines him thinking of things he has to say in that dramatic
exchange.
The writer could perhaps describe his sad, wistful eyes as he looks over the grassy field
in the park, and maybe the author could describe how the dog whines softly, how his ears twitch
eagerly, how he looks hopefully up at his master wishing that he might be let off the
leash just this once.
All of these examples demonstrate how you can use various conventions of writing in
conjunction with one another to try and make a more powerful argument, or simply to produce
a more engaging, interesting, readable piece of writing.
At the same time, just because you know how to employ the conventions of all these genres
of writing doesn't mean that you should do that all at once.
Sometimes restraint, knowing when to hold back, can be the most effective strategy of
all.
You want to engage your audience, not completely overwhelm them, and while it may be impressive
that you can work in a variety of genres, that you can show off, that you know poetry,
that you know drama, that you know fiction, that may not be what gets you to your ultimate
goal.
And in this case, your goal is to get an off-leash area of a dog park.
The more you write, the more you will learn to walk this fine line between effective display
and use of your writerly knowledge, and simply showing off.
Something that's likely to turn your audience off and is not going to help you in getting
what it is that you ultimately want.
As I've mentioned before, there are exercises that accompany each of these lectures, and
it's a good idea if you can take a little time and at least read over them, or better
to get, take a stab at writing them out.
For example, in the exercises that accompany today's lecture, I give you short selections
of poetry, prose, and drama, and I ask you to rewrite them, say, take the poem and write
it so that it reads like a piece of fiction, or take the short fictional piece and turn
it into a poem.
These exercises aren't just good practice, they're fun too, and you can learn a lot from
taking a stab at them, which I encourage you to do.
Each genre we've examined today offers tools for improving your own writing, no matter
what genre you choose as your own.
One thing that we've also touched upon several times in this lecture and the two preceding
it is the issue of voice, or how you construct your writerly persona for your intended audience.
In our next lecture, we will explore the issue of voice at considerable length, and we'll
learn how you can shape your voice to best suit any number of specific circumstances,
audiences, and goals.
