In our last lecture, we explored five major genres of writing to begin to get an understanding
of how different types of writing might be more or less appropriate for different goals.
We also explored how these categories of writing are never absolutely distinct from
one another.
Fiction might contain lines that read as what we think of as poetry.
Dramatic style might help make a piece of fiction more engaging.
Autobiographical elements can help make an essay more persuasive.
And as any great writer can tell you, a supposedly purely fictional piece of writing is rarely
ever just that.
The personal life of the writer usually informs the piece of writing in some way or another.
In the exercises that accompanied our last lecture, I asked you first to identify whether
three selections were poetry, prose, or drama, and probably most of you had no trouble with
that part of it.
But then I asked you to try and rewrite each passage so that it was generically different.
For example, to try and turn the prose into a piece of drama or the drama into a poem.
And as you recall, this is the poem I asked you to revise.
The flames came over the brim of the world, a terrible, hungry sunrise that ate and ate
the earth, well into the sleeve of night and out the other side.
When you tried to put this into prose form, what happened?
Well, you might have had a few variations ranging from those that kept a lot of the poetic
language.
So images like the brim of the world, of flames that were eating rather than burning the earth.
And you might only have changed the structure and punctuation a little.
Another version might have gotten rid of almost all of the poetic elements in an attempt to
give a straightforward account of what's happening here.
You might have come up with something like the fire came over the horizon in the morning,
burning the earth as far as the eye could see, and lasting through the night and into
the next morning.
This conveys what the poetic lines are saying in a really straightforward fashion.
So the audience understands the event that's being described, but at the same time they
lose out on several of the poetic elements that might add a little extra something to
this piece of writing.
So at the same time that the prose version might be a little clearer in what we might
call accessible to a wider range of people, what we also need to recognize is that this
prose version, as simple as it is, still contains some poetic elements.
So for example, as far as the eye could see, this is more poetic than something like burned
a whole lot of the ground.
So even though it's more straightforward, it still has elements of poetry in it.
Within the genre of fiction, there's a wide range of styles available, from the most prosaic,
something like the language you get in an instruction manual on how to hook up your computer.
And it can also be incredibly poetic.
Indeed, some critics have argued that certain short stories read more like poems than stories
at all.
These short stories, many of them, are so carefully aware of language and style and
nuance and diction, instead of maybe being concerned with the plot, that really these
stories are more like poems than short pieces of fiction.
The trick, as a writer, is to know for whom you're writing and what it is you're trying
to convey.
So although we've begun to discuss several different styles of writing, today we're going
to narrow our focus to prose, and this is the most common form of writing with which
most of us engage on a regular basis.
And we're going to narrow our focus even more so that we can really hone in on fiction.
In particular today, we're going to talk about the issue of voice, and this is sometimes
called tone or style or even diction, and it's a really important element of writing.
Now, voice is a critical component, I would say, of any kind of writing, from the formal
essay to a letter to the editor to a note you might leave on your neighbor's windshield
asking him, please don't park in my driveway.
But let's consider an example of how voice can be used both as a means for a writer to
establish his or her identity, and then how the voice can be used to shape the expectations
of your reader.
In other words, make them have some idea about what's going to come next.
So listen to this quote, most everybody seems to assume these days that if a guy is young
and has money, he's looking for someone to marry.
Okay, so what is that sentence trying to say?
Think about that for a moment.
You could probably sum it up pretty easily.
And now compare it to this version of the same kind of statement, but in a very different
style.
It is a truth universally acknowledged that a single man in possession of a good fortune
must be in want of a wife.
Now as I'm sure you've noticed, both of these sentences say essentially the same thing,
but in very different voices.
The first version is what we might imagine a modern person living in the 21st century
might say casually while in conversation with friends.
The second version, as many of you have no doubt recognized, is the famous opening line
of Jane Austen's classic novel, Pride and Prejudice.
It most definitely does not sound like something someone today might say in casual conversation.
Rather, it signals and sets the tone for much of what is to follow in this book.
And what follows is a story about upper class 19th century British people.
Okay, how can we tell that?
Well, first there's the use of an objective third person voice with an unusual and quite
detached syntax.
It is a truth universally acknowledged.
Who's doing the acknowledging?
How is this truth determined to be such?
The line itself also seems to be somewhat self aware.
There's a little rye bit of humor here when it says must be in want of a wife.
If you consider that line and the socio historical context in which it was produced, we get an
impression of mannered yet ambitious mothers making calculated moves to secure for their
daughters the best marriage possible.
If you consider the tone, style and wit of the line, we as readers are now primed to
expect certain things from the narrative that follows.
And we might reasonably argue we'll be disappointed if we don't get what we're expecting.
Sometimes however, what is interesting about voice in fiction is how you can set the reader
up for certain expectations and then by playing with or twisting them, you can create a really
memorable effect.
So for example, keeping with the Jane Austen theme, let's consider this quote from the
recent sensation entitled pride and prejudice and zombies.
The opening line of this work shows how the imitation of the style of Austin when we transfer
that to what is normally the cheap paperback world of zombie thrillers produces a new comical
effect.
The writer demonstrates an understanding and an ability with Austin style while also humorously
exploiting its limits.
So here are the opening lines from this version quote, it is a truth universally acknowledged
that a zombie in possession of brains must be in want of more brains.
Okay, so part of what the adapters relying on here is our familiarity with Austin's voice
and our appreciation of the satire applied to it.
In some sense, we as readers who know Austin are now in on an inside joke and who doesn't
like to be in on an inside joke, right?
We all enjoy that.
Part of the pleasure comes from recognizing that we get the joke because we're well read.
We've all read Austin.
We're chuckling in part because we know some people maybe won't recognize or get the reference.
So now consider this original passage from pride and prejudice in which the character
of Mrs. Bennett wants to tell her husband the exciting news that a nearby estate has
been rented by an eligible wealthy young bachelor.
She says, my dear Mr. Bennett, have you heard that Netherfield Park is let at last?
Mr. Bennett replied that he had not, but it is returned she for Mrs. Long has just been
there and she told me all about it.
Mr. Bennett made no answer.
Do you not want to know who has taken it cried his wife impatiently?
You want to tell me and I have no objection to hearing it.
And that's Mr. Bennett's reply.
So in this case, you have a conversation between Mr. and Mrs. Bennett.
It's rather straightforward.
They're talking about this house being let or rented to an eligible young bachelor and
Mr. Bennett seems sort of irritated with Mrs. Bennett's paddling on and on and on.
And so the writer of Pride and Prejudice and Zombies then takes that idea and he twists
it.
My dear Mr. Bennett, have you heard that Netherfield Park is occupied again?
Mr. Bennett replied that he had not and went about his morning business of dagger sharpening
and musket polishing for attacks by the unmentionables had grown alarmingly frequent in recent weeks.
But it is returned she Mr. Bennett made no answer.
Do you not want to know who has taken it cried his wife impatiently?
Woman, I am attending to my musket.
Praddle on if you must, but leave me to the defense of my estate.
Now obviously what's really funny here is that Seth Graham Smith, the writer behind
Pride and Prejudice and Zombies, imitates Austin's voice even when he changes the plot
in a dialogue so that it's about zombies and not an upper class British comedy of manners.
It's the successful imitation of the voice rather than the subject matter that makes
Graham Smith's book delightful in so many ways.
Let's consider another moment of distinctive voice and this time from a writer whose style
is one of the most famous and most easily identifiable and this is Ernest Hemingway.
His short story Hills Like White Elephants begins with the following quote.
The hills across the valley of the Ebro were long and white.
On this side there was no shade and no trees and the station was between two lines of rails
in the sun.
Close against the side of the station there was the warm shadow of the building and a curtain
made of strings of bamboo beads hung across the open door into the bar to keep out flies.
The American and the girl with him sat at a table in the shade outside the building.
What's the adjective that comes to mind if you're trying to describe Hemingway's style
and just a single word?
Well, one descriptor that comes up a lot in which you might have heard is the word spare.
Simple and clean are other words that are often used to describe Hemingway's style.
Hemingway's voice engages the audience by what we might call writing by indirection.
His style is deliberately simplistic and some people, myself included, would say occasionally
it's maddeningly so, but a distinctive choice that Marx is writing out from so many others.
In this story he describes the scene, what the characters say to one another and some
other details like the strings of bamboo beads, but the reader is forced to fill in gaps to
try and figure out what the real story is about since Hemingway doesn't tell us what
any of the characters are thinking or feeling and he limits also descriptions of their nonverbal
behavior.
For example, this opening doesn't say anything about how the couple look.
Are they excited to be going somewhere?
Are they slouched in their chairs?
We've got to work it out for ourselves as we read.
A writer whose voice might be considered the polar opposite of Hemingway is Henry James.
Some people might go so far to say that while Hemingway was a master of the simple sentence,
James, by contrast, seems to have aspired to torturing the English language and writing
the most complex sentences he could.
You'll see this in a minute.
Here are just two sentences from his story, The Tree of Knowledge.
It was one of the secret opinions, such as we all have, of Peter Branch, that his main
success in life would have consisted in his never having committed himself about the work
as it was called of his friend, Morgan Malo.
OK, so what's the difficulty here?
Well, for one thing, you might have noticed that this passage was a little difficult to
follow if you were simply listening to it.
Without question, James has established a voice that's meant for writing, not reading
aloud really, although some people might want to argue with me about that, but I think
it's much easier to read than to listen to James.
And one clue that tells us this is the piling on of subordinate clauses.
Readers on the page in the form of punctuation help the reader make sense of what the author
has to say.
And even in this case, James has what we might call a difficult voice, even in written form.
So if you consider that opening sentence and we rewrite it and take out the subordinate
clauses, it becomes something somewhat upfront.
It was one of the secret opinions of Peter Branch that his main success in life would
have consisted in his never having committed himself about the work of his friend, Morgan
Malo.
OK, so still a little tricky to follow, but it's much clearer than the first version
we considered.
But then, of course, you might be asking, well, if we do that, what have we lost if
we cut big chunks of the text out?
The subordinate clauses, what we might call asides, and these were the phrases such as
we all have, and as it was called, do contribute to the voice of the work.
These clauses convey immediately that the voice of this author is in some ways a critical
one.
He's making comments on the beliefs and actions of his characters.
Notice particularly that when he's describing the work of Morgan Malo, James inserts, quote,
such as it was called, and in just those four words, we immediately get the impression
that this work is really not much to speak of, and perhaps it isn't even work at all.
We don't even know exactly what the work is, but we do know that the attitude conveyed
by the voice of the writer is a negative attitude, and that's the most important element here
if we're considering the matter of voice.
Now, both Hemiway and James are considered by many, scholars and non-specialists alike,
to be masters of the craft of writing, and their work suggests the really powerful effect
that can be achieved when you willfully ignore some of what we consider to be rules of writing,
and you go off in your own direction.
I would be the first to say that they are in fact fabulous rule breakers, but if I got
a piece of writing like this from either one, or that was similar to either one of
these two examples, and I got a sample of writing from a student that was like either
one of these, I'd be doing a whole lot of correcting and commenting.
I might write something like, this piece needs more detail and explanation in the margin
of something that sounded like a Hemiway piece.
In a piece that was written in the style of Henry James, I'd probably write something
like, your reader has no idea what the most important or key idea is if you start off
this way.
And also I'd probably write in the margins of the Henry James piece, write clearly.
I might say something else like, the main argument is obscured by your wordiness.
As I always say to my students, sometimes it is powerful to break the rules of writing,
but before you do that, you need to show me that you know what the rules are.
Rules about writing in complete sentences, never beginning a sentence with and etc., etc.,
and so on.
These can produce really great powerful effects when those rules are deliberately broken.
But in order to understand just how powerful an effect you can create, it's a good idea
if you've mastered the rule first, if you know how to execute it properly.
Both Hemiway and James are quite conscious of the conventions they're choosing to disregard.
And it makes their writing all the more powerful because of this.
One of the most famous literary voices from the last hundred years has to be that of J.D.
Salinger's character, Holden Caulfield.
Let's consider two versions of the opening statement from this main character of his
novel, Catcher in the Rye.
So here's the first one I want you to think of.
Most likely, you will want to know my history, the details of my birth and adolescence, what
it was like to grow up with distant parents and other similar matters.
But I would actually rather not discuss that part of my life.
Okay, fair enough.
Now consider this version.
If you really want to hear about it, the first thing you'll probably want to know is where
I was born and what my lousy childhood was like and how my parents were occupied and
all before they had me and all that David Caulfield kind of crap, but I don't feel like
going into it if you want to know the truth.
Both of these passages have a particular voice, obviously, but one is arguably stronger and
more interesting and more engaging than the other.
Why is this?
They both speak directly to the reader as if Holden was having a conversation with a
reader.
So arguably, they're both really engaging from the start.
And if you were going to consider these sentences alone, try and imagine which speaker you'd
want to have over to dinner.
Probably most of us would pick the speaker of the first passage because although he declines
to tell the reader about himself, he says he doesn't want to talk about this rather politely.
A second speaker, on the other hand, comes across as somewhat emotional and angry.
He uses coarse language, modifying the mention of his childhood with words like lousy and
crap.
And the sarcastic mention of David Caulfield suggests a distaste for stories of the rags
to riches variety.
In other words, he seems unhappy, cynical, and maladjusted.
Now although you probably wouldn't want to have him as a house guest, you probably are
more interested in reading the story told by him, by the second speaker, than the first.
Why is this?
Well, the second speaker has a realness and grittiness in his voice that makes his story
compelling.
There is a reason that polite, diligent, hardworking people don't often have unauthorized biographies
written about them.
It's just not as interesting to most readers as a life that is somewhat unconventional in
which the main subject breaks rules or engages in bad behavior.
Truly masterful writers are those who are able to write in multiple voices, depending
on the needs of their fictional narratives.
One of the best recent examples of this, and one of my favorites, comes from Barbara King
Solver's novel, The Poison with Bible.
And this book tells the story of a missionary family in Africa, and it tells the story from
the various points of view of the mother and her four daughters.
Let's give you a couple quick examples.
Here is the mother's voice.
Once every few years, even now, I catch the scent of Africa.
It makes me want to keen, sing, clap up thunder, lie down at the foot of a tree, and let the
worms take whatever of me they can still use.
I find it impossible to bear.
Now consider the voice of the daughter, Rachel.
Well, hallelujah and pass the ammunition, company for dinner, and an eligible bachelor
at that, without three wives or even one, as far as I know.
You can sense the difference immediately.
The mother seems to be deeply introspective, sensitive, emotional, and coping with the
aftermath of a life-changing experience.
By contrast, the voice of Rachel suggests a character a little more shallow, more interested
in the immediate present, a little flighty with a bit of judgmental attitude.
And then there's the voice of the youngest daughter, Ruth May, whose voice is compellingly
that of a young child who reports what she sees as she sees it from a perspective that's
wildly different from that of her mother or of her older sister.
At one point, Ruth May says, then we got in the plane and flew to Stanleyville.
The back of the airplane was so full of bags, I had to sit on them.
I looked inside, rocks, sparkly things, and dirty rocks.
It was diamonds.
I found that out, and I can't tell how.
Mr. Axleroot said if I told, why then God would make mama get sick and die, so I can't.
It sounds like a child's voice, one who would believe an adult who used a frightening threat
in order to keep her from revealing a secret.
And in this case, the secret is that Mr. Axleroot, the pilot of the plane, is in fact smuggling
diamonds.
King Solver is a master at creating different voices for her characters.
But if you think about it, we all do this to some extent every day, changing what we
would call the register of our voices depending on our audience, or the goal behind whatever
it is we're writing or saying.
For example, the register or tone you use might change dramatically if you're talking
to a friend in casual conversation, versus say if you were the president of the United
States addressing Congress.
And the president probably uses a different register or tone when he's addressing Congress
than he does when he's meeting with his chief of staff or talking to his wife.
Take a moment and try and think of times when you've deliberately altered the tone of your
voice, either because of your audience, or because of a particular point of view or emotion
you'd like to convey.
Surely, you probably can think of a few just off the top of your head.
Here's an example.
Imagine your neighbor, a guy named Mr. Wafflebeard, let's say, keeps parking his car so that
it jets in front of the edge of your driveway.
This is irritating, right?
One day you decide to leave a note on his windshield.
Here are two possible versions of this note.
Here's the first I'd like you to think about.
Hi, Mr. Wafflebeard.
Could you please possibly park your car a little further back from the edge of our driveway?
I almost hit your bumper as I was leaving for work this morning, and I'd hate to ruin
the paint job on your car.
Thanks, Thaddeus.
Okay.
So how does that compare with, let's say, this version?
Just four words and an exclamation point.
Do not block driveway.
How important is voice in this exchange?
In the first example, as you probably already have figured out, the tone or the voice seems
intended to try and maintain neighborly relations.
It suggests a concern for the well-being of Mr. Wafflebeard's property rather than simply
irritation at the inconvenience that it's caused the note writer.
Remember, he says, I'm worried that I'll ruin the paint job on your car and not you're
really bugging me by not parking your car where you should.
And also the use of Mr. instead of a first name for Mr. Wafflebeard shows respect.
Well, the fact that the writer of the letter signs his first name indicates an effort at
friendliness.
All of these things together are clues that the writer is using to try and shape a response
from his neighbor.
In other words, if you get right down to it, he wants Mr. Wafflebeard to move his car,
but he also wants to try and stay friends.
In the second example, where we have do not block driveway exclamation point, definitely
what we could say about this is there's a hostile, unfriendly tone.
Now, maybe this is in fact the voice that the writer wants to use.
Maybe Mr. Wafflebeard has been blocking that driveway every day no matter how many times
the writer has nicely asked that he not do this.
So the writer's fed up and he wants Mr. Wafflebeard to get it.
He wants Mr. Wafflebeard to understand that he's angry and he's hoping that by maybe conveying
his anger, he'll get a different result or just some result.
And with a note like this, the lack of any form of address suggests also a lack of friendliness,
a lack of respect, and the command-like nature of the note also suggests this as well.
So what can we take away from today's discussion of prose, fiction, and the construction of
voice?
Well, first of all, we gained a little clearer understanding of the difference between prose
writing and other forms of writing like poetry.
You know, remember we worked through this when we talked about the first exercise from
the last lecture.
We also discussed how the one form of writing can use elements from the other to create
a certain effect.
Choosing a certain kind of diction or a sentence style contributes to the voice of a piece
of writing.
And by examining some famous writers and analyzing the voices they've constructed, you've gotten
some idea, at least, of how important voice can be and how just a few words or a certain
arrangement can create particular expectations on the part of your reader.
Austin's Pride and Prejudice leads us to expect a certain kind of story set in a certain
social and cultural milieu.
Pride and Prejudice and Zombies takes those expectations and then takes great delight
in turning them on their heads.
From this, we can see the power of understanding how a particular voice can work and being
able to adapt it for one's own ends can have powerful effects.
We examined what we might call three extreme examples of unique voice excerpts from Hemingway,
from James, and from Salinger.
And we saw that each breaks some traditional writing rules, but does so to strong effect.
Hemingway forces us to read carefully and fill in the blanks.
James is able to convey attitude and humor with just a subordinate clause here and there,
and Salinger teaches us that sometimes an unfriendly or hostile voice can also be interesting
and engaging if it's produced skillfully.
The example of the conflict between the neighbors over a parked car reminds us that we all use
different voices on different occasions for different reasons.
It reminds us also that audience is a crucial consideration whenever you're writing anything.
Because whatever you are writing, you are not only constructing a voice or an author's
persona for yourself, but you are also constructing an audience, even if you don't realize it.
You are writing for someone specific, even if that someone is only yourself.
Let's say if you're writing a diary or a journal, then you would certainly be the audience.
And in our next lecture, we'll talk about the other side of the coin of writing as an
author, and we'll talk about engaging or constructing a reader and the dangers of not adequately
respecting your audience.
