Welcome back. In the previous lecture, we discussed three important concepts for supporting
an argument. The first was the necessity of explaining the meaning of your evidence to
your readers, of providing a clear link or connection between your proof and your claims.
As I mentioned last time, evidence does not explain itself. You'll remember the example
of the prosecuting attorney presenting the murder weapon in a court case, but not bothering
to explain its relevance. It's not enough to show us evidence in support of your argument.
You have to show us, and then you have to tell us in no uncertain terms how that evidence
is relevant. The second key point in our last lecture was to make sure that the links or
the connections you forge between your evidence and your argument are not based on association
or speculation or just simple correlation. This is especially crucial when your argument
is relying on statistics or what we might call empirical evidence. You probably remember
my pet peeve about the tendency of many writers to draw on scientific studies of caffeinated
lab rats to speculate on the effects of coffee drinking on human beings. Now, while it's
true that such connections, based as they are on association or correlation, can often
carry some real persuasive force, their ability to sway someone's opinion is usually short-lived
and not sustainable. To support a lasting, substantial, convincing argument, you need
to draw clear connections between your proof and your claims. And these connections have
to be direct. We can easily see how you got from A to B. They have to be definitive. They
have to clearly explain how this works and they have to be based on a cause-effect relationship.
Finally, we discuss the importance of using concessions, recognizing that other people
may hold different points of view than your own and conceding that those opinions have
to be acknowledged. We studied how an effective and successful writer like Thomas Payne uses
concessions to actually strengthen his own argument. He presents an opposing viewpoint
as a means of highlighting or calling attention to the differences between that argument and
his own. And it's these differences that he then uses to underscore the strengths of
his claims and the weaknesses of his opponents. So, while concession might at first seem like
a strategy that would undermine your argument, it really can end up strengthening it. So
we saw how his use of concessions bolsters his own credibility as a writer by demonstrating
how thoroughly he studied alternative arguments. And so the fact that he's done his homework,
so to speak, makes his own claims that much more convincing. We're much more likely to
trust the person who acknowledges counter-arguments to his own than we are the person who tries
to ignore or hide counter-evidence. And I'm sure that you found yourself in a position
sometimes when you're making an argument where you think, oh, if I could just ignore this
counter-evidence, then it will make my argument stronger. And that's not the case. It will
actually weaken it. So, in the previous three lectures, we've studied strategies for starting,
organizing, and supporting arguments. And these are strategies that will make your writing
more powerful and persuasive. Today, we're going to focus on methods for crafting effective
conclusions. In other words, how to wrap up and finish off your presentation of an argument
in ways that really solidify your claims, establish your viewpoint, make your case, and
perhaps, we can hope, even leave your readers wanting to hear more of what you have to say
about the issue, topic, question, or problem you've been addressing and discussing. Now,
I know very well, because I have been there myself, that by the time you reach the end
of a piece of writing, you are tired and you just want it to be done, so maybe you dash
off a conclusion that isn't really that well thought out. And you have got to fight this
impulse. If you need to go do something else and then come back to your writing in order
to really focus on writing a good conclusion, then do that. Just don't neglect the end of
your argument. It's the final impression. It's your final chance to make an impact on
your reader. You've probably been told at some point by an English teacher or a writing
instructor that conclusions have to include a summary of the highlights of your argument.
So you have to reiterate points that you've already made. And those teachers and writing
instructors would be correct. This is certainly true. An effective conclusion should include
some sort of recap of your main ideas that have structured your argument all along. I
always encourage students to touch again briefly on the main points of their arguments when
they come to the conclusion. They may think that it's redundant and boring. After all,
they've been writing about this thing for days. And so the conclusions seem really obvious
to them. But readers who haven't been working on this thing for days are generally grateful
for a short summary of what the argument is about and why it matters. And of course the
key component of this short summary needs to be a restatement or a reiteration of the
main thesis of the argument or the primary position or viewpoint you've chosen to argue
for or defend in this piece of writing. If you've followed the strategies we've covered
in the previous three lectures, the basic elements of your conclusion should already
be established, meaning you really shouldn't have to work too hard to formulate this summary
that goes in your concluding paragraph. But at the same time, you need to take the writing
of this conclusion as seriously as possible and as seriously as any other dimension or
element of the writing process. Most importantly, and I can't stress this
enough, you should not simply repeat verbatim, word for word, what you say in your introduction.
A little variation shows that you've really thought about wrapping this argument up in
a compelling and engaging way. Okay, but what else should you do with a conclusion?
How can you effectively finish an argument by doing something other than or more than
just summarizing for your readers the thesis and key points that you've already articulated
for them throughout the rest of the piece of writing? And here again, the famous essayist
we've been talking about, Payne Thoreau and Swift, can provide us with some concrete examples
and some answers. Let's look first at Payne's final two paragraphs in common sense. And I
should note here that just prior to these final paragraphs, Payne provides his readers with
precisely the kind of summary or recap of his arguments, key points to which I referred
just a few moments ago. He actually begins his summary with the phrase, to conclude.
Now, as a general rule, I recommend not using the to conclude phrase, if at all possible.
It's a little boring and unoriginal, but at the same time, it does make clear for your
readers that they are going to get a summary of your argument. So it can be useful in terms
of signposting and directing your reader to the particular portion of your writing.
After his to conclude, Payne goes on to list and restate four points. He says, first,
secondly, thirdly, fourthly. And these four points constitute the heart of his argument.
The most important thing to keep in mind for our purposes at least, is that Payne does
not stop after he's presented his four point summary. He goes on to include these final
two paragraphs and in doing so, he raises the quality level of his conclusion from good
to outstanding. Here's the first of the two paragraphs I want you to consider.
Quote, under our present denomination of British subjects, we can neither be received nor
heard abroad. The custom of all courts is against us and will be so until by an independence
we take rank with other nations. Now, as you're no doubt well aware, the main point of Payne's
pamphlet is to call for the independence of the 13 colonies from Great Britain. And he's
been making this point in a variety of ways throughout the essay. But just in case we
miss something, he states it here in no uncertain terms and with a succinct eloquence, that
is truly memorable. And after this, he then moves on to his final paragraph where he says,
quote, these proceedings may at first appear strange and difficult, but like all other
steps which we have already passed over will in a little time become familiar and agreeable.
And until an independence is declared, the continent will feel itself like a man who
continues putting off some unpleasant business from day to day, yet knows it must be done,
hates to set about it, wishes it over, and is continually haunted by the thoughts of
its necessity. So the strategy Payne uses is one you certainly can and should follow
in crafting your own conclusions, especially as a supplement to your summary or recap of
your larger arguments, thesis and main points. Payne's approach in these final paragraphs
is what I like to call a negative consequences conclusion. Everyone store that phrase away.
Negative consequences conclusion. And this means that he uses these last few lines to
underscore the negative things that could happen if readers are not persuaded by his
argument and fail to support his vision of governmental reform.
I want to emphasize here that Payne is not using the negative consequences approach as
a scare tactic. He knows that few readers, especially those who are still uncertain as
to the validity of a particular argument, are likely to be persuaded by overly dramatic
or apocalyptic claims. But he also knows that his audience is likely to respond if they
are presented with a clear statement of what the ultimate consequences may be if they choose
not to accept his argument. In other words, what we learn from Payne is that effective
conclusions can underscore ultimate consequences without resorting to ultimatums. Stating ultimate
consequences is more like saying, if we do not do X, then Y will happen. Whereas stating
an ultimatum is like saying, you'd better do X or else Y is your fault.
I offer this advice to my students whenever we discuss the tone and content of conclusions.
Do not confuse ultimate consequences with ultimatums. I want them to understand, as
Payne does, that ultimatums put a tremendous and needless strain on the writer-reader relationship.
And such a move is likely to alienate undecided readers and close off the possibility of future
discussion of an issue, problem, or question. Stating something as an explanation of ultimate
consequences doesn't put your reader in as defensive a position as an ultimatum does.
There's one final element of Payne's conclusion I want to touch on before we look at another
example. And that element is the curiosity factor. Notice that Payne does not go into
extensive detail about what the ultimate consequences will be if people are not persuaded by his
argument against maintaining the status quo of British rule. He makes it clear that the
consequences will be negative, but he doesn't elaborate on the degree or the type of negativity.
Except maybe that he suggests it will resemble the feelings of a man who has some unpleasant
tasks to do, but keeps putting it off, only to find himself dogged by the sense that he's
doing himself a disservice by procrastinating. This is not a nice state of mind to find yourself
in, to be sure, but it's certainly not an emotionally devastating one either.
And this is, I think, a calculated move on Payne's part, and it serves as a strategy
for both downplaying the difficulty of rebellion against British rule, while simultaneously
arousing his reader's curiosity about the matter. Following this restrained and relatively
low-key approach, Payne crafts a conclusion that's meant to pique his reader's interests
in other potential consequences of staying under British rule. Consequences that Payne
indirectly suggests he would be willing to elaborate on in subsequent written arguments,
and in fact, this is what he goes ahead and does. Even if Payne's readers are not yet
ready to fully accept his claims, they should be sufficiently intrigued to read whatever
else he might have to say about this topic. And what writer doesn't hope that readers
will want to read more of her or his work.
Let's take a look at another example of an effective conclusion. And this one is from
Jonathan Swift's A Modest Proposal, which we've discussed at length in some of our
earlier lectures. Swift is offering a version of Payne's negative consequences approach,
but he provides an extra twist. And this is a variation that I like to call the no viable
alternatives. There's no other option here. Recall that Swift satire, following the structure
of classical Latin satires by writers like Horace and Juvenile, proposes this outlandish
solution to a seemingly impossible problem. And in this case, the problem is pervasive
poverty in Ireland, and the solution is to allow poor parents to sell their children
to the rich so that the rich can eat them so that they can provide tasty and nutritious
meals. I should add that Swift is mocking both the British imperialist treatment of
Ireland and this impulse among politicians and reformers of his day to suggest really
simple cure all solutions to what were complex social and economic problems. So he's criticizing
that as well as a general attitude towards the Irish. In his conclusion to A Modest Proposal,
Swift offers a direct challenge to those who would support these naive attempts at social
engineering. And again, he does this in satiric mode and his tongue is planted firmly in his
cheek. And since he himself has just finished outlining this simple and simply ridiculous
plan for fixing the problem, he then has us primed to be ready to listen to what he says
next. And here it is. Quote, I desire those politicians who dislike my overture and may
perhaps be so bold as to attempt an answer that they will first ask the parents of these
mortals whether they would not at this day think it a great happiness to have been sold
for food at a year old in the manner I prescribe and thereby have avoided such a perpetual
scene of misfortune as they have since gone through by the oppression of landlords, the
impossibility of pain rent without money or trade, the want of common sustenance with
neither house nor clothes to cover them from inclinacies of the weather and the most inevitable
prospect of entailing the like or greater miseries upon their breed forever.
So when I say no viable alternatives, what I mean is that this strategy gives you a way
in which the conclusion focuses not so much on ultimate consequences of accepting or not
accepting the argument, but instead suggests that alternatives to this proposal for changing
the status quo aren't workable. They aren't viable at all. Now notice that he doesn't
launch a direct attack on any particular plans that other writers have offered. Rather, he
just points out that any such plans are not likely to work unless and until their authors
consider the causes and implications of the problem as fully and as carefully as Swift
himself has. He also offers a kind of litmus test to determine whether any alternative
proposals would be as viable as his. He asks the parents of impoverished children if a particular
proposed solution would be something they would choose. Swift implies that if the answer
is no, then the proposal cannot be considered a worthwhile alternative to his since his
has already passed the test. Including your own version of Swift's litmus test, some criterion
or standard against which alternatives to your claim or proposal have to be measured is a
powerful strategy for persuading readers that you and not someone else will offer the best
solution or answer to the problem at hand. In essence, what you're doing is using your
conclusion to establish the rules of the game, the terms for assessing the strengths and
the weaknesses of any arguments other than yours that deal with the same or similar issues.
And if other arguments can't measure up to yours using the standards you've set, then
they can't be viewed as viable alternatives. And thus, your argument is the winner. There's
one other element of Swift's brilliant conclusion that we can apply to our own work. But I want
to save that for the last item of the lecture. Before we get there, I want us to look at
an example from a conclusion that takes a different tone than Payne's or Swift's. Because
as powerful and as entertaining as their arguments can be, both Payne and Swift finish up on
something of a negative note. And I don't at all want to leave you with the impression
that a strong conclusion necessarily has to carry a negative tone. Now, let me be clear,
I'm not suggesting that either Payne or Swift is overly pessimistic. It's clear from the
larger arguments they're making that they believe their claims and proposals have the
potential to really make some positive, productive change. Because really, why bother to write
an essay like this unless you're actually hoping some change will occur as a result?
Neither of these writers offers an especially upbeat ending to his work. And I think it's
in our best interest to examine a writer who does. An argument that stresses the negative
potential outcomes in its conclusion can be powerful, certainly. But one that manages
to end on a hopeful note is really arguably going to be much more persuasive. I mean,
I think most of us like to think of in terms of if I follow the suggestion of writer A,
good things can happen, rather than if I don't do what writer B says, then bad things will
happen. For this example, I want to turn to Thoreau's civil disobedience and examine
his final thoughts and the ways he presents them. You will call that Thoreau's main thesis
involves a dual claim, a two-part claim. First, he argues for the merits of limited government.
And this is like when he insists in the opening of the essay, that government is best which
governs least. The second part of his claim is that he insists on the primacy of the
individual over and against any governing body. So the individual is more important than
the collective or the group. And he makes this point even to the point of arguing that
resistance to an unjust government is not simply an option, but it's actually a kind
of civic duty or an obligation on the part of the individual. Given the strength of Thoreau's
critique of government intervention into the lives of individuals and his strident, strong
opposition to the tyranny of the state, and this is whether it's in the form of wars
against other nations or raising taxes against its own citizens, what's really intriguing
to see here is how he softens his tone in the final lines of civil disobedience and
he allows himself to imagine what an ideal government might be like. And he says, I please
myself with imagining a state at least which can afford to be just to all men and to treat
the individual with respect as a neighbor, which even would not think it inconsistent
with its own repose if a few were to live aloof from it, not meddling with it, nor
embraced by it, who fulfilled all the duties of neighbors and fellow men. A state which
bore this kind of fruit and suffered it to drop off as fast as it ripened would prepare
the way for a still more perfect and glorious state, which also I have imagined but not
yet anywhere seen. Now the reflective tone Thoreau takes in this conclusion in no way
contradicts the main content of the argument that he's been making throughout civil disobedience.
In fact, it provides a large measure of support for his claims by relying on what I like to
call the positive consequences strategy, meaning he uses his conclusion to emphasize potential
new possibilities for a less intrusive government and these possibilities will go unrealized
if readers fail to heed his arguments. In other words, his goal is not to point out
the negative things that may occur if readers do not accept his claims, but rather he wants
to underscore the fact that some potentially positive things won't happen.
Thoreau also includes a dimension to his conclusion that mirrors something like what we saw in
Payne's final lines and try and think back if you can to Payne's final lines and see
if you can recall a similarity between the two. That's right, it's the curiosity factor.
Like Payne, Thoreau does not go into extensive detail about what the more perfect and glorious
state he imagines is really like. He makes it clear that the consequences will be positive
but he doesn't elaborate on what those positive consequences will look like. Just as Payne
makes clear that the consequences he's alluding to would be negative, he doesn't elaborate
on the type or the degree of that negativity. And so what we said of Payne holds true for
Thoreau as well. Even if his readers are not yet ready to fully accept his vision, they'll
be sufficiently intrigued to read whatever else he might have to say about this topic.
And in Thoreau's case, maybe they'll be excited to read these writings as well.
Now, earlier I promised to end this lecture with one last piece from Swift's satirical
argument in favor of transforming the impoverished children of Ireland into a culinary staple
for the richest members of that society. And I'm sure you'll find that it was worth waiting
for. Not only because it's entertaining, which it is, but also because it exemplifies
yet another method you can employ to make your own conclusions more effective.
Here are the final lines of a modest proposal.
I profess in the sincerity of my heart that I have not the least personal interest in
endeavoring to promote this necessary work. Having no other motive than the public good
of my country by advancing our trade, providing for infants, relieving the poor, and giving
some pleasure to the rich. I have no children by which I can propose to get a single penny,
the youngest being nine years old and my wife past childbearing.
Here Swift sends his readers off with the assurance that he's got nothing to gain in
a financial sense from his proposal. He maintains an intellectual investment in the argument
of course. And he notes his satisfaction in doing something for the broader public good.
But he takes really special care to point out that no economic benefits will be forthcoming
for him personally if his argument is accepted and his proposal is implemented.
Swift's razor sharp wit and the satirical edge he uses are still readily apparent. There's
no question about that. But this is also a deliberate attempt to thwart any of what
we might call ad hominin challenges to his writing. These would be attacks on him on
his personality. So these attacks against his character or charges that his arguments
are biased due to a personal stake in the outcome aren't going to work because of what
he's done here at the end. Obviously Swift's preemptive strike is like the rest of his argument
carried out in ironic terms. There's no chance he'd be accused of crafting such an argument
in the hopes that it would be implemented and lead to a financial windfall. In other
words there's no way we could imagine that he would write such a piece. And then he goes
say and I'll go first and sell my child to show you how profitable it can be. Still he
was correct and his preemptive strike indicates this. He's correct in a more general sense
to anticipate there's going to be some form of backlash from his readers. They may not
have suspected him of plotting to pad his pocketbook but many certainly were offended by the graphic
nature of his argument even though it's presented as a satire. So it'd be safe to say that Swift
was in fact responding to the possibility of ad hominem attacks. Just not from anyone
who might seek to advance his own children as hors d'oeuvres social welfare scheme. We
can glean from Swift's closing lines an important reminder and a striking example of how conclusions
can be used to anticipate and refute in advance. Charges that an argument for some broader
goal or cause is actually self serving. Now you don't have to follow Swift's over the
top style but we shouldn't hesitate to emulate the spirit of his conclusion when we perceive
that some similar possibility of a personal attack will follow in the wake of us making
our own arguments. Okay so what things should we take away from this final lecture in our
four part series on crafting successful arguments? Well I can't stress enough the importance
of using the conclusion to recap the main thesis and key points of your argument but
I would also strongly encourage you to go beyond a basic summary and explore the three
strategies we've covered here today. Those are as you remember the negative consequences
approach used by Payne, the no viable alternatives model which Swift gave us and the positive
consequences model which Thoreau used. I'd also urge you to think about ways of using
conclusions to peak your reader's curiosity to get them interested as Payne and Thoreau
do. How they touch on consequences without going into extensive detail as a means of
enticing readers to consider other arguments they might have to offer. And finally I hope
you'll always be mindful of the possibility that you may need to use a conclusion to preemptively
defend yourself against critiques and challenges that would seek to undermine your claims by
labeling them as a selfish or self-serving. If you can anticipate how someone might argue
against you and what they might say then you'd better address it head on rather than ignore
it. As Swift makes clear conclusions are a powerful place to dilute or diffuse such
attempts and turn the tide of readerly opinion in your favor.
Okay so now that you've all become experts on how to produce effective arguments I'd
like you to turn your newly critical eyes to some literary works and consider how they
can help you become more engaging writers. In our next three lectures we're going to
focus on poetry and drama and what we can get out of having an understanding and appreciation
of writing in these genres.
