Welcome back. In our last four lectures, we discussed the basics of argumentative writing,
how to start an argument, support it, and conclude it. Today, we're going to turn our
attention back to issues of genre and explore how understanding specific styles of writing,
like poetry, can help us be better readers and writers, no matter what we're trying to
say or to whom we're trying to say it. Let's stop for a moment and consider the question,
what is poetry? Probably, as you consider that question, many of you are thinking something
like a poem rhymes, or it's got a particular rhythm or pattern, or maybe even something
a little broader than that, like poetry is using words in unusual ways. You would not
be alone if you were thinking that the definition of poetry is probably something like the U.S.
Supreme Court's infamous definition of pornography, which is, I can't define it, but I know it
when I see it. When I ask students if they can define poetry, I often get a series of
responses kind of along what you were probably just thinking when I pose the same question
to you. They'll tell me it sometimes rhymes, or it's written in a different style than
normal writing. Think for a moment about how you would define poetry. What makes a poem
a poem and not something else? Consider the following short piece of text. Mary, Mary,
quite contrary, how does your garden grow with silver bells and cockleshells and pretty
maids all in a row? Is that a poem? Most of us would say yes. It follows a pattern, it
rhymes, and most of you may recognize it as a nursery rhyme from your childhood. So we
could probably all agree that's a poem. Now consider this. I have eaten the plums that
were in the icebox, and which you were probably saving for breakfast. Forgive me, they were
delicious, so sweet, and so cold. Now, many of you are probably thinking, well, that's
not a poem. That's a note of apology that someone has written to someone else. But in
fact, what I just read to you is a poem, and it's a very famous poem by the poet William
Carlos Williams. Part of what makes it a poem is not the words themselves or the content,
but how the words are laid out on the page. And I know you can't see it right now, but
I want you to listen to it again, and this time notice where I pause. Those are breaks
between lines, and what you'll most likely notice when you're paying attention to the
pauses is that phrases and sentences are cut off in unusual places, places where you wouldn't
expect to find a pause. It would be unexpected to have a break there in what we might call
normal, or everyday writing. So here's the poem again, and this time I'm reading it to
really emphasize the line breaks on the page. I have eaten the plums that were in the icebox,
and which you were probably saving for breakfast. Forgive me, they were delicious, so sweet,
and so cold. This poem has no punctuation. There are no commas, periods, exclamation
points, nothing. So the only guide as to how to read the piece is to use the line breaks
to see where they occur. And in this case, what the breaks do by popping up in kind of
unexpected places is call our attention to certain words or combination of words that
we might not otherwise recognize as sort of standing apart or being outside of the realm
of kind of normal writing. For example, in this poem, the word saving has its own line.
There aren't any other words on that line. So obviously our attention is called to the
word saving, and it makes us ponder maybe if it's not just the saving of the plums that's
being referenced here, but maybe there's some larger, deeper idea of saving that's at work.
Similarly, forgive me stands alone. Again, suggesting not only forgiveness for the
eating of the plums, but also I would say raising in the minds of the readers possible
larger ideas about forgiveness in general. The final two lines of the poem, so sweet,
and so cold, also seem to mark this piece as something that's not typical of a note left
on the kitchen table. It's one thing to apologize for eating plums, but apologizing for eating
the plums doesn't require the writer to tell the reader how the plums tasted. It's a little
extra flourish that signals that something poetic is happening here. And that final word,
cold, is interesting in that it really doesn't describe what the plums tasted like, but instead
the fact that they had been in the ice box. And that in turn calls us back to that word,
ice box, which occurs early in the poem. Probably as you were listening to it, that was a word
that caught your attention. And it probably caught your attention because it's what we'd
call archaic. It's old. It would be really unusual to hear anyone use that word nowadays.
We'd be more likely to say refrigerator. So the choice of that word tells us something
perhaps about the age of the poet or gives us an idea that the speaker of the poem at
least lives sometime in the past. In any event, it tells us that we're not dealing with what
we might call straightforward modern day normal or average writing. Okay, great, you
may be thinking, but how can this help us with our own writing? Well, at the very least,
it calls attention to how important the arrangement or the structure of words on a page can be.
For example, consider this sentence, something like, it seemed like a good idea, but the
end result proved otherwise. Alright, that's pretty straightforward. There's not a lot
that seems out of place or unusual there. But if we altered the structure, if we put
in what we could call poetic stops, then the impact is heightened. So let's play with
a sentence. Let's put a period after the word idea and another after the word but so that
this one sentence now becomes three. And it reads, it seemed like a good idea, but
the end result proved otherwise. And many of you are probably thinking right about now,
but according to the rules, you can't have the single word but followed by a period.
And you would be right, technically speaking, you can't. But that's the other thing that
poetry can teach us, how breaking the rules can create a dramatic and memorable effect.
Here's another poem by William Carlos Williams. So much depends upon a red wheelbarrow glazed
with rain water beside the white chickens. So is this a poem? Most of you probably said
yes. How do we know? Well, after the practice run we did with the first poem, you were probably
listening fairly attentively for the line breaks. And notice that they appeared in odd
or unexpected places. And also this piece, although you can't necessarily hear it, it
does have a pattern, a three word line, a single word line and then a break. And that
pattern repeats throughout. So, for example, line one has three words, so much depends.
Line two has one word, a pawn, and then there's a two line break before the next line picks
up. That conscious structure also declares that this is a poem. Another thing about it
is that it has a strong pictorial quality. In other words, it calls up to our minds a
pretty vivid picture, at least in the contrast between the colors red and white. And even
more than the first example, this poem seems to be conveying or suggesting something that's
not readily obvious. Why, I'm sure many of you are asking, does so much depend on a red
wheelbarrow rainwater and some white chickens? If you could answer that question convincingly,
you would become the darling of the academic world. Literally thousands of pages of analysis
and interpretation have been written about this poem since it first appeared in 1923.
But I want to stress that trying to figure out what Williams is trying to say is not
what's most important here. Nor would I argue is trying to figure out what a poem means,
the most important thing about poetry in general. Instead, what I think is most important is
that poetry can intrigue us, can get us to think intensely about a certain subject in
new or unexpected ways, and can also simply delight or stun us with its use of wordplay
or images. So we're back to that initial question. What is poetry? Poetry has occasionally been
defined as something like, quote, beautiful violence done to language. And I tend to think
that that definition comes pretty close, but we might want to refine it a little bit. Scholar
Terry Eagleton, in trying to describe what literature is, famously has said, and I quote,
literature transforms and intensifies ordinary language, deviates systematically from everyday
speech. If you approach me at a bus stop and murmur, thou still unraveished bride of quietness,
then I am instantly aware that I am in the presence of the literary.
So if someone comes up to you at the bus stop, for example, and says,
is this the number 10? Well then, that's not really poetic, nor does it seem to be literary.
But if someone comes up to you at a bus stop and says, thou still unraveished bride of quietness,
you can think, number one, this is a poet, or number two, this person is crazy, or number
three, all of the above. And I would argue that history has suggested that number three is more
often than not the correct choice here. So Eagleton's definition of literature also helps to get us
closer to a definition of what poetry is. And we've gotten a little closer to having some idea
of what a poem is or can be, even if we can't come up with a totally satisfactory definition.
By now, at least, you surely understand that poetry plays with words and images in unexpected
ways, no matter what else it does. Okay, so now that we have a working definition,
and it's general and vague admittedly, but we have a working definition,
you then might want to ask the question, why bother to study poetry at all?
Now, the mature and academic argument would be that by examining works by some of the greatest
poets in the past and recent times, we can learn to recognize particularly clever or skillful
treatments of language that help the words on the page add up to more than the sum of their parts.
And that's sort of a poetic image in and of itself. The words on the page add up to more
than the sum of their parts. Now, while you might not want to write your job letter in rhyme or
structure your next essay along the lines of the free verse of William Carlos Williams,
the study of poetry can teach us how both following the rules and breaking them
can produce really dramatic and engaging effects. The other answer to the question,
why study poetry is quite simple, and that's because it's fun. Engaging a poem can be a
wonderful exercise and analysis, and we can get even more pleasure from doing this once we
understand some of the basic conventions of this style of writing. So in this lecture and the next
one, we're going to examine poetic devices like metaphor and simile, words you've probably heard
before but maybe aren't quite clear on the definition of. And we're also going to look
particularly at how poetry's contradictory reverence for and love of playing with language
make writing in this genre some of the most powerful and persuasive you are ever likely to encounter.
So as you probably recall from some of our previous discussions,
voice is a big deal no matter what kind of writing you're doing. For example,
if you consider the following excerpts from famous poems and you try to define what kind
of voice they each have, you probably will come pretty close to hitting on the right answer.
Is the voice or tone happy or sad, arrogant, angry or excited? By practicing this, you can get a
feel for how powerful voice can be. Let's start by considering just the first stanza, just the
first four lines of John Keats' Ode on a Grecian Urn. And this is when you get right down to it,
a poem about an old vase. But it's become one of the most famous literary works in the English
language and here are the opening lines. Thou still unraveished bride of quietness,
thou foster child of silence and slow time, Sylvan historian who can't thus express
a flowery tale more sweetly than our rhyme. Okay, so what are some of the first things
you notice here? Well, there's rhythm and rhyme, obviously. That's going to be probably the first
thing that catches our attention and maybe announces to us, this is a poem. But what about the tone
or the voice? From the very first word, we're given a strong suggestion that we are dealing with
subject matter of what we might call a higher order. Thou is the first word and this is a form
of address you really don't hear anymore in which many of us associate with an earlier time period
or with extremely formal forms of address. Although originally, I will tell you that Thou was the
informal form of addressing someone in English, but that fact is neither here nor there and really
not important for our purposes today. But as a medievalist, I couldn't help but point that fact
out. For most of us today, as an audience, the word thou is most likely to conjure up associations
with something like the King James Bible. Other words that kind of signpost to us that the tone
of this piece is rather formal or elevated are words like canst and Sylvan. The first you can
probably figure out no problem. It's an older, archaic form of can. The other word, Sylvan,
is absolutely bursting with associations with the classical world, the world in which the great epic
poets Homer and Virgil wrote. Technically speaking, Sylvan just means having something to do with the
woods. But if you were an educated person in John Keats' day, that word alone should immediately
conjure up images of Greek and Roman gods and some minor deities and mythical woodland creatures
frolicking through the forest. And a moment ago, when I said Keats' poem is about an old vase,
well, it is. But it's about a vase that belongs to the great works of art of the ancient world.
Any museum worth its salt will have a Grecian urn or two. And these are some of the most
spectacular pieces of art to be preserved from antiquity. So knowing all of this
was the tone of the poem, was its voice. Probably many of you are thinking of adjectives like
reverent or full of awe or admiring. And these would all be right. There is also a kind of
delicacy, humility, and respect that Keats is conveying through his word choice. Now,
after that example, it should be fairly easy for you to determine the tone of the next sample.
This comes from Edwin Arlington Robinson's poem, Luke Havergal. And I'm just going to read you
the third stanza. Out of a grave, I come to tell you this. Out of a grave, I come to quench the
kiss that flames upon your forehead with a glow that blinds you to the way that you must go.
Yes, there is yet one way to where she is bitter, but one that faith may never miss. Out of a grave,
I come to tell you this, to tell you this. Okay, you may have no idea what is going on in this
poem. And in fact, you would not be alone. Many scholars, in fact, have had long debates about
what's going on here. But even without knowing the subject matter of the poem, can you at least
tell what the tone is? Is it happy? Definitely not. Somber? Most definitely. Gloomy, frightening,
and threatening are some other words that come to mind when I try and think of what the tone of
this poem is. Your first clue here is probably the phrase, out of a grave. Okay, we can all
probably agree that not much good has ever really come out of a grave. Other words that contribute
to the mood are words like quench, blinds, bitter, and some others. The images that these words and
phrases conjure up are definitely not sunshine and springtime. So we can nail down the tone pretty
easily. And let's compare that to our last example of poetry for today. John Dunn's
Elegy on his Mistress Going to Bed. Dunn was one of the most revered poets of the English Renaissance,
and his work today remains some of the most studied and enjoyed in all English literature.
And let's listen to these lines from the middle of the poem.
License my roving hands and let them go before, behind, between, above, below.
O my America, my newfound land, my kingdom safest, when with one man manned,
my mind of precious stones, my empery, how am I blessed in thus discovering thee?
To enter in these bonds is to be free, then where my hand is set, my soul shall be.
We could spend days unpacking this poem. It's a delightfully clever play on the idea of exploration.
It references the discovery of what Europeans at that time thought of as the new world.
You'll recall that line, oh my America, probably leaped out at you. At the time when Dunn was
writing, English society was all of us with this fever of discovery and exploration.
Fortunes were being made as people rushed off to exploit the natural resources of the Americas.
And you may have picked up, as I was reading this, that there are maybe a double entendre,
or sometimes it's so obvious it's essentially a single entendre, a double entendre or two.
And if we're thinking about the issue of voice, though, how would you describe the tone of the poem?
What are some of the words that spring to mind when you're trying to describe
how this poem sounds, the kind of feeling it's trying to convey? Well, I think certainly joy
might be one, delight or even ecstasy. Remember, he says, oh my America, that oh with its emphasis is
all in one letter, a sense of happiness, of discovery, oh my America, my newfound land,
my kingdom safest when with one man manned, my mind of precious stones, my empirey,
how am I blessed in thus discovering thee? If the words themselves weren't enough to convey the
speaker's happiness, then if you're reading it, you'd notice the exclamation point after
how am I blessed in thus discovering thee? And it certainly creates emphasis and makes clear
that the speaker here is in a state of extreme happiness.
What else makes Dunn's poem so compelling? Well, one of the most important elements of this poem
is his use of what we call a poetic device. Dunn uses several, but the dominant one that's
being used here is something called metaphor. And probably most of you are familiar with metaphor,
and it's similar to another poetic device called simile. And quite often people get metaphor and
simile confused, and that's very understandable because they're alike in many ways. But here's a
quick way, a quick definition so you can distinguish between the two. A simile makes a comparison
between two things by using the words like or as. So an example of a sentence that uses a simile
would be her eyes were like the ocean, or her eyes were as blue as the ocean. Now a metaphor
would be if you got rid of the like or the as, and you simply said her eyes were oceans.
In the case of Dunn's poem, the metaphor is that his lover's body is an undiscovered country
ripe for exploration, and he makes brilliant use of it. There are numerous other poetic devices,
and our ability to recognize them and know when they're being skillfully employed by a poet
can really enhance our pleasure when we read a poem. There are devices like alliteration,
assonance, consonance, all these things have to do with the way words sound, and these are
often used in poems that have a rhyme scheme. Metaphor and simile can be effective devices
for engaging a reader's attention, as can devices like the synecdoche, when you use a word describing
a part to mean the whole. For example, the classic line, all hands on deck. It does not mean what it
literally says. Everyone put their hands on the deck. It means all people on board the ship get
up on deck now. The word hands stands in for people. A close relative of this device is metonymy,
when a word that describes something associated with an idea is used in place of the usual
logical practical word. And here the classic example is the White House said today. Obviously,
the White House is not speaking, but the words White House here are standing in for the president
and his representatives. Similar examples would be things like the Vatican announced today,
or Wall Street reacted strongly. So as you can see, there are poetic devices that we use every day
in our normal everyday lives. Okay, that's all well and good. You might be thinking and we could
spend several hours discussing numerous poetic devices that exist, and we could come up with
examples of each. But how, you are probably wondering, can this make me a better writer?
The ways in which understanding poetic devices can make you a better writer
are a little obvious, but how do we take that and then apply it to our own writing? I mean,
you could probably identify it in other writing. Oh, here's how a poetic device made this piece
stronger. But then taking what you've learned and applying it to your own writing, that's a little
trickier. And at its most basic, we can take that working definition of poetry, that it's language
used in unusual or non-typical ways. And by taking that working definition, we can at least be conscious
of how we might make more dramatic or effective choices in our style and diction when we write.
So let's consider something quite simple, like the description of a house. And here is a quote.
The exterior was dark green, and the huge lawn that surrounded it was just a shade or two lighter.
There was a brick walkway leading up to the front door. It's pretty straightforward. And you might
think, there's no reason to change anything here. But if you were trying to intrigue your reader and
draw her in, you might try and punch things up a bit. So for example, what if you wrote,
the exterior was dark green, like the forest at twilight, and the lawn that surrounded it
was an ocean of emerald, the walkway to the front door, a streak of blood that marred its perfection.
Okay, so that's a little over the top. But this version is definitely more interesting.
How many poetic devices did you notice? Well, there's at least three at work here.
One simile and two metaphors. And by adding some devices and some key words, twilight,
emerald, blood, you suddenly have a much more interesting piece of writing, especially if
your intention is to set the scene for a murder mystery full of rich glamorous characters.
If your goal, however, is to place an ad in a real estate magazine to persuade someone to buy
your house, then perhaps you've gone in the wrong direction here. In the exercises for today's lecture,
I've given you some really straightforward sentences, and I've asked you to make them
more interesting by rewriting them with some of the poetic devices we've talked about today in mind.
Now, when you're doing these exercises, I really want you to push the envelope and go a little
bit overboard just so you start to get the hang of this poetic language thing. But as I've said
before, sometimes less really is more. And showing some restraint is always a good idea.
Paragraph that has simile, metaphors, and ecta key and other devices all used together
might be a technical tour de force, but you don't want your readers to be so dazzled by your writing
that they miss the major point of what it is you're trying to say.
So what have we learned from today's discussion of poetry? Well, at the very least,
we have some idea of what poetry is, even if we can't exactly define it in so many words.
We saw how sometimes the arrangement of words can make a poem, even if the words themselves
don't say anything that unusual. This was the case with the William Carlos Williams poem about the
plums. It could be read as if it was just a note left on the breakfast table. What we can take
away from this lesson is, again, the importance of the arrangement of words on the page, even if
you're not writing a poem, but rather an essay, a magazine article, a short story, or a letter to
the editor, how you arrange your words can have almost as much of an impact as what your words
say. We also talked about recognizing voice or tone in poetry, and we looked at three famous
examples, the ode on a Grecian urn, Luke Havergall, and to his mistress going to bed,
to better understand how voice or tone can be created. We discussed some of the most common
poetic devices, like metaphor and simile, and we saw how they can be used in non-poetic works
to create greater impact. As you might be thinking, we've just scratched the surface when it comes
to poetry, and there's a whole lot more to be said about how to engage a poem and how to use
what you know about poetry to improve your own writing. In our next lecture, we're going to
continue our exploration of poetry, and we're going to spend some more time talking about diction,
syntax, and the benefits and drawbacks of working in English, one of the more delightfully idiosyncratic
languages. I hope you'll join us for more.
