In the last lecture, we studied several key elements and features of autobiographical writing
that you can use to make your own written self-presentations more successful, whether
you're describing your skills and accomplishments in a college admissions essay, crafting an
argument to convince your boss you deserve a promotion, or putting together your biographical
profile for an online professional or social networking site.
We studied the work of one of America's most famous and successful autobiographers, Benjamin
Franklin, and we learned how to more effectively organize and focus your presentation of personal
information into three basic areas, interests, abilities, and achievements.
We also discussed the importance of creating a progressive, unified narrative of these
three areas that illustrates how your interests help you develop a skill set and how that
skill set, in turn, led to your specific accomplishments and achievements.
Using Franklin's examples, we also learned how to highlight our individual accomplishments
while also framing them within the context of a group-based effort or team-building
situation, and this is what I like to call the I-We strategy.
We saw how Franklin made excellent use of this, coming off as both a natural leader
and a popular member of a group.
Finally, we looked at his strategy for presenting faults and weaknesses in a positive light.
In other words, we saw how Franklin was able to present his mistakes as evidence of talents
that had simply been misdirected or skills that had not yet been fully realized, his
virtues in the making, essentially, as part of a life that was still a work in progress.
The boy who played clever pranks in his youth became a man who used that cleverness to help
create a nation.
One of the most striking and intriguing elements of the anecdotes we discussed in Franklin's
autobiographical writing was his presentation of himself as a kind of leader figure.
Even at ten years old, he already demonstrated leadership capabilities among his peers.
When he's venturing out on the water in a boat with his friends, he says they looked
to him as their captain, especially if the situation was difficult or dangerous.
And back on land, he showed himself to be a miniature version of a project manager
as he organized a team of his friends to take stones that were supposed to build a new house
for someone, and instead he and his friends used them to construct a wharf so they'd
have a better location for their fishing.
It sounds as if growing up with Ben Franklin, it would have been a lot of fun to have him
as a friend.
In this lecture, we're going to expand on this important link between autobiographical
writing and leadership.
And the reason we're going to be examining this topic in greater depth is because the
subject of leadership, its different qualities, its various styles, its capacity for success
or for failure has garnered massive amounts of attention in all kinds of fields in business,
in education, in government, in athletics.
The list goes on and on.
There's hardly a field or area where the topic of leadership is not the center of attention.
The shelves of bookstores and libraries literally grown under the weight of all these leadership
guides and management studies.
If you browse a professional website in your field, more often than not, you'll find some
notice or ad or link that describes a leadership seminar or a workshop that promises to transform
you into the ideal CEO, or at the very least, it makes you a better manager or administrator.
Even late night TV infomercials tout these 10-step programs that are guaranteed to increase
your self-motivation or help you discover hidden talents and strengths and will transform
you into a more effective leader or your money back.
And given the choice, most of us would want to be leaders rather than followers, wouldn't
we?
Many of these books, seminars and workshops are based on sound research by experts in
the fields of management and organizational studies.
Some are based on rather less substantial evidence.
Sometimes they borrow their general information from other sources and all they're doing
is kind of repackaging this as a new discovery.
And some of these really offer not much more than pep talks or sort of really generalized
power of positive thinking suggestions, and there's no clear way to actually apply this
stuff to your own life.
But none of them, at least none that I've come across in my research, focuses on the
crucial link between writing and leadership.
Or if we want to get more specific, how the study and practice of autobiographical writing
can help you better understand how leadership skills are developed.
The study of autobiography can also help you see how different approaches to leadership
can be defined.
And here I'm talking about things like a top-down management style where one person
makes most of the decisions as opposed to something like a more inclusive, collaborative
approach, where a group of people might vote or discuss various actions or decisions.
And what I think is most interesting and important about autobiographical writing is
that it really can give you concrete examples about how you can put these strategies into
practice to advance your career or achieve your professional and personal goals.
Let me put this another way.
Have you ever considered how many highly successful leaders have written autobiographies?
I'm sure that if you took just a minute or two, you could jot down a list of 10, 20,
or even more famous figures whose writings exemplify this connection between writing
about your interests, abilities, and accomplishments, and becoming a more effective leader of a
group, a company, a movement, or even a nation.
Here's my own list, starting, of course, with Benjamin Franklin.
Who else would be on this list?
Well, there's Mahatma Gandhi, leader of India's struggle to become an independent nation.
Or how about Helen Keller, who became one of the most successful leading activists and
advocates for reforming treatment and education methods for those who have disabilities?
If we continue on, there's Booker T. Washington, whose autobiography, Up from Slavery, remains
a classic study of the development of a leader in the face of overwhelming adversity.
Or there's Ronald Reagan's An American Life, which is one of the top-selling autobiographies
of 1990.
Even the famously self-effacing Abraham Lincoln wrote three brief autobiographical sketches
that describe some of the circumstances that eventually led him to the presidency.
And then there are a couple of my favorites.
There's the brilliant Hildegard of Bingen, one of my personal all-time favorite autobiographical
writers.
She's born into a noble family in or around the year 1098.
And Hildegard became a founder of monasteries, a religious visionary, a gifted composer and
artist, and a leading theologian whose wisdom and insights were sought by everyone from
the common folk up to popes and emperors.
She's a fascinating woman and a really unique example from her period.
Then there's also Marjorie Kemp, a weight medieval English woman who was illiterate,
but who was so convinced of the importance of her religious experiences that she essentially
browbeat a scribe and a couple of priests into taking dictation from her and writing
down the experiences of her life.
Her book is often called the First Autobiography in English, and it was actually lost for a
few hundred years.
When it was discovered in the 20th century, it sent medieval scholars into a frenzy.
Many of us now believe that one of Kemp's goals in writing her autobiography, whether
or not she consciously realized this, was to try and set herself up for sainthood.
Now, talk about the link between autobiography and leadership.
Sainthood is about the top of the heap when it comes to leadership and influence.
Some could argue that highly successful leaders pen autobiographies because there's usually
a substantial audience of people who want to read their stories and they want to read
them in order to be entertained or inspired or because they want to behind the scenes
look at someone they find fascinating or controversial.
True enough.
But if we look more closely at some examples from the works of these figures, we find something
else holds true far more often than not.
And this is that autobiographical texts offer valuable tools and strategies that show how
individuals can establish themselves as leaders or representative figures who are speaking
not just for themselves, but also to and for a larger group.
Autobiography is perhaps the richest and most underused source of practical knowledge for
anyone seeking to present herself or himself as qualified to take on a leadership role
and make effective use of it.
Whether you're running as a candidate for president of your local school board or you
want to be someone in an upper level management position or you're struggling with a college
admissions essay, the following examples I think will help you represent yourself and
your capacity for leadership in the best possible way.
So to help us better get at this link between autobiography and leadership, we're going
to continue our discussion of Benjamin Franklin's life and we're going to add some examples
from the autobiographical work of another figure as well, Frederick Douglass.
And as most of you probably know, Douglass was a former slave who made his way north
and to freedom in the 1830s and then he subsequently became one of the most famous and influential
abolitionists of the 19th century.
After the Civil War, he became a leading figure not only within the African-American community,
but also in the nation as a whole.
He served as a statesman and a diplomat and eventually he was named the U.S. Ambassador
to Haiti.
He wrote three separate autobiographical accounts of his life, each one extremely successful
in both commercial and critical terms.
And here's an excerpt from an account of his boyhood in the 1820s, and this occurs
not long after he'd been moved from the back country of Maryland's eastern shore to Baltimore
and there he was bound out, as it was called, by his master to work in the local shipyards.
In this selection, Douglass describes how he learned to read, something slaves were
expressly forbidden to do.
And I should add that slavery and education were generally deemed totally incompatible
by Southern slaveholders.
This is something that Douglass recognized really early in his life and it made him even
more determined to become literate.
He tells us that, quote, the plan which I adopted and the one by which I was most successful
was that of making friends of all the little white boys whom I met in the street.
As many of these as I could, I converted into teachers.
With their kindly aid obtained at different times and in different places, I finally succeeded
in learning to read.
When I was sent of errands, I always took my book with me and by going one part of my
errand quickly, I found time to get a lesson before my return.
I used also to carry bread with me, enough of which was always in the house and to which
I was always welcome.
I was much better off in this regard than many of the poor white children in our neighborhood.
This bread I used to bestow upon the hungry little urchins who in return would give me
that more valuable bread of knowledge.
Every time I read this passage, I'm astonished by how insightful Douglass is when it comes
to forging an emotional connection with his readers.
He solicits their sympathy, but he never puts himself in a position to be pitied.
And I'll come back to this point about the relationship between emotional expression
and leadership later in the lecture.
But right now, I want you to think about the similarities you see between Douglass's description
of getting young white boys to help him learn to read and the description Franklin gives
us that we discussed in the previous lecture of getting his friends to help him build a
fishing wharf out of stones that were supposed to be building a neighbor's house.
Certainly, both of these excerpts give a general sense of the resourcefulness and the ingenuity
of Douglass and Franklin.
And specifically what we see here is an ability to get others to help you achieve your goals.
Both passages show how determined and dedicated their authors are in terms of their respective
tasks that they've set themselves.
But it's important for us to see how both writers also use their autobiographical anecdotes
to suggest that good leaders need to exist in a kind of what we might say reciprocal
relationship with those around them.
And reciprocal, in this case, does not mean a relationship of equals.
By any measure, both Franklin and Douglass benefit a whole lot more from these interactions
than the people with whom they're interacting to.
Still, the autobiographical descriptions underscore what you can gain by writing about yourself
not simply as a representative of a group, but as someone for whom reciprocity is a crucial
function of leadership.
Douglass clearly understands that what the poor, literate white boys need is something
to eat.
And if he could supply this, he would get what he felt he most needed, and that's knowledge.
Here's another example from Douglass's autobiography.
And in this episode, he describes how he taught himself to write.
Again, something slaves were expressly forbidden to do.
First, he learned individual letters and two-letter combinations by watching carpenters in the
shipyards mark pieces of lumber with letters that identified which side of the ship those
pieces were designated for.
So S for starboard, SF for starboard forward, SA for starboard aft, et cetera.
And with this knowledge, Douglass then moved on to try and establish a set of reciprocal
relations with people who could help him.
He says, when I met any boy who I knew could write, I would tell him I could write as well
as he.
The next word would be, I don't believe you.
Let me see you try it.
I would then make the letters, which I had been so fortunate as to learn, and ask him
to beat that.
In this way, I got a good many lessons in writing, which it is quite possible I should never
have gotten in any other way.
If you were to read or reread the various autobiographies I mentioned earlier, those
by Gandhi, Helen Keller, Booker T. Washington, or Ronald Reagan, you'd notice a similar
thread running through every text.
It's this theme of reciprocal relations.
And again, reciprocal doesn't necessarily mean relations that help both parties to benefit
equally, but both parties do get something.
In addition, the reciprocity model applies even if the leadership style of the author
seems more top down than collaborative.
In fact, Douglass suggests implicitly in the anecdote that we just looked at, and Franklin
also argues this explicitly throughout his autobiography, that it's even more crucial
for top down leaders to always present themselves and their accomplishments in some sort of
reciprocal relationship to those around them.
You can weave this same thread through your own autobiographical writing, especially if
your goal is to describe or define your leadership qualities and style for, say, a potential employer
or a new boss or a college admissions committee.
And come to think of it, if I were in the position of advising prospective college students
or the parents of prospective college students about writing one of those autobiographical
admissions essays, the first thing I'd recommend would be to have their child read Franklin's
autobiography or any one of Douglass's three narratives before they start writing.
The takeaway point here is that whatever events or achievements you choose as the centerpiece
for the autobiographical writing you have to do, take the time to imagine and then describe
those events or achievements in or through some connection with other people, people
that you work with, supervise, who are part of whatever group or network you're a member
of, and people who have served you in return.
Here in this lecture, when we were discussing that first excerpt from Douglass's autobiography,
I mentioned that every time I read that particular passage, I'm amazed by Douglass's gift for
establishing a particular kind of emotional connection with his readers.
He solicits their sympathy, but never puts himself in a position to be pitied.
I want to come back to that point now and expand on it a bit.
The use of emotional expression is one of the most complex dimensions of autobiographical
writing.
If you handle it well, you will generate all sorts of powerful persuasive feelings that
will compel your audience to follow wherever you want to lead them, and it's also then
going to help you achieve your goals.
If you don't do a good job with this emotional aspect, you're pretty quickly going to alienate
your readers, and you may find that it's impossible to convince them to support you,
accept you, or help you within a request you might make.
Another thread that runs through almost every great autobiographical text is a careful use
of emotional expression.
By careful, I mean an expression of feeling that's not made for an overly dramatic effect.
In fact, I think that in most cases, the more intense and emphatic the representation of
an emotion is, so the more insistent you are that you felt sad or you felt angry, the less
effective it ends up being.
In contrast, I think a low-key or understated approach has a much better chance of making
a productive connection with your readers.
To illustrate the effectiveness of emotion when it's expressed in what I like to call
a minor rather than a major key, let's take a look at an especially moving event from
Franklin's autobiography, and this is the account of the death of his son from smallpox
and the guilt that Franklin feels because he didn't have the child inoculated.
And so he says, in 1736, I lost one of my sons, a fine boy of four years old, by the
smallpox, taken in the common way.
I long regretted bitterly and still regret that I had not given it to him by inoculation.
This I mention for the sake of parents who omit that operation on the supposition that
they should never forgive themselves if the child died under it.
My example showing that the regret may be the same either way and that therefore the
safer should be chosen.
I want to emphasize that there's no requirement or reason or rule dictating that Franklin needs
to include some comment on the loss of his son or the feelings that he had as a result
of that.
He could have left this out with no consequences at all, but he makes a deliberate decision
to include this event, and he takes care to describe it in a way that directly connects
this individual loss that he experiences to something much larger than himself.
And in this case, you could say that's sort of the health of the general public.
It's easy enough to recognize the kind of selfless attitude that Franklin has here,
his willingness to share this information not for his own sake, but for the good of
his readers.
And there's no reason to suspect that he has any ulterior motives here.
At the same time, we would be remiss as students of Franklin's work if we didn't note that
when he decides to include this, when taken within the broader context of the autobiography
as a whole, what this scene does is add considerable credibility to his role as a leader, and then
it helps him to get really significant sympathetic support for anything else he might want to
say or do.
It's not a self-serving move in a direct sense, but it ultimately has the effect of enhancing
his status as a kind of representative figure who speaks for and to a larger group.
I want to reiterate my warning here about incorporating emotional expression into your
own autobiographical writing, because for many people it is just too tempting to try
and provide a really intense description of a really intense situation.
And obviously when people do this, the hope is that by dramatizing a set of emotions,
they can then trigger a sympathetic response in their readers.
And whether that sympathy manifests itself as shared anger and outrage at some injustice
or its commiseration over some sort of trauma that they've all experienced or if it's a
collective sense of accomplishment or well-being.
Please don't mistake my meaning here.
I am not trying to tell you to avoid the use of emotional moments or language, but I am
recommending that you study Franklin's model carefully and thoroughly before you make use
of emotional appeals in autobiographical writing.
So think back to the tone of that passage and note the overall tone of it.
Again, it's intimate, but the intimacy is low-key.
It's understated.
And what's even more crucial here is that there's a clear effort to try and define the
meaning of this experience not at just an individual level.
It's not just about his personal grief and guilt, but he's trying to talk about it in
a broader collective sense that connects the experience to something larger than himself.
Franklin's strategy for establishing leadership is what we might call the use of soft power
or the ability to achieve one's goals by establishing intimacy and cultivating personal connections
with a larger public body or group.
Now let's take a look at our final excerpt, and this one is from the last paragraph of
Frederick Douglass' narrative.
At this point in the autobiography, Douglass has reached the north and is just starting
to become involved with the abolitionist movement.
He's been invited as a guest to a lot of anti-slavery meetings and lectures, and other people have
told his story for him to sometimes very skeptical audiences, and they're holding him up as proof
that slaves are worthy of freedom, and if you gave them freedom, they would make good
use of it.
Now, although Douglass had been encouraged to speak on his own behalf, at this point
in the narrative, he has only done so for black audiences, but in the moment I'm going
to read to you, he finally decides to speak to a white audience, and when he does this,
he takes the first step in what's going to become a hugely successful career as an activist
and reformer.
He starts off by saying that he's reluctant to speak, but finally, at an anti-slavery
convention in 1841, he feels compelled to tell his story, and another person attending
urges him to go ahead and do this.
And then Douglass says, quote, it was a severe cross, and I took it up reluctantly.
The truth was, I felt myself a slave, and the idea of speaking to white people weighed
me down.
I spoke but a few moments when I felt a degree of freedom, and said what I desired with considerable
ease.
From that time until now, I have been engaged in pleading the cause of my brethren, with
what success and with what devotion, I leave those acquainted with my labors to decide.
Douglass's goal in these final lines of the narrative is to make himself accessible to
a broader audience, and he does this in part by revealing a personal and highly emotional
experience, and in this case, it's public speaking, and it's accompanied by fear and
anxiety.
What he's also doing is addressing attention or a paradox that we see a lot when we're
dealing with leader figures.
And this is how do you maintain connection to a group that you represent when the very
process of becoming that group's leader sort of separates you from it in some way.
In other words, by taking up the, quote, severe cross of speaking to a white audience, Douglass
is acknowledging not simply a fear of public speaking, but also the burden of representing
a group that he no longer has a direct connection to since he's managed to successfully escape
from slave holding territory.
So in this sense, Douglass faced far more of an imperative than Franklin to include emotional
experiences in his autobiography.
Failing to describe his first speech to a white audience would have undermined his goal
of taking on the role of a representative leader for the reform of black-white relations.
At the same time, Douglass recognizes the need to articulate his emotions in an understated
fashion.
There's certainly evidence of the strength and intensity of his feelings, but we receive
that message sort of obliquely rather than directly.
And this is a strategy that allows Douglass to create just enough of a sense of intimacy
to solicit sympathy from his readers, but not so much that they feel overwhelmed by
the sentiments he's expressing.
So what have we learned from our extended looks at Franklin and Douglass, and how can
we apply it to our own autobiographical writing?
Well, keep in mind that autobiography is a rich source of knowledge for understanding
how leadership skills can be developed and how different styles of leadership can work.
Winning that seat on your local school board, getting promoted to project manager or convincing
people on the admissions committee that you are an ideal student for your dream college.
In each case, you would be well-served to follow the models of Franklin and Douglass
and present yourself as a leader who establishes reciprocal relations with those around you
with your fellow board members, your team, your student peers, and it would be good to
try and present yourself as someone who never allows an individual effort or accomplishment
to be represented without some connection to those people that you're serving.
And you've got to keep in mind as well the benefits of careful understatement when you're
dealing with emotional expression.
Don't rely on the intensity of an emotional experience to try and form an intimate connection
with your readers.
All you're going to do is push them away.
Instead, you should try to create a sense of intimacy like Douglass and Franklin do.
You selectively reveal a set of feelings that readers can identify with, but they won't
feel overwhelmed by them.
When the conditions or circumstances of a writing situation are such that if you express
emotion, it could work in your favor.
Remember that really, once again, less is more.
Low key pitch, understated tone, that's going to draw your readers closer and invite them
in.
In our next three lectures, we're going to continue to focus on how to create a compelling
meaning and engaging identity as a writer by making use of some key ideas from the area
of classical rhetoric.
These are ideas and traditions that go back to ancient Greece and Rome, both places where
the ability to present yourself compellingly through speech or writing was raised really
to something of an art form.
By studying what the Greeks and Romans studied, you'll gain greater awareness of how to present
yourself in your writing and be better able to recognize and appreciate how and when other
writers do this effectively.
