Welcome back. In our last lecture, we talked about two of four major concepts in classical
rhetoric. And these concepts were invention and arrangement. As you probably remember,
question is the process of figuring out what you can write about in a given situation or
in relation to a particular topic or question. And when you're starting to think about a
piece of writing, it may seem silly to actually stop and ask yourself the basic question,
what can I say about this topic, issue or question? Most likely you have something in
mind or you wouldn't be writing anything. But sometimes calling our attention back
to the most basic questions or issues like what can I say about this helps us to focus
so that we can move forward and produce a really engaging piece of writing. The other
term we talked about was arrangement. And this is pretty much just what it sounds like.
It's the process of choosing which things to include in your writing and which order
you want to put them in. You want to arrange the elements of your writing so that they are
the most effective they can be in any given situation. You'll pick and choose which elements
to include and the order and style in which you treat them based on how you deal with
the issue of invention. Now again, arrangement seems like a really basic concept and one
that you maybe don't even have to consciously think of. Of course you're going to arrange
your writing but you don't just want to throw a jumble of words or ideas on the page and
hope that someone can figure out your main point. Okay, I take that back. I have seen
some pieces of writing that seem to have falcoed this model of organization but you don't want
to do that. And again, returning your focus to a very basic question like how do I arrange
and present this stuff can help make it better. As we've already discussed, these terms and
others like Kairos come from the world of classical rhetoric from the ancient Greek
and Roman worlds where good public speaking and persuasive writing were actually considered
art forms. The Greeks and the Romans were almost fanatical in the way they broke things
down into steps, the way they gave certain elements of their writings, categories or
labels that probably wouldn't even occur to us to even try and name. And they were famous
also for the rigorous and dedicated way they studied and tried to master these concepts.
And you're probably asking, so just what does that have to do with me and writing in the
modern world? Well, as I've already pointed out, some of the most compelling writers we've
studied in this course, particularly Benjamin Franklin and Frederick Douglass, were actually
students of classical rhetoric. And as you may recall, Douglass in particular treasured
his copy of the Colombian orator, which he had managed to purchase when he was 12 years
old. Douglass famously said in an interview, every opportunity I got, I read this book.
The Colombian orator was a foundational text in the schools of early America, and it contained
lots of speeches and argumentative pieces that employed the techniques of classical
rhetoric. Children were supposed to study and try to imitate the pieces in this text
with the idea that through practice and imitation, they could master these concepts. And you'll
have to admit, in the case of writers like Franklin and Douglass, this seems to have worked
rather well. Their writing is compelling. It's engaging. It's persuasive. It's all
the things you want to be in your own writing. So logically, if studying classical rhetoric
worked so well for them, surely it can work for us too. And as I've already mentioned,
although you're learning terms like kairos, invention, arrangement, etc., etc., and in
this lecture we're going to study two more, ethos and pathos, you never need to actually
use those words in your own writing. I find it helpful simply to have a post-it note on
my computer that lists these words that my attention's brought back to them. It's a reminder
that I should pause and consider how anything I'm working on uses these concepts and whether
or not I'm using them effectively. Again, it's all about being intently mindful or hyper
aware of what's going on in your own writing so that you can make it the best it can be.
So as I said, last time we talked about two of four key terms, and those two were invention
and arrangement. In this lecture, we're going to focus and analyze another two rhetorical
concepts, and these are ethos and pathos. These ideas are particularly useful in writing
situations where you're attempting to persuade somebody to give you something, like job application
letters or grant proposals. You'll learn different ways to establish ethos, and this in a nutshell
means simply the perception that readers have of your reliability or character. And we're
also going to look at some methods for inspiring pathos, and pathos really means simply inspiring
emotion in your readers, especially feelings of sympathy. A quick note here, pathos, spelled
P-A-T-H-O-S, is sometimes pronounced pathos, but most scholars of rhetoric say pathos.
The similar case with one of the writers we've been discussing in this course, Henry David
Thoreau. Some scholars insist that his name should be pronounced thorough. Whichever
way you decide to say pathos or thorough, you'll be pleasing some people and you'll
be irritating others. Just pick whichever you prefer and go with it, and don't worry
about it.
So to get back to ethos and pathos, careful use of each of these ideas can greatly increase
the chances that your written request for something will meet with success rather than
rejection.
As I suggested just a moment ago, ethos is a term that in the most general sense refers
to the character and the credibility of the person making an argument. While pathos is
a term that in the most general sense refers to the emotional aspects, or what we would
call the effective qualities of an argument.
Now when I introduce these two concepts to my students, I begin by asking them if they've
seen those late night TV programs that feature images and narratives or stories about impoverished
children in developing countries. And those ads usually then ask viewers to send money
to sponsor a child or contribute something to help fight hunger or disease. Most of my
students in the class when I ask them about this, they say, yeah, we've seen these programs.
I then ask them to raise their hands if they've actually sent a check or if they've made
a donation. A few hands usually go up and usually it's somewhere in the realm of maybe
two or three people in a class of about 35.
I tell the ones who say that they've sent in money that I admire them for it. They're
good people. I tell the other students that I don't judge them negatively since I consider
this to be an issue of individual choice and absolutely everyone has the right to say
no without being criticized or condemned for it, and least of all, by me.
But I then tell them that I've never written a check in response to one of those pleas
from the people on television. But I also say I have written checks for similar groups
in response to requests from people that I know. So for example, I have some friends
who've done volunteer work fighting poverty and disease like in those places we see on
TV. I have some friends who work for Doctors Without Borders. And I say to my class that
the reason I write checks for people I know is that they have a kind of built-in ethos
with me. They have credibility because I know them, I trust them, and I know exactly what
kind of work they've been doing. And it's not, let me be clear, it's not that I distrust
the people on TV. It's just that they haven't offered the combination of ethos and pathos
that I find really persuasive. Now, if you think about it, obviously the pathos is definitely
there. How could images of starving children not arouse feelings of sympathy or make you
have a desire to help? But the pathos that's inspired by those images is not effective
if I really don't know much about the person or the group that's showing me these images
and asking me for my money. That's why some of these charity organizations get celebrity
spokespeople to help them make their pleas. And the idea is something like, if I see actress
Charisma Charming make this request, and I like Ms. Charming's movies, and I like what
I've learned about her from reading magazine articles, etc., etc., then the thinking goes,
I'll be more inclined to donate money because she has an established positive ethos, at
least for me. And I'm not at all suggesting here that these organizations are trying to
trick me in some way by using celebrity spokespeople. In most instances, almost all these organizations
are really doing fantastic work. And what they're doing by getting celebrities to speak
for them is simply employing a strategy from classical rhetoric, whether or not they actually
know that that's what they're doing. And they're doing this in order to get me to help them
out. There's absolutely nothing wrong with this, and there's a whole lot that's right
about it as long as it's done ethically and responsibly.
Okay, but let's take another example. I imagine that almost every one of us has gotten an
email from someone claiming to be in charge of a bank account in Nigeria. This email usually
begins something like Dearest One, and then a hard luck tail follows, and then the writer
usually says something like, if you'll just help me access this account worth five million
US dollars, I'll give you a cut. So just send me your account number and then we'll be good
to go. Other emails of this type claim to be from people who have an illness, or they've
got a family member who is sick or recently deceased, and they either need help paying
for medical bills or else they need, for some reason it's always your bank account number,
but they need your bank account number in order to help them access, say, an inheritance.
Okay, how would you describe the ethos connected with these emails? I tend to think of the word
sketchy when I think of emails like this. I don't know anything about the writer. They
don't seem to have any idea who I am. They never use my real name, and I've got no way
of verifying their identity or checking on their situation. Now, let's consider what
if I got an email from a friend of mine who happens to be in Nigeria, and this friend
is there, say, working with an organization like Doctors Without Borders. Well, if she
says that she needs my help with a financial matter, I am much more likely to offer help,
and this is because she has established an ethos as someone who is reliable, trustworthy,
and working for a noble cause. What goes wrong with these emails from unknown sources, among
a whole list of things that are wrong with them, but one thing that goes wrong is that
they are heavy on the pathos, but light on ethos. There's nothing intrinsically ethically
or morally problematic with just simple pathos-based appeals, but as a general rule, attempts to
persuade are much more successful when they combine pathos and ethos, and usually they're
successful if they emphasize the ethos instead of the pathos. So let me just say that again.
The most successful attempts combine ethos and pathos, and they're usually most successful
if the ethos is sort of the dominant element rather than the pathos. You can give me the
most pathetic in the kind of classical rhetorical sense of the word, the most pathetic argument
ever, but if I don't trust the ethos, it's not going to get you very far.
Okay, so how do you establish ethos? Well, generally speaking, ethos is established through
habits or patterns of behavior. Figures in the public eye, people like celebrities or
politicians, they have established an ethos based on what's widely known about their
actions, about their words and interviews, publicity about their charity work, their
statements about positions on certain issues, et cetera, et cetera. All of this works together
to create an ethos. And that's all fine and good, you might be saying, but how do I construct
an ethos in a piece of writing if the audience doesn't actually know me personally? Well,
in this case, what you have to do is demonstrate knowledge and expertise, and or you've got
to speak from a position of authority in the writing itself. And in order to make whatever
it is, whatever your writing is about, have the greatest pathetic appeal, and again, I'm
using pathetic here in the classical sense, not the sort of common everyday way we use
it nowadays, you need to establish your ethos fairly early on. And if you're trying to figure
out how to balance ethos and pathos, less pathos, as I've said before, is usually better
than more. Okay, so let's look at an example of an attempt to persuade readers to do something
that models a mix of ethos and pathos. In this case, we're going to return to Frederick
Douglas' narrative. It's a text that's intended in its broadest terms to persuade its audience
to support the abolition of slavery. In the first part of the quote I'm about to read
to you, Douglas establishes his ethos, his authority to speak on this subject. This is
what he says.
Quote, I have no accurate knowledge of my age, never having seen any authentic record
containing it. By far, the larger part of the slaves know as little of their ages as
horses know of theirs, and it is the wish of most masters within my knowledge to keep
their slaves thus ignorant. I do not remember to have ever met a slave who could tell of
his birthday. They seldom come near to it then, planting time, harvest time, cherry
time, spring time, or fall time. Okay, so how does he establish his ethos and his right
to speak on the matter of slavery at all? Well, obviously, first and foremost, there's
the fact that he was a slave, and this in and of itself certainly makes him qualified
to speak on the subject. But this, of course, is an aspect of ethos beyond anyone's control.
It just simply is. But here, when it comes to the particular matter of slaves knowing
personal information, like their own ages or their birth dates, he goes ahead and establishes
himself as someone who has paid close attention to this issue specifically, and thus he's
someone who has a right to comment on it. So, Douglas establishes ethos by providing
some specific information. He tells us how slaves reckon or remember their birthdays,
and this is usually in terms of seasons. And his language here indicates that he has asked
numerous slaves if they know their birthdays. So this means that he's done a little research
into the matter. His language here also suggests that, well, his personal experience absolutely
is the key part of the establishment of his authoritative ethos and his right to speak
on this topic. What we get from this passage is the sense that he has looked beyond merely
his personal experience. He's inquired about slaves and their relationship to their personal
information. He says at one point, it is the wish of most masters within my knowledge.
And he also says, I do not remember to have ever met a slave. So he presents himself as
a source of information on slave holding culture whose authority is based both on first hand
personal experience and on further investigation and inquiry. And notice there how carefully
he qualifies his statements. He does not come out and say, all masters do this or not a
single slave knows his or her birthday. He's quite careful to put bounds or limits around
his authority to speak. He acknowledges that there's some sort of outer limit to his knowledge
and this further enhances his ethos. He's cautious, he's reliable, and he does not claim
to know things that he can't know. This balance of humility with authority is part of what
makes his writing so powerful and also so persuasive. So that's the establishment of
ethos and I think we can agree that Douglas does a pretty good job of this. He then continues
on to work some pathos into this passage by saying, quote, a want of information concerning
my own birthday was a source of unhappiness to me even during childhood. The white children
could tell their ages. I could not tell why I ought to be deprived of the same privilege.
I was not allowed to make any inquiries of my master concerning it. He deemed all such
inquiries on the part of a slave improper and impertinent and evidence of a restless
spirit. The nearest estimate I can give makes me now between 27 and 28 years of age. I come
to this from hearing my master say sometime during 1835 I was about 17 years old. Okay
what is your first reaction to this portion of the passage? Probably some of you registered
feelings of shock, of outrage, of sympathy. But what makes this so pathetically powerful
is that Douglas takes what I think we can all agree is a relatively understated tone.
He offers a matter of fact discussion of slave holding culture's practice of keeping slaves
ignorant of such basic personal information as birth dates and ages. And when he does
this he doesn't pile on negative adjectives. And he doesn't even really describe or characterize
the practice as directly and specifically as he could have. He could have said this
was cruel or he could have said my master yelled in anger whenever I asked. But instead
he keeps the tone calm. The lack of this knowledge he says is a source of unhappiness.
It's very understated, a source of unhappiness. He's confused as to why he can't know this
information and we get a very circumspect description of his master's attitude. Douglas
is simply as he puts it, quote, not allowed to make any inquiries. His master, quote,
deemed all such inquiries on the part of a slave improper and impertinent. Again this
really seems like understatement if we think about everything we know about slave holding
culture. So the understatement Douglas uses here allows us to imagine the reality as somewhat
more unpleasant. And he does not come across as trying to prey on our sympathies. He presents
the facts straightforwardly and most readers will feel sympathy for his situation. Why can't
a slave even know his or her own birthday? Of course he doesn't understand why one group
of children could know their birth dates and another group would be ignorant of this information
for no other reason than the color of their skin. Now in order to really appreciate and
recognize this understatedness what we have to remember is that Douglas is speaking to
an audience of mostly white northerners who while interested in the question of abolition
might have had little to no knowledge of actual slave holding culture. Douglas was really
strongly aware of the need to introduce them to the nature of slave holding culture but he
needed to do that as carefully and as judiciously as possible. And the concern here is that his
audience might become so emotionally overwhelmed by the description of the horrors of slavery that
they would just stop listening. So remember those commercials featuring starving children I
mentioned at the beginning of this lecture? Well how many of us have turned the channel when
they come on simply because they're so upsetting? The horrors of starving children just like the
horrors of slavery are really hard to see or to hear about. And for Douglas perhaps even worse
than the possibility of overwhelming his audience so much that they just stopped listening would be
if they listened and thought his story was so incredible that it couldn't possibly be true.
In other words Douglas has to take care so that his audience does not disbelieve him. At the same
time he also recognizes that pathos is a powerful tool for persuading his audience to join the
anti-slavery movement. So what he's doing here is really walking a very very fine line. He wants to
draw them in, he wants to educate them about slavery but he doesn't want to make them leave the room
or turn the channel as it were because they're so overwhelmed by that story. I once heard a
Holocaust survivor Rose Van Tyne speak of her experiences. The horrors she described were
emotionally wrenching for her audience but I was struck by how while she detailed what happened
to her in various concentration camps there was one about what she said and that I cannot even talk
about what happened there and then she waved her hand as if to brush it away and she went on with
the rest of her story and make no mistake the things that she actually did describe were truly
horrific. Now I'm guessing that certainly Mrs. Van Tyne was not concerned so much with how we her
audience would react to this moment as much as she was aware that this something that she didn't
want to speak about this something was so horrible she couldn't even tell it to others without
causing herself excessive pain but the fact remains that when she did this it has a similar effect
intentional or not to Douglas's restraint that he demonstrates in his own work. Until her death this
year at the age of 88 Mrs. Van Tyne regularly spoke to groups about her experiences in the
Holocaust so clearly it was important to her that people were aware of what had happened and that
people did not forget. And when we came in Auschwitz in Kettelkart the Hitler's elite the SS were
waiting for us and they literally beat all the older people out of the Kettelkart and they
were put in a row. I was put with another hundred women between the ages of 18 and 45 and we were
set apart. The other people went by truck to the guest ships but they didn't know we didn't know
that it changed. It was certainly hard to listen to and I have no doubt that it was also hard for
her to relive these experiences over and over and over. Rose Van Tyne had an amazing ethos and it
was made all the stronger by the things that she did not say by the moments when she held back and
also by the fact that in the midst of an account of humanity's darkest days she still found a way to
work in some humor and jokes. I remember her laughing when she related how after the war she and her
husband came to the United States after being sponsored by a family in Shreveport, Louisiana and
this family owned a pipe company. They were allowed to immigrate to the US because this family had
guaranteed her husband a job and when they arrived they were surprised to discover that the company
did not make pipes for smoking but pipes for plumbing. They had assumed that he'd be working in a pipe
factory that would make pipes that people smoked. But like I said we were very blessed to come to
Shreveport and to America and we couldn't I told you that this country made a special one for
the Holocaust and Louis was a diamond cutter in Holland and here he went into the pipe business.
Oil pipe. We thought in a papers that said pipes and we thought about smoking pipes.
By the end of her talk Mrs. Van Tyne had managed to brilliantly mix ethos and pathos so that the
audience regarded her as an authority absolutely and her words had considerable weight.
We bought this house in San Bernard and all the neighbors came and they brought coffee and they
brought cake and I was so surprised I mean and we're still very good neighbors except for one who
doesn't like juice. Too bad. I can change and why should I change. So when someone asked her if she
missed her homeland if she ever felt like she wanted to leave the United States and return home to
Europe to the Netherlands which had originally been her home she said I remember this so clearly
she said no because this is the greatest country in the world. It may not be perfect but if
something is wrong you are allowed to speak up and say something about it. Now if we can imagine
say a 17 year old born in North Dakota who spends part of his childhood in New York and part of his
childhood in Texas if this hypothetical 17 year old said something similar how persuasive would his
statement be. I mean he may be totally sincere and he may be perfectly correct but does it have the
same effect as Mrs. Van Tynne making the same statement. Well you're all thinking I hope of
course not and if Mrs. Van Tynne had opened her talk with a comment about how great the United
States is rather than concluding with it would it have been as powerful a statement. Well not quite.
It's because the account of her experiences establish her as an authority on the Holocaust and
its aftermath giving her a compelling ethos and it's because the events she relates definitely
create pathos. It's because of this ethos-pathos combination that her concluding remarks about
the United States of America being the greatest country in the world are powerful compelling
and persuasive. Now I'm guessing and I'm also hoping that most of us don't have personal situations
similar to Frederick Douglass and Rose Van Tynne. While their examples really drive home how the
ideas of ethos and pathos work you don't need to have lived through a horrible situation in order to
establish a compelling ethos nor do you need to recount horrific events in order to get a pathetic
response from your audience. Let's take something as simple as a letter to your local city council
requesting the installation of a speed bump in your neighborhood. What kind of ethos and pathos
do you get from the following letter? Dear city council I'm writing to request the installation
of a speed bump on Main Street between 1st and 2nd Avenue. Cars drive too fast through this
neighborhood and it's only a matter of time before someone's pet or kid gets hit. How's
the ethos and pathos here? Well it's a good attempt at getting a pathetic response. Certainly the
idea of pets or children getting hit by cars draws on the reader's sympathies and emotions but this
falls short mostly because there's no compelling ethos. In fact there's not even really an ethos
at all. We don't know why this person wants a speed bump beyond the obviously stated reason
and we don't know if he or she lives in the neighborhood or how long this person has lived
there or whether or not they know something about traffic engineering. With just a few
tweaks the ethos and thus the letter as a whole can be improved. Consider this rewrite of the letter.
Dear city council as a longtime resident of Friendlyville I'm writing to call your attention
to a traffic situation. As you know the closure of Concord Street and rerouting of traffic along
Maine has caused an increase in cars traveling down this street. As a 25-year resident of 1234
Maine I've witnessed this increase firsthand and I have also seen the average speed of cars
traveling this street increase. In the last month alone I have witnessed five near misses between
pets and cars and one instance in which a child narrowly avoided being hit by a car. I'm writing
to suggest that the installation of a speed bump on Maine between 1st and 2nd Avenue would help slow
traffic and potentially save lives. Thank you. What's the difference? Well the writer tells us
where he lives, how long he's had the experience of living on this street, he's got a knowledge of
traffic patterns in the area and he gives a firsthand report of some close encounters between pets,
people and cars. With that authoritative ethos established his pathetic plea that the installation
of a speed bump could save lives is much more effective than it otherwise would be. So what
you can take away from today's lecture is an understanding of how ethos and pathos can work
together and how it's usually more effective to have more ethos than pathos to make a really
compelling piece of writing. An awareness of the elements of classical rhetoric that we've covered
in this lecture and the two before it can help you become a better writer simply by calling
your attention back to what we might call the basics of good writing. You may never use the
words kairos or ethos or any of the others but knowing and understanding them will definitely
be a benefit. In today's lecture we spin a considerable amount of time discussing how to
establish yourself as an authoritative voice in your writing by focusing on certain concepts.
In our next two lectures we're going to get down to the nuts and bolts of setting yourself up as
an authority by focusing on the process of conducting research.
