Welcome back. In our last few lectures, we discussed how understanding the elements of
classical rhetoric can help make you a better reader and writer. By this point in the course,
we've also come to understand different genres or categories of writing. You've learned how
to unpack or engage poems, short stories, drama, essays, and autobiography, and you've
explored the issues of voice or tone, and you've learned how important it is to understand
and respect your audience. In this lecture and the next one, we're going to move our
attention to some more practical concerns of writing, specifically the process of conducting
research, and then putting that research to use in a piece of writing. Put simply, today
we're going to talk about how to find stuff, and in the next lecture, we're going to focus
on what to do with all that stuff once you've found it. There are several writing situations
in which you might find yourself needing to do some research, and these can range from
the most obvious and classic example, like the college research paper, to a magazine
article, or a short story, or a letter to the editor of a paper. In other words, almost
any type of writing can be improved with a little research. Although the specific example
I'm going to use today comes from the academic world, the steps I'm going to outline apply
just as easily to an article for a magazine that you're researching, or a report for work,
or even a story or novel that's said in a time and place about which you maybe need
to learn a little more. The key things for all of these types of writing are knowing
your objective, knowing where to look, narrowing your focus, finding a hook, and then figuring
out how much time you have for research and when you need to start writing, and you need
a plan to get you through all of these steps. So as I just indicated, there are several steps
that can help with the process of research, and before you begin, it is most helpful to
try and identify what your objective is. Is it to prove a particular position, or support
a belief that you hold? Is it to educate your audience on a certain topic? Is it to entertain?
I find that it also helps to write out what I think my objective is, and I have to keep
in mind that as I research and find more information, my objective might change a little bit.
Although the objective may change somewhat as you research, having some goal in mind
can help you avoid wasting valuable time as you're doing this work. I'm sure you can
imagine how discouraging it is to spend several hours researching a subject related to your
main topic, only to discover that when it comes time to write the thing up, you really
don't need that extra research in order to make your point. And then you think, but I
did all this work. Let me show you what I did. And the end result could be that you end
up muddying your main point rather than clarifying it. After identifying your objective, however
nebulous it might be at this point, your next and perhaps most important action will be
to find your hook or the way into your research. For example, let's say you want to write
a murder mystery. If that's all you know, and that's totally fine with earliest stages,
then starting research can seem like a really daunting task as you could just start looking
things up and reading about them and never stop. But maybe you could find a way to narrow
your research and give yourself a clearly defined way in. For example, you might start
small and decide, I'm going to go to the library or my local newspaper's archives and I'm
going to look up the articles about every murder that's occurred in my area in, say,
the last 20 years. Or you could decide, I want to write a mystery like Agatha Christie
or Ellis Peters, in which case you might start by reading the works of those writers very
carefully in order to get some inspiration. Now, maybe after starting with this as your
way in, you decide you want to narrow your focus to, let's say, poison. So then you start
reading about different poisons, eventually narrowing your specific focus to, let's say,
arsenic or something similar. But obviously in a case like this, you do need to be a little
careful. The writer of Berto Eco, whose medieval murder mystery, The Name of the Rose, has
become really a classic, tells a story about how he had decided that in The Name of the
Rose, the poison in the book would be applied to the corners of the pages of a book that
was read by medieval monks and the monks in the story would be poisoned through the act
of licking their fingers before they touch the corner of each page to turn it. Without
thinking this through too much, he wrote to an acquaintance who specialized in plants and
he asked that friend if he knew of some substance that could poison someone if it was administered
in this way. But Eco neglected to say that he wanted to know this as part of research
for a novel he was writing. Understandably, this acquaintance replied with something like,
um, yeah, I don't think I'm going to be able to help you with this. Now, sometimes in a
case like this, you have to do research in order to know what it is that you want to
research. This sounds a little silly, but at the early stage of researching before you
have a topic, really narrowed and limited to something that's workable for the length
of your assignment. It's ideal to read as much as you can on anything related to your
general topic. Or as I tell my students, you might reread a particular text or poem you
enjoyed and try to figure out why you enjoyed it. Or was there something in the text that
you found puzzling that grabbed your attention? That might be the way to focus your energies
in terms of research and provide you with a place to start. Here's an example of finding
a hook for my own graduate school days. I was trying to write a research paper on Sir
Thomas Mallory's version of the Arthurian legend, and I was totally lost. I decided
to focus on the quest for the Holy Grail. So I read that section of the book over and
over. And then I went and I read Mallory's source for that story. And something caught
my attention at a key moment in the story. King Arthur orders his nephew Gawain to do
something. Gawain obeys the order, he fails at the task, and then he's told that he shouldn't
even have tried. I know that, he says in response, but I could not disobey my lord. And in this
case when he says lord, he means his uncle, the king. That's what he says in the French.
But in Mallory's version, one word has been altered. I could not disobey my uncle, Gawain
says. He doesn't say lord, he says uncle. I was intrigued by the shift in emphasis.
Why did Mallory want to call attention to the family relationship rather than the ruler
subject one? With this as my hook as a way to focus my research, I discovered all sorts
of changes in Mallory's version of the Grail Quest, and a lot of these changes related
to the matter of families. With this as a focus, researching got a whole lot easier.
Or here's a semi-fictional example from that recent bestseller, The Girl Who Kicked the
Hornet's Nest by the late Steve Larson. Now at one point in this thriller, a minor character
who's a magazine reporter wants to do an article on why rents and appliances cost so much in
Sweden. Where to start? Well, he notices that two companies that sell toilets sell almost
the identical toilet for dramatically different prices. Okay, he thinks. Here's a hook. Let's
start with toilets. I mean, everybody needs toilets after all, right? So, good place to
start. He researches where and how they're made, all the way in Indonesia, he discovers,
and then he investigates the conditions in which the workers produce them. This leads
him to discover some appalling facts about labor laws, or actually specifically the lack
of labor laws. And he discovers some other things about human trafficking and kickbacks.
And finally, discovers that a powerful man on the board of directors of his own magazine
is in fact an evil opportunist. And all of this starts from toilets. This is a classic
example of how your research project can change once you get started. And here you have to
be careful. But come on, if you're trying to write a compelling investigative piece,
human trafficking is going to get you work more attention and potentially more Pulitzer
Prizes than an article on the inflated prices of toilets. Although, since as I noted before,
everyone needs toilets, that piece too would probably find an interested audience, to
be sure. Now, in addition to finding a hook or a way into your research project, it is
imperative, and I cannot stress this enough, it is imperative that you have some sort of
schedule. This can be really general, something as simple as, this week I'm just reading
and taking notes. Next week, I'll start writing. Or it could get really specific, something
like Monday, two hours reading, a half hour drafting ideas or points for an article or
essay. Tuesday, four hours reading, or if you've identified some key articles or books
that you think will be central to your research, you can identify by which day you hope to
have read through each of these. Now, if you're working on something like an article or short
story that you're composing for your own pleasure or satisfaction, you may be thinking, well,
I don't need a schedule. I don't really have an external deadline. It'll be done when
I finish it. That's okay, but I promise you, you will be more productive and focused if
you try to give yourself a schedule and some deadlines. You may not meet those deadlines,
and the plan schedule may go totally wonky at some point because of, you know, life getting
in the way, but at least having a schedule will help you focus and move forward. So,
let's look at a rather classic example of the kind of writing that demands research
and explore the process by which you might try to complete it. Whenever I teach a course
called the Arthurian Tradition, and this is a class that focuses on literature that
tells the story of King Arthur, it covers works written in the Middle Ages up to the
present day. I always finish the course with a research assignment, and it's usually something
like, use at least seven secondary sources, and then make an argumentative claim that
you support with both direct textual evidence from a primary source, and that you also support
with secondary evidence you discovered in your research. Okay, so, given an assignment
like that, where would you begin? The assignment, as I've given it, is deliberately, broadly
described, and it's really nonspecific, because when I teach this class, I really want to
hear what my students have found most interesting in the course, and I want to give them the
freedom to explore a theme or an idea that most appeals to them. As you could probably
guess though, some students are totally at a loss when it comes to finding the hook,
or the way in to start their research. So, what happens next is I usually have a conversation
with a student, and I try to find out what he or she found most interesting or intriguing
or puzzling in the class. Sometimes it's a single text that we read in this Arthurian
literature course, and it's the single text that stayed with them, and the student might
say something like, I'm interested in how important the role of magic is in Arthurian
literature. The student could then start researching King Arthur and magic as a means to narrowing
the topic still further. In other words, what he finds in this initial research period might
then help him to zero in on something particular about magic in King Arthur. Who wields magic?
For what ends? In what texts is magic most important? These could all be questions that
the student asks and looks into as he's doing his research. That's all well and good, but
how do you actually begin to do that? Well, you might start with an internet search. It's
quick, it's easy, you don't even have to get out of your chair to do it, and in some cases
literally millions of pages of information will be at your fingertips almost immediately.
So you might ask, what's the problem here? Well, the problem is also one of the most
exciting things about the internet, and that is that literally millions of pages of information
will be at your fingertips almost immediately. How do you sort through this information and
better yet, how do you decide which information is useful and which is not? Which information
comes from a responsible scholar who's done some thorough research and which comes from
someone who has some crazy theory and it's all built out of wild conjecture? That's the
tough part, and I'm going to try and give you some tips to make this a little easier. There's
absolutely a time and a place for internet research, and I will admit right up front
that I use the internet all the time for all kinds of research. At the same time, however,
relying on the internet as your sole source of information can be dangerous. Remember,
anyone can post anything they want on the internet, and there's really no way to fact
check what you find unless you, guess what, do a whole lot more research and not just
on the internet. For example, last week I did a Google search for King Arthur. The first
page to come up is one for a company called King Arthur Flour. They make very fine flour
for all your baking needs, including Queen Guinevere Cake Flour, Sir Lancelot High Gluten
Flour, et cetera, et cetera. But that's not going to help anyone trying to do a research
paper on King Arthur. The next page that comes up after King Arthur Flour is the Wikipedia
page for King Arthur. Now, nine times out of ten, I have found that the information on
Wikipedia is more or less reliable, but this is also a source that can be altered by anyone.
It's not rigorously fact checked in terms of the way that the academic world would think
rigorous fact checking should be done, and Wikipedia entries can be slanted depending
on the interests of the person writing the entry. You might look here, certainly, for
an overview of information, but I'll tell you right now, if you are writing a college
paper or an article for a magazine, citing Wikipedia as a source will not earn you any
points with your professors or your editors. Okay, so after the Wikipedia site, there's
a website dedicated to the movie King Arthur, which starred Clive Owen along with some images
of him as King Arthur, and these are lovely to look at, but they're not going to help
you with your research paper. Next comes the Britannia source for info on King Arthur. As
an academic source, this is pretty reliable, but it doesn't do much to give you a handle
on whatever specific topic you want to research, except it can serve as a really basic starting
point. Obviously, your research is going to turn up a few other sites. One of these is
the website of Arthuriana, the premier scholarly journal on all things Arthurian, and full
disclosure here, I have recently become the editor in chief of this journal, and I think
it's very, very important and does very good work of providing the world with the latest
solid research on all things Arthurian. The website of Arthuriana has links to pages
with resources on teaching. It's got a list of key texts for anyone interested in the
Arthurian tradition, and you can also subscribe to the electronic version of the journal,
and that gives you access to the latest scholarly research on the legend of King Arthur. Now,
obviously, as an academic website, this is a reliable source, both for basic information
and to guide you to other reliable sources of more specific information. But in my Google
search, this site was immediately followed by the website of a guy who thinks he's the
reincarnation of Arthur, and then that was followed by a site that publishes Arthurian
fan fiction. Fan fiction is when people rewrite stories or imagine new episodes of a well-known
long-established story. If you're trying to write a scholarly essay on Arthur, obviously
those sites aren't going to help you any. So, what are some clues that sources online
might be reliable and might point you in the right direction? Well, one clue would be if
the site has an EDU ending. This would tend to mean that the website and its author are
affiliated with the university, where people, you know, make a living studying these kinds
of things. But you do have to be careful that you're dealing with an official site edited
by a scholar and not a student at the same university simply posting his or her thoughts
on the topic. The same criteria apply for print sources that have an online component.
If you want to research microbes in space, you can bet that you'll find the most reliable
information in a scientific journal like Nature. Fairly reliable information, although perhaps
not as scientifically detailed, you might find on the website for the New York Times.
And if you find an article on microbes in space in the National Enquirer, well, obviously
you're probably going to want to stay far, far away from that. You also absolutely want
to stay away from those sites that claim to be able to sell you research papers on a variety
of topics. These are simply thinly disguised tools, or I would say in many cases they're
not even disguised at all, for helping people plagiarize. The quality of the papers on these
sites is not very good. It's a total waste of time and money. Now, other reliable sources
of information would be long established scholarly entities like the Encyclopedia Britannica
or the Oxford English Dictionary. Things like that.
Okay, so let's go back to our hypothetical example of the research paper on Arthurian
literature. So the web, obviously, is just a starting point. For this kind of writing,
I can't stress enough how important it is to actually get into the library. Many electronic
resources that would be helpful with a project like this can only be accessed from libraries.
There are a lot of different databases out there that can help you with this kind of
writing, and there are many databases geared toward particular fields. For example, for
a paper like this, I tell my students to do a search for their topic in the MLA or Modern
Language Association database, or else the Arts and Humanities Citation Index, or there
are some full text databases like Project News and JSTOR. Nearly every field of interest
has specialized databases for reliable information in that field. In my field, literature, the
MLA database is the gold standard, and there are several other good ones as well. You should
find out what the most useful databases are for your field of interest, and if you're
not sure, ask a librarian. Databases come and go, they change, they get updated, but
these are not entities with minds or self-awareness. Librarians make it their business to keep up
with the changes, to be able to listen to what you're working on and help you find the
sources that will best help you at that moment. In this age of amazing computer technology,
the human factor often gets overlooked, but remember, librarians have experience. They
know the idiosyncrasies of this or that database, and they're there to help you, so please ask
them for help, as they can certainly, at the very least, guide you to the database that's
going to be of most help to you, and they're going to help you get there much more quickly
than you could find it on your own. Okay, so once you've got a range of books and articles,
you're going to want to get your hands on as many of them as possible. Sometimes this
is really easy. You check to see if your local library has one of the books on your list,
the library's catalog says it does, and off you go to pull it off the shelf. Now here's
something to remember as you're wandering the stacks of your library, looking for a
particular call number. Once you find the book you're looking for, don't just take it
off the shelf and walk away. You really should take a moment to stop and look at what books
are around the one that you just grabbed. Very often what you'll find is that there
are other books in this same area which are related to your topic, and some of them may
in fact have not come up in your initial database search for a variety of reasons. I learned
this lesson when I was in graduate school and I was working on my dissertation. Once,
while I was in the library to get a book, I noticed that there was this series of monographs
on the shelf that were directly related to my main topic. There was just one shelf above
the book that I was actually looking for. So while I was there, I grabbed those books
as well as the one I had originally come in search of. I checked them out and I found
these unexpected monographs to be really helpful. A few months later, sometime after
I'd returned them, I realized that I wanted to look at one of them again. I knew what
the title was, so I went back to my library and I did a search in the catalog to find
the location of the book so I could check it out again. When I searched for the title,
it did come up. So I tried the next approach. I searched for the editor's name, and luckily
I remembered this name as well. No luck. I then tried a keyword search, no dice. And
finally what saved me is that I remembered the book that I had been looking for before
when initially I had accidentally stumbled across these texts. So I did a search for
that book, the one that I had originally looked for. I got the location, went back to the
general area, and then I looked at the shelves around nearby until I found the book that
I had wanted. So this is a good lesson. Some things aren't always easily found or accessible
when you do database searches in it. You really should take the time to look around you.
On a related note, when you're conducting research, you may get a hold of an article
or book that you thought was going to be helpful, but it's clear from the first page or so,
it doesn't actually relate directly to your topic. Do not just put it down and forget
about it. Before you set aside an article or book and you decide that it's really not
going to be helpful for your research project, you really should spend a few minutes perusing
the notes and the works cited section. Very often when you do this, you might find a reference
to another article or book or a point being made that does relate to what you're working
on. In fact, in several instances, I have found the notes and the bibliography of a
book or an article to be more helpful than the content of that article itself.
Okay, so now that we've covered some basics of research, let's go back to our specific
example of the research paper on Arthurian literature. Again, the techniques I'm discussing
here are easily translated to research for other kinds of writing. It's not just for
the scholarly essay, but by using this one specific example, I hope you can see how this
approach can work in practice. So let's examine some possible topics for this paper.
How about the figure of King Arthur in literature? Okay, obviously this is way too broad for
a paper like this. You could write a book or five or 12 on this topic alone. So we've
got to narrow that. So let's try again. How about the figure of King Arthur in medieval
literature? Okay, that's more specific, but once you start researching, you'll probably
again realize that this could fill an entire book or more. So we need to get a little more
specific. What if we went with the characterization of King Arthur and Sir Thomas Mallory's Mort
d'Arture? This is closer to what we're looking for. It focuses on just one text and just
one character, but Mallory's text is over 700 pages long in paperback. So this topic
is probably still too big for, say, a college level research paper. If we were dealing with
a shorter text, something like the medieval text Sir Gowan in the Green Night, then an
analysis of the character of King Arthur in just that one text might work, but in this
case, it doesn't. Now, it's possible that you can go too far toward the opposite end
of the spectrum, and you can have topics that are far too narrow. For example, you could
think, all right, I'll focus in on a key scene, and I'll do a topic like the importance
of the moment when Arthur pulls the sword from the stone in Mallory's text. This is
possibly workable, but you may run out of things to say well before the end. A more
satisfactory topic might be something like the significance of the shift in Arthur's
character once he's founded the order of the round table. This topic has as its main focus
a particular moment in Mallory's text, but then it also leaves you free to discuss moments
both before and after it. In other words, it's focused, but it can be expanded. It's
flexible while still having a great deal of specificity, and you can adequately address
it in sort of the length that you might expect a college level research paper to be. Now,
at the beginning of this lecture, I talked about the importance of having some kind of
research schedule, of setting yourself some deadlines to help motivate you as you move
through the process of writing. So how long do you think you should give yourself to work
on a project like this? Well, first of all, as you can imagine, everyone works at a different
pace. Some people read quickly. Some people have great retention when they read. Others
need to go back and reread some things a few times to really get the gist of what's
important or key in terms of your topic or goal. But for an assignment like this, I would
estimate that most people, depending on how many hours per day they can devote to it and
how familiar they are with the topic to start with, I am estimating that this paper could
get done in about two weeks. One week to do research, take notes, start to brainstorm
the structure of the paper, and then maybe another week to take everything you've read
and make use of it in your argument. Now to be sure, these two activities, researching
and writing, are necessarily going to overlap. But it's important to have an idea of how
long the one and the other will generally last. At a certain point when you're still
researching, you may get a really clear idea of how you want to open your essay or short
story or magazine article. Now, should you not start writing just because you're not
into your writing week yet? Of course not. If you feel inspired to write, you should
start while keeping in mind that you may change what you've written or you might throw it
out altogether once you've done a little more research. Or you may come across a quote that
you want to use as one of your supporting points that would occur midway through the
paper. By all means, go ahead, write it down and do some drafting of the way you're going
to use this point in your argument. By the same token, at a certain point you may have
to make yourself stop reading and start writing. When you're researching, you may feel that
you just can't write yet. There's so much more you could read. And it's important to
remember that that's always going to be true. There is always something else you can read.
There's always more research you can do. But at some point, you're going to have to put
down the book and you're going to have to put the pen to the paper or your fingers to
the keyboard, as the case may be. And when you start writing in earnest, you're going
to need to be able to have all that research you spent so much time collecting easily accessible
so that you can use all that stuff that you looked up online, that you tracked down at
the library, that you found through perusing footnotes and you read and reread and reread.
In our next lecture, we'll talk about putting all your research efforts to work as you start
the process of writing.
