Welcome back. In our last two lectures, we discussed the process of conducting and using
research. Whether you're writing a magazine article or a short story, an essay for class,
or a presentation for work, there are very few types of writing that wouldn't benefit
from a little research. So in lecture 18, we discussed how to go about acquiring information,
and in lecture 19, we discussed how to use that information once you've found it, paying
particular attention to things like issues of concern that pop up like proper attribution
and avoiding plagiarism. But sometimes the hardest part of producing a polished piece
of writing is in fact simply the act of getting started. The blank screen on the computer
or the blank sheet of paper in front of you can seem particularly daunting if you have
several ideas and you're unsure where to start, or even worse if you know you need to compose
something and you feel as if you have no ideas, let alone how to begin organizing them into
a persuasive piece of text. This lecture will help introduce some techniques that can make
starting a piece of writing seem a little less formidable than might at first seem to
be the case. Today we'll talk about how to get your pen moving or your fingers clicking
across the keyboard. I found that once I get started, as long as I have a clear idea in
my head about what I want to say and how I want to say it, the writing process is easier
and even becomes fun once I get past the initial hurdle and I'm a couple of paragraphs in.
But that's me. You might be totally different. You might be the kind of person who gets going
but runs out of steam partway through. So the first thing to do and arguably the most
important thing is to try and get a sense of what kind of person and what kind of writer
you are. Take a moment. Try to think about how you might describe yourself. Do you prefer
organization? Do you have a label maker that you use regularly? Do you work better with
materials strewn around so that they're within easy reach or do you like things put neatly
away so you can find them again? As I've said repeatedly and as you're probably getting
really tired of hearing me say, no matter what kind of writer you are, it's important
that you give yourself time whenever you're starting a new writing project. That means
whenever possible, don't begin something the night before it needs to be handed in or mailed
off. To produce a really polished piece of writing, you might give yourself three days.
Set aside one day for brainstorming or prewriting, one for drafting the letter or the short
essay or whatever other document it is that you need to produce and then one day for revising.
If you don't have three days and despite the best of intentions, all of us at one point
or another find ourselves trying to write something the night before the deadline. In
that case, if you don't have three days, try to at least give yourself three breaks. Maybe
take a short break after brainstorming. Then give yourself an hour off after writing the
first draft and then give yourself at least another hour, if not a whole night, between
the initial composition and the revision process. We'll talk more about revision in a later
lecture but I can't stress enough how important it is to try to look at your writing with
fresh eyes at some point in the process. And that means even if you just set the first
draft aside, go out for a walk and then pick it up again, that little time away from it
can help you to see your writing in a more objective and critical light. It helps to
give you enough distance from it so that you can make it the best it can be.
Let's take an example from earlier in the course. Let's say you've been given an assignment
to write an argumentative essay about the short story, The Yellow Wallpaper by Charlotte
Perkins Gilman and we discussed that in a few lectures earlier in this course. We focused
particularly on it in lecture five where we talked about fiction, finding your voice
and having respect for your audience. And as you may remember, this story is told in
the first person. It's as if we're reading the main character's diary and what the diary
chronicles is her descent into insanity. It's a decline that seems to be triggered and sped
up in part by this hideous yellow wallpaper in the narrator's bedroom.
So let's say the assignment is wide open. You have to write on the yellow wallpaper but
you have no idea where to begin. First, you'll need to do some brainstorming and you have
to try and find out what really intrigues you about this text. Again, you need to find
a hook or a weigh in. So take a moment and given what you know about the yellow wallpaper,
you might make a quick list and it might look something like this. These are just some
ideas I jotted down quickly. You might write on a piece of paper one, narrative style interesting.
Story is told in the first person by an unreliable narrator. Two, clues at certain moments contribute
to major impact at the end. Narrator grows more and more obsessed with yellow wallpaper.
Three, increasingly ominous tone. Narrator at first describes room as a former nursery,
but details make it sound more like some type of prison. Bed is bolted to the floor, bars
on the windows, rings attached to the walls. Four, problematic conclusion. We shift from
reading her words on the page to reading her thoughts. Problem with consistency.
Five, issue of gender. Much of the plot seems to hinge on the fact that doctor has prescribed
strict rest for narrator, but the treatment specifically geared toward a woman seems to
be making things worse rather than better. Okay, so there you have a list of five interesting
things. Some of these overlap and now you have to find a way to craft an argument based
on the list of things you found compelling or interesting about the text. So what interests
you the most? Well, it might be the unreliable narrator and the way that Charlotte Perkins-Gillman
makes a mistake, asking us essentially to ignore the fact that she moves near the end
from giving us the narrator's written thoughts to giving us her actual thoughts. But it might
be that although this is a story about insanity, it's really a story about gender and the
different ways that gender can cause doctors to treat their patients. Just a little bit
of research into Charlotte Perkins-Gillman's life reveals that this does indeed seem to
be one of the things that interested her and encouraged her or inspired her to write this
story. Any biographical information on Charlotte Perkins-Gillman contains the fact that after
suffering from postpartum depression, her doctor ordered her to undergo a rest cure,
which is very much like the one described in this story. She was forbidden to write
or to really take care of her child and it's a situation that she later said drove her
right to the brink of insanity. She stated on numerous occasions that the only way she
pulled herself out of this state was to do the opposite of what her doctor had ordered.
Most importantly, she started writing again. This experience convinced her that medicine
at the time, with its emphasis on the idea that women had delicate constitutions, actually
contributed to making them subservient to men, contributed to preserving the status quo
of gender inequality at the time. So after doing this little bit of research, you may
have some idea that this is a topic to which you can do some justice. Your main focus is
manageable, it's a single short story, but there looks to be a fair amount in the way
of secondary sources that you could use to help you with your research. So to guide you
as you start writing, you might choose something like this as your main idea or thesis.
Quote, although on the surface Charlotte Perkins Gilman short story The Yellow Wallpaper
is about one woman's decline into insanity, closer analysis reveals that it is really
a critique of gender relations in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Okay, so what next? Well, your next step would be to find some key pieces of evidence supporting
your point. And here you want to make use both of what we call primary and secondary sources.
And I've mentioned these terms before. The primary source is the original piece of writing,
the short story itself. And the secondary sources would be books and or articles about
Charlotte Perkins Gilman and about this particular short story.
So first, you might reread the story carefully noting any instances of what seem to be references
to the matter of gender. You might highlight the passage where the narrator mentions that
she and her husband have retreated to the country to help her quote, get well, or the
moment where she says there's a nurse who's responsible for caring for her young child
and that the journal she's keeping is written on the sly. More than once the narrator makes
references to the fact that she needs to keep her writing hidden as she's not supposed
to be writing a word. So with this as your base, you might turn to any secondary sources
you found. Here you might copy onto your note cards or into your note file what other critics
have said on this topic, especially how they analyze certain scenes in the story. And you
might certainly look at biographical data, evidence of relevant events in the author's
life, and indeed her own comments on the story itself. She made several. And so from here
you have a decent argumentative framework that you can fill in with your own argument
about the topic. This same process can work in a variety of other situations like if you're
writing a letter applying for a job. First, you might do some free writing or brainstorming.
For example, you might make a list of the specific qualifications that the job requires.
And then you might make another list of your own qualifications. A list like this can help
you figure out how to organize your letter. Maybe you're currently a gardener, but you
want to apply for a job as an editorial assistant. Should you mention your current job as a gardener
first? Or maybe should you mention before that the fact that you were an English major
in college and that you wrote for your college's newspaper? Obviously, while you certainly
should discuss your current job and there's no reason to hide it, you don't want that
to be the first thing you mention in a letter like this because you're not applying for
a job as a gardener. And as with the yellow wallpaper example, you might want to do a
little research, research about the company to which you're applying. Maybe you'll discover
that you and the CEO are from the same small town in the Midwest or that you went to the
same college. As long as you can manage it without seeming awkward or forced, it might
be helpful to include these details in your letter. So instead of writing, when I was
in college, I wrote for my school's newspaper, you might write, during my junior year at
St. Excellence College, I was a reporter for the St. Excellence Daily, the campus paper.
Now, right about now, you may be saying, okay, that's all well and good, but I am feeling
blocked about even beginning the brainstorming stage. So I'll give you a few strategies that
have worked for me and for friends and colleagues of mine. And in doing this, I'm probably going
to reveal far too much about what will appear to be my own neuroses, but I hope you won't
mind indulging me just for a moment or so. So one thing that works against all of us,
as we attempt to get started with the process of writing, is the desire to produce a really
good piece of prose. On the surface, this might seem totally contradictory. Wanting
to do something well actually makes it harder to do it. But when confronted with a challenge
that seems particularly daunting, the desire to do well can make it seem totally impossible.
And sometimes, in order to get to the good writing, you have to slog through some garbage.
In other words, one way to get to a point where you produce something decent, something
good, is to give yourself permission to write poorly. Now, giving yourself this permission
can really be liberating. It allows you to scribble or type ideas or points in no particular
order with poor grammar, bad spelling, incomplete sentences. The key here is to simply get whatever
ideas you have out of your head and onto the paper. One thing that can help you get started
with this deliberately bad writing is to set a time limit on yourself. Let's say you have
the whole day to write an essay or letter. Now, in some ways, this can actually hinder
you from getting started because you think, well, I have all day. I'll empty the dishwasher
first or I'll do the laundry. And then pretty soon, you're organizing all your closets,
you've cleaned out the refrigerator, you've alphabetized and arranged all your books according
to the Dewey Decimal System, and you're using a label maker. And you're labeling things
like timer or microwave, things that don't need labels. Okay, so this is where leaving
yourself enough time ahead of due dates can work in your best interest. If you start three
days before something is due, on the first day, it might help you if you actually set
a limit and say, for example, today, I am only allowed to write for one hour and then I have
to stop. Setting these kinds of boundaries can actually motivate you to start. The task
has a definite ending time, so it might be nice to get it out of the way. Then you sit
down at your desk or at the computer and you can write on the topic in any way you like.
You would be amazed at how productive you can be if you've told yourself, I only have
an hour or I get to stop as soon as I've done my hour. Okay, so now, you may think this
next part is a little nuts, but I took this approach to extreme lengths when I was working
on my PhD dissertation. What helped me initially was that I had a really supportive understanding
professor as my major professor and director of my dissertation. I had finished my coursework,
I had passed my written and my oral exams, and then I was supposed to start writing my
dissertation and I was utterly paralyzed. I took up knitting, which conveniently took
up some time when I should have been researching or writing, and my apartment was spotless.
After about a month of this, my dissertation director called me and he said that I needed
to bring him 8 to 10 pages of something the following Friday. This something, he said
on my answering machine, would most likely be terrible. He actually said this, I should
have saved the message, it's a great message, but anyway, this is probably going to be awful
and that's fine. We have to start somewhere and probably somewhere in the terribleness
of the 8 to 10 pages I brought him, we'd find a good idea that we could start working with.
So I showed up at his office at 9 a.m. on Friday and I handed him my 8 and a half pages
of what I was sure was the worst garbage ever written on the legend of King Arthur in the
Middle Ages and it was pretty bad. Maybe not the worst, but it came close.
But my director was right and giving myself permission to write poorly quickly became
liberating as I figured out a way to keep my momentum up. So after we talked about it,
my professor was able to help me pick out what was useful or interesting in that chunk
of bad writing and then I could keep going. The strategy that I then used was to tell
myself that I needed to write a certain number of hours per day at least five days a week.
And I tried to figure that in a typical eight hour work day, maybe about four of those are
actual serious work. So I decided to start small and I set myself what seemed at first
to be this really manageable paltry goal of just 20 hours a week. But those were 20 real
hours. So when I sat down at my desk every day, and here's where the crazy comes in,
when I sat down at my desk, I noted the time on a small note card. I then read, I wrote,
I reread, I edited until there was some sort of interruption. Let's say the phone rang
or I wanted to get myself something to drink. When that interruption happened, I immediately
noted the time on the note card and then I added up the minutes that I had worked so
far. So if I started working at 8am and the phone rang at 8.06, I had done six minutes
out of the 240 that were my goal for that day. What I discovered pretty quickly is that this
approach made me want to start sooner because I told myself that once I had done my 240
minutes, I was free to do whatever else I wanted or whatever else I needed. I could
prepare for the classes I was teaching that semester, I could go to the gym, I could knit
for a while, whatever. And pretty soon, it became a game. More often than not, when
I reached the four hour mark, I was in the middle of an interesting idea or I was writing
down what I thought was a particularly good insight and I didn't want to stop. So what
did I do with those extra minutes that I was working? Well, I told myself, if I work some
more minutes now, I can work fewer tomorrow. And then I began thinking, what if I do eight
solid hours of dissertation work today? Why, I could take all of tomorrow off. And then
on weekends, even though I technically had given myself permission not to do any work,
I figured I could get a little work done and then I could count that time toward the next
week's total. You can see what's happening here. Pretty soon I was in this steady rhythm
and I was playing mind games with myself and imagining that I could get so much work done
that I could take a whole month off. And then the next thing I knew, the dissertation was
done. I still find this approach useful today when I have a chunk of substantial writing
and research to do. If I'm working on an article or a book chapter, I set myself a goal of
a certain number of minutes per day or hours per week and I try to meet that. And even
if I don't quite make it, it's still an excellent motivator that helps me to be more productive.
My husband says he always knows whenever I'm working on a writing project because he finds
little slips of paper all over the house that have times and numbers of minutes written
on them. Now, part of what makes this approach particularly useful is something I like to
call the scatter shot approach. In other words, you throw all your ideas out of your head
and onto the page with little or no concern for order, spelling, grammar, all that important
stuff and you leave the unholy mess there and then you return to it after some time
away. After a break, and remember we've talked at considerable length about how important
it is to take a break and come back to your writing with what I like to call fresh eyes,
after some time away, you can come back and take a look at what you've written and then
you can start to think about how the pieces that you've put on the page could be rearranged
into something that you hope resembles a coherent argument. Another thing to realize is that
very often the process of writing itself can help you figure out what it is you're trying
to say. I cannot tell you how often I see students who hand in a paper that begins a
little wobbly, but by the end they've expressed some wonderfully original insight that they
didn't have when they started. This phenomenon is called writing your way to an argument
and while this is wonderful, what would be ideal is if this happened in the first draft
of a paper or an article or a letter and that the writer then had time to go back and revise,
keeping that insight they achieved at the end as the guiding force that now drives the
paper forward. On these papers I inevitably end up writing something in the margins like
as a first draft this is an A, as a final draft more like a B minus. You need to give
yourself time to play with your argument because often that is how you discover what it is
that is really important about what you're trying to say. Now even if you've moved past
the initial writer's block, starting your article or short essay or a short story or
a letter can still be really difficult. If you find yourself just totally paralyzed because
you're struggling to figure out where to start with your writing, my advice and I've
mentioned this before, my advice is always don't begin at the beginning. I had a good
friend in graduate school and she and I regularly exchanged pieces of our writing. Every week
usually on Thursdays we give each other ten pages or so and then we met the next day on
Friday afternoon to comment on and critique each other's work and have a talk about it.
And without exception the first two pages of everything my friend wrote were somewhat
awkward, the language was clunky, it was kind of stilted but then by page three it was as
if a completely different person was writing. By page three her argument was humming along,
her style had improved appreciably and by the end she usually had produced an excellent
piece of writing that was articulate, witty and original and ultimately that's the kind
of writing we all want to produce. What she and I both learned from this experience is
that sometimes you leave the first for last, skip the introduction and get right to the
meat of the argument. When you've made the claims that you want to make and you've summed
up everything in a satisfying conclusion then you can return and you can write an introduction
that will probably be much smoother and more pleasing to read than the one that you struggled
to write for so long that you tore your hair out over and you've done all this work, all
this sweating, this expended all this effort before you've even gotten to the meat of
your argument. So it can really actually detract from your overall argument if you spend too
much time on the introduction and it's just not coming. And by the way, finding a writing
partner or a writing support group is a great way to get yourself motivated. If you know
that you have a deadline when you actually have to hand something to someone else who
will in turn be passing something he or she has written to you for your comments, most
people usually manage to get some words down on the page. Serving as a reader for someone
else's work can also make you a better writer. As you edit a friend's writing or a colleague's
writing, as you're looking for the thesis, as you're circling supporting points that
really aren't fully or satisfactorily fleshed out or supported, you're also learning more
about writing in a way that you can apply to your own work and you can apply it almost
immediately. As I've suggested several times before, if you want to improve your writing,
read as much as you can. The more you read and write, the better you'll get at both.
Now for some people, getting to the meat of the argument is the most important thing.
But for others, composing an effective piece of writing comes much more easily if you get
the bones, if we want to call them that, the bones of the piece down first. Some people
work better with an outline, even if it's just tentative and you've told yourself, okay,
this may change, but some people at least have an outline as a guide. It can help them
as they move through their argument. Now when I say outline, this could be anything from
the sort of classic Roman numeral followed by capital letter type of outline that a lot
of us learned how to create when we were in school. Or it could just simply be a quick
jotting down of main point, supporting points, evidence, and conclusion. At the other end
of the scatter shot approach that works for me at the other end of the spectrum, there
are those few people who move clearly and logically straight through whatever the writing
piece is with no need for substantial tweaking and editing. My roommate, my freshman year
college was this way. And this was back in the days before computers were common and
occasionally I would type up her handwritten papers for her as she didn't type and I did.
Her papers were clearly structured. They were methodically organized. They moved logically
from point to point and her writing never showed signs of difficulty or struggle. And
I was insanely jealous of this fact every time I typed her papers up because it felt
like I had to work a whole lot harder to produce something. And my husband, who's also a college
professor, he writes this way as well. He spends what feels like, to me, like a really
long time working on, say, just an introductory paragraph or the discussion of a key quote
that supports a claim he's trying to make. At the end of an hour of work, he may have
produced one paragraph while I've generated four pages with my scatter shot approach.
But his careful attentiveness and his precision means that he almost never has to go back
and do any substantial editing or rewriting while my approach means that I always do.
When he reaches the end of a paragraph of an article or a chapter, he's pretty much finished
except for maybe some very minor revising. Now, when I reach the concluding point of
what I want to say, when I reach that final paragraph, it means that the serious work
of editing and restructuring is still before me. He and I simply work differently, although
we both manage to be quite productive. And here again, it's just a matter of figuring
out what kind of writing temperament you have and then using an approach that works best
for you. Okay, but what to do if you're just totally
blocked and you can't figure out how to move forward? Well, this may sound like contradictory
advice, but I've found that it works. Get away from the computer or the desk and do
something physical. Studies have found that physical activity doesn't just help your body,
it helps your brain. So in the middle of a paper or a short story, when you're stuck
on a particular point, get out of the house and go for a walk or a run or put your notebook
in your pocket and go for a short walk. And I bet you 15 minutes in, an idea will come
to you that has something to do with your project. And you'll have your notebook right
there so you can be ready to jot it down. The husband and wife writers, Michael Shebon
and Islett Waldman, talk about how when they're stuck with their own writing, they go on what
they like to call plot walks together. And the late science fiction writer, Isaac Asimov,
said that whenever he was totally stuck, he'd go to the movies. He said it had to be a movie
that would engage his consciousness without asking his subconscious to do too much work.
In other words, something like an action movie or a romantic comedy. A bleak documentary
or a foreign film with subtitles was not going to work for him. He said that without
fail, this strategy allowed his subconscious to do some work on the problem he was encountering
in his writing. And that when he left the theater, nine times out of ten, he'd hit on
a way to move forward. Now obviously the danger here is that you could spend a lot of time
going to movies and then you could claim that you're working. But if you use this strategy
judiciously, it really can help. I hope that you found some of my strategies for overcoming
writer's block helpful. And I hope you don't think I'm completely neurotic although I wouldn't
blame you. I mean, seriously, counting your minutes does sound a little extreme. But as
I said, once I started doing this and it became a kind of game, my dissertation moved very
quickly to completion. Your task is to find out what makes writing possible for you.
Now that we've discussed how to get an early draft down on paper, we're going to turn our
attention in our next lecture to editing that draft and making it as strong and persuasive
and compelling as it can be.
