Welcome back. In our last lecture, we wrapped up our discussion of the revision process,
one of the most important but also most overlooked stages of producing an effectively written piece.
Many of the strategies discussed in lectures 21 and 22 are also useful tools for avoiding the common errors in grammar and punctuation that we're going to discuss today.
For example, in our last lecture, we talked about how important it is to set aside a piece of writing,
even if it's just for an hour or so, and then return to it with fresh eyes, allowing you to better spot places that need revision.
Even better is to ask for someone else to look it over for you, whether it's a business letter or a resume or a magazine article.
Having someone with some distance from the piece can help you identify moments that are perhaps confusing or unclear.
If your friendly reader has trouble understanding a point you've made or how your argument is moving,
then you can be sure that the intended audience of the writing is most likely going to have some trouble with that as well.
And of course, one of the easiest and quickest ways to spot errors, awkward moments, confusing turns of phrase and typos is simply to read your piece out loud.
Reading aloud forces you to slow down and your eye is less likely to skip over a typo like a misspelling or even a missing word.
Those are things which can happen when you're reading your own work silently to yourself.
Today, we're going to start to focus on some more specific common errors for which every good conscientious writer should check when doing a final revision.
This is a topic I think that we could probably spend several hours on, but in the interest of time, I'd like to limit myself today to ten of the most common errors that I've seen
in my experience teaching college-level writing over the past decade or so.
I've selected these errors because I see them crop up again and again and again.
And what I would love more than anything in the world is to never see them again.
The errors I'm going to discuss in the next few moments are issues to which writers should be attentive no matter the audience.
And I'd like to begin with the common error that I personally find the most distressing.
And that is the incorrect use of I when it should be me and vice versa.
So let me start by asking you to consider which of the following two sentences is correct.
It was such a wonderful time for Michelle and I, or it was such a wonderful time for Michelle and me.
Which one uses the first person pronoun correctly?
The answer is the second sentence. It was such a wonderful time for Michelle and me.
If we can stray into the world of grammar rules for a moment, the reason that the second sentence is correct is because the compound object Michelle and me is the object of the preposition for.
And because of this, the first person pronoun has to be in what we call the objective case.
Now here you need to remain aware of the difference between what we call the subject and the object form of a pronoun.
For example, I is the subject form, me is the object, he is the subject, him is the object, she is the subject, her is the object, we is the subject, and us is the object.
You get the idea, I think.
Here are another two sentences. She loves her, or her loves she.
Now I'm sure your ear can tell you right away that the first sentence is correct.
She is the subject of the sentence, so the pronoun is in the subject case.
Her is the object of the verb loves, so it is in the object case.
Now while it's useful to know the rule, and I think it's a good idea to invest in a comprehensive grammar book that you can consult when you're writing and you get stuck or you're unsure,
it's also possible to use your ear in most cases to figure out the correct usage.
For example, an easier way to check for the correctness of our first example would be to take Michelle and me and make it singular.
So here are those two sentences again. It was such a wonderful time for I, or it was such a wonderful time for me.
For most of us, we don't even need to know the rule. Our ear tells us that the second sentence is correct.
And once you know that, you're fine. The rule doesn't change when just me becomes Michelle and me.
Now let's invert this sentence and see what happens, which is correct.
Me and Michelle had a great time, or Michelle and I had a great time.
In this example, we have a compound subject, and so the pronoun would be in the subject case, and that's I.
Again, you can check this by ear simply by making the subject singular.
Me had a great time, or I had a great time.
The first sounds a little like caveman dialogue in a bad B movie.
The second one sounds so right that any native speaker of English wouldn't even have to think twice.
But let's take a slightly trickier example. Which one is correct?
Just between you and me, or just between you and I?
Now here, you can't simply do an ear check, and in this case, knowing the rule is what will save you.
Between, just like the word for in that first example, is a preposition,
and prepositions need to be followed by pronouns that are in the object case.
So the correct answer is just between you and me.
I think that's what has happened, is that many people mistakenly believe that the use of I is somehow more formal,
so they use it in an attempt to sound educated and sophisticated.
The misuse of I when it should be me has become so common that I have heard CEOs,
university presidents, and heads of state use it incorrectly,
and for a time actually the grammar check on a popular email software program was miscorrecting me to I.
Just because it's misuse is widespread, however, does not mean that there are not plenty of people who do understand how it should be used,
and any number of those people might be potential employers to whom you send a cover letter and resume,
or teachers to whom you submit an essay.
I personally know of a few instances when a candidate was actually removed from consideration for a position,
simply because this misuse appeared in the cover letter when the candidate applied for the particular position.
So I can't stress enough how important it is to get this correct.
The second common error I want to address also relates to pronouns,
and it's something called subject pronoun agreement.
To illustrate this issue, let's examine another two sentences.
Here's the first one.
If a person has a complaint, he or she should contact the Human Resources Department,
and here's sentence two.
If a person has a complaint, they should contact the Human Resources Department.
Okay, sentence two sounds simpler, and it's more economical,
but in fact that's the sentence that is incorrect.
The reason is that person is singular, but they is plural.
In other words, they don't agree.
That sentence could easily be corrected by simply turning person into people.
If people have complaints, they should contact the Human Resources Department.
People and they are both plural, and thus they agree.
By using a sentence like, if a person has a complaint, he or she should contact the Human Resources Department.
Not only do you manage to have your pronouns agree, person, he and she are all singular,
but you also avoid the pitfall of using what we call gender exclusive language,
and that's the third common error of which you should be aware.
Now when I was in school, I was taught that when you were trying to get your pronouns to agree,
it was all right to use he to stand in for the universal subject.
Thus the sentence, if a person has a complaint, he should contact the Human Resources Department,
would be considered correct, as it's understood here that in this sentence, he is referring to all people, not just men.
The masculine here was working in the same way that mankind is understood to refer to all humanity.
Now, as a female myself, this didn't seem quite fair to me when I learned it as a high school student,
and by the time I got to college, the grammar police, whoever they are, seemed to agree,
and thus it was suggested that subject pronoun agreement be achieved by composing sentences like,
if a person has a complaint, he or she should contact the Human Resources Department.
This solution also seemed somewhat unsatisfactory, as did the more streamlined,
if a person has a complaint, she he, with the S in parentheses before he,
she he should contact the Human Resources Department.
I was obviously not the only one who found this solution somewhat awkward and unwieldy,
and I've been told by some of my recent college students that their high school teachers have instructed them
to use the plural pronoun they, even if it's paired with a singular subject like person.
The idea here would be to try not to offend anyone,
and it works except for the fact that it really offends anyone who cares about proper grammar.
Today, I think the smartest thing to do is try and follow the rules about subject pronoun agreement
and gender-inclusive language as closely as possible.
The easiest way to do this is to use a plural construction throughout.
If people have complaints, they should contact the Human Resources Department.
Or if you're really committed to using the singular form, the word one works nicely.
If one has a complaint, one should contact the Human Resources Department.
Now, you may be wondering right about now why I don't suggest using you.
If you have a complaint, you should contact, etc., etc.
Because this is a rather informal lecture,
it's technically okay for me to use you throughout as I address you, my audience.
There's a difference, however, between the spoken and the written word
and informal writing, like in an essay.
You is generally not considered proper form.
In a cover letter to a business, however, it makes perfect sense to say something like,
please contact me if you have questions or require additional information.
I look forward to hearing from you soon.
Another common error that I see all too frequently is the misuse of apostrophes.
This seems to be the most common punctuation error these days,
and it's at the top of my list of mechanical errors that personally drive me crazy.
Very frequently, students add apostrophes where they're not needed or they omit them altogether.
The construction that trips most people up is the tiny word it's in its various forms.
The problem here is that apostrophes can be used to show possession,
that something belongs to someone, and they are also used when we contract two words
and combine them as when we take cannot and make can't.
So let's take an easy example.
That is my aunt's house. Where does the apostrophe go?
A lot of you are probably thinking, oh, okay, that's easy enough.
The apostrophe goes between the T and the S in the word aunt.
And you're indicating that this is your aunt's house. It belongs to her.
Okay, but what if you have three aunts who all live together?
The same sentence, that is my aunt's house still works,
but you need to move the apostrophe to after the S to show that this house belongs to your multiple aunts.
But if we can return to its for a moment,
the problem is that there is one rule for how to write this when you are indicating possession,
and there's another rule when it's a contraction of it is.
When you turn it is into its, that is when you use an apostrophe.
If you are merely stating that something belongs to it, there is no apostrophe.
So consider the following sentence.
The snake shed its skin. Where does the apostrophe go?
Nowhere. How about this sentence?
It's interesting to watch a snake shed its skin.
Now, there needs to be an apostrophe in the first it's, but not the second.
The first it's is a contraction of it is, while the second one merely indicates possession.
The desire to place apostrophes where they are not needed has turned into some kind of disease,
and every day I see apostrophes misused on business signs, in letters, in emails, etc., etc.
For example, if you are sending out letters and want the return address to indicate that the letter comes from the Armstrong family,
how should you write the Armstrong's?
All too often I see return addresses or even address signs on houses that will add an apostrophe,
so Armstrong's becomes Armstrong's with an apostrophe between the G and the S.
This is incorrect. You are not indicating possession of anything or even a contraction.
No apostrophe is needed.
Now, one could argue that signs on houses are claiming ownership or possession,
and if that is the case, and you're saying that this is the Armstrong's house,
then really the apostrophe should go after the final S.
So one more time. In that case, an apostrophe is okay, but only if it comes after the final S.
So you spell out Armstrong's and tack an apostrophe on the end,
because this shows that the house is the home of all the Armstrong's and not just one Armstrong.
Recently I was in a coffee shop, and this business had a sign on display saying that they could do resumes
posters and other documents, and each word had an apostrophe before that final S.
Every single apostrophe was unnecessary, and it did not make me feel inclined to trust them with any of my copying needs.
Adding to this feeling was another small sign they had near the cash register, which said,
and I quote, at our store our customers' needs come first.
There was no apostrophe in the sentence. Think about it for a second.
Should there be, and where should it go?
The answer is yes, there needs to be an apostrophe, and it needs to come after the final S of customers,
since the management is discussing how they would deal with the needs of the customers.
The apostrophe is needed to show possession.
I could talk about misused apostrophes all day, but suffice it to say,
this is an area in your writing that will always need close attention,
and I would suggest again reference to a good book on grammar and punctuation just to make sure you haven't made any mistakes.
One easy rule to remember is possessive nouns always use an apostrophe, but possessive pronouns never do.
Almost as problematic as misused apostrophes is number five on our list of errors,
and this is the misused comma.
This is a major issue when it comes to writing elegantly and properly structured sentences.
In many of the papers I've graded in recent years,
commas seem to have simply been sprinkled randomly throughout, as if the student said to him or herself,
well, I probably need some commas, so I'll just stick a few in here and there.
Commas are most frequently used to separate ideas in a sentence,
to separate multiple adjectives describing the same thing,
and they can help prevent confusion when the meaning of a sentence would otherwise be unclear.
Let's start with that last issue, which has become something of a sensation
with the publication of Lynn Truss's humorous take on grammar and punctuation entitled,
Eats, Shoots, and Leaves, and I highly recommend this book.
The meaning of the following sentence should be clear.
The giant panda eats, shoots, and leaves.
Punctuated thusly, the sentence is telling us about the diet of a particular animal.
Pandas consume bamboo, shoots, and leaves.
But if we sprinkle in some commas and we get the giant panda eats, shoots, and leaves,
with commas where I've paused, the giant panda eats, shoots, and leaves,
while we then have a sentence describing how a single large animal consumes some food,
fired a gun, and then departed.
While this certainly might be a more interesting sentence than the first one,
we can be sure that the misuse of commas here has obscured what the writer originally intended to say.
Commas are also commonly misused in such a way as to produce what's called a run-on sentence,
or a comma splice.
This is an easy mistake to make when you have two closely related ideas that you're trying to talk about.
Let's take this sentence.
I was tired, comma, but I kept working until the project was done.
And then let's take a sentence with the same idea, but phrased this way.
I was tired, comma, I kept working until the project was done.
Both use commas, but one is a proper sentence and one is a run-on or a comma splice.
Which one's correct?
The first one is, the use of the coordinating conjunction and or but makes this work.
When you remove the and or the but, you have two totally independent clauses,
and properly speaking, these should be separated by a semicolon or a period because they can stand alone.
And as you might guess, I could continue to discuss commas and their abuse for the rest of this lecture,
but I'd like to move on to the sixth of our top ten common grammar and punctuation errors,
and this involves something called misplaced or dangling modifiers.
A dangling modifier can be a word or a phrase that is describing or referring to another word or an idea
that's not clearly present in the sentence.
Okay, that definition is a little confusing, so again, it's best to illustrate with some examples.
Let's see if you can figure out what's wrong with this sentence.
After being lost for years, John Smith discovered the crown jewels hidden behind a staircase.
Okay, most of us can probably figure out what that sentence is trying to say.
And what it's trying to say is that a guy named John Smith found the crown jewels which had been lost for some time.
The way it's written right now, however, the phrase after being lost for years is misplaced.
The sentence reads as if John Smith and not the jewels had been lost,
although probably anyone could figure out what the original intent was.
So think about that and then consider this sentence.
Polished smooth by thousands of years of wave action, Jane Doe picked up the speckled rock.
Again, the first part of the sentence which should modify the speckled rock dangles.
It sounds as if Jane Doe is the one who's been rolling around in the sea for thousands of years the way the sentence is written now.
Number seven on my list is the rampant use of the word ironically when the speaker or writer really just means coincidentally.
Newscasters in particular seem to be in love with ironically and they consistently use it when they shouldn't.
I've noticed that this is a practice that seems to have encouraged the misuse of the word by the general population.
Let's take this example which was uttered by a sportscaster on the late night news not too long ago.
Quote, the team will play its next game in Toronto which ironically is where their coach began his career 25 years ago.
Is it ironic that the coach is going back to the place where his professional career began?
Well, if the definition of irony is using a word to mean the opposite of its dictionary meaning,
then how on earth could this event be ironic?
In fact, it's coincidental.
Also, ironic has been used incorrectly to describe situations that are simply not good.
And the blame for this has to be laid at least in part at the feet of singer Alanis Morissette who in her hit song Ironic
taught a whole generation of young people that ironic happenings included a black fly in your chardonnay
or rain on your wedding day or meeting the man of your dreams and then his beautiful wife.
None of these situations are desirable or pleasant but there's nothing ironic about them.
They are simply unfortunate.
Now, here's an example of the correct usage of irony.
Ironically, the fire station burned down.
Okay, that is ironic.
It's also coincidental maybe but definitely it fits our definition of ironic.
Number eight on our list of common errors is misspelled words.
Now granted, with modern word processing programs, a lot of these errors get caught while they're still fresh on the computer screen
but some words may slip through.
For example, I've had students misspell the names of proper, I'm sorry, the proper names of authors and characters and essays they're writing
that shows they just aren't paying close attention.
If you do this in any context from a short story or an article you've submitted for publication to an essay to a letter
it's going to cause you to lose credibility in the eyes of your audience.
Take a moment and see if you can spell these common words.
How about independent, occurrence, accommodate, acknowledgement, commitment.
These are some of the most common ones I see.
If you had difficulty or a moment when you were unsure how you might spell those words
you might want to refer to our guidebook that has a list of 50 commonly misspelled words.
Another very common error in usage has to do with the problem of words that sound like other words.
Most frequently I see this error in the phrases could have, should have and would have as in
I could have gone to the park but I had a lot of work to do or I should have gone to the gym but I had a lot of work to do
or I would have done my work but Raiders of the Lost Ark was on TV.
As I've said these words just now there's no problem understanding what the sentences mean and how the words in them should be spelled.
The problem comes from the pension of English speakers to contract or combine words in order to speak more quickly.
I could have gone to the park or I should have gone to the gym.
The contracted forms spelled for example S-H-O-U-L-D apostrophe V-E sound an awful lot like should of with the word O-F in place of the V-E.
And people very frequently will write these forms unthinkingly.
In other words they'll write could of when they really mean could have.
For an astute reader this kind of mistake is going to leap off the page so you really need to be careful about it.
Like the previous example the final common grammar and usage mistake I want to discuss today also has to do with the frequent
misspelling of words that sound alike and in this case I'm talking about the various forms of there and your.
Listen to the following sentence and try to supply the proper spelling for each form of the word there.
They're going to put their stuff over there.
Now although it sounds like the same word is used three different times in fact three different spellings are required.
First they're going to put is really they are going to put and so the proper spelling in that case would be T-H-E-Y apostrophe R-E
as this is a contracted form of they are.
The second there as in their stuff indicates possession and it needs to be spelled T-H-E-I-R.
The spelling differentiation helps to keep this meaning distinct from the final form in which their spelled T-H-E-R-E indicates a location a place.
Similar mistakes happen with your and your Y-O-U-R and Y-O-U apostrophe R-E.
The first indicates possession things that belong to you and the second is a contracted form meaning you are.
So in the following sentence which form goes where you're doing lots of good things with your money.
The first your indicates action something you are doing and so it's a contracted form and it requires the spelling Y-O-U apostrophe R-E.
The second usage indicates possession money that belongs to you and so it's simply Y-O-U-R.
As anyone who has ever spent any time online reading blogs or postings in response to a news article, anyone who's done this knows the confusion and misuse of the various forms of your and there is rampant.
And very often it's obviously due to laziness instead of ignorance.
It's an easy mistake to make if you're up late writing and you're not entirely focused on details.
And again this is why it's always a good idea to set your writing aside for a while and then come back to it with fresh eyes and even better get someone else to read through it for you.
Now I've come to the end of the ten most common errors of grammar and usage and some of you may be wondering about two features of grammar that are not on my list.
These two grammatical issues are the rules against splitting an infinitive and ending the sentence with a preposition.
I'll explain the logic behind the rules as well as my logic for not finding them worthy of being in the top ten and then you can decide how you feel about it.
Let's start with split infinitives.
An infinitive is simply the two form of a verb so in English to love, to run, to walk, to have, to give, to do.
When the first self-appointed grammarians began trying to make rules for English several centuries ago,
most of them because they were educated Englishmen of a certain class,
looked to the language of Latin for guidance as to how they should go about doing this.
They're the ones who gave us the split infinitive rule.
Their logic was this.
Infinitive forms, the two form in Latin and the language developed from it, can't be split.
They're all one word.
So amare means to love, audire means to hear, scribere means to write.
The thinking here was that because Latin infinitives can't be split and Latin was considered the perfect language,
then we shouldn't split English infinitives either.
Now the problem of course is that it's perfectly possible to split English infinitives
and until these grammarians decreed otherwise, there really wasn't a good reason not to do this.
Today, people tend to fall pretty vociferously on either side of this debate
and I fall into the camp of those who think splitting infinitives is usually alright.
Perhaps it's just the Star Trek fan and me that I feel quite strongly that the phrase to boldly go where no one has gone before
sounds a whole lot better than to go boldly where no man has gone before
or boldly to go where no man has gone before.
Still, as I've said repeatedly, the most important thing is to know your audience.
So while in principle I'm fine with a split infinitives, I correct any I find in my own writing
if I think it's going to be an issue for my reader.
Always err on the side of caution and follow the rules.
Occasionally you can break them, but I think it's a good idea to at first demonstrate that you know what the rules are.
Same people who policed infinitives are also the ones who gave us the rule for not ending a sentence with a preposition.
Prepositions are words that link other words in a sentence and indicate location.
Common prepositions include too, for, of, by, with, from, and a whole host of others.
The logic for forbidding the placement of prepositions at the end of the sentence is found in their name.
Preposition seems to suggest that this word has to come before something else and it can't stand alone.
Now as a rule I'd suggest if you can rewrite or revise a sentence so the preposition doesn't come alone at the end
as a lot of readers will feel that this is a rule that you have to follow.
But sometimes what you have to go through in order to do this is just plain silly.
A famous story tells how Winston Churchill was reading through proofs of a piece he'd written
and he noticed that his editor had rewritten his sentences so there's no preposition at the end.
In the margins Churchill wrote back, this is a situation up with which we shall not put.
Which sounds better? This is something I won't put up with or this is something up with which I shall not put?
Most of us will say the first sentence sounds better even if the second might be technically correct.
We're totally out of time and we've barely scratched the surface when it comes to matters of grammar and punctuation.
Still, today's lecture has identified ten common errors and given you the means to check for them in your own writing.
When it comes to our bonus errors, infinitives and prepositions, I'm going to leave it up to you to decide which side you're going to take.
Over the last 23 lectures we've explored multiple issues surrounding how to be a good reader and writer
and in our final lecture we're going to conclude this course with some examples of beautiful, compelling, intelligent writing
and we're going to discuss what makes these pieces so engaging.
