Lecture 2 – The Complex Layers of Face-to-Face Talk
Welcome to lecture two.
As I said in lecture one, there seems to be far more going on in talk than simply an
exchange of words between people.
In this lecture, we are going to review a model of face-to-face communication developed
by communication theorists and researchers over the past fifty years, which reveals what
else is actually happening as we talk with one another.
What the interpersonal communication model demonstrates is that what we say between the
lines about ourselves and our relationship to the other actually shapes the meanings
of the lines we deliver about the conversational topic.
This is an important revelation because it helps to explain why we are effective communicators
in some situations and not in others.
We are born into a web of human relationships without language, and yet we develop ways
of communicating with our caregivers to survive.
We send out a dense stream of signals using hands, faces, body, voice to help our mothering
other define what it is we want and need, and by gosh it works.
Not only do we survive, but as we grow we watch, we imitate, and we learn to use recognizable
combinations of sounds and words to influence our world.
In fact, once we learn the language and see the effects of our words on those around us,
they seem so powerful that we come to think of them as the only way we can say what we
mean.
And we do speak a lot.
Our recent study had people carry around a small automatic tape recorder that went on
randomly throughout their day.
The study shows that people use about 16,000 words in a 17-hour day.
Some people use anywhere up to 47,000 words a day.
Now that's really talking.
Wonder we end up with a talk-centered model of communication.
Talk is something we do all the time.
But why?
Well, to fulfill our basic needs.
Our first need is to discover ourselves.
From birth we come with very little inside of ourselves to prepare us to survive in the
world.
Most interestingly, we don't know anything about the self that we are, so we have to
discover that in our conversations with other people.
We react to the way they react to us, and after six months or so, we begin to figure
out that there's a difference between us and them.
And we get the idea that the way they speak back to us says something about this thing
that seems to be emerging inside of us is called our self.
And we begin to build an interesting kind of narrative around that, a story that holds
all of our impressions together.
Now our second need is to build relationships with other people.
We also suddenly discover that these other creatures are kind of like us, and we need
to build connections with them.
And once we start, we keep doing it for the rest of our lives.
Why?
It feels good.
But also we come to realize that without those positive emotional connections, we can't fulfill
our third need.
Our need to influence others.
We need them to give us what our body tells us we need, when we need it.
So cries, gurgles, facial grimaces, smiles, all seem to work.
Now all these fundamental needs are wrapped together into a kind of single need.
We need to know what's going on, to understand the world around us so we can affect it.
So we can predict what's going to happen next, and how we will be treated by those around
us, so we can survive and thrive.
This need to know never dissipates, it underlies all of our connections.
We're always trying to reduce the uncertainty and the unpredictability in our sense of the
world around us.
We dislike that, and the emotions it automatically invokes.
And we talked about that in lecture one.
In every conversation we want the answers to our three questions.
What's going on?
What's going to happen next?
And how am I being treated in this situation?
Everybody enters every situation with the first question in their mind.
What's going on here?
We don't want to be embarrassed.
We don't want to look like a fool in the situation.
We don't want to be made uncertain.
We need to know what kind of conversation this is.
And therefore if I know the kind of conversation it is, I'll be able to get through it without
making myself look like an idiot.
We also need to know what's going to happen next.
In every talk it's not a matter of just knowing what's going to happen at the end of a conversation.
But as I said earlier in lecture one, there's a kind of expectation built into every sentence
we utter that the other person is somehow going to get it.
And that the conversation will proceed moment to moment in a predictable, effective and
satisfactory way.
The last question, however, how am I being treated here is a continuously needing question.
We have around that interesting construction we begin to develop in our first year and
throughout the rest of our lives, our sense of self.
There is something about the way people talk to us that lets us know whether our self is
being enhanced or diminished in every situation.
So the answer to how am I being treated is critical.
It allows us to interpret what's going on in the situation as a whole.
If we don't get a clear answer to how am I being treated, then we decide we really don't
know what's going on and we don't like it.
How communications theorists see all this, of course, is different than our everyday
model of talk.
We needed to build a model of talk that reflected these interconnected fundamental needs.
So we had to move away from our model of talk as rhetoric, which is essentially one-way
communication to a model of talk that is face-to-face and is two-way.
By the 1950s, we had put together a basic model that says there's a sender in every
face-to-face moment and a message.
And they send that message down channels to a receiver of the message.
Not surprising, perhaps, it was called the SMCR, Sender Message Channel Receiver Model.
Technically, very practical, I suppose, but not very poetic.
Finally, we have two people to study, Sender and Receiver, unlike the older model of rhetoric,
which was really focused only on the sender and their manipulation of words.
We also added two additional concepts, first, noise, to clarify potential problems with
the sending of the message.
It is anything that interferes with this sending, and a second concept, feedback.
The receiver's immediate verbal response is to whatever the sender said.
Now, this is how it works.
We have a person on the left-hand side of our model, they're the sender.
Their job is to encode a message.
They have to take the ideas in their head, put together a string of word symbols.
We talked about this in lecture one.
And make the prediction that when they string this together, they have a sensible message
that the other will somehow get.
They're going to send it to the person on the other side of the model.
They're going to send it down channels of the body's sensory perception systems.
Sight, hearing, touch, smell, taste.
And for most of our communication, we use sight and hearing.
Occasionally, we use touch depending on who the conversation is with, and how well we know them.
But here, we're just going to send our message via words, spoken to the ears of the person
across from you.
And their job is to decode.
That's their function as a receiver.
And how do they decode the message?
They have to assign meaning to the incoming symbols that we've strung together in our head
and uttered as words to get or understand our message.
Seems like it's all working right, except to be more realistic.
We've added the concept of noise to the model.
Because anything that can get in between two people and interrupt the message,
we call physical noise and they alter the message as it comes across.
So we have the classic situation of the uncertain suitor standing on the street corner beside
his beloved, fiddling with the diamond ring in his pocket.
He finally gets up the nerve and turns to her and says, honey, will you?
And a huge truck goes by.
The air horn blasts and she doesn't get the words, marry me.
And she looks up and says, what?
And he goes, nothing, nothing.
Interfering noise can happen all the time.
Think of the number of times you're driving around with your cell phone and you drive
into your underground parking lot, or you drive under an overpass and the signal just goes.
Physical interruption of signal means that the person you were trying to get across to
may actually get a different message than you intended.
But there are other kinds of noise as well.
For instance, there's noise in the sender's head.
We call this semantic noise.
What if the sender actually picked the wrong set of symbols?
Perhaps spoke over the head of the other person.
Using words that were too abstract or too complicated or required a different level
of education in the receiver than the ones we should have picked.
I'm sure this has happened to all of us at some point.
It's very frustrating.
So we can have semantic noise in the head of the sender.
We can also have what we call psychological noise in the head of the receiver.
Now that's really interesting stuff.
How is it that they don't unpack our message the way we meant it?
Because of course they may have biases, prejudices, preconceptions.
Any number of things that can get in the way of their thoughts as they are actually trying
to figure out what it is we said.
The concept of noise added a whole series of insights and possible layerings of understanding
about why messages do or do not get through.
Now as the model began to work, there were additional insights that came out of our experience
in using it to analyze talk and out of the research that it inspired.
Scientists came to recognize that what's in people's heads actually isn't noise,
but their personal experience.
But they got from our words may not be our meanings, but the meanings they actually put
into the words as they were coming in.
This was all summarized in a famous comment by David Burlow.
He summarized a far more complex analysis into this famous bumper sticker.
Meanings are in people, not in words.
Words are empty vessels.
Sender sticks his or her meaning into them and then they travel to the receiver who may
actually put different meanings into them as they process them.
And words don't have single meanings.
They not only have multiple meanings in their written form, but they can have additional
meanings that are specific to the receiver's experience.
Now what's interesting about this thought is not only is it about the nature of meaning
in a general sense, but it shifts our focus from the sender to the receiver.
After 2,000 years of rhetorical analysis where we focused on the sender, now we put the receiver,
the other person, at the center of our analysis.
As our thinking and research progressed, we also realized we needed to move away from
our traditional emphasis on words to a focus on the relationship between words and nonverbal
displays in our analysis of the continuous and simultaneous flow of messages on both
the sending and receiving ends of the process.
Turns out people are not just talking about topics, they're entering into a kind of continuous
transaction and exchange and not just of words, but of definitions of themselves and definitions
of the other person while they're actually talking about a topic.
Just Irving Goffman argued persuasively that we are always presenting ourselves to another
while talking.
We literally put little bits of ourselves into our talk.
These are emotional messages intertwined with our words.
As the conversation goes on, we hope that in the flow of the other's nonverbal responses
to us, we'll find support for the aspect of our self that we are presenting with our words.
We call this aspect our face.
In the end, we want people to support more than our words.
We want their support for us as we've presented ourselves.
If they do, we feel enhanced.
If not, we can feel diminished, even threatened.
All of this was made clear in Barneland's description of the six people involved in
any two-person talk.
So, you want to hear that again?
When you're talking to somebody else, it's not just you and them.
There are four other people involved here in quotation marks.
Let's see what that means.
Basically, when you are communicating something to someone, you actually have an image of
yourself speaking in your mind.
You also have an image of the other person listening to you.
And, of course, you have another image.
This is very interesting.
And that is, you have an image of how the other person might be thinking about you while
you are talking to them.
We call that the projected self-image.
So, this is a very interesting idea, huh?
That there's a series of perspectives or images that are kind of having a communicative moment
of their own here.
A kind of feedback process that goes on in the head of the sender.
That's three of the people.
The other three people, of course, are in the head of the receiver.
The receiver has their own self-image of them listening to you.
They have their image of you speaking to them.
But they, too, have a projected self-image.
They have in mind, I wonder what this person thinks of me, given the way they're actually
talking to me.
Now, the more elements we add here, the more interesting the process becomes, but also
the more complex and potentially unstable it becomes.
Think about how this might work.
You are a help giver in this situation.
You're giving advice.
Somebody has asked you for some information.
So, you see yourself as giving them the answer to the question.
You can see yourself doing that, and you can see them listening to you while you're actually
talking.
And you can think, they must think I'm pretty cool.
They ask me a question.
I have the information.
Giving the answer actually makes me feel good.
Let me tell them some more.
On the other side of the coin, they get to see themselves listening to you.
They get to see you talking enthusiastically on and on.
And after a while, they begin to have a projected self-image change from, I'm a person who needs
an answer to a question, to one of, this guy must think I'm an idiot.
He's overwhelming me with information, and he's sounding just a little condescending
here.
Any number of things can be happening in the head of the other person.
All the time, you're thinking you're fabulous.
They're thinking, what a jerk.
And suddenly, the conversation is over.
The person thanks you coldy, walks out the door, and you think, pfft, how ungrateful.
Now, what we have in this model is a transaction in selves going on.
These are operating at two different levels, the topic level and the relationship level.
Words and nonverbals are working together.
All the sensory channels are in full use for sending, receiving, and feedback.
You'll also notice in our model that everybody is a sender-receiver here.
Both sides are in the business of sending and receiving information because it all happens
simultaneously.
While you're sending your message verbally, you're already receiving information from
the receiver nonverbally through the site channel.
And while they're responding to you verbally in the next second or so, you've already gotten
a ton of information from them about how your message was received because you can see it
in their faces.
Interpersonal communication is now a continuous process.
Transaction in selves and in topical and relationship information.
And it's happening in a particular context where you are and when you're speaking makes
a tremendous difference to the other in terms of how they interpret your words and nonverbals.
Context shapes the meaning of everything that's going on.
How this system of face-to-face talk and a kind of transaction in selves really works
is outlined in a set of axioms or self-evident basic truths that were published by Paul
Watzlauik and his colleagues in one of the classic treatises on interpersonal talk published
in 1967 called the Pragmatics of Human Communication.
These axioms are so powerful they continue to be quoted in textbooks today.
So let's talk about some of these key axioms or truths which explain how this continuous
exchange of messages, verbal and nonverbal, topical in relationship actually goes on.
The first axiom is that in face-to-face situations communication is inevitable.
All behavior has message value.
You don't have to say a word.
As soon as you're in somebody's sight and as soon as you turn towards them you're already
telling them something.
I used to make this joke to my students all the time, listen guys, if you come into the
lecture hall and I'm at the front of the lecture hall on the floor lying face down and not
saying a word, it's a message.
Call 911.
Really, the other side of this coin is that we can't take words back once we've uttered
them.
Once they're spoken they're irretrievable.
We can apologize and we can explain and we can clarify but that's just more communication.
We can't take back the original words.
The second of our axioms or truths says that face-to-face communication always combines
words and nonverbals.
You can't avoid this.
What you say and how you say it is tied together and that means that sometimes these two levels
can reinforce each other or contradict each other.
The third axiom is that in face-to-face communication it's always about content and relationship
at the same time.
It's always about a topic but it's also always about how you're treating me and how I'm treating
you.
Now if you believe that then you have to come to accept one little piece of advice at this
moment.
The next time you have to offer somebody some difficult feedback, some tough advice, please
do not utter the cultural cliché.
Don't take this personally.
Everybody takes it personally.
It's actually built into the way we talk to each other.
Now the next axiom says that in face-to-face communication all communication is either
symmetrical or complementary.
This is what's lawic and his colleagues way of talking about how we use power to influence
one another.
In symmetrical communication when you speak you get a response from the other that's
the same as yours.
This can be positive or negative.
So you're trying to exercise influence over your beloved by saying, hey honey, want to
go to a show tonight?
The complementary response would be sure.
Sounds great.
Then the sequence is over.
You've agreed to something.
On the other hand you can say, honey, want to go to the show tonight?
And she goes, nah, I don't want to go.
Oh come on, I really want to go to the show tonight.
It's been such a long time.
I don't want to go to the show.
This can go on and become heated.
It's called a negative symmetrical escalation.
And is there a way out of this?
Yes.
The way out is a complementary response.
Just agree.
Okay, okay, so you don't want to go to the show tonight.
Great.
How about we stay home and watch TV and next week we'll go to see one of my favorite movies.
What do you think?
And she goes, sure.
And it's done.
Face-to-face communication is a process of mutual exchange and adjustment.
Here comes the axiom.
It's a process that is punctuated differently by each of the participants.
This is a major way of explaining how we can have disagreements over the same flow of events
that happen in a relationship.
This is the root of countless struggles in relationships because people view things from
a different perspective depending on where they are in the conversation.
When you punctuate a flow, what you're saying is this happened here because that happened
over there first.
The classic, why did you say that?
I only said that because you said it first.
Yeah, but I only said that because you said something else before.
No, no, no, no.
It's all your fault.
You said that first and that's why I said this and I don't want to talk about this anymore.
All these punctuations represent the self-serving bias we talked about in lecture one.
It sustains our positive view of ourselves.
And notice what's happening in our model here.
We have internal feedback going on while we have external communication happening between
people, messages working at two levels, topic and relationship feedback that happens instantaneously,
also at two levels, verbals and nonverbals.
People are being senders and receivers at the same time, encoding and decoding pretty
much at the same time while talking to themselves very, very quickly while they're talking
to somebody else.
It just seems so complicated.
It is.
But rather than focus on the complexity, let's look at what this model actually does.
It gives us many more ways of understanding how talk works.
And perhaps more importantly, it gives us explanations for why talk doesn't always work.
We can learn something from all of the elements.
Maybe something happens in the communication when the encoding process and decoding processes
fail because of the various kinds of noise that can come into the communication moment.
Maybe it's because of a conflict between the nonverbal and the verbal levels of the communication.
You're saying one thing, but your face and tone of voice is doing another.
Maybe in fact, it's the topic relationship character of all this.
You may be talking about something ordinary, but in a way that diminishes the other's conversational
face.
The tone and intensity of your voice tells them a different tale than you intend.
Let's look at this from the position of a teenage boy who comes home later than be promised
and is being questioned by his mother.
Now, of course, what he has to do here is make something up.
He has to try to tell her a story that he thinks she'll believe and that will cover
what he's actually been doing out late with his buddies.
At first, she lets him go on, but she can't help notice that while he's talking, he's
inventing.
His eyes momentarily flick upwards or sort of glaze over as he tries to find the next
piece of the story that will make sense to her.
He hesitates.
He shifts his weight back and forth.
He looks away too often to carry this off properly.
What's happening here is that his face and his body are telling his mom one story while
his mouth is trying to tell her another.
Perhaps needless to say, she doesn't believe this and in a very focused and coherent display
of words and nonverbals because fear and anger can do that for you.
She gets him to tell it again, except this time, I want you to tell me the truth.
So let me sum up the model and its implications for talk in a working definition of interpersonal
communication.
Something that pulls together all of the things that we've said into a few sentences.
Interpersonal communication is a process whereby two or more people, remember the two heads
in our model, within a particular context, they've got to be in the same situation and
who are aware of each other.
Also recall that the first axiom says you have to pay attention to each other first
before all that inevitability of communication can go on.
So they have to be aware of each other and they act together to create and manage shared
meanings.
It's a collaborative activity and it's about two things.
The topic of the conversation and about each of their selves and their relationship to
each other while they're talking about the topic.
And all this goes on through the non-conscious display or conscious sending and receiving
of messages using a shared repertoire of both verbal and non-verbal symbols.
Now you have to have some place to start with this and that's the key word in this last
sentence, shared.
So in our next lecture we're going to analyze aspects of our society's culture.
This represents the great store of meanings that one generation passes on to the next.
Without which we wouldn't be able to start the first conversation.
However before the next lecture I want you to think about a few things for me.
I want you to think of a time when you were talking to someone, when you thought you were
being perfectly clear, but they didn't seem to get it.
How might the concept of noise, as I reviewed it earlier, help you explain why this moment
of ineffective communication actually happened?
For instance, if something happened to get between you as you were talking, was there
some physical interruption of the exchange?
Maybe one of your phones went off and it distracted them.
Physical noise happens all the time.
Or did you choose words to put together in a sentence that they just didn't quite understand?
Something we call semantic noise in the head of the sender.
Or do you think that your words were decoded by them in a different way than you intended
because of the things going on in their head?
Psychological noise.
For instance, their emotional reactions to the message.
Or perhaps their beliefs and values about the topic.
Lots of things can be going on in their heads that prevent them from hearing your message.
And you see how these types of noise might explain why your message didn't get across?
Another thought I want you to ponder for a little while before lecture three is this.
I want you to listen carefully as a friend tells you about a conversation with somebody
else, not you, that didn't go well.
Or remember somebody telling you such a story recently.
As you listen or remember, I want you to recall the fifth fundamental axiom of the interpersonal
communication model.
People punctuate the flow of talk to serve themselves.
Now does this help to explain the way the story is unfolding for you at the moment?
We feel compelled to change the flow of events in our personal stories so that we look all
right to ourselves and to our friends.
To feel good.
Of course, this means that we are being told a version that may be quite different from
reality, may have actually a little connection to what really happened.
But as a friend, we accept the story as it comes because we want to stay connected to
the other.
So, of course, if we raise any issues about the plausibility of their tale, we might be
seen as criticizing them so we don't want to let that get in our way.
We just take it as it comes.
Finally, have you ever been in a situation where your mental image of yourself while
talking with another is very positive but the reaction of the other seems to suddenly
contradict that?
They suddenly stop listening.
You can actually see it in them.
Or they interrupt and abruptly change the subject in a way that surprised you.
If that has happened to you, can you recall anything about the way you happen to be talking
with them in that moment?
Perhaps something about the tone of your voice or your facial gestures that might have accidentally
undermined their sense of self-image.
Maybe your emotions came through in a way that made them feel the necessity to break
off the conversation or to quickly alter the exchange.
These are things I'd like you to think about until next time.
Thanks very much.
