Lecture 8 – The Development of Our Sense of Self
Hi, and welcome to lecture 8.
In the past three lectures, we have reviewed the key processes of the conscious mind separately
to clarify their operations.
But of course, that's not how they work in our lives.
In reality, they operate in a fully integrated way through a unique collection of perceptions,
beliefs, and feelings called the self.
Now, unlike other creatures, we think about ourselves as separate from the world, as objects.
This unique sense of separateness shapes the way our mind processes external reality.
Now, it's inconceivable to me as an interpersonal communication theorist about how one could
talk about face-to-face communication without talking about how the self works.
Because it is through this construct in the conscious part of our minds that all the information
flows that we are getting from other people, and also through our bodies from the cognitive
unconscious.
It's a filter we use to handle the information.
And how we construct this filter makes a good deal of difference in terms of how we perceive
and deal with other people.
Moreover, all the low-effort mental processes we've been discussing so far essentially serve
the self.
They sustain it and protect it.
So we need to understand something about how our sense of self emerges, out of, and then
continues to shape our relationships with others.
In this lecture, we'll review several facets of this, our most cherished set of perceptions,
beliefs, and feelings.
We'll begin with basic personality and the development of our conscious sense of self,
our self-concept, the three aspects of the self.
Personality, the bedrock, the very slow-to-change aspect of the self, our inherited temperaments
and our very early learning.
And we'll talk about self-concept, the conscious development of the perceptions, feelings,
and beliefs of who I am.
Now, this changes over time as our life experience changes, but we always construct it as we
go, so in the moment, it always looks whole and seamless.
In the next lecture, we'll then talk about self-esteem, our evaluative feelings about
our self, and that can be changed with our sense of conscious effort and support over
time.
We'll look at this in the following lecture.
Today, we're just going to look at personality and self-concept.
Personality, broadly defined as an enduring set of characteristics, needs, perceptions,
and emotional reactions, which influence our reactions to the world across a variety of
situations.
Recognizable differences between people in terms of psychological functions, the way
they use their minds.
It's partly inherited, partly shaped in early learning.
Although there are a number of models of personality that define the structure of the
human psyche in a general way by focusing on the measurement of widely recognized dimensions
of behavior or personality traits, including things like openness, conscientiousness, neuroticism,
I'd like to focus on the work of two applied practitioners, Catherine Briggs and Isabel
Briggs-Meyers, who developed a model of the personality based on differences in the way
people develop and learn to process information, to make sense of the information the mind
receives from the world, and on how they make decisions about relating to the world around
them because of that.
They developed a highly detailed and quite long questionnaire called the Myers-Briggs
Type Indicator, to help reveal the ways our conscious mind processes information to get
us through our everyday lives.
The more traditional model of personality traits evaluate people in terms of how their
scores fall on an inventory relative to the highest score on the positive qualities being
measured.
The implicit judgment is that not generating high scores on various dimensions may indicate
personality dysfunction.
Moreover, the descriptions of the function and potential dysfunction generated by these
inventories are very, very broad.
The reason I like to use the Myers-Briggs approach is because their inventory measures
simple differences.
All their scores represent functionality, just differing combinations of what they call preferences
for dealing with information.
And these can be combined into 16 types of personality.
There's no implicit judgment of dysfunction because their model of personality is built
around the idea of the mind as an information processor rather than a fortress against negative
emotions.
Myers and Briggs take the general notion that we have different places we can find our
emotional energy.
This is their extraversion, introversion dimension.
They ask the question, when life presents you a problem?
When life gives you a question to answer?
Where do you find the information?
Do you turn your energy inward or do you call out to the world around you?
Those of us with a preference for introversion go into ourselves.
We ask ourselves the question again.
We think about the past.
We compare this to them.
We seek information by thinking deeply and taking a private, reserved, kind of reflective
approach to finding an answer.
Extroverts, they call a friend.
They go to the external world, seek breadth, social interaction.
They talk to find out what they think.
They're active.
The world gives you a question.
First thing you do, talk to somebody.
You think about how widely you can reach to get the information.
You actively engage with the world in seeking the information you need to solve the problem.
The argument is that extroverted folks tend to think about things while they're talking.
That's how they learn by talking.
Folks with a preference for introversion think about things before they talk.
Now the Myers-Briggs questionnaire also locates people on two dimensions of internal information
processing and decision-making dimensions.
The first one is the sensing intuitive dimension.
Their question asks, how do you prefer to have the information from the world organized
for internal processing?
The scale runs from sensor to intuitive.
The sensors tend to look at the world in terms of facts, routines, details, a sequential
approach.
They take a practical view of information.
Give it to me the way I can do something with it.
Sensors on the other hand are people who tend to look at the big picture first and then
see confirming facts.
They see it all at once.
However, they take a much more random approach to collecting facts because they've already
got the answer in their minds.
They also tend to have a more future focus orientation than sensors do.
The second internal function of the mind in processing is how do you decide about what
you've received?
How are you going to make a decision about all this information you've taken in?
They're thinking feeling dimension.
A thinker's use objective rational logic.
They see themselves as firm and just in their decision-making.
They focus on objective analysis, rational connections between elements, making logical
sense, making logical arguments, a firm, just, clean approach to dealing with reality.
No messy bits.
Feelers of the other end of the dimension prefer to take a more subjective personal approach,
focus more on emotions and values.
These are the folks that take things a little more personally, focus on the larger values
that are being represented by the information, and focus on emotional reactions and between
them and others in a situation.
Let me give you an example of this between thinkers and feelers.
A classic one.
Retirement story.
You have a committee in your organization that handles retirements for long-term employees.
What if it has two thinkers and two feelers on it, trying to get the work done?
Now, it's your turn to come up to retire and the thinkers on the committee want to be sure
that everything is done right, that the formal relationship between you and the organization
is ended properly and formally, that you get all your retirement benefits, that you've
received investment advice, that you've applied for your social security, you receive a letter
thanking you for your service, and outlining all the things that have been done to assure
you a successful retirement.
And then they say, having taken over the first part of the meeting, well, that's it, let's
move on to the next case.
Two feelers on the committee who've been nodding all the way along to the formal details, agreeing
with them, suddenly speak up and go, hey, what about the party?
This person's been here for most of their working life.
We need to say goodbye properly.
I mean, someone needs to make a speech here.
There should be a gift.
This person needs to remember this place and think of people fondly in their retirement.
At this point, the thinkers are likely to say, great idea.
You organize it.
Can we move on to the next case?
Now, I'm not trying to make the point that feelers are somehow better or more humane
than thinkers.
Thinkers like parties do.
And of course, they would have gotten there eventually.
And feelers really do want the details and formalities of retirement to be in order.
It's just they start in different places when they want to solve a problem.
Their first choices are at the opposite ends.
Meyers and Briggs locate each individual on one more dimension, orientation to the world.
Their question is, once you've shaped the information, once you've decided about it,
how do you respond outwards?
How do you go back to the world?
As with the other dimensions, there are two general types of orientation.
They call them judges, very structured, scheduled, ordered, planned for, decisive, deliberate
kinds of decision makers.
And then there are perceivers, flexible, spontaneous, adaptive, responsive to changing
situations, a tendency to keep on collecting data.
The judges tend to have a neat desk, by the way.
They're all the planner organizers in the world that you see on TV telling you how to
reorganize your life.
The reason I never follow any of those people's examples, of course, is because I know that's
what they are, and that's not me.
You know, and when I look at my desk, it's a mess.
I know where everything is, but it's not orderly looking.
I'm a perceiver.
In our condo, where my desk sits in the corner, a sort of out in public, my wife sometimes
comes by and says, could you just keep it a little neater, or, you know, we have guests
coming over.
Could you just clean up a little bit?
Well, I do clean it up for a while, then it all comes back.
MBTI personality type results are usually organized as follows.
E, N, F, P are my preferences.
The source of information is the first E, extroversion, introversion dimension.
The basis for our perception is sensate versus intuitive.
The mode of deciding, thinking, and feeling.
So in fact, I'm a feeler.
And the orientation to the world, judge or versus perceiver, and I'm a perceiver.
Now we all use all functions or modes, but we have a strong automatic preferences for
one over the other.
Our first choice, that's what I was trying to make the point around when we were talking
about the thinkers and feelers on the committee.
When we understand this about ourselves and others, we can anticipate possible issues
that will arise in communication relationships, and we can learn to manage our responses to
others in ways that will allow us to be understood and allow us to understand others.
The Myers-Briggs model of personality and their questionnaire is based on the idea that
for couples or for colleagues in the workplace, these functional differences can be identified
and learned about before anyone gets into difficult situations.
Their intention is that if we can understand these differences in a relatively easy and
straightforward way, we can head off the tendency to be threatened by people with different
approaches to processing information and making decisions than ours, and we can avoid taking
these differences personally.
Our type, our collection of preferences, shapes how we communicate because we come to prefer,
of course as I said earlier, one approach, one way of processing information over another
as we develop.
We can use them all if we have to, but our first thought is to see ourselves as okay
the way we already are, and others who are not like us as not okay.
In fact, the title of one of my favorite books as a general reader on the subject of MBTI
concepts and research is by Perriman and Albertan.
I love the title that says, I'm not crazy, I'm just not you.
Because all preferences are normal and functional in the model of the MBTI, it becomes a model
of diversity and tolerance, but it can also be one of personal change.
We can adapt and learn.
I discussed this practical model of personality because it seems to be more closely related
to how we communicate with others than the more general trait models.
But like them, the Myers-Briggs model and its accompanying inventory cannot predict
exactly who we are.
After all, personal inventories are just what they are, their paper and pencil tests, snapshots
of how we perceive ourselves at the moment we're answering the test.
The best thing we can hope that they do is describe the differences between us and others
in a language that allows us to see those differences without being defensive about them, and shows
us more effective ways of relating.
Everyone agrees that personality is slow to change throughout our lives, although it can.
Self-concept on the other hand, despite our denial of this in any one moment of our lives,
is always in the process of changing.
Why?
Because the self-concept is built out of the communication with others, starting from
a few months in when we realize there's a difference between us and the blooming and
buzzing confusion around us right up to the moment that we're talking to somebody in the
present.
This is a constructed inner creature that can answer all the questions that come after
the words, I am.
Self-concept is established and sustained and altered through communication with other
people and of course is built on the foundation of our inherited temperaments and how these
were responded to by our earliest caretakers.
We've just forgotten all of that by now.
The self is always in process.
We interact with others and we revise our views of our self.
Sometimes we consciously revise parts of our self to make our communication work by
enhancing or hiding parts of our self story in crucial moments like relationship moments
of courtship.
We do a little narrative revision all the time in the courtship stage of a future long-term
relationship.
We rewrite our history by emphasizing things that we think will make us look better in
the eyes of the other.
Remember the projected self of our six people in every talk moment.
I wonder what they must be thinking of me as I'm talking with them.
And we leave things out that we think might not make us look so good.
We think, well, we'll tell them later when they know us better, ignoring the basic contradiction
in there that how will they know us better if we're already revising us now?
Courtship is just a very clear example of the alterations to our sense of self that occur
as we play multiple roles in our lives.
As a child, teenage peer, college student, young lover, parent, employee, manager, in
law, we adapt to fit each of these roles and the feedback we get from others as we
do this suddenly shifts our sense of self, who we are over time.
We need to think of our self as a diamond.
We're always polishing it.
And sometimes we actually cut new facets.
We glow in different ways.
We naturally alter the outside edges of our self as we learn new things and try new things.
But this is mostly done automatically, unthinkingly.
A good deal of our learning about ourselves comes from watching ourselves perform things
that we are called upon in life to do.
And as we are trying to manage our presentation of self, we give ourselves feedback just as
others do.
Our self or self-concept is the narrative that holds our lives together.
Some argue that this is the primary role of the conscious mind in human life, the construction
of and the carefully managed maintenance of this story of the self.
Finally, our self-concept anchors our attitudes and our judgments.
We never approach situations neutrally.
Ourself is the position from which we look out at the world and see it the way we are,
not the way it is.
In fact, major contemplative religions argue that this construction, this ego, is the very
thing we have to get out of the way if we are ever going to see the world the way it
really is and be one with it.
Well, they may be right.
But for us at this moment, the self is here.
It's real and we need to notice its development and operations in our everyday talk.
Because we can see ourselves as objects, we can monitor ourselves and we can put ourselves
in the place of others, it's called taking the role of the other, and run our interactions
ahead of time to evaluate future outcomes or consequences.
And of course, we also judge ourselves, and sometimes we are our own worst judges.
We are the perspective from which we can see ourselves, can you imagine that?
The concept is that of the turn of the century social philosopher George Herbert Mead, who
in a foundational book called Mind, Self, and Society, established the social psychological
view of the development of the self.
This model is still quoted by sociologists today as a robust, easily understood metaphor
for how the self develops in our interaction with others.
The I and the me.
The I is the individual impulses.
The I is also the perspective from which we can see and evaluate the other part of the
self concept, the me.
The me is the organized set of attitudes of others, which as a child we learn to internalize.
These are our socialized responses to situations.
The I is the spontaneous creative aspect of the self that responds to inner needs, not
social norms.
Remember our lecture three.
The me on the other hand is a collection of our social selves.
We learn these as other perspectives we've taken in.
They come to us as roles in the form of role playing and we play roles in all social situations
enacting the norms attached to the positions, the expectations and obligations, and we notice
how others respond to our performances.
We try to remember the good performances and eliminate the bad ones so our me can evaluate
what is normal or right behavior.
Mead's model of the self actually appears in our lives each time we lie down to go to
sleep.
We put our head on the pillow and run the movie of our day.
And particularly if we did something awkward or worse, we hear ourselves saying, why?
That's not me.
I mean you need to ask yourself when you're saying that, who's actually saying that?
Of course it's being spoken from the perspective of the I.
Now Mead's model of self development of children is a powerful metaphor for the development
of the mind as well.
According to his model, the child's ability to observe, evaluate and manage themselves
and their behaviors comes in three stages.
The imitative stage.
In the earliest stage, children are already modeling what they see around them.
On the conscious level, children imitate sounds.
They learn to know which sounds to produce positive reactions because they can see them
in the people around them.
They anticipate the more complex roles they see by doing what others do, trying to stand
so they can learn to walk, try to keep up.
Of course they fall down, they just get up again.
It's all awkward, uncoordinated imitation, but it prepares the brain body for the real
work of the next stage, trying to play at being people, around people, to manipulate
objects the way they think they see others using them.
Preparing themselves for a more complex play and learning slowly that there might be other
points of view besides their own in every situation.
It's a kind of hit and miss trial and error process, but at some point around 18 months
they begin to get control of their bodies.
They acquire rudimentary naming words.
Between 18 and 24 months, the language capabilities expand enormously, and by 36 months they've
nailed the language, that is they've nailed word order or syntax, and they're ready to
enter the play stage.
In the play stage, the child learns to play out the roles he or she sees around them in
a much more coherent fashion.
Hundreds and hundreds of hours of practice actually makes the child better.
The metaphor here, used by me, is playing house or playing games in the house.
All the way through this time, not just in little bits and pieces.
The child learns to name the roles and learns that they have to be completed for the game
to actually work.
Child also learns to take the role of the other, because the child has language now
and can run the inner movie of how a role works with dialogue and consequences, and manage
their behavior and the steps in the process, and attach sounds, names to all the images
that flow by as they're enacting the role.
In the process, they learn to see themselves from another's perspective.
In this case, me calls it the significant other.
This would be the parent or an older brother or sister.
The child is now learning to use its memory by remembering all this stuff in order, not
through momentary trial and error and picking things up and putting them down.
This is a now more complete process.
They're learning to avoid bad behavior, both inwardly and sometimes out where you can actually
see them do it.
Why?
Because they can run the entire movie of what will happen if they do something.
They can anticipate the outcomes, the consequences.
They will talk to themselves as if they were a parent, slap their own hands and say, bad,
don't do that.
And when they don't do that, a miracle has occurred.
Full human, this is at hand.
The great power of being human is that we can consider doing something, evaluating the
consequences ahead of time, and decide to do it or not to do it.
That's self-managed behavior.
All this happens in the house process, mostly of role-playing and game-playing.
But at this point in me's model, the child is spending more time outside the house in
what he then calls the game stage.
He's playing more complicated games than he or she would with significant others in
the household.
Parents are older peers.
And these are more complicated games.
And their rules becomes the next key to learning and developing the self.
The rules of the game, the invisible rules that guide people's behavior become what
he calls the generalized other, invisible but very powerful.
People have to follow them even though people are not telling you what to do.
They're just there.
They represent the rule of law, the community, the larger values of the community.
They have to be taken into consideration for managing your own behavior.
Children learn this in more complex games because they learn that if they don't follow
the rules, the game doesn't work.
So out of this process, we develop a self-concept.
It's our reality creator, our tool for self-managed behavior.
Unlike other creatures, we can talk to ourselves about ourselves and we can feel our self-concept.
Now in this lecture, we've discussed two aspects of the self.
The personality, which we can think of as our natural temperaments, as close to inborn
as anything can be, and the self-concept, that aspect of our self that is formed and
shaped by our experience and response.
We also call them the I and the me, the I correlating to that natural temperament inborn
personality that we come into the world with.
The me, that side of the self that is shaped by our social interactions, both will affect
our interaction with other people, including, of course, our communication with them.
Now before we conclude, let's see where these insights into personality and self take us.
I've tried to create eight tips for effective talk across personality types.
We'll loosely base these insights on the personality types of Myers and Briggs.
First, where the energy comes from and in your information gathering, where that comes
from.
On one hand, we have the quieter, more internally focused people and on the other, the more
vocal, outwardly focused folks.
We know these categories well.
These are the introverts and the extroverts.
Here are some ideas for each.
Introverts, communicating with extroverts.
Provide more feedback.
Don't leave others to figure out what you're thinking.
Publicly state your agreements and disagreements.
Would really be helpful for extroverts to hear you talk.
On the other hand, extroverts communicating with introverts.
Take time to listen.
Make an effort to allow introverts time to reflect before responding to you.
Now of course, we've also get different ways of organizing information.
One type focuses on facts, figures, hard information, reliable and detailed.
The other type has a broader, more conceptual approach to what they understand and trouble
themselves with fewer facts and less precise detail.
So how are they going to communicate with each other?
The facts and figures communicating with the broader picture people.
Well facts and figures people don't overgeneralize.
Personal experience tends to make sensors, the facts and figures people, overconfident
in their opinions and conclusions.
And confidence is not the same as truth.
On the other hand, broader picture people communicating with facts and figure people.
Base your opinions and suggestions on factual information.
You can gain the confidence of sensors by connecting your opinions and suggestions to
facts, figures and hard evidence.
Now we've also got people who value objectivity and rationality in making decisions.
And another type we're inclined to rely on an intuitive sense of things.
Remember these are inclinations, not hard and fast delineated characterizations.
We are all both to some extent, which is why we can still talk to each other.
But most of us tend to be more of one sort than the other of course.
So when someone who is more inclined to facts and objectivity and less to intuition or
emotion wants to communicate most effectively with someone who has a more intuitive approach,
here's an idea.
Be more appreciative of the other's comments.
Thinkers consider their rationality and objectivity to be virtues, but critical objectivity can
be perceived as callous before attacking others ideas, take time to understand and appreciate
what they mean.
And for those intuitive folks in a room full of objective thinkers, get to the point.
While other feelers like yourself may appreciate time consuming communication, thinkers probably
won't.
Finally we've got the folks who want to plan, to know the action that will be taken, those
folks with the organized clean desks, and the other sort who love to continue taking
in information and who want room for more spontaneous responses.
So clean desk planners, communicating with messy desk spontaneity people, don't jump
to conclusions.
Judges prefer to make quick decisions and move on, but the desire for closure can cause
them to make decisions prematurely.
And messy desk spontaneity, folks communicating with the clean desk planners, be less vague.
Receivers like to keep their options open, but their constant consideration of possibilities
can represent vagueness and a lack of preparation to judges.
Now we're going to talk about the next lecture here.
All this self-managing talk we learn to do as children is never neutral.
Since we learn to see ourselves as objects, we can evaluate or judge ourselves and our
behavior like other objects in our mind in terms of how we feel about them.
So in the next lecture we'll clarify this essential self-judgmental process and how
it drives us to answer the third relentless question behind all talk, the question of self-esteem
and how we seek to preserve it in every conversation.
Thanks.
