Lecture 11, Conscious Self-Talk and Self-Management
Hi there and welcome to lecture 11.
As I hope we've discovered in lecture 10, automatically denying or avoiding the realities in others' communication
is a recipe for communication and relationship failure.
And that failure is the basis for much of the emotional upset in our lives.
Defense mechanisms and defensive talk may get us through in the short run, but in the end, they don't work.
On the other hand, learning to manage our automatic internal talk and our external responses to others does work,
particularly in difficult situations that require managing our first emotional reactions.
And that means thinking before we speak.
So that's what we're going to discuss in this lecture.
We're going to talk about our self-talk.
I'm going to offer you several techniques to interrupt the flow of emotional reaction and negative self-talk in difficult situations
and then describe a form of problem-solving for situations that gives you more time to respond.
These techniques take practice to be effective.
Pay off is that momentary emotional self-management and the use of conscious self-talk radically improves our chances
to be heard, understood, and accepted in tough situations.
And the repeated use of problem-solving self-talk raises our sense of self-worth and our sense of control over our lives.
Our self-talk is automatic and constant.
It's really an ongoing exchange between the I and me, the perspectives of our self.
It involves self-evaluation.
I'm doing well.
I'm good at this, as well as an almost constant evaluation of other people in the world around us.
It involves problem-solving.
How can I take care of this without too much cost?
And planning for the future.
What would I or should I do in this situation?
And if I did something differently, how would that work?
Through this self-talk, we are always building and sustaining the narrative of the self.
I know who I am.
So how do I fit in here?
So how we talk to ourselves is vital.
It affects our moods and feelings and reactions to the world around us.
Our self-talk helps us work things out sometimes.
But its constancy is a kind of distraction from the reality around us.
As someone who has used various practices to still the mind in my adult life,
I can say with confidence that this remains a constant intention, but only a momentary achievement.
However, I continue to practice because of the side effects.
A calmer body, reduced muscle tension, lower blood pressure,
and a reduction of the noise in my mind enough that sometimes insights about my world magically appear.
Nothing less than years of meditative practice in a distant monastery will enable us to stop the talk on our heads.
So we have to take a much more practical approach to this automatic process.
If we can't stop it, we can at least become more consciously aware of what we're saying to ourselves.
The value in doing this is summarized nicely by Breaker.
Becoming aware of exactly what you're saying to yourself, about yourself,
can help you understand why you react the way you do to events and people in your life.
It can also give you a handle on controlling your moods, repeating your successes,
and short-circuiting your shortcomings.
And I believe that momentarily calming the mind and body is vital to that awareness,
so I'm going to show you a simple technique for that later in this lecture.
As we look back over Lectures 5, 6, and 7 and review our natural habits of mind and communication,
involving perception, cognition, and emotion, we see that our reactions are fast,
and difficult situations are natural responses, are schematic, automatic, fast, and certain,
and they often don't provide us with the good information we need to respond effectively.
In previous lectures, we said that this natural, low-effort, automatic style of perception and thinking
works fine for well-structured situations, but in difficult situations where our feelings
and our reactions dominate, it has a high probability of being inaccurate.
Why? Because in situations where our self and our self-esteem might be damaged,
our cognitive unconscious is already preparing our bodies to be hyper-aware and reactive.
Remember what we said in Lecture 4.
We said that the cognitive unconscious seems to know what's going on before our conscious mind gets it.
In this biochemical reactive process, our access to choices through slower, more effortful thought
is diminished as our feeling reactions take over.
And when we do react externally, our natural responses tend to be self-protective,
judgmental, and controlling, not the most effective if we're trying to deal with a difficult situation.
Given that, let me pose two questions to you.
Since our natural responses can make a difficult situation worse,
could we learn to manage our responses consciously?
Could we somehow wake ourselves up in the process,
subdue our automatic emotional reactions, and manage our next words?
We could. It takes time and lots of practice, but like any good life skill,
and we're going to get you started on that this lecture.
If we can interrupt the automatic processes I've been reviewing in the first lectures,
we can avoid saying the first worst thing out of our mouths and work on our second thoughts.
That is the next better things that we need to say in order to take good control of ourselves and the situation.
To be successful at this, however, we also need to manage how we talk to ourselves when things don't go well.
So let's talk a bit about our inner talk in difficult moments.
In many challenging situations, we tend to react to ourselves in the same ways we react to others,
and the results are just as unreal.
When we're in trouble, our self-talk is shaped by the same processes that shape our inner talk about other people,
including the use of selective perception.
If we're in trouble with the world, we tend to focus only on the bad stuff,
stuff that reinforces our position and protects our self-esteem.
The evolutionary biologists theorize that this process is about survival.
The theory is that if we focus on the negative outcomes, we'll learn from the situation how to avoid or deal with them in the future.
Turns out, we rarely learn from focusing on the bad stuff.
In fact, doing that simply gets us down emotionally, so we react negatively the next time.
Instead of learning from our mistakes, we most often ruminate on our negative-feeling reactions.
In the situation, we simply make ourselves sadder, but not wiser.
In one experiment, undergraduates were given a test in the lab. Some didn't do so well.
They were then asked to meet with the experimenter one week later.
When they showed up, the researcher asked them what they'd been thinking about since the test.
Some had moved on, just put it behind them. Others had focused on trying to figure out what went wrong, ruminating on their mistakes.
When given a second test, the folks who put it behind them did far better and without any further preparation.
However, the ones trying to learn from their mistakes got a poorer score because they felt de-energized, distracted.
They couldn't focus emotionally. They were actually back at the site of their first failure.
If the situation sparks negative feelings, fear, sadness, and anger, we tend to focus on negative details and in our recent history to confirm them.
In the perception lecture, we call this the confirmation bias.
We believe information that confirms our already held beliefs about situations.
And because we're focusing on our negative feelings and they can be intense, rage, despair, remorse, severe hurt, fear,
and we've given ourselves good reasons for having them, they push our thinking up the inference ladder.
Our thoughts become more abstract. We think it labels about ourselves. I'm an idiot.
We talk to ourselves in over-generalizations. This single bad moment suddenly represents a pattern of defeat.
And we say, this always happens to me.
As soon as we do that, we also jump to over-generalizations about ourselves.
Since I'm such a loser, I'll never get this right. Or we think in all or nothing terms.
If I don't win here, I'm through.
Breaker has a clever name for this. It's called negative fortune telling.
In difficult moments, our emotional reactions, our feelings drive our problem-solving processes too.
I'm feeling bad, so the situation must be bad. Or I'm feeling fearful, so they must be out to get me.
Our solutions become a series of what Book and Stein call major musts.
I must or you must do something for me to be happy.
They also talk about absolute shoulds. The world should be different. You should be different for me to be happy.
The trouble with extreme answers framed this way is that there is little room in your mind,
and if you say any of this out loud, in the other's mind, to negotiate an improvement in the situation.
We need to learn some healthy, unnatural habits of mind to deal with this kind of situation.
We need to learn how to interrupt an emotional hijack, slow our internal reactions,
and give us time to debate with ourselves over the instantaneous reality we've just created,
and give ourselves a chance to recover and discover what's actually out there.
I'm going to show you how to calm yourself. And naturally, in this lecture, you're going to have to do something unnatural.
It's called the centering breath.
You need to take a breath that works in your body in just the opposite way a normal or automatic breath does.
This is the type of breath that many religions use to calm the mind and move your attention to your center of energy.
In Western culture, we think of the center of energy of our existence as our brain,
particularly the front part of the brain just above the eyes.
We think we tap into the greater energy of life through thinking.
However, in some Eastern religions, the metaphor for the center of your existence is actually in the center of your body,
about one hand width above your belly button, your solar plexus.
It is there they believe that you can tap into the larger energy of life through the correct breath.
And whether you believe that the energy of life passes through your solar plexus or not,
this type of breath really does calm the mind.
It's always been taught by the best yoga, martial arts, and singing teachers.
And since the 1980s, it's been taught to help women relax and control pain during birth.
And in the most recent Olympics, the world's best coaches help the elite athletes find their calm
just before they try to shave milliseconds or millimeters off some world record.
It's not new to our society, it's just not widely used in everyday life.
Time to start using it.
It'll help you slow down and manage your more difficult communication moments with others much more effectively.
Now, I'm going to do this standing up, but when I meditate, I do this breath sitting upright in a comfortable position
for 30 minutes in a darkened space.
I also use a particular mental process to try and keep my mind from chattering during the time.
For the purpose of quick self-management, however, one or two deep breaths, deep centering breaths, will be just fine.
If done correctly, they will literally calm you and refocus your thoughts.
For a longer, more relaxing meditation, you'll want to get into a comfortable seated position.
Now, to begin this demonstration, I want you to interlace your fingers and place the tips of those fingers on your stomach
with one of your little fingers sitting in your belly button.
Start with your hands, palm up where your belly is with the tips touching.
Open your fingers and interlace them.
And then wiggle them and point them to your chin.
You remember that old child's game about the church and the steeple and the people inside?
That's what I want you to do.
Now, I want you to turn the hand down where the fingers touch the belly
and put your bottom little finger in your belly button.
Okay, now we're in the right position.
Now, we're going to use the nose for breathing.
This isn't Lamaze after all. There's no breath pushing out of the mouth.
When you're practicing, I want you to close your eyes.
That is, if you're not listening to this while you're driving, please don't do it then.
I want you to do this just to momentarily reduce any external distractions.
When you get good at this, you can breathe with your eyes open.
But for now, close them.
And here's the really unnatural part.
I want you to breathe in slowly through the nose and as you do,
push your belly out against your waistband or belt.
Your fingertips should feel it pushing outwards as you breathe in
or rising if you happen to be lying down when you do it.
When the in-breath is complete, pause for just a moment,
then breathe out slowly through the nose and as you do, pull your belly back in.
Your fingers should feel it flatten as you breathe out.
Now, let's try this.
I'm going to close my eyes and I'm going to breathe in.
Breathing in, push out the belly so that your breath naturally flows to the bottom of your lungs.
Then you pause and slowly breathe out and you flatten the belly.
You actually pull in your stomach muscles.
If you feel your shoulders going up, you're not breathing correctly.
You need to pull the breath all the way down into the bottom of your lungs
and you do that by pushing against your fingers from your stomach.
Now, this is not the way we normally breathe.
We usually just pant using the upper third of our lungs.
And if we take a deeper breath, we tend to expand our chest and raise our shoulders.
That's what I want you to avoid.
That's the normal way of taking a deeper breath.
In the centering breath, we don't move the chest or shoulders.
What moves is just the belly in and out.
Why?
Because as we move our stomach in and out, it opens the space for the bottom third of our lungs to expand.
The part we rarely use in everyday breathing.
The part, by the way, where most of the oxygen transferred to our bloodstream actually occurs.
In fact, if you do this five times in a row, you may feel a little lightheaded.
Not to worry.
This is just your brain getting more oxygen than it usually does.
I'm asking you to consciously use your stomach muscles so that you get used to the movement associated with the centering breath.
And with enough practice, your stomach will move in and out without your conscious attention.
Sometimes people say, hey, I'm going into a tough meeting. When will I do this?
And I tell them that's what bathroom stalls are made for on the way to the meeting.
Or they might say, listen, something's just happened in front of me. What do I do?
Disengage for a moment. Take a timeout.
Say, just a sec, I'll be right back. Walk away for a moment and breathe.
In a stressful, difficult conversation, you have to interrupt the flow of emotional pressure from within and without.
Sometimes you learn how all of this works by actually having to do it.
Like me, having to remind myself how to do this in front of 70 clients in a large hall when I'm running an exercise.
A colleague of mine was helping me facilitate a brainstorming and planning process for a group of 70 folks from a very large organization.
These were all the senior and middle managers.
Now, this particular process is taught to consultants, this planning process, using one sequence of steps.
But I and others have found that some of the steps can be reversed or even left out to good effect.
A colleague, however, was a true believer in the process and in the steps in the right order.
I wasn't not here and not for this group.
But halfway through the process, she realizes from the instructions that I was giving to the larger group that I wasn't going to do the process the right way.
Now, having given the whole group direction, our job at that point was simply to check the tables where people were working and make sure that folks were working on the next step as we laid it out.
That gave time for the two of us to talk in the center of the room.
And she started in on me about the order of the steps.
Now, several times she tried to persuade me to alter the process out in the middle of the floor in front of my clients.
All very nicely, of course, and very rationally, but very insistently.
When I simply disagreed by brushing off the arm and saying, listen, we have to move back to the tables here to see what they're doing.
She wouldn't back off when we got back together in the middle of the room and I could feel my anger rising.
And as soon as I got the group's focused on another step, I simply turned and walked away about 50, 60 feet to a part of the room that wasn't filled with working tables of managers.
During my walk, I breathed quite deeply and told myself that although she was correct about the ideal process, it wouldn't work here.
And that moreover, I'd already made this choice. These were my clients and I was happy to live with the outcomes that were being generated.
When I returned from my little time out and my breathing, that's essentially what I said to her.
After first acknowledging that she was right about the ideal process, I spoke calmly and firmly and gave her the reasons for my approach.
I said that I needed her to stop trying to persuade me to do it the old-fashioned way. It was making it hard for me to focus on my client's work.
And my responses to her work just fine. It seemed that she simply needed to hear more reasons for my wanting to do this.
And she needed to hear them in a voice, my adult voice, that she could believe.
The self-management method. Well, the first step is to take one or two centering breaths.
The second step is ask yourself a focusing question beginning with the words, I wonder. Like, I wonder what's really going on here.
And then you answer yourself to yourself, say anything descriptive that you see, hear or remember from the moment before.
Anything to get the left frontal lobe of your brain to process information. Anything to stay at the bottom of the inference ladder.
Step three, straighten your posture.
This move is to trick your non-conscious brain into slowing the flow of the fight-flight chemicals into your bloodstream.
By straightening your spine, dropping your shoulders, pulling in your butt, you're assuming a calm, grounded stance.
And communicating to your unconscious through your body that you're okay here.
Combine this with a deep centering breath and talk to yourself with your conscious mind.
Answer your I wonder question and suddenly you'll feel stronger, less vulnerable to the next negative reaction.
You are forcing a change of perspective in your automatic self-talk and you're interrupting your automatic judgment processes.
Step four, in difficult moments, take a timeout, just like I did in my example. Give yourself a chance to become calm.
Be polite, say, I need to take a quick break here and walk away for a moment.
You're looking for the next best thing you can say, you need to do this by yourself.
Now, the only longer-term answer to automatic negative self-talk is practical problem-solving self-talk.
It's really an internal debate. You have to actively challenge your automatic thinking and reaction processes.
And the only way to do this effectively is to practice on paper first.
Writing out detailed answers compels us to use our frontal lobes and puts us at a distance from our emotional reactions.
And so reduces their effect on our thinking.
Ask and answer these questions. What really happened in the current situation?
Be as tediously descriptive as possible. I mean, write down, when I said this, they said that and then they seem to be upset.
And then I responded by saying, think of this as you being a witness at an accident.
Try to recall as much detail about what they actually said, the behavior you saw and the feelings you felt that they were expressing to you.
This is the provoking event. Describing it as clinically as possible diminishes its emotional power to provoke.
Then describe how you're feeling about the situation right now.
Name and describe your feelings as specifically as you can.
This is what we recommended at the end of lecture 7.
Write, I am angry or frightened. My neck is tight or my stomach hurts or I'm frustrated. I'm seeing red.
What are your emotions on the paper has the same effect as describing what happened?
Why does this work? Because as you run your feelings through the thinking processes of your frontal lobes, you disconnect them from the biochemical push of the amygdala.
Ask yourself, was I the sole cause of this? Were there other contributing factors?
Your negative automatic reaction may be to take the blame or avoid it entirely.
But remember, this is an interaction, emphasis on the inter.
The other is always involved in creating this moment and so are you.
Communication is always about relationships and topic at the same time.
And remember that meaning comes out of the context.
Be specific about where and when this is actually happening.
Before or after what other events that may have contributed to this difficult moment.
Look at the contributing factors in this particular situation from above and to one side, from the balcony,
which is William Urie's felicitous metaphor, a place of perspective, calm and clarity,
where you can mentally step back and up for an overall perspective on the scene you're about to play.
Move your eye up there and look down for a moment.
Analyze the outcomes, often in difficult situations we catastrophize.
Avoid that by challenging yourself with two questions from Leonard Seligman's model of resilient thinking.
Are the negative effects I'm feeling limited to this part of my life or will they somehow devastate my whole life?
And is this outcome limited to this moment in time or will it last forever?
Because of our immediate emotional reactions, we treat negative things as lasting forever when they're actually momentary.
So you made a mess of a situation at work.
And you're left with that terrible sensation that my life is ruined, inconsolable grief and anger.
I'll never be able to face anyone again.
And if it's not work failure, it's something else in your life where you let yourself down or were let down by someone else.
Turns out that 99.9% of the time, your whole life is not ruined and the effects last a short time, not forever.
Of course, there is external stuff that can happen to you that lasts forever.
But this doesn't happen as a result of bad moments of interaction.
They rarely last a long time despite the intensity of your first reactions.
People get on with their lives and without thinking about it, they return to what their internal balance of happiness or sadness was before the incident that upset them.
Finally, I'd like to offer you three more questions you can use to challenge your automatic negative reactions and make your self-talk more positive and helpful.
In a problematic situation, ask yourself, do I have any objective data about what might have contributed to this situation?
You might know other people who've been in the same situation. Did they react the same way? Find out.
It's important often to discover that there is a general issue at hand here and that you're not the only one who's been there.
For example, you return to school and take an adult education class.
On the first exam, you get what you think of as a low grade. You feel incompetent and embarrassed.
Finding out what the class average is may get you past your feelings of incompetence.
Turns out it was low and your grade was about the same as the average.
Now you're in the same boat as many other people, so the exam or the professor's expectations may be at issue here, but not your competence.
Also, sharing subjective reactions from others who've got similar grades will help you get through.
Another great question to ask yourself is, what advice would I give if a friend brought this problem to me?
This is another great way to distance yourself from your immediate reactions.
Put yourself in the position of being an advisor to yourself.
Treat yourself like you would a good friend.
The point of this internal debate is to shift your feelings from hot to cooler, from anger to annoyance and irritation, from despair to sadness,
from remorse to regret, from self-hate to self-disappointment, from fear to concern,
and also to shift your thoughts from major musts and absolute shoulds to preferences.
All of this shifting will give you choices to deal with the reality at hand rather than denying or avoiding it so you won't feel the pain.
Important actions to take the next time you are confronted with an undermining communication.
Calm yourself with a deep breath and an inner dialogue of problem solving rather than self-criticism.
Discover the voice of self-management and use it effectively.
When you're faced with others' criticisms, unfair or not, choose not to talk to yourself from the position of the critical parent or the whiny, angry child.
Talking to yourself from these emotional positions reinforces the negative perceptions, thoughts, and feelings that you have in the moment.
Instead, choose to first talk to yourself from your adult ego state.
Use a calm, reasoned problem-solving voice to argue with yourself.
Practice does make better.
If you do this again and again, this voice will become available to you when you have to problem-solve with others in difficult situations.
The next lecture begins a series on how we can choose to speak to others in complicated and unsettling situations and still help retain a connection with them.
We will answer the question, once I've managed my internal emotional state into my adult voice, what do I actually say to others to show this?
Thanks very much.
