Lecture 12 Challenges to Effective Communication
Hi there and welcome to lecture 12.
We're at the halfway point in the course now,
and it's a good time to look backward and forward for a moment.
We began with our rather simple view of the interpersonal communication process
provided by our cultural learning.
We talked about our sense that we're good at communicating, talking.
But as you remember, we were a little less certain about whether we were effective as we might be in our talk.
Turns out that communication effectiveness is really important
because it means that we get what we want in a situation,
but the other person also gets what they want,
and the whole thing happens in a way where we can both feel positive about the process.
And if these three things don't come together,
we instantly feel some level of psychic pain,
against which we automatically begin to defend ourselves by distorting or ignoring incoming feedback,
while pretending, of course, to ourselves that we actually know what's going on and what's going to happen next.
In lecture 11, we said that to be truly effective communicators,
we need to make choices based on more conscious assessments of the reality inside of us.
This means slowing down our mental processes and managing our emotional reactions.
By using our breath to create a moment or two of intercom,
we can still our internal chatter
and bring the problem-solving power of the conscious mind to the forefront.
Calming our feelings and thinking more clearly about ourselves
can help us to manage more effectively, even in difficult situations.
But how does this manifest itself in our talk?
Well, in this lecture, we will complete our model of self-management
by outlining several ideals of thought and talk
that will allow us to consciously and effectively connect with others in the same situation.
It's a workable set of ideals.
We can actually do these things if we pay attention and choose to.
And just to remind you, we're building this ideal model of effective thought and talk
to counter all that low-effort, automatic thinking, and action that gets us into trouble in complex situations.
And we are working from the acceptance of the two general axioms of interpersonal communication
from lecture two, which state?
Interpersonal communication is always about content and relationships, axiom three.
We're talking about each other while we're talking about something else as simple as the weather.
It's the way we talk that matters.
And as axiom two states, our talk is always mixing up verbal and nonverbal behavior.
The way is always present in face-to-face talk.
And when things go south on us, we automatically fall back on my seventh axiom from lecture nine.
We need to be and feel right in difficult situations.
After all, it always feels better to be right than real.
Our model is based on two fundamentally new ways of thinking, mindfulness and appreciation.
Let's think about mindfulness first.
Mindfulness means waking up to what's going on within and without us in the present, right now.
We have to come to accept that we spend much of our time in a kind of waking trance.
Our cognitive unconscious, which always operates in the here and now,
allows us to act without having to think about things too much in typical situations.
We drive while thinking about other things or while talking on the phone.
In fact, we often look at our cell phones throughout the day.
How cool are we?
We invent and then fall in love with a technology that says it connects us
when it's really just another way of disconnecting us from the moment we're in
by taking us away to some other moment on the screen.
Psychologist Ellen Langer described mindfulness as a flexible state of mind
in which we are actively engaged in the present, noticing new things and sensitive to the context,
which she distinguishes from mindlessness when we behave in ways that made sense in our past
but have little to do with the present moment.
Her research suggests that to be mindful, we need to do three things.
We need to recreate categorical labels we have for the people in our memories.
Now, we tend to store information about people under one or two labels that are easy for us to recall
but that also limits the ways that we can think about them.
As an exercise, think of your partner in terms of all the roles they play in daily life
so you can develop a wider variety of categories for them to fall into.
Never know, this exercise opens up the possibility you'll end up thinking about them in a new way.
My favorite example of this process involves men who think of their partners as mere housewives
and treat that as a limiting category until they discover, while contemplating divorce,
the wide variety of roles they play, services they provide and jobs they do
and just exactly how much it's going to cost to pay for their replacement.
We need to be open to new information and points of view,
particularly when they challenge some of our dearly held stereotypes.
Accepting rather than ignoring new information helps us to reconsider long-held but perhaps out-of-date views.
Being open to new views and being willing to see our own and others' behaviors
from another perspective may reduce the number of times we use the self-serving bias to explain reality.
Remember it, you got a problem, it's your fault.
I got a problem, it's not my fault, it was the situation.
We need to awaken to our reliance on first impressions.
This means truly breaking through an automatic mode of perception.
Trying to treat first impressions as tentative, as hypotheses to be revised or rejected or accepted,
but with more information.
Although the unconscious makes up our mind for us almost instantly in most situations,
we need to pause, get more information and at least wait until we've shared a conversation
to see how the other person might actually be.
We pay attention for only a moment to what's in front of us.
We leap up the inference ladder and create a single clue judgment.
Remember our door story from the lecture on perception?
It was easier for people not to notice changing the person they were talking to in mid-conversation
when the person was dressed in hard hats and boots.
Because he was no longer an individual, he was a construction worker.
The implication of Langer's suggestions is that if we intentionally observe
and consciously describe the reality of a moment or of another person to ourselves in some detail,
we are less likely to judge it.
We can tell ourselves what it is, not what it ought to be.
Mindfulness is about pausing, looking again, waiting for a second longer and being patient.
An attitude of mindfulness helps us suspend our need to attribute motivations to mind read.
We can challenge our belief that we actually know what's going on when in fact we're only assuming.
When we become mindful and slow down our thinking and we temporarily suspend our judgmental categorizations,
we stop acting as if our mental inventions are real and ask people what they actually mean or intend.
Then we can come up with a shared agreement about the immediate reality in between us.
It'll make us far more effective than acting simply on our own reality.
It will make it easier for us to appreciate the other as well.
Mindfulness is about staying focused on the present and open to new information.
Appreciation is about how to evaluate this new information.
So let's talk about appreciation.
Appreciation is the other side of mindfulness.
The values represented in the appreciative mindset are found in the three essential meanings of the word.
To have full understanding, I appreciate your situation.
To value and honor the other, I appreciate you.
And to add value, something of worth has appreciated in value.
In fact, I'd like you to think for a moment how our talk could change
if we consciously committed to fully understanding a situation before we acted or spoke for the second time.
What if we spoke after exercising wise judgment based on a more complete perception
and understanding of the worth of the other and the situation we happen to be in?
Valuing and honoring individuals as we speak.
What if we could express or simply display a sense of admiration, approval, or gratitude for another?
If nothing more than, in the way, we happen to choose to talk or listen to them.
Wouldn't both of these what ifs automatically enable us to achieve the last meaning of appreciation?
And that is to increase the value or worth of every situation we enter?
I believe so.
Appreciation is a way of looking at the world that focuses our mind on what's working here, not what's failing here.
It's not a glass half empty pessimistic or a glass half full optimistic view of life.
It's a positive problem-solving view.
The appreciative mind does see the glass half full, but what it wants to know is, why is it half full?
How did we get this far?
What can we call up to add more, do better?
The appreciative mindset allows us to see the useful, desirable, or positive aspects that already exist
in the current situation or in the people present.
We know that these can be revealed, evoked, or realized if we ask the right questions.
What's called an appreciative inquiry?
Here's a story that shows what I mean.
I was called to sit in a meeting by a general manager who was struggling to get a group of department heads
to make some creative choices about managing the effects of their diminished budgets.
When I sat in the group was in a dark mood, tension, fear was hovering around the edges of their opening talk.
Do you remember what we said about mood and decision making in lecture seven?
A somber mood supports analytical thinking, but people here needed to be positive to be creative.
The boss started the meeting, restated his purpose, and then introduced me as someone who might help them with their tough decision making.
My intervention was easy.
I said, before we get on with the agenda, I want you to take a moment and think about something that went well in your unit this week.
Something that not only worked the way it was supposed to work, but better than anyone thought.
It could be an event you were involved in directly or that you just heard about.
I gave them a moment to recall this and then said, before we talk about today's agenda,
could we go around the table and have each of you tell us about something that really worked for you and or your people in your unit this week?
And please, could everyone give each speaker their full attention while they're telling the story?
By the end of the go around, the mood was radically altered.
People smiled, some of them actually chuckled out loud at several of the stories.
In fact, it seemed easier to tell a more positive story as the time went on and people went around the table.
By the time they got to the agenda, the mood of the room had shifted by 180 degrees and within minutes of starting the formal agenda,
people were responding more openly and positively to the questions before them.
Several people told me at the end it was the best meeting they'd had in weeks and they felt they were finally getting somewhere.
An appreciative question.
What's working? What can we call on that has worked in the past?
That is mindfully asked and answered. Works like magic.
So when people ask me about the quickest thing I can recommend that is to shift their folks towards an appreciative mindset,
I recommend starting off recurring meetings with the following question.
What went well for you this week or if it's a monthly meeting, what went well for you this month?
Of course, I also remind them this is all much easier to do when everybody is literally present focused and mindful in the situation.
Now, appreciation is an other oriented view of talk.
It compels us to get past our natural focus on ourselves.
If we're going to fully appreciate others, we have to get out of our own way long enough to communicate attentiveness and interest in what they're saying.
An appreciative view includes valuing and honor the other while they're talking by showing them things like respect,
giving them time to finish a thought, not interrupting to take over the discussion,
showing them consideration, asking if it's a good time to talk instead of just starting in,
showing direct acknowledgement of their value by asking for their input.
What do you think? How do you see it?
Legitimizing their feelings. I'd feel that way too.
Asking for clarification where appropriate.
That keeps you focused on understanding what's really going on from their point of view.
Now, I want to think about mindfulness as it relates to another new idea,
Medicare communication.
Mindfulness is essential for another way of talking to become more effective.
Instead of simply talking about a topic or about each other,
why not talk about the process of talking itself?
Medicare communication is communication about communication.
It represents mindful talk about the talk occurring in the moment.
This is where we choose to publicly acknowledge what's going on here between us,
the way we are talking to each other so we can say the next better thing.
We can learn to meta-communicate about our perceptions of the conversation when we say,
when you said that, I didn't understand it. Can you tell me more?
Or when I said I felt hurt, I actually meant,
or we can comment on the whole conversation.
I don't like the way this is going.
Could we try to...
This is particularly helpful in difficult situations because it slows down the automatic reaction process
and helpfully redirects our thinking to the process of talking
and shifts it away from each other for a moment.
It can wake up the other person to the process in which they're unconsciously participating.
Also, our meta-communication compels us to be one step removed from our immediate reactions.
It can help us get down the inference ladder again in our thinking
and get closer to what's real between us.
That is, my description of or asking a question about what's going on
or what just happened a moment ago momentarily moves me away from a high inference
from an exchange of that inference as a judgment with you.
Meta-communication works best, of course,
when we are already talking to each other in ways that allow us to be more open with the other
and feel supported as we share points of view.
And we know how people do this because of a classic piece of research by social psychologist Jack Gibb.
His research focused on sustaining a climate of openness between people as they talk.
The following are three of the six dimensions of supportive or defensive behavior
developed by Gibb out of his observations of people talking in small groups over an eight-year period.
It is still widely quoted for its insights into the kind of talk that make people feel supported and open
or defensive and closed in their talk with others.
Defensive talk, of course, occurs when people feel threatened or anticipate threat.
Although people can still focus on a common task or subject,
they give a substantial amount of their energy to avoiding or mitigating a perceived or anticipated attack.
If uninterrupted, say by a piece of meta-communication on the part of one of the people involved,
defensive talk can create a downward spiral where it engenders defensive listening in others,
which, through facial, postural, and verbal cues, is feedback to the original defensive speaker,
who, without course, becomes more defensive in their speech.
On the other hand, supportive talk can create a climate of open discussion
where people tend to read less negative feeling into the exchange
because their tendency to project their fears and concerns onto the other is not being simulated.
As the talk becomes more supportive, each person is more able to focus on the structure,
the cognitive, as opposed to the emotional, meanings of the messages being sent.
Supportive talk permits people to be open and receptive in their own experience in the moment.
Freer to examine each other's assumptions and deal with genuine differences more competently
from their adult ego states rather than their critical or parent-child ego states.
Mindfulness requires openness to be present.
Appreciation is harder to call up in a defensive climate.
Here are three ways we can commit to creating such an open and supportive climate,
even in the midst of difficult exchanges.
We can speak from description versus evaluation in our talk to other people.
Description we've already talked about in another lecture, but of course it's about giving and asking for information.
Presenting events, perceptions, or feelings in a way does not imply that the receiver should change his or her behavior.
Using description we try to describe our feelings and how they relate to the other.
When I hear you say this, I feel.
Now all this is in contrast to evaluation or judgment.
Praising, blaming, or passing judgment on the person or their thoughts.
Recall our lecture on the inference ladder again.
We often speak without noticing this critical difference.
This is all your fault, or you made me feel.
When we speak like this, we cause the other to close down and be defensive and we give away our power.
Speaking with equality versus superiority.
Equality involves the demonstration of mutuality in talk.
Trust and respect.
Participate in decision making.
Deemphasizing status and power versus superiority which communicates dominance
and a lack of willingness to enter into a shared problem-solving relationship.
Remember the doctors who got sued back in our lecture on perceptions?
They simply took over the conversation from the patients and they told them what they needed to do,
but they never answered the two out of the three questions that the research showed patients actually brought into the examining room.
In an equal relationship, disagreement and conflict are seen as attempts to understand differences
rather than as opportunities to put the other person down.
Disagreement is viewed as a problem-solving, not a winning and losing process,
or to show the other person up.
In everyday talk, equality is also shown by not making you ought or you should statements,
putting the listener in the one down position while you speak from your standard-setting parent voice.
Going back to our lecture on emotional self-management,
the only voice that truly communicates equality is the adult voice.
In it, we can ask questions and speak descriptively, acknowledging the other's thoughts,
the other person's contributions before expressing our own.
This works to embody a sense of equality in our talk because the adult voice is the only one of the three ego states
to evoke or call out the same voice in the other person rather than calling out the opposite emotional ego state.
Saying, I see, I understand, or that's right.
Let's the other person know you're listening and understanding.
Also, please avoid correcting the other if there are mistakes or of little consequence.
Correcting someone shows you think of the relationship as unequal.
You know more, you have the right to correct, and it can embarrass the other person.
Speaking with provisionalism versus certainty.
Provisionalism, of course, means approaching each conversation with a tentative open-minded attitude
and a willingness both to hear opposing points of view, to postpone taking sides on an issue.
In the way you assert your views, it contrasts with certainty, being dogmatic, needing to be right.
Let's compare these two assertions.
It seems to me that she is having trouble in her relationship.
Maybe she's too focused on herself.
The second statement could be, it's obvious she just doesn't know the first thing about caring in a relationship.
She's such an egomaniac.
The first statement is provisional, of course.
It invites further discussion.
Seams is a perception word, not a judgment, and maybe opens the door to other possibilities.
The second statement is essentially an allness statement.
We've talked about those before.
Completely certain, spoken like there's nothing else to be said.
In fact, the only thing one can say after that is, you're full of it and start a fight.
People who speak like they know everything, who always have the answer, are rarely appreciated.
We become defensive with such people pretty quickly and tend to hold back our own opinions rather than subject them to their critique.
So let's review our model of ideal thought and talk.
When we choose to speak as mindful, appreciative, other-oriented communicators,
we radically increase our chances of being effective, even in difficult moments.
In fact, using appreciative questions can actually shift difficult situations into more positive and manageable interactions.
Having begun with a mindful and appreciative approach to communication,
we can build and maintain the necessary open climate between us, if we speak descriptively,
and as open-minded equals to the other person.
And whenever necessary, we can meta-communicate, talk about the ongoing talk,
slow down the process, and re-engage everyone's mindfulness about the present moment.
Now in the upcoming lectures, we're going to review in some detail my model of everyday talk
to discover the two ways we can automatically or naturally speak in both predictable and comfortable situations,
as well as those that are complicated and unsettling.
Then we will move on to describe a third way that is entirely built on conscious choice,
energized by the adult emotional state, and that reinforces the communication ideals we have outlined in this presentation.
We will demonstrate how to put these ideals into practice in more detail in Lectures 16 through 19, later in the course.
In these lectures, I'm going to present to you with three types of talk.
The first one is called Connect Talk.
This is the automatic talk we use every day to begin and sustain our connections with other people.
It begins as the talk of ritual greeting. It's the high, how are you talk that we make endlessly throughout our days.
The next type of talk will be Control Talk.
This is the automatic talk we use to solve problems between us and other people.
This is the talk, however, that we referred to earlier as Contest Talk.
It's about resolving problems by persuading people to your see your rightness, by winning or losing an argument, by defeating them in informal debate.
It's the kind of talk our boss used in our example of the parental ego state.
When this employee complained, he just said to it, this is Control Talk.
The third type of talk we'll call Dialogue Talk.
It's built to solve problems and keep people connected to us during the process.
Now, this is a much more powerful form.
That's why we have to be mindful about it and embodies all the other ideals for good talk that we've outlined in this lecture.
Meanwhile, let's give you something to think about before the next lecture.
Remember our goal here?
It's learning to speak so people will actually listen, stay connected, even when separated by differences, disagreement and disorder in difficult conversations.
Think of the last time when your drive to be and feel right in a complicated conversation took over your thought and speech in ways that judged another,
from a position of condescension or even contempt, because you were so certain of your position that you didn't care what they thought at that particular moment.
And who was the receiver of all this rightness?
A friend, a loved one, a boss, co-worker?
And how did it work out in the moment?
Were they persuaded, changed, really glad to have your insight?
Or resistant, threatened, fearful, just plain angry?
And if the relationship continues, how is it?
Do you and they feel you still have a positive connection, is all forgotten and forgiven?
And you get along like nothing has happened?
Or do they act like they remember your attack of rightness and are wary of what they say and do around you?
I want you to take some time before the next lecture to write out a list of six appreciations of things that have happened in the recent past in your life.
Six things that have happened to you or others around you, family members, friends, co-workers,
that they've done or said in the recent past that made you feel good.
As you do this, I want you to notice your mood.
Do you start feeling more positive and optimistic even for a moment?
That's what writing an appreciation list does.
I want you to create a list of appreciations and share it with someone close to you.
How about telling someone that you love the one thing you appreciate them about them and what they've done every day?
And let me give you a hint.
The best time to say this is just before you say goodnight.
Thanks very much.
