Lecture 18 – Assertive Dialogue to Manage Disagreement
Welcome to lecture 18.
When we have to deal with difficult behavior in others, actions that challenge our expectations
about appropriate behavior in a particular situation, we often resort to control talk,
and or demand, to get others to stop.
Now, command as a form of control talk does work in one situation, a crisis, where someone
focuses the thoughts and fears of others by ordering them to behave in a way that will
help them get through it.
But this is the only situation where one can get away with command without the other people
involved thinking, why are they talking to me like that and disputing our right to speak?
In non-crisis situations, instead of creating change, commanding someone to stop or start
a behavior simply creates resistance, sometimes rather dramatic resistance.
To reduce the chances of this outcome, if we want another to change, we need to assertively
ask for the change, using dialogue talks spoken in a voice that communicates courage, calm,
and clarity.
In this lecture, we will review the essential steps to doing this successfully.
Let's talk about the three steps to successful assertive dialogue.
First one is show up, stay in the moment, speak out.
Showing up in your head in the moment, when someone does something that infringes on our
sense of self or our sense of fairness in a particular situation, our emotions are aroused
and feelings of either righteous indignation or anger instantly appear in our conscious
mind.
Our mind zooms into the past to compare this moment to other moments so we can make a judgment
about it.
That's wrong, or they're wrong, or this is not fair.
In a general way, all that might be true, but you know it doesn't help us get into this
moment, the one we are about to act in.
To do that effectively, we need to get there by taking a breath and asking ourselves, what
really did happen here, or I wonder why they might have acted like this, and how do their
words and actions impose on me, and what can I do or say about it?
What we're really asking ourselves is why.
Why do I need to say no to what's going on here and ask for a change?
Now remember, we said that why is not a good early question to ask others in difficult situations,
but it's really useful for us when we need to discover what's behind our need to stop
something and to start something else in a difficult moment.
William Urie in his book, The Power of a Positive No, argues persuasively that to effectively
say no to another, we first have to discover our own best interests in the situation.
What we think of, or value as important, so we can say yes to ourselves.
We need to focus on the situation from what he calls the balcony, you remember we mentioned
that in lecture 11, that moment of calm reflection where we can see the larger things that are
a part of us, and as he says, the real action of standing up for yourself takes place inside
of you before you say no.
If we can do this, we can anchor our no in a personal value or a deeply felt need that
we want to protect or fulfill.
This will give us the strength so that when we speak, we will come across as acting firmly
to protect something of value rather than simply preventing them from doing what they
want.
Moreover, if we explain our deeper reasons for saying no, the person may not feel that
our no is a reflection on them.
Another example of a work friend who tries to hit you up for a small loan, but as often
happens with small things, still hasn't paid you that bit of cash that he borrowed from
you last month.
How do you say no without sounding petty or personal?
By asking yourself why you won't like doing this.
If you do, you'll realize that when you lend money to friends, it inevitably diminishes
the friendship.
It's your principle, so tell them when you say no.
I'm sorry, I can't do it.
I've committed myself not to lend money to friends because I value their friendship,
and I don't want a few dollars to get in the way.
Now, you've made the no about you and your values around friendship, not about your forgetful
colleagues request.
So we need to talk to ourselves for a moment before we talk to them.
Every exercise about finding the yes in ourselves to strengthen our no to them will do two things.
It will stop our conscious mind from dredging up past grievances.
It will give us the confidence to say one of the hardest words there is to say in any
conversation without fear or guilt, and that's the word no.
Next I want you to stay in the moment and prepare yourself to speak authentically.
Assertiveness starts with your adult ego stage and involves self-talk focused on problem
solving in the moment, beginning with three questions.
What do I want out of this situation?
What do I think they want?
And what can I say or do that will get me the outcome I am looking for and preserve the
dignity of everyone involved?
The answers to these inner questions is communicated to the other through a firm but not parental
sounding, pleasant tone of voice, direct eye contact, appropriate facial gestures, focused
and calm, a confident body stance and controlled body movements.
In the hopes of deepening your understanding about what assertiveness is, I would like to
compare it with the three other more automatic, far more common responses we have to the problematic
behavior of other people.
I hope to show you that assertiveness is different from aggressiveness, passive aggressiveness
and pacivity.
Aggressiveness.
Some people confuse assertiveness with aggressiveness when in reality they couldn't be more different.
Aggressive speakers start in a different place emotionally and talk to themselves in a very
different way about how to get others to stop doing something they don't like.
Everyone flows out of the angry parent or angry child ego states and aggressive responders
ask themselves three quite different questions about the situation.
Who do they think they are?
And why should I sit here and take this?
And what can I say to put them in their place and keep them there?
Very different questions.
As a result they are likely to say too much, too loudly, demanding or commanding others
to change their behavior and even swearing at them to make their point.
What about passiveness?
Passive communicators take on a difficult situation from the opposite perspective of
the aggressives.
They seem to see the world from the dependent, adapted child ego state and their self-talk
questions may include, how can I respond without hurting their feelings?
What do I need to say in order to have them like me?
Why do these things always happen to me?
This kind of thinking results in simply giving in or holding back, saying and doing nothing.
Then later ruminating on what we should have or could have done in the situation.
And how about passive aggressiveness?
Now again this style of response comes out of a very different thinking and acting process
that we've outlined for assertiveness.
Self-aggressives work from the offended, adapted child ego state.
An aggressively whiny version of this.
They're very judgmental and often angry in their self-talk because they feel unjustly
treated and they know they're not going to do anything in this situation.
I don't like what's happening to me here.
I think they're trying to get me and I need to find a way to get them back without taking
them on directly.
How can I get even with them later after this is over?
If they do speak in the situation they will make sarcastic remarks or intensely complain
to anyone nearby, but not to the person who they believe has offended them.
Then they'll leave the situation doing nothing to change it.
However, they will continue to complain to everyone they meet later.
They also seem to thrive on negative gossip and spread rumors about people who they think
have behaved inappropriately.
To summarize, assertive speakers will act directly to change a difficult situation unlike
passive or passive aggressive speakers.
Unlike aggressive speakers, they will do it in a way that is intended to make positive
change but not at the expense of the other.
What does it mean to speak out effectively in the moment?
It means we can say what we mean and tell the other the only truths we own in the moment.
Our perceptions, thoughts and feelings about what has just happened.
Using descriptive eye messages or you-action messages without attacking or directly criticizing
them.
Consider the common example of someone who cuts in front of you in line in a store.
Passive people could raise their voices, be sarcastic or swear, but they're not likely
to change the situation.
In fact, this aggressiveness is likely to compel the line cutter to resist and save
face by staying in place.
Nobody likes to be ordered about.
The downside of this is that the aggressive person's anger will be with them for hours
later.
Passive people on the other hand are likely to stand by quietly, fume-inridly thinking
of all the things they'd like to do but doing none of them.
They turn their anger inward for not acting.
That and their self disappointment will also be with them hours later.
By being assertive in this situation, it is possible both to change the outcome and to
feel good about the way we handled it.
And assertive response would involve the following eye messages to the line jumper.
I know that the cashiers are really busy today and our line looks short, but the store manager
asked us to stand back a bit and keep the aisle clear.
I'm at the front of this line and you're going in front of me is upsetting.
I've been waiting here a while.
Would you join the end of the line back there?
Now you might get an angry or aggressive response or be ignored a passive response or you may
get an apology for unknowingly cutting in and they're moving back to the end of the
line.
What you certainly will get is a strong feeling of self respect for having tack of the situation
in a straightforward way and kept you cool.
Whatever the outcome, it won't spoil the rest of your day.
Assertive dialogue talk shows that you have confidence in yourself and are positive while
at the same time understanding other people's points of view.
You respect yourself and you show respect for others.
So let's unpack our general statements about assertive dialogue and show exactly how we
can effectively speak out in the present.
First tell our truth and then ask for a change.
Telling your truth involves three steps.
You have to describe your perceptions directly to those whose actions are affecting you.
Say what you saw and or heard using descriptive eye messages or descriptive view action phrases.
For example, I heard you say or when I hear you say something or I saw you do something
or when I saw you do something or when you do that all of these ways are calmly clearly
describing specific behaviors and actions.
You're trying not to make any judgments or assumptions here and be brief but say what
you really need to say.
Two additional considerations about what we need to describe include we often really need
to talk about the little things that happen repeatedly in a relationship and bother us
but about which we usually don't say a word.
They seem too small to talk about at the time.
However, Daniel Gilbert's research on happiness makes it clear that it's the little hurts
in life that happen again and again but we ignore them each time they do.
The drag is down, drag our relationships down in the end.
So if we're facing the same irritating behavior for the umpteenth time, it's time to describe
it to the other.
Also, when appropriate, begin your description with an acknowledgement of the situation or
the other's expressed concerns.
In our line cutting example, our assertive customer began by stating the obvious.
I know that the cashiers are really busy today, a classic situational acknowledgement and
our line looks short but the manager told us, you remember the rest.
Then move on to your you action descriptions.
Now that you've described the behavior you're concerned about, you need to do the second
step which is to disclose your feelings.
You need to say how you feel about it.
I felt annoyed or unfairly treated.
Know that what you're feeling right now is important.
Don't try to soften it or smooth it over.
Accept it.
We might pay attention to what our body is doing in order to accurately name the feeling.
The first thing you feel is the one that needs to be spoken.
Try to get the intensity right.
Say what is.
At additional judge metal labels, you're trying to be descriptive of what is rather than
speak in inflammatory generalities.
For instance, you may be annoyed or angry but not abused by someone's behavior.
In addition to evoking our feelings, their actions have special effects on us that need
to be talked about.
So, your third step is to describe the tangible effects their behavior is having on you.
Be as specific as you can.
Describing the specific effects helps to convince the other person to make a change.
Don't just end your first steps with, and it makes me mad.
That's essentially an indirect feeling statement from the previous step.
Ending this way can also be seen as a way of imposing your values on them and can be
easily dismissed with a, well, too bad or get over it.
If you end instead with concrete effects like my time is being wasted here or it costs me
more, or in the case of the line cutter, I'm late and I need to get home to my kids, it
actually sounds more real for the other.
May be able to more easily identify with it than with an internal result like your anger.
Describe the overt effect directly and firmly.
Put it in terms of a value or deeper need you discovered in your reflective trip to the
balcony before you spoke.
This may make it easier for them to hear.
Just don't hint around about it or speak evasively to save face or ease the situation.
Now here comes the big one, you have to ask for a change of behavior.
Say what you think needs to happen next, respectfully, but without additional reasons.
I need you to stop something or start doing something.
Stop and look at them with pleasant anticipation.
This is a kind of non-verbal encourager that shows you believe they will do as you ask.
And when appropriate, in a longer term relationship, not in a difficult moment like line cutting,
we can also state the benefits of the change or the consequences of not changing.
So let me summarize this process.
Step one, describe a specific behavior of the other person non-judgmentally.
When I see you do this or when I hear you say this, step two, disclose how you feel
as a result without using the expression you make me.
I feel, step three, declare the effects or impact of the other person's behavior on you,
your principles, values or the situation.
I can't focus on my work, I lose time or money.
Step four, ask for the change.
Describe what you want the other to do or to stop doing.
I prefer you to or I would like you to or I need you to.
Now, why do all this self-managed descriptive eye messaging in your adult voice?
Well, not just because it's more likely to work to get you what you want and it's really the only way
to tell your truth and stay inside your own space, but also because it prevents them
from using your bad behavior as an excuse to continue their bad behavior.
It hardly seems fair, but when you point out another's behavior as inappropriate
by using control talk commands and demands in an angry voice, they instantly defend themselves
against the way you spoke to them and ignore what they did to upset you in the first place.
Let me tell you how we've handled this in some customer service training we've done in the past.
In their anger, frustrated customers often take out their feelings on frontline service providers,
particularly in those moments when they're trying to return a failed product or get a refund.
Every company has a set of rules to follow.
Questions to be asked before an item can be replaced or refunded.
These procedures often make customers even more frustrated and angry
and they take it out on the poor old frontline employee.
Now, the service provider often hears these as personal attacks
because the angry customers often make them personal.
You give me what I want or you get your supervisor over here and I'll get you fired.
So, of course, like everyone else, they feel the need to defend themselves.
What we have to ask them to do and train them to do is not to feel that way or not just to feel that way,
but not to respond that way.
They can feel whatever they like, but they can't respond that way because as soon as they do,
the customer immediately starts to focus on their behavior as the real problem.
Not on whatever they, the customer may have done to get into this difficult situation in the first place.
When a frontliner replies to attacks in kind,
it allows the customer to shift focus of their anger to the service provider's bad behavior.
And for many people, this justifies them escalating the situation.
So, when organizations focused on quality customer service,
frontline employees are trained to use a sort of dialogue.
So, they won't give the customer a reason to let that happen.
With practice, they can avoid the tough situation of having their boss called over
and being put in the position of actually having to take the customer's side.
That is, nobody wants to hear their staff responding to customers with righteous anger.
Try to teach the employees to rise above their natural righteous anger
and keep acknowledging the customer's service concerns in their adult voice.
And offer to do whatever they can to resolve the issue.
Anything else allows an ugly acting customer to get uglier
and then blame the employee for their ugliness.
One of the clearest examples of this is from my consulting work.
It's a time when my firm was called in to help 911 operators
in a rather large regional police department
to manage their responses to difficult calls with citizens.
Now, the thing that caused the situation, of course, which you may already know,
is that 911 is a dedicated line.
Once someone calls in and their call is not about an emergency,
you have to get them to hang up the phone at their end of the call.
Having a dedicated line is the way 911 folks find you.
For instance, if you pass out when you're making a call
or when you're incoherently being surrounded by danger,
they say stay on the line, because, of course,
the line on their computer tells them where you are.
So if you need to get somebody who calls in inappropriate
and to get off the line,
you have to often deal with drunken or irate members of the public.
This would be quite a chore.
Particularly if you're dealing with a drunken teenager
who wants to know where his pizza is
in the midst of a real disaster, a multi-car pile-up in a nearby expressway.
And the calls are just coming in fabulously fast.
Needless to say that under pressure, some 911 operators
were better at this process of negotiating people off the 911 line
so they could open it up for the real emergency calls.
What caused our firm to be called in was that,
in a fit of righteous anger and indignation,
one of the operators took the names and numbers of the difficult callers
and called them back at home after her shift
and told them off for their bad behavior
and threatened them with police action if they ever did it again.
The chief discovered this the next morning in a hail storm of citizen complaints
that just rained down on him.
The citizens, of course, felt justified in attacking him and the department
because of the way they'd been treated.
Of course, all the while ignoring the behavior
that angered the operator in the first place.
So she got an extended leave
and we got a chance to train the other operators.
Besides the basic steps of assertive dialogue,
staying present, speaking up descriptively and asking for change,
we also teach employees additional techniques that everyone can use
in dealing with personal relationship struggles too.
These additional assertive dialogue techniques include repeat as needed.
Repeat as needed is almost inevitable in difficult situations.
Disagreements arise, people are not listening the first time
or perhaps the second time.
So they're reacting.
So you have to say it again.
Now, this isn't the same kind of repeat that you do in control talk.
This is repeating as needed in your classic iMessage dialogue talk.
Repeating what we want to have happen several times may seem a bit awkward.
I mean, after all, people are supposed to get the message quickly.
We just seem to forget, however, that children do this all the time
and it works fine for them.
Repeating your request gets the other's attention, keeps them focused.
We just have to do it without sounding like a four-year-old or a machine.
We need to ask for the change, then acknowledge their response to our request
if it's not already agreement, and then ask for the change again.
Tell them what you need or what the situation needs
in a short, clear, descriptive iMessage.
Calmly expressed and then acknowledge their next response.
Then repeat your request for change.
By using an acknowledgement to open each repetition,
you would demonstrate that you're listening to what they're saying.
You can feel with them at that moment,
but you can't help them or can't support them
in continuing to do whatever they're doing.
Then ask, acknowledge, and ask again.
This response permits you to persist, to get what you need
without them sidetracking you with their reactions
or demonizing you as uncaring.
Let me give you an example of how well this can be done.
This happened to me and another passenger in a small regional airport recently.
I walked in early from my indirect and longer flight home
to find the airline staff still boarding the direct flight.
I and another man approached the desk and asked
if there were any empty seats left and if we could still get on.
Round service employees said, I do show some empty seats,
but the flight is called. I'm sorry, but I can't get you on now.
So I comment, are you sure? Why, any child?
Are you sure? It would be great to get home an hour earlier.
It's been a very long day.
She listens to me and then says,
I can see how getting home an hour earlier
would really make a difference for you,
but my system is closed for this flight and I can't open it now.
I accepted my fate at this point and let it go.
But the other late comer started asking the same questions,
but with a much more complaining tone and her responses.
Well, after listening to him, she said,
I know it's the last direct flight out,
but our departure was already delayed
and passengers on the plane need to make their connections.
I can't hold it any longer.
And after he complains a little louder and over again,
she says, it may seem like a straightforward thing to do,
but you'd have to go back down to departures, get an override,
and there are fees for this kind of last-minute change,
and there's just not enough time for that now.
The second man finally walked away grumbling quite loudly
that he didn't see why it couldn't be done.
It seemed so simple.
Me, I just went off to get a coffee to pass some time
until my indirect flight showed up.
A ground person, ground service person,
never gave in to something she couldn't do.
And she was never anything less than positive,
both in her acknowledgement of our self-justifying
whittling tactics, but also in her resistance
to our last-minute requests.
As I passed by her desk a couple of minutes later
with my coffee, it's a very small airport.
She looked up, smiled, and said,
sorry, I couldn't help earlier.
Too bad you didn't come sooner.
I smiled back, acknowledged my fate,
and thought to myself, hey, she couldn't do anything
to get me on the plane, but she could be pleasant,
and that's always something.
Now, what happens when they come at you
with their criticism?
Acknowledge their truth.
There's always some in there.
When someone is behaving aggressively,
they expect direct resistance.
Try to sidestep that anger by agreeing
with some part of what they have to say.
Use words like, sometimes I am like that,
or that does happen, or I can see how you might think that.
Note that you are not agreeing with them,
but only acknowledging that one could think that way.
Now, in this situation, you need to be self-managed,
calm, and confident, so you acknowledge a bit of truth
instead of responding defensively.
By offering no return in kind, no obvious resistance,
you can diffuse some of their negative energy
and open the door for them to listen
to what you have to say next.
As you progress towards some sort of resolution
of the situation, you'll find these
additional connective statements also helpful.
Situational acknowledgement is a good one.
I know this has been tough on both of us.
This works well because it restates the equality
between you in this situation and expresses your willingness
to see how they might be affected by what's going on.
It connects you even at a difficult moment,
even in moments of separation by your differences.
How about a blameless apology?
I'm sorry this has happened.
This is a simple recognition of what's happened to them.
It doesn't mean taking responsibility for the problem
that they're bringing to you,
but like a hypothetical acknowledgement,
you can see how it would affect you
if you were in the same position.
You're connecting with them through a general feeling
of supportive regret.
And finally, you can use a situational requirement description.
What else can we do here?
Your mother is coming on Friday.
Sometimes the other person simply needs to be awakened
to the larger pressures on both of you
to do something they don't want to do.
By shifting their attention to the situation
and off of you, you can help them move towards an agreement.
The goal is to reach an agreement to change
that works for you and the other.
Without beating yourself up or beating up the other person.
Now, before we conclude, let me suggest some things
you might do to improve your use of a sort of dialogue
in difficult situations.
These techniques only work if we practice them.
And I suggest you can start by practicing on paper.
In fact, this is really important for you to go
to the balcony approach to finding your inside yes
to bolster your outside no,
or whatever change you're asking for.
Although he gives examples of doing this on his feet
in difficult bargaining situations,
for most of us the process will take a little time.
His quick example, however, reminded me
of a preparation story I have in my past.
Having attended a motivational workshop years ago,
the leader asked me to call the answering machine
of a friend of his to discover an important truth about life.
He assured me that no one would pick up.
So I called the number and the machine said,
this is not an answering machine.
This is a questioning machine.
Who are you and what do you want?
And if you could answer those questions truthfully
in the next 60 seconds, you're far better off than I am.
Well, of course I couldn't do it.
I think we need, we all need a little more time
and practice to assert ourselves effectively.
So working things out on paper is vital to preparing ourselves
for the next conversation.
So recall a difficult situation
where you didn't get what you want.
Write in detail the conversation as you remember it.
I said this, then they said that, be specific.
How are you both framing your statements?
Descriptive I messages or you messages
or some fake I messages like I think you are an idiot.
Recall the moment when you asked for a change
and they refused.
What had you just said just before that moment?
How did their refusal sound?
What did you say in response?
Now rework the situation on paper
using the suggested tools.
See if you can invent more effective responses
to substitute for what you actually said.
Anticipate how they might respond to your new approach.
People almost always resist at first.
So repeat as needed and use additional connectors
if you feel you might need those too.
Rehearse what you've written in front of a mirror
until you're comfortable with the sounds of your own words.
You're practicing being present.
And if it's still appropriate,
that is you still need to change in their behavior.
Start a new conversation and try to follow your new approach.
Learning these assertive dialogue techniques
will really help you to deal with situations
where you need someone to make an immediate change.
In the next lecture, however,
we will review a process for dealing with persistent problems
where your earlier requests have fallen on their deaf ears.
Thanks very much.
APPLAUSE
