Lecture 19, Compassionate Confrontation
And welcome to lecture 19.
Today we are going to review the steps in what I've called structured dialogue.
Some of this will sound a bit artificial because it is.
It's not the usual automatic control talk.
It's not the quick blow up in the mall or the parking lot or at home in front of the kids.
In fact, it's a method of preventing exactly that.
And it works.
If you are patient with the process, this is a process that should be used when you've asked for a behavior change from another
and it hasn't changed.
Or after changing momentarily, they've simply started up again.
The important thing to note is that this process isn't taken on lightly.
It takes time, focus, patience, energy and lots of self-management to make it work.
Structured dialogue is an extension of the ideas in our previous lecture,
speaking from the two levels of truth you own.
Your immediate perceptions, thoughts and feelings about what's going on now and or in the recent past, if it just happened.
And from your deeper values and needs, so you'll have the emotional energy, the strength and the courage to begin and continue this process.
Structured dialogue is simply a slowed down, opened up form of dialogue talk.
Its goal is the achievement of mutual understanding before taking action to resolve an issue.
And it's a very useful alternative to the tennis match approach to solving ongoing problems that we usually employ in control talk.
You know, the one where you make a criticism or complaint, the other makes a defensive return,
then you respond with another criticism lobbed over the net to reinforce the first one.
It comes back with a quick defense.
It's crazy.
Each party is engaged in attack and defense and neither is going to change and the process won't stop
until somebody gives up or gets hit by a below-the-belt silencer, a service ace, and collapses or leaves the field.
Right now, we're going to look in on a couple fighting this kind of bad fight.
They have a persistent problem and they're getting ready for another go-around.
You don't care. You're always working. It seems like you're never home.
Hell, I could be a widow.
I'm always working because you spend so damn much money. Nothing is ever quite good enough for you.
You always got to buy the best.
Well, at least I'm home with our kids, not married to my job. It's like I'm single.
Well, at least I'm not a critical shrew who's trying to bankrupt our family.
On the surface, it seems simple enough, doesn't it?
She reads his mind and tells him he doesn't care. Why?
Because she's carrying the whole burden at home and she blames him for that because he's always working.
High influence ladder on the statement.
He immediately defends himself by blaming her for his overwork with a criticism of her spending too much money
and always buying the best.
Another high influence ladder all in the statement.
She plays the emotional, at least I'm at home with the kids shot and he returns it with the silencer.
The critical shrew bankrupting the family comment.
A surface ace. She strides out.
This is heavy competitive control at its best.
Each trying to heap the blame for their unhappiness on the other.
Either one of them looked like they got what they wanted.
All they have done is set themselves up to do it again.
The reason is that neither is really listening to the other and when they choose to engage in a structured dialogue next time
and begin to really listen, they and we may discover there's more going on here than actually meets the eye.
There's actually a better way to do this.
It's the structured dialogue we've been talking about.
And if you have a persistent problem like our wife does, then you need to be the one to start it.
Like dialogue talk, this approach has to start in our heads.
For example, if the wife in our video example is going to engage in a structured dialogue,
she needs to take the first step and choose the proper mental state for doing it.
She needs to clear out all the interfering noise.
You remember noise from lecture two?
All that interfering noise of blame and judgment so she can create the internal conditions in the head stuff
that will allow her to emotionally self-manage.
She can do that by committing to appreciation, just to remind you.
Appreciation has three elements to it.
A commitment to full understanding, valuing the other even in disagreement,
and a commitment to making things better for both of you.
Let's talk about these three commitments for a moment.
Committing to full understanding.
Let's understand something about understanding, particularly in this kind of relationship situation.
You may have known this person for a while, and you think you understand them.
Our husband and wife have been together long enough to have a couple of kids.
But you know only your story, and you only know your version of their story.
It's not the same as their story.
You may have known the other for years, but they aren't you.
And if you're choosing structured dialogue, you and the other, like this couple we've just seen,
are likely to have different views of each other's behavior and of your own actions.
So when these differences become persistent problems, you have to bridge them.
And the way you reach out involves the second thing that's important in the appreciative mindset.
You have to value the other even in disagreement.
Now, this is going to get complicated.
This is the most difficult part of appreciation.
This talk is going to get personal at times, negative talk,
driven by their fear, anger, or contempt is likely.
This is very natural, and you're just going to have to accept it.
After all, you wouldn't be here doing this if you didn't care about this person.
And this is a way to demonstrate your emotional self-management.
An easy way to see your behavior as self-managed is to keep in mind a metaphor.
We want you to think about the metaphor of the matador.
Now, what is it that matadors learn to do that we don't
when faced with a thousand-pound bull coming directly at them?
When ordinary human beings face an oncoming bull, they let it run right into them.
It hits them right in the chest, it stops their hearts, and freezes their minds.
What does the matador do?
He steps aside, Ole, and lets the bull go by.
And that's what we have to do if we are to keep our emotional balance,
our emotional focus on value in the other, even though we don't like what they're saying.
And of course, this focus will allow you to keep your commitment to the outcome
of the structured dialogue, the third aspect of being appreciative,
where you're striving to make things better.
You're going to resolve an issue.
And you're going to make it better for both of you, if you can.
And if possible, you're going to make it better permanently.
So to review, by choosing the appreciative mindset,
you are committing to seeking full understanding of what's going on.
That means both sides of the story.
Valuing the other in the midst of the crisis and making things better for both of you.
Now, there are also some external conditions that have to be in place here for
an effective structured dialogue to happen.
So let's talk about those for a moment.
These are a little more straightforward.
First of all, you have to choose a safe place and enough time
when the kids are not around, if you have kids.
And not just before going to bed.
And certainly not when either of you is already exhausted from a hard day at work, for instance.
You need to invite the other to the process and make a date for this.
And set aside at least 30 to 60 minutes of time,
because talking about persistent problems can't be done in five minutes.
Then before you actually begin the discussion,
ask the other person to commit with you to two simple process guidelines
for carrying out an effective discussion.
The first one is, let's not leave until the time is up.
The second one is, let's try not to interrupt or attack each other.
Now, why would we actually get people to come to these two interesting agreements?
Let's not leave until the time is up.
Well, what happens in most discussions like this, as you saw,
is when one person gets angry enough, they simply leave the field.
It's the slamming door exit.
And it doesn't sustain the discussion.
So if they start to get up after only 15 minutes of a promised 30-minute talk,
say, please, please sit down.
I thought we agreed that we would sit here until the time is up.
Now, they are likely to respond, what's the point?
I don't want to talk anymore.
Just say it again, please sit down.
Let's just sit here and think about this together for a while, right here.
Now, you know, a surprising thing happens when people actually sit in silence for a few minutes.
Most people really don't like silence.
So people will begin to talk again.
Isn't that the point of the process?
The second process guideline, your second agreement,
asks each of us not to attack or interrupt each other.
Now, you know what's going to happen.
It's going to happen.
So what's the point of this upfront agreement?
Well, because it is going to happen and you need something on your side
when it comes time to tell them they've broken the rule.
Besides, of course, your loud voice commanding them to stop that,
stop attacking me, stop cutting me off.
That's just you in your demanding control talk mode,
making it easy for them to react against you.
It's much more effective if you say, hey, I thought we agreed not to do this.
This is a descriptive eye message.
It keeps you in the dialogue, frees you from the need to use your personal power
to manage this discussion, manage the other,
and instead calls on the power of the earlier mutual agreement,
the moral commitment you both made at the beginning of this talk.
They're much more likely to stop if you point to a rule rather than make it personal.
Now, of course, we need to start the structured dialogue.
And you have to open it with a statement that describes the situation
from both of your points of view.
I like to call it a mutualizing acknowledgement.
Begin your sentence by saying something like, I think this affects us both.
Then you need to follow this up with one more sentence describing your view of the problem.
Just a sentence of descriptive eye messages.
The way I see it and then complete the sentence, but only one sentence, then stop.
As soon as that sentence is over.
And now why would I ask you to stop?
Because I don't want this to be your rant.
The whole point of a structured dialogue is that you need to get a deeper understanding
of their view of the situation, their way of looking at what's going on here.
The best way to do that is to ask a question.
Can you tell me how you see this problem?
You can set up this key question with a short sentence,
but if you turn that short introduction into a rant,
a full-fledged description of all your pain and sadness,
I promise you they will stop listening almost instantly.
They'll see this is just another controlled talk tactic,
and then they'll start using whatever you say against you when they start to defend themselves.
As a result, the next exchanges will have nothing to do with your learning
from their point of view what's really going on here.
And of course, this defeats the whole purpose of the structured dialogue.
So you restrain yourself to a simple,
I see it this way and one additional sentence,
and then take the next step by asking a question to get them to talk.
Can you tell me how you see the situation?
Then you move on to the hard part of the process.
Listening actively for understanding.
You have to give them your undivided attention,
using your face, body, paravirbal, and verbal encouragers to keep them talking.
Even when you're hearing things you don't like
and letting them get their stuff off their chest.
Remember, no judgment, no arguing back.
Matadors don't fight the bull.
When the bull comes out, they just let the negative energy go by.
Your appreciative commitment is the full understanding.
So you have to listen for the emotional concerns behind the behavior.
Then provide understanding feedback periodically through their talk.
You have to do the second part of active listening
by acknowledging what they've said in your own words,
which shows you understand them.
And if necessary, you'll have to reframe emotionally negative statements
into the content that is submerged
beneath the negative emotions they're expressing.
Let me give you a couple of examples here.
A classic confrontation in the office.
The messy worker beside the neat worker.
The neat one buttonholes our supervisor one day to complain about it
and says, her desk is always a mess.
Well, that might be her way of seeing things,
but it's a profoundly negative judgment of the person beside her.
So the supervisor, rather than feeding into her frustration, reframes it.
So you're concerned about neatness in our office.
Is that it?
Now, you might say, okay, maybe she is,
but why would the supervisor make the effort to do this?
The answer is, if the supervisor says, yes, I agree,
it forces her to take sides
and reinforces the tidy one's anger about her messy partner.
When talking to her messy compatriot after this,
the tidy one will no doubt feel compelled to say,
yeah, well, even the boss agrees with me.
This actually won't help the other make any changes.
And it won't give the supervisor much room to work
when she's trying to facilitate a resolution of this issue
between the two of them in the future.
I was putting in exactly the same position
in a union management discussion once,
a pre-negotiation discussion about problems in the workplace.
I started off by saying, let's try to keep it neutral, okay?
Keep the discussion descriptive, focused on the larger issues,
and I'll let everyone put their stuff on the table
in a way that we can all hear each other.
Right away, I get some macho aggressive manager
who jumps in and says,
oh, this is going to be a short meeting.
It's the damned union's fault, and that's all there is to it.
At that moment, the whole room is electric with negative energy.
And I'm thinking the union guys on the other side of this table
are going to come around and punch this guy in the face
if I don't do something here.
So I say firmly, looking directly into the eyes
of the angry executive,
so you're concerned about the union's role in this situation.
Is that right?
Yeah, I'm really concerned about it.
I think it's their fault.
And a little louder on my part.
So you think they may have a major role to play in this situation.
Is that right?
And this time he slowed down and kind of looked up at me
quizzically and said, yeah, that's right.
I turned to the flip chart and wrote down
concern about the union's role in this situation, dash, major.
So I turned back to the rest of the room and said,
what are the rest of you have to say about this?
And they got it immediately.
I wasn't going to permit negative emotional attacks in this discussion.
By reframing it twice and repeating the content
rather than the emotion,
I modeled the way I expected other people to talk.
And for the most part after that, they did.
People spoke about their concerns and contributing causes,
not about the damned management or unions.
And that's what I want you to do when you're facing
the one across from you and they're hitting you with the hard stuff.
Persistently model emotionally neutral descriptive talk.
And when necessary, reframe the emotions out of their criticisms.
Ask questions to clarify or confirm your understanding
of any points they're making.
And remember, in this part of the talk,
anything you say is only about your communicating your understanding.
It's not about you telling them about you and your stuff.
That chance will come soon enough.
Because when they seem to have come to a place
where they've put it all on the table,
at least for a moment and they've sort of run out of emotional steam,
you can break in gently and say,
okay, you might if I tell you my side of the story.
Again, I know you might be thinking,
why am I asking permission here?
I know this person.
You see, it's a modeling issue.
Seeking permission shows respect, reinforces equality.
And the basis for effective dialogue of any kind requires equality.
It's that positive symmetry that is demonstrated by civility,
even in tough situations.
Implicitly, if I'm civil to you,
I expect you to be civil back to me.
And from time to time,
you need to ask for their feedback on your words as well.
Because you know what?
You have to say,
what do you think about what I've just said here?
Because maybe they didn't take the course.
And maybe don't get this active listening stuff.
So ask them.
And then give and get clarification until you're satisfied.
They understand your side of the story.
And now I have to give you the hard news.
This is not likely to work the first time through.
You're not likely to reach mutual understanding
by the end of the first iteration.
This is a repeat as needed process.
You have to go back to step three,
start the next round of discussion with another question,
get them to talk so you can then listen more actively
and take your turn to talk afterwards.
It's the cycle required to reach full appreciation
of the situation.
That is mutual understanding
through valuing and honoring the other's talk
by listening actively.
Once you have this mutual understanding,
it's time to do something else.
It's time to solve the problem.
Now that you both have a full appreciation of what it is
that resolving or at least managing a persistent problem
may require,
you have to enter into some kind of negotiation
of creative solution development.
Say things like, what if we try to?
A kind of brainstorming.
And perhaps some creative behavior exchanges
to reach an agreement on an appropriate solution
or an approach to managing the problem.
You know, if I do this, will you do that kind of thing?
And finally, a decision on exactly who will do what when,
if that's appropriate to the situation.
Now, the problem-solving stage occurs late in the process
and is in many ways far less important
than the discussion itself.
The rule in successful problem-solving
is that 90% of the time should be spent
on focusing around a clear
and mutually shared definition of the problem.
We need to get that done first.
Once that's done,
solution development agreement can happen very quickly.
This is the opposite of the way
we naturally see the conflict resolution process.
Most often, we've become very goal-oriented
in this kind of situation.
And in part, this is a version of the avoidance defense mechanism,
but also it's a deep cultural tendency
towards unreflective action in difficult situations.
In the business world,
it's called the fire-ready-aim approach to problem-solving.
We take the view that we need to do something here.
Don't just talk it to death.
Solve it.
When we try to rush the communication process
and we are listening defensively,
if we hear anything at all from the other side
that we can work with,
we just simply jump on that to start the problem-solving
without understanding fully what it might mean.
And as a result,
the quality of the solution often suffers.
Now, our angry couple
is going to start a structured dialogue for us.
The wife has already created the conditions
for an effective structured dialogue,
so they engage in it.
You'll see that she opens with a neutralizing acknowledgement
and then stops and asks him a question
to get his view of the problem.
Then she has to do the hard part.
She has to use her appreciative mindset
and her listening actively to get past its criticisms
to try to understand what's behind them as a response.
Let's see what happens.
I need to talk to you about something that concerns both of us.
It seems to me,
I'm doing all the work taking care of the kids.
I'm overwhelmed here.
I really need your help,
but it seems like you're always working.
Well, how does this look to you?
Hey, you're the one that wanted kids right away
and someone's got to pay for our life.
I'm breaking my back to bring home the money
and you keep buying stuff we don't even need.
I thought we had a real partnership going here.
Partnership? Some partnership?
I'm working my tail off to bring home the money.
You keep spending it as fast as I can make it.
Wow.
I can see you're really concerned about the way I spend our money.
Concern? You're damn right I'm concerned.
It drives me crazy every time you raid our bank account
just to go and buy the most fancy toys to feed your ego.
What is it with you anyway?
Listen, I...
I thought we agreed not to attack each other personally.
You asked me about my feelings and you're getting them.
I asked you what you felt about our situation,
not for another criticism of me and my behavior.
Well, maybe it's the same thing.
I don't think it is.
Please, just tell me what you think and feel
about the bigger picture we're facing here.
Okay, look.
Of course I get mad about some of the stuff you buy,
but that's not really it.
I just think as a whole we spend too much money
and I'm worried about our future.
So you're stressed about it?
Big time. I just feel like if we could lead a less extravagant life
then maybe we could have something left over for a safety net for the future.
My dad worked himself to death trying to take care of us when we were kids.
He died when he was my age.
Don't you remember that?
I hadn't remembered that.
Well, I've been thinking about that a lot lately.
Of course I love to spend more time with you and the kids,
but in order for that to happen I have to work fewer hours at work
and that means less income.
The only way this is going to work is we have to cut our expenses.
So what you're saying is you are worried about our financial future.
You feel tremendous pressure and you'd like us to spend less
so you can spend more time with the kids.
That's exactly right. You got it.
Alright then.
Well, for what seems to be the first time on this issue
she has achieved some understanding of his side of the persistent problem.
And to do it you'll notice that she simply had to matador her way past some direct criticisms
and had to entirely reframe one of his harshest critiques,
partnership, some partnership, into a concern about spending money
and without responding in kind by saying,
wow, I can see you're really concerned about how I spend our money.
Now she needs to tell her side of the story so she asks to start
and she asks for feedback from him as she speaks.
She will ask to take her turn by saying,
can I tell you how all this looks to me now?
Then she describes the issue from her point of view
that she's been avoiding, discussing for a long time.
It relates to her vision of the marriage.
She thought that when they married she could also continue her career
at least on a part-time basis,
and they would both share the child-rearing duties.
That's what she meant by partnership,
splitting all the work of the marriage right across the board.
Not he gets to work and she gets to stay home and raise the kids.
He acknowledges her frustrations and commiserates with her
by saying, well, when reality kicks in,
things just go differently than we planned.
She agrees, but adds that the traditional division of labor
that emerged in the marriage has left her feeling very alone.
A married single mother, she calls it.
So she's feeling two losses here.
The loss of her dream of how a marriage could work
to balance both their needs and the loss of his company
and support because he seems to be at work all the time.
He supports her by adding that he really misses the time at home
with the kids and her.
So they discuss how her shopping habits and his fears
about not having enough money,
how that might have come together
to create real misunderstanding in each of them
about the other's intentions.
And by the time she's finished her story
and with his listening and giving her periodic supportive feedback,
for the first time they seem to see each other differently.
Their understanding of each other has deepened.
She builds on this moment and says that they have to work together
to deal with the issues that they've both raised.
And he agrees, that works for me.
Where do we start?
Now this couple's discussion is a demonstration of the basic process.
In reality, a couple with this level of disagreement
would have to go through the structured dialogue cycle again and again.
Now there were some bumps in the flow of this exchange, of course.
But if they'd been bigger and more challenging,
our couple would have had to repeat steps three through six as needed
until they reached a full appreciation of the situation
and a mutual understanding before starting to problem solve.
That's the point of a structured dialogue.
Asking and listening and then talking in that order
to achieve a mutual view of the situation.
By the end, however, it seems that they are ready
to resolve the problem that underlies the issues
they were using to beat each other up
her shopping and his overwork.
The real problem seems to be an interconnected sense of loss
for her a loss of career, for family,
and for him a loss of family, for career.
Now that they can see this,
they will likely come up with suggestions
that both can understand and accept.
Now let me conclude by saying that the appreciative approach
to structured dialogue is also vital
for dealing with the tensions and potential for communication breakdown
that underlie any conversation we may have with others from a different culture,
a different national or language base,
or from the same country and language base,
but from a different community or upbringing,
a different subculture.
When others do things or say things that seem odd,
wrong-headed or simply confusing,
our natural reflex is to jump into criticism and control talk,
and that doesn't help the situation very much.
Appreciative thinking and structured dialogue
can slow down our judgments,
create a connection,
and help us build bridges of fuller understanding
in these situations.
As you'll see, when we talk about the one collection
of subcultural differences that affects us all,
the ones tied to gender.
So in our next lecture, we're going to look at gender and talk.
Thanks very much.
Thank you.
