Lecture 22 – Leadership, Appreciation, and Productivity
Hi, and welcome to Lecture 22.
Well, there's no avoiding it.
Work is central to most of our lives.
And this usually means, unless we're self-employed,
that we are either managing someone, or being managed by someone, or both.
The relationship between managers and employees is the bedrock of survival and success for all organizations,
and the quality of this relationship is shaped by the quality of the communication between them.
The difference between this and many of our other relationships is one of legitimate power, as we discussed in Lecture 13.
Managers are hired to plan and organize work, and to direct people to do it.
They are also told they have to solve any problems that crop up in the flow of the work,
or in the interpersonal relationships in their units.
It turns out that how they communicate their directions and solve any emerging problems
shapes both the quality of the relationships and the productivity of the people who work for them.
The relationships between managers and employees are shaped by deep cultural schema for organizational structure and culture.
Like every other bit of cultural knowledge about how things and people work,
the way our contemporary managers and employees relate is profoundly shaped by those unconscious patterns we call schema,
that describe organizations and the roles of managers and employees, and that were developed over 100 years ago.
Now here are the traditional Western assumptions about the nature of an organization.
It's a machine.
It's built of thousands of interlocking parts arranged in a hierarchy of authority, top to bottom.
Organizations are built in that form because employees are cogs in the efficient operation of this machine
and are subject to control by managers above them in the hierarchy.
This deep schema of top-down control emerged out of 19th century European treatises on bureaucracy
and out of that scientific management movement of the early 20th century in America.
The scientific approach to management brought order to the chaos of the turn-of-the-century manufacturing processes,
but it also put managers completely in charge of controlling the work, devising the best way to do it,
training the workers to follow their rules and paying them more only if they work faster.
Now in this system, communication was intended to serve two simple purposes.
Deliver orders downward and deliver production information upwards.
And managers were committed to discouraging two other types of communication.
First one, bypassing.
Employees should never go around a local supervisor to talk to the manager above him or her.
And number two, horizontal talk. Employees should never talk with each other about how to do the work.
Both of these communication moments were considered to be either dangerous or inefficient and were definitely discouraged,
which may seem odd to us today.
Within this organizing schema, there's a subset of schema for the role of manager and employee.
Let's review the traditional role of the manager first.
Manager's job is to maintain control of the work process and of the people they oversee.
To do that, managers must plan and budget, establishing detailed steps for needed results
and allocating resources to enact the plans, including deciding who will do what.
Now that's the cognitive part. Here comes the communication.
Managers must delegate to individual employees the responsibility to enact the plan.
They also have to provide policies and procedures to follow and methods to monitor the work and the outcomes.
Essentially, they tell people what to do and how to do it.
And finally, they must control and problem solve, discover any deviations from the plan, and control or eliminate them.
And what is the role of the employee in all this?
Well, in hearing this overview of the traditional duties of the manager, I'm sure you can see what the employee's role actually is.
They can only respond to whatever they're being told.
The controllable employee is the complementary schema to the controlling manager.
The employee is not only an object of control, but also is thought to need controlling if he or she is going to work productively at all.
Now, this view was summarized in the work of management professor from MIT, Douglas McGregor,
and is now famous 1960 book called The Human Side of Enterprise.
Herein, McGregor summarizes two models of the theories that managers had in their heads about what motivated workers.
He named one view Theory X and the other Theory Y.
Based on his observations of managerial behavior, Theory X was the dominant theory.
Managers acted as if workers were people who, among other things, disliked work and avoided it when possible.
Were not ambitious and preferred direction.
Employees were not concerned with the organization's needs and only cared about their take-home pay.
Now, of course, when managers saw employees in this light, they communicated by giving them direct orders
to provide their work very closely and were quick to criticize and threaten punishment to avoid any deviation from the plan.
Now, it turns out there was a smaller group of managers in McGregor's study who seemed to hold an opposite theory of worker motivation.
He called that Theory Y.
These managers seemed to communicate with employees rather than down to or at them.
They generally spoke to employees with more respect.
Interestingly, the units led by Theory Y managers were more productive than those led by Theory X-style managers.
At the time, however, few people beyond academia actually paid any attention to this difference.
These management and employee schema have survived for centuries.
The reason I'm reviewing McGregor's key findings is to remind you that fundamental schema lasts a long time
and are passed on by generation after generation of managers to newcomers to the organization.
They survive an enormous number of changes in the larger society.
I want to think about this with me for a minute.
Consider how different the society was in 1960 compared to the early 1900s when scientific management was introduced.
Or consider how different the U.S. is now in the 21st century compared to the 1960s.
Look at all the changes in our social values.
Far more public emphasis on individual rights since the 1960s.
And changes in technology and the extension of organizational life into the farthest reaches of the world.
There have been tectonic shifts in our society.
Except in the managerial schema about worker motivation.
In their 2005 book The Enthusiastic Employee, David Sarota and his colleagues summarized 10 years of research on managers and employees
done between 1993 and 2003.
Hundreds of thousands of interviews and observations across a wide variety of organizations.
And they reveal several important findings including what the authors call management myths about employee motivation.
And what do managers misbelieve about worker motivation at the turn of the 21st century?
People dislike work of any kind.
Don't care about whether they do a quality job.
If not supervised closely, employees will try to get away with whatever they can.
And all employees care about is their pay and benefits.
Haven't we heard all this before?
And this turns out to be the views of about 85% of the managers surveyed in 2005.
Now in addition, Sarota's research team asked employees in these organizations a series of questions that include measures about their level of enthusiasm,
their emotional involvement with the organization and their work.
Key result, repeated in many other studies, was that most employees are very unenthusiastic about their work.
They're just doing enough to get by.
And their lack of enthusiasm is closely related to how they saw themselves as being treated by the organization and its managers.
The more traditional Theory X style management, which seems to be alive and well at the 21st century, seems to compel employees to give the minimum, not the maximum.
After McGregor's 1960 book, much research was done to demonstrate that Theory Y style management was more effective.
But real world managers thought of it as a kind of personality trade issue.
You're either a kind of Theory Y manager, kind of a nice guy, or you weren't.
Since then, research has shown that Theory Y is not a sort of personality trade at all.
It's actually a learnable set of behaviors that are attached to the traditional manager's role.
They're the leadership side of the traditional manager's role.
Now we know that these essential acts of leadership are integral to being a successful manager.
Managers could carry out both the order-creating functions of the traditional manager and the leadership side of management at exactly the same time.
That means that managers can plan and budget, organize the work, delegate it to employees, and manage the plan.
They can do all of this by talking with people rather than planning by themselves and then telling people what to do afterwards.
And what are they saying to their employees as managerial leaders?
Well, they're setting direction by creating and communicating a positive vision of the future and giving reasons to people to actually carry out the plan.
And they're securing alignment.
Once having worked with employees to develop strategies to put the plan into action,
they secure their acceptance by constantly communicating with them to sustain their cooperation.
And it also means that they support employees by energizing them to overcome barriers to success that inevitably appear by satisfying very basic but often unfulfilled human needs.
And which needs are these?
The needs that every one of us has.
The need to be seen as valuable, competent, and influential by another person.
Although they can be, these needs don't have to be spoken about directly.
They are worked out through the manager's collaborative leadership style.
To be effective, managers have to be leaders as well as controllers of the plan.
You have to step outside of the traditional unconscious scheme of managing,
which is the exercise of external control over uncaring workers,
and consciously invite employees to join them as partners in managing the process.
Successful managers, we now know, learn to lead employees so that employees can manage themselves.
Let's do that again.
Successful managers learn to lead employees so employees can manage themselves.
This not only requires managers to re-envision their role,
but it also requires a conscious shift in the way they talk to their employees.
Remember, managers are perfectly positioned to enact control talk.
They have the legitimate authority with the attached power to reward and punish.
They can exercise control talk without even having to think about it.
And that's the trouble.
All the limitations we've attributed to control talk in personal relationships
also apply to using it in the workplace.
It's automatic.
It starts with critical judgment.
It's about trying to manage or change others to see and do things your way.
And it's just as likely to create resistance as cooperation.
When used often enough, whatever cooperation you get as a manager
is offered grudgingly and unenthusiastically.
And grudging and unenthusiastic people turn out not to be very productive.
To change the way employees involve themselves in their work,
we need to change the automatic managerial mindset with its focus on control and control talk.
To a managerial mindset of appreciation about organizations
focus on the use of dialogue with employees.
The appreciative view of organizations is just the opposite of the traditional schema,
and it has three elements.
From an appreciative view, the organization is not a machine with a thousand cogs,
but a system of interwoven relationships brought to life every day by thousands of conversations.
In every organization, there is something that works well.
And the positive energy around this can be evoked from employees to improve any situation
you just have to change the conversation you're having with them.
And the way to do that is to enter into an appreciative dialogue with your employees
and be a managerial leader.
Now we've already defined appreciation in Lecture 12
and appreciative questions in Lecture 17.
And when appreciation is framed as the leadership side of management,
it reveals the action values behind managerial leadership.
Appreciative leadership means that managers seek to fully understand a situation before they act.
They value and honor individual contributions,
and they seek to increase the worth of everything they touch.
This means they take pride in what they do,
and they model the need to take pride in work for everyone they manage.
I have a story with you about how appreciative managerial leadership worked
in a traditionally top-down organization, the U.S. Navy.
Commander D. Michael Abershoff had completed his mission.
Through what he called grassroots leadership,
he turned around the operations of the USS Benfold,
one of the U.S. Navy's most modern warships,
worth about a billion dollars, had a crew of 300.
It was the most dramatic turnaround of a ship and crew since World War II.
His methods weren't complex, yet the results were amazing.
Here's a couple of high points.
In 20 months, he managed to change the ship's combat readiness indicators
from among the lowest to the highest ever in the history of the Pacific Fleet.
When a ship is directed to a combat zone,
the pre-deployment training cycle usually takes a total of 52 days.
He was completed by the Benfold crew in just 19 days.
He operated the Benfold on 75% of its allocated budget
and returned 1.4 million to the Navy's coffers.
Commander Abershoff also had 100% of the Benfold's career sailors
signing on for another tour.
Typically, only 54% of sailors stay in the Navy after their second duty tour.
It's estimated that this retention alone saved the Navy 1.6 million that year.
Now, Abershoff's driving principles behind this 20-month turnaround were simple.
Don't command, communicate purpose.
Organize around performance, not obedience.
The work you do matters more than the stripes you wear.
It turns out that what he chose was the appreciative mindset.
He communicated a positive purpose.
He saw the useful, positive aspects that already existed in the current situation.
As he said, the young folks on this ship were smart and talented,
and he knew he could evoke their engagement by asking two kinds of appreciative questions,
those for understanding and those for improvement.
For instance, almost as soon as he took command,
he began a 15- to 20-minute personal interview with each of his crew of 300.
He asked three questions.
What do you like best about the ship?
What do you like least?
And what would you change if you could?
Then he acted as quickly as he could to institute the ideas that came from these interviews.
Just an example of this, everybody hates the food on a ship.
So he found a way to twist the budget around,
sent the cooks to culinary school,
and within a few months, people were actually visiting the ship to have lunch whenever it was in the dock.
Now, this appreciative commitment extended to improving every situation he touched,
not just the cooking.
So he asked everyone, is there a better way to do this?
He got all levels involved,
and when naval procedures got in the way, he encouraged people to bend or change them,
as long as it served the larger purposes of supporting the crew and enhancing readiness.
Needless to say, this kind of change always runs into some resistance,
so he practiced appreciation as self-management,
and he was seeking full understanding before acting,
as a way of managing his reactions to difficult situations.
He used an internal dialogue of questions when dealing with a staff problem.
He said, before flying off the handle, I would ask myself,
did I clearly articulate the goals I was trying to achieve here?
Did I give people the time and resources they needed to succeed,
and did I give them enough training to get the job done properly?
And after answering my own questions, 80% of the time,
I found I was part of the problem,
and that through my actions alone, I could have altered the outcome significantly.
Now, the new Benfold culture has continued after his departure.
After his tour, Aberchoff was promoted to another job,
but the Benfold continued to have the highest readiness ratings in the Pacific Fleet.
Also, the Navy has added courses on enlightened leadership to their officers' training.
Why the change in an organization that, as Aberchoff argued,
hadn't changed this view of leadership since the time of John Paul Jones
and the American Revolutionary War?
Now, while he was making leadership history in the Navy,
a breakthrough large-scale study was being done in the private sector by Marcus Buckingham
and a team of researchers at the Gallup Organization.
In the end, it clarified how any manager could enhance employee commitment to work.
In this study, he called it engagement.
He was the first researcher to call employee commitment engagement.
And so how do managerial leaders create very enthusiastic or engaged employees?
Well, after reviewing years of Gallup employee satisfaction survey data,
Buckingham teased out 12 themes that seemed to relate employee satisfaction scores
with measures of productivity.
He wrote 12 strong questions representing these themes,
and then surveyed about 106,000 people in 24 organizations across 12 interstices.
This was a very big study.
He argued that where employees could answer these questions in the emphatic affirmative,
five out of five, where five means I strongly agree, there was high engagement.
And engagement, it turns out, yields productivity.
Units which had mostly fives not only were productive,
but also were the highest in measures of profitability, customer satisfaction, and employee retention.
Although each of the 12 questions was correlated with one of these measures,
I'm going to review the first seven questions because the answers to these were correlated to all of the measures.
To achieve every manager's dream of high productivity and high profit,
they need to have employees who are unequivocally positive in answering the following questions.
I know what is expected of me at work.
I have the materials and equipment I need to do my job right.
Now let's stop for a moment here and think about these two questions.
They mean that a manager needs to be clear about what their employees' jobs are,
and if they have the resources to do their job right.
Remember, people hate uncertainty and demotivates them.
These questions reflect the part of management that is about planning and organizing the traditional role.
Let's talk about the next questions.
I have the opportunity to do what I do best every day.
In the last seven days, I have received recognition or praise for doing good work.
My supervisor or someone at work seems to care about me as a person.
Someone at work encourages my development.
Now when employees give fives to question three through six,
they are saying their manager is considerate of them as individuals,
and that the manager has given them the chance to do their best work,
some thanks, some general care, and encouragement to improve.
The last question, of course, was at work, my opinions count.
When employees give question seven a five,
it means that they see their manager as being collaborative in their decision making,
of being able to include the employee's opinions and acknowledging their input into the decisions that actually affect them.
Now, it sounds really simple. These questions are very simple.
So how many of the 106,000 employees said they were in full agreement with these questions?
Only 26%.
55% were disengaged. Their scores kind of hung out in the middle range of the answers,
and 19% were actively disengaged.
They were actually working against their local manager.
According to Buckingham's data, engagement levels are local.
People are not engaged with the organization.
They're engaged in their work because of their manager.
And if the engagement level falls too far and they can quit, they will quit.
If they're not leaving the organization, they're leaving their manager.
And if they can't quit, then they'll move into the disengaged middle,
a disease that consultants now call presenteeism.
That is, their bodies are present, but their commitment has left the building.
Now, these themes appear over and over again in very large studies from US,
from the US, Europe, from Canada.
The seven steps of clear, considerate, and collaborative communication
represent the practical behaviors of managerial leadership.
They are the concrete aspects of theory Y management.
Theory X was about creating a plan and managing employee behavior
by exercising control over them.
Theory Y is about leading employees so they can manage their own behavior.
The answers to these questions speak to the employee's fundamental needs.
I'm competent. I can do things right and I can do my best work.
I am valuable. I'm shown consideration as an individual.
And I can influence the situation because my opinions count.
In Sirotas and Buckingham's very large studies, we can see that this kind
of managerial leadership really, really works.
So why do so few managers actually use it?
Because it's not unnatural or automatic choice for most managers.
Control is built into the job and the deeper organizing scheme of the firm
and control talk, as in everyday life, simply comes to mind automatically
in the way we have to deal with others in difficult situations.
To be manager or leaders, managers have to consciously choose dialogue talk
for their problems and they have to do the work of dialogue.
That is practice it often enough that it starts to feel natural.
So how can managers use dialogue to enhance employee motivation?
Managers need to see dialogue talk as a strategic tool to deal with those moments
where, despite their best collaborative intentions,
employees seem unwilling or unable to take on responsibility
or make the decisions required of them.
They choose the appropriate elements of dialogue to begin and then continue
a conversation that will enhance employee motivation in such situations.
It's a matter of learning what to say first and what to say next.
As we said in lecture 16 and 17, dialogue talk has three key elements.
Description and eye messages, which is how managers can provide direction.
This is what the client needs. I'd like you to start this by Monday.
Asking appreciative questions and listening actively, which will engage employees' minds,
get them to think about situations, issues, and solutions.
For instance, if we're going to do this better, what would you do?
How about open acknowledgement and genuine support, the third element,
which managers can use to ensure sufficient confidence in the employees
to take on responsibility and to make and enact decisions more effectively.
Come on, you guys have done this job in the past. I know I can count on you again.
But before dealing with a disengaged employee or team of employees,
we asked managers to do what Michael Abershoff did so successfully.
We asked them to use inner dialogue before intervening with the employee or a team of employees.
They need to ask themselves questions to manage their voice.
They had all voice.
They were placed on the inference ladder and to focus on emotional self-management and understanding.
Then, considering the situation calmly, they need to decide the order
in which they will use the active elements of dialogue talk.
Now, here's an example question for each element of dialogue talk.
Before using descriptive eye messages to provide more direction,
managers need to ask themselves, does the employee already know what to do and how to do it?
The answer to this question is yes, don't be directive.
In fact, using descriptive eye messages to tell people what they already know how to do
is likely to reduce your credibility and undermine your authority.
Secondly, before starting with appreciative questions and listening actively to engage employees' minds,
there's one other key question we have people ask to themselves.
Does the employee have the experience or knowledge that will allow them to find their own solutions?
If the answer is likely to be yes, ask the questions and actively engage them,
engage their minds in defining the situation, discovering the connections they need to make,
and developing possible solutions by themselves or with you in conversation.
They will own their answers much more deeply than any answer you could provide them.
If the answer to this question is no, then asking questions will only put them on the spot and embarrass them.
Use descriptive eye messages at this point to give them more information.
And finally, before a manager uses the open acknowledgement and support elements of dialogue talk
to ensure that employees have sufficient confidence to make and enact decisions effectively,
they first need to ask themselves, does this individual seem to lack confidence?
Has anything occurred in the environment that would be unsettling to him or her?
If the answers to these questions are yes, then focusing on acknowledgement and support
would help an individual settle down emotionally and as a result, learn faster.
If the answers are no, managers need to shift gears and begin asking questions
and listening to engage the employees in solving the problem with them.
Now, here's an example of the strategic use of dialogue talk to avoid a potential problem.
The team with which you are working has a pretty good track record at producing results.
They've recently increased productivity and reduced waste without much assistance.
However, it's time to go through another round of this process
and the improvements will require the team to adjust their behavior, adjust their processes one more time.
If nobody likes to do this.
So, which aspects of dialogue would a manager use to start this conversation
and sustain the team's engagement?
Number one, first and most important, start with acknowledging their recent and successful efforts.
It's time here for some recognition and support before you move on to your next step,
which is asking questions and listening.
After your acknowledgement, ask two questions.
And report requiring additional process improvements.
And if the answer is yes, how do you think you can implement these new requests?
Then just stop talking.
These folks already know what to do.
So, giving them direction will only bore them and make you look like you're trying to control them.
Your job here is to show appreciation and reengage them in a process they've already successfully begun.
Now, as a manager or leader, your job is to find the time to open up this kind of space for conversation.
A conversation that engages the employee's minds, provides direction when they actually needed
and supports growth and development in taking more responsibility.
Appreciative leaders who use dialogue talk strategically get the work done by sustaining
or increasing the engagement levels of their staff.
What do managers do when unexpected differences appear in the workplace?
They use assertive dialogue and ask for change, just the way we talked about in lecture 18.
Now, one general rule for work situations, if you want people to change their behavior,
it's best to have data to rely on as a basis for your request.
Simply stating your opinion about change is easily resistant and demanding change
puts you back into the role of the controller.
So, as we outlined in lecture 18, I noticed that you came in 20 minutes after start time this morning.
Avoid using categorical labels like late.
Be as specific in your description as you can.
And I overheard one of your colleagues complaining about it as well.
I'm not happy about this.
In fact, I checked the time sheets for the past couple of months
and you've already showed up after the start time every couple of weeks.
Can you tell me what's going on here from your point of view?
Now, if they respond in a way that seems to diminish the importance of the issue,
you can always describe the larger effects of their behavior on the unit as a whole or on other individuals.
And of course, for persistent problems, there is structured dialogue.
Managers follow exactly the same steps I've already outlined in lecture 19
when we were dealing with a couple with a persistent problem.
Different content, perhaps less obvious emotional talk, but the same process.
Yet, them to talk first and seek mutual understanding before going into problem-solving.
I believe that what appreciative managerial leaders are trying to achieve
is captured in the comments of David Hitz, co-founder of NetApp, a leading high-tech firm
which was named the best employer in the U.S. for 2009 by Fortune magazine.
In a television interview, he said,
just showing appreciation is part of the two-way interaction of humans.
And when someone's motivated, when they're engaged,
they'll do five times as much if they understand where the company is going
and where they're trying to get to and they feel good about it.
Then magic happens.
Of course, like all relationships in our life, work relationships are two-sided.
And both sides have to attribute to the magic of the success.
In the next lecture, we'll review research on the work goals
and needs of enthusiastic and productive employees
and the communicational dynamics between them, their colleagues, and their managers.
Thanks very much.
