Hi guys, it's White The Nerd, and I think I just saw one of the greatest movies of all
time.
You know what that movie is?
Dawn Kirk.
Oh my gosh, dude, dude, dude, dude.
This movie is definitely going to be the best movie of the year.
I don't see how there's going to be a better movie than this movie.
This movie takes the crown.
Logan, second, but this movie, this movie's number one.
This movie, oh my gosh dude, I can't believe it.
Christopher Nolan does it again.
Dawn Kirk is amazing.
This is the best new movie of the year.
And if you don't see it, you're missing out, because this is, oh my gosh dude, I don't know
how to, it's just, like when people are like, hey, movie, movie, movie, movie, movie, movie,
movies can't be art.
This is pure art.
This is like a painting.
So yeah, today I will be reviewing the brand new Christopher Nolan movie, Dawn Kirk.
And if you guys want to know the story of it, it's about when these troops or soldiers
from Belgium, the Great Britain Empire, and France.
So and then, and they're in Dawn Kirk, France, and they're surrounded by Germans.
And there's 400 soldiers there.
And by the way, this takes place on World War II, even before the US joined.
So yeah, so they have to escape before they die.
And by the way, this is based on a true story.
And let me just tell you, it is so realistic, okay?
This is one of the most realistic movies I have ever seen.
I mean, I don't know, there's probably a lot of false stuff in it, like in every, based
on a true story movie.
But this movie just felt like I was watching, like, war footage.
I mean, even though it was like really high quality, it felt like I was watching like
a World War II footage.
It felt like I was watching footage of a war.
That's how realistic it felt.
Like, it just felt like they got everything point on point.
They got all like the uniforms, right?
They got everything right.
And you know what's cool about it?
They filmed this movie in Dawn Kirk.
Yeah, they actually did.
They filmed this movie in Dawn Kirk.
I mean, some of it was probably filmed in other places, like in the studio set.
But the beat scenes are filmed in Dawn Kirk.
And so that makes it a lot more realistic.
This movie is just, like, as I said, it feels like you're watching war footage.
Like, it feels like you're actually watching a war.
Most of the time, I forgot that it was a movie.
It didn't feel like a movie.
It felt like a war footage.
It felt like I was watching footage from World War II.
That's how realistic it feels.
And basically, the main reason why is because of the visuals.
The visuals are amazing.
Like, this might be one of the best visual movies ever.
I mean, I know Christopher Nolan doesn't like great visuals, but this might be one
of his best.
I'm just telling you, these visuals are amazing.
Like, these are just appealing to the eyes.
Like, when I was watching the movie, I was just looking at it and like, wow, man, this
is so appealing.
Like, it's just one of the most appealing movies I have ever seen.
One of the most appealing movies I have seen in a movie theater.
Like, it is so appealing.
Like, when I just looked at the movie screen, I was like, oh my gosh, dude, that looks so
beautiful.
Like, it is just awesome.
Like, if you love watching, like, the visual scenes and like, visual scenes that look amazing
in film, you have to see this movie because the visuals are just amazing.
Like, it's like, they got, like, again, with like, the realistic part, they got point-on-point
on the visuals.
They did so good with the visuals.
It just looked amazing.
Also the quality of the film, it was just amazing, and just seeing like, all like the
World War II stuff, and high quality film.
And again, it felt so realistic, so it looked really appealing to the eye.
And the acting.
Oh my gosh, dude, the acting was so awesome.
Even though like, the main character, one of the main characters is acted by a guy that's
in one direction, even though one direction sucks.
Still.
Still, he's really good.
All the actingness was good.
Like, oh my gosh, like, even if there was a bad actor in this, like, the guy from One
Direction.
Like, I bet you, I bet you Chris Funoan did a directess.
He wanted to be a really good actor, but since he was in Chris Funoan film, Chris Funoan
made him into a really good actor.
That's the thing about Chris Funoan.
To me, he's my favorite director, because he knows how to make a movie.
He knows how to make a movie good.
I mean, sometimes there might be some like, like, you might nitpick sometimes, and like,
there might be some little bats if any, but still, he gets stuff point on point.
Like for example, the acting.
He knows how to make actors act good.
I mean, they can even suck, but he makes actors act.
Like, it's just amazing.
I mean, I think I'm a huge Chris Funoan fan when I first saw Interstellar in the movie
theaters, and that's why I was very hyped up for this movie.
I was starting, like, I was kind of like, well, I don't know.
I mean, I watch the trailers, and like, the runtime is like 106 minutes, which that's
an hour and 46 minutes, and that really short, like, instead of Interstellar was like 2 hours
and 49 minutes, which that's like 3 hours, and this movie's like 2 hours, so I was kind
of worried.
It didn't feel that long, but this movie, like, I'm not a big fan, I don't really like watching
short movies, but this movie makes you feel like, like, I mean, you know it's short when
you're watching it, but it's like, it's short in a good way, okay?
Like, I mean, I don't like it to be longer, but still, they made, like, they made the
film short, but it, like, it was short in a good way.
It just felt awesome.
Like, when you were done watching it, you felt like you'd seen a whole flippin' war.
It seems like you watched, like, this whole footage of a war.
That's what it felt like, and it felt like you got enough, and that's what's good, because
the running time's short, but, like, I don't like short movies, because it feels like they're
not enough.
But when I was done watching this movie, I'm like, wow, that's enough, that is amazing.
That's the thing about this movie, it's just, it's just awesome.
Like, I mean, if I had a nitpick of a thing that was wrong with it, is that the, I mean,
the story, I don't know, like, the story could kind of feel bland, or like, not, like, it
might be, like, eh, but still, still, I mean, I don't, it's still, like, all the acting
and all the visuals, and everything else that's awesome about it, like, just amazing, it makes
you forget that the story is kind of bland, and it's just, it's just awesome.
Like, I mean, I don't, it's like it just makes me not really care that the story's a little
bland.
And, yeah, if you want a nitpick, you can tell that the story's kind of bland, well, that's
for me, but still, still, as I said, the visuals just make it an amazing story, even though
if you just put it on paper, it might seem a little bland.
And it's just amazing that, like, I don't know, this is one of the more realistic war
movies, like, it's not, it's not really, like, hacksaw rich, it's not like, I mean, hacksaw
rich was realistic, but this one's, like, more, I don't know, I feel like this one's
a lot more realistic, and, I don't know, it feels a lot more, less CGI, like, a lot less
CGI.
I bet you some of the playing scenes were CGI, but, like, this, this just feels like,
like, they didn't really use CGI a lot, and that's the one thing good about Christopher
Nolan, he doesn't really use CGI, I mean, he does use CGI, but he likes to film stuff
without CGI to make it more real.
This movie felt a lot more real than hacksaw rich, that's what I think this movie's better
than hacksaw rich, which hacksaw rich is another World War II movie, and, I don't know, it's
just this movie, it's just amazing, like, I don't know, it's just, like, you guys just,
it's such a shame for yourselves, okay, like, you guys will be shocked, okay, I mean, if
you don't really like, like, movies not with a lot of humor, you probably shouldn't go
see this movie, I mean, it does have some humor in it, I guess, but, like, this movie's
more, to me, is more like an art form, I don't, I, I know people hate it when people call
movies art, but really, I think movies should be art, okay, movies are basically art, because
it's like, you're filming, and, I mean, that's, that's your own art, like, forget, but when
people like, oh my gosh, video games are not art, but really, if you think about it, that's
your own project, that's your, uh, masterpiece, that's your art, that's what I think about
this movie, this movie's just, like, a painting, it's just art, it's just amazing, I don't
know, I mean, I mean, it was worth it for the three-year-long wait, I remember when I saw
Andrew Stella, I'm like, I can't wait till Christopher Nolan's next movie, and look at
it now, it's Dunkirk Arisoli, and it's just amazing, it was worth the wait, I'm just telling
you, and you're probably like, why the nerve, where are you gonna rate the movie? It's definitely
10 out of 10, there is no way that it's not a 10 out of 10, okay, I mean, so I think a
lot of people, I think a lot, like, it depends basically what person you are, it's like, the
movie is like, I don't know, to me, like, I like it, because it's so very realistic, I
mean, to me, there's not like, I don't know, there's not like a lot of dialogue in it, I mean,
there is dialogue, but it's kind of like a, I don't know, it's weird, because there's
like, a lot of characters in it, and it feels like, I don't know, like, sometimes there's
like, there's like, two minutes of no dialogue, sometimes there's a lot of dialogue, well,
not really a lot, but like, when you hear all the dialogue coming on, you're like, whoa,
that's a lot of dialogue, because sometimes there's minutes of no dialogue, and that's
what I like about it, because it makes you more intense, like, that's what I think movies
should do more, still, there should be like, the movies that are like, huge, but this movie
is just, to me, it's just a realistic, like, a realistic war movie, this is, to me, one
of the greatest, or the greatest war movie of all time, I bet there's so much better
ones, but this is just, wow, like, I don't know, this movie is just amazing, like, this
is definitely, probably, definitely going to be the greatest movie this year, and it's
just, and I'm not really that surprised, I mean, I think Interstellar, The Dark Knight,
and The Dark Knight Rises is better than this movie, but it's better than Inception and
Batman Begins, well, it's a little better than Batman Begins, and again, this is directed
by my favorite director, Christopher Nolan, and yeah, and again, he did another masterpiece,
which was Dunkirk, and I don't think this can be performed again, I don't think there's
ever going to be a really realistic war movie again, yes, there's going to be, like, Hacksaw
Ridge type movies, like, the ones with all the, like, action, and, you know, you know
what I'm talking about, I think there's still going to be a lot of war movies, but this
might be one of the last realistic war movies ever, like, I don't think there's ever, like,
see, and, like, it's just like, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, this is, no, not war movies,
maybe one of the last realistic World War II movies, because World War II is just like,
it's getting like, like, the years are passing by, it's getting more, like, it's getting
more past, you know, and like, I think when it, I think when it's like, it reaches the
hundred years mark, I don't think there's going to be a boy really doing any realistic
World War II movies, I think, yes, there's going to be a lot of World War II movies,
but I think, I think this might be one of the last, or maybe the last, realistic, like,
really, like, on realistic World War II movies, but yeah, I don't know, or, you know, maybe
they're not going to do, like, a lot of realistic war movies, because this might be, like, I
don't know, this might, I feel like this is going to be one of the last realistic World
War II movies, maybe a long time, so, not to miss your chance, I mean, I'm sorry to
say realistic War movies, there's going to be a lot of realistic World movies, but this
one, this one's probably the most realistic World War II movie, like, you know, that's
probably going to happen in a long time, like, I mean, still, there's probably still some,
like, false stuff about it, because of course, in every true movie that's based on the true
story, there's still going to be false stuff on it, I bet you like, a lot of, maybe some
of the characters are false, I don't know, I don't know, even some of the main characters,
I don't know if they're false or maybe they're all true, but really, still, even if some
of the characters are false, this still feels really true, like, it just feels, like, it
feels like it's all real, and that's what a masterpiece should do, it should be, like,
really believable, and that's what it is, like, again, it feels like I'm watching World
War II footage, it's just amazing, I mean, this might be one of the last realistic World
War II movies, I mean, there's still going to be a lot of other really good realistic
World War movies in the future, but this might be one of the last realistic World War II
movies, so before you go out and see any other movie, before you see the Emoji movie, before
you see Spider-Man, before you see Planet of the Apes, before you see any movie in the
movie theaters, the next time you go, please, please see this 10 out of 10 movie, because
if you don't see Dunkirk, you are missing out, you're going to miss out on one of the
greatest World War movies of all time, I'm just saying, I'm just saying, I'm just warning
you, do not miss this movie, I mean, I have seen War for the Planet of the Apes, and like,
I love that movie, but, like, you should see Dunkirk before you see that, because Dunkirk,
Dunkirk is just 10 out of 10 amazing, so just please see it, I mean, I don't think everybody
is going to like it, and I bet you're just going to, I mean, there's still a lot of people
that hate it, but this movie, to me, is just a masterpiece, it's a work of art, it feels
like I'm watching World War II footage, the acting is amazing, I mean, it's totally my
field plan, but everything else in it is just amazing, and I was thinking, I forgot to point
out the action, the action is amazing, I mean, it goes apart with the visuals, but the action
makes it so believable, like, I mean, the action does go into the visuals, and it's just the
action, like, the explosions make you feel like, wow, this feels like it actually happened,
like, everything in it, just everything in it feels like I'm watching an art form, it's
just a masterpiece, I don't know if I should really say anything else, I think, I think
to end off this review, as I said a lot of times, you just need to see this movie, okay,
again, if you do not see this movie, you're missing out, okay, because this is one of
the greatest war movies of all time, you might not see a war movie like this ever again,
so yeah, don't forget to subscribe, leave a like, and please, give this movie, because
I give it a 10 out of 10, and see it before you see Planet of the Apes or any other movie
theater, please, please, just see this movie, okay, so bye.
