So, our next talk is by Michael Wheeler who's going to talk to us under the title, he's
on the screen, Science Friction, Phenomenology, Naturalism and Cognitive Science.
And as the slide shows, Michael comes from the University of Stirling, he tells me he
recently published a book called Reconstructing the Cognitive World, which is a Heideggerian
version of cognitive science, sounds challenging.
And indeed, even more bravely, he's recently finished an entry for the Stanford Encyclopedia
on Heidegger, which no doubt we will send all our students to, but which will no doubt
also fail to satisfy the impossible demands of the world's Heideggerians.
So, I hope here we are in a more friendly, friendly disposition towards you Michael.
Well, maybe you start out that way, we'll see how we end up.
Okay, so the term friction in the title is doing two jobs.
On the one hand, it's tagging the fact that, I think for many people, the combination of
phenomenology and naturalism invites a certain tension, shall we say, philosophical tension.
There's a kind of primer face here that we're friction there.
But it also is going to play a positive role later on in the talk.
In the sense that, what I want to argue in the end, I think quite consistent with what
Dan Zahavi was saying yesterday, I want to provide a framework in which we can see phenomenology
and naturalism as it were placing friction on each other in a way that is productive
and positive with respect to understanding.
There's a kind of negative to positive shift in the notion of friction in this talk.
Now, as you may reasonably infer from the introduction, the person I'll be referring to
is not Hussel, but Heidegger, a little bit of Merleau Ponty at the end if I get time,
but most is Heidegger.
And I guess the comparison that sets up the initial tension is with a sort of mad scientist,
or shall we say more likely, a mad philosopher who loves science in that way.
Don't use people at the end of the time.
My hair's quite similar.
So anyway, for the point being here, as soon as we put Heidegger next to science,
then we feel a tension, and the question is, can we relieve that tension?
Let's see where we go.
I'm going to try to start out by being as specific as I can about what I mean by phenomenology
and as vague as possible about what I mean by naturalism.
Later on, I'll sharpen up the notion of naturalism.
Main menu.
Sorry, I'm just going to dim the light.
So later on, I'll sharpen up this notion of naturalism as the argument unfolds.
So I'm going to take phenomenology, and immediately some people will dislike this,
but just read out the definition and I'll come back to it.
I'm going to take phenomenology to be a theoretical, or perhaps some sense,
theoretical philosophical enterprise, that through an attentive and sensitive examination...
Hang on, I think I can make it better.
There.
You might be able to see this firing the gun, if you don't mind.
It's not a theoretical or perhaps a meta-theoretical philosophical enterprise,
but through an attentive and sensitive examination of ordinary human experience,
I used to reveal the transcendental yet historical conditions which give that experience its form.
So first of all, notes on the things in green here.
I think that there's a kind of way of thinking about phenomenology,
where you think of it as a descriptive enterprise,
and to the extent that you emphasise that,
it often seems as if all you're doing is just kind of reporting the surface features of subjective experience.
And that's clearly not the notion of phenomenology that it's at work in hiding it.
So in the broadest possible sense,
I'm going to take the loss of phenomenology to be a theoretical expanding enterprise,
that attempts to mine, as it were, the transcendental conditions of possibility for experience to be the way it is.
The historicality in Heidi's notion of the transcendental comes from the hermeneutic character of understanding in general.
The phenomenologists will be bringing certain preconceptions to the task at hand.
It's a culturally embedded, historically embedded understanding.
And that will play an absolutely critical,
and I think possibly under-argued part in the argument a bit later.
So I'll hopefully cover that up when we get to it.
On the other hand, naturalism,
so I'm talking very specifically about what I'm going to mean by phenomenology,
but I'm going to start out with the thought that naturalism is just the claim
that philosophy should be continuous with the empirical science.
And nothing more than that for the moment.
Obviously, to have any kind of decent understanding of what naturalism is,
we need to fill in the details of what continuity amounts to.
And that will come back later.
Alright, so, uneasy bedfellows.
Could one develop a coherent research program that was committed both to phenomenology
as a philosophical methodology and to naturalism?
So my strategy here will be to focus on a specific case in which this has been attempted.
The attempt to build a hydrogarean cognitive science.
And I'm going to concentrate on some arguments that have been lodged
against the very idea that one could build a hydrogarean cognitive science.
And these arguments have two different forms.
According to one of these arguments,
cognitive science, of course, as I say in a moment,
is going to be committed to a certain kind of naturalism.
And naturalistic theorizing fails to respect the deliverances of phenomenology.
That would be one kind of complaint that could be made.
A second kind of complaint that could be made is that phenomenology
has an unyieldingly anti-naturalistic character.
And we've seen versions of both these arguments already in this conference.
And I'm going to concentrate on some published versions of these.
And try and resist them.
And in the process, I hope, show how one could have a naturalized phenomenology,
or perhaps a phenomenological naturalism.
All right, so, test case of hydrogarean cognitive science.
Let's first be very clear.
What I mean by a hydrogarean cognitive science
will be a cognitive science that systematically integrates
hydrogarean phenomenology with the foundational features of cognitive science.
So let me just say something about that.
Of course, it's possible for people in cognitive science
who are interested in explaining conscious experience, for instance,
through whatever scientific states and processes
that scientifically identified states and processes they work with,
it's possible to borrow insights from Heidegger.
So, famously, for instance, Heidegger's notion of the ready-to-hand,
for instance, has played a big role in some recent cognitive science thinking.
But for something that counts as a Heideggerian cognitive science,
we have to go further than that.
It's not a question of borrowing the odd piece of early stages
of the existential analytic in being in time.
It'll be a cognitive science that systematically integrates
its theoretical postulates, its methodology,
and so on with a kind of Heideggerian philosophical framework.
And part of that will mean ensuring that its methodology
is consistent with the foundational features
that will be necessary for something to be a cognitive science.
Now, I take it that any philosophical framework,
particularly a philosophy of mind, cognition, consciousness,
that right shotgun, as I've put it, with cognitive science
that's going to align itself with cognitive science
must be naturalistic in a form.
I'm going to take that to be an assumption.
I guess one could try and think of having a cognitive science
that wasn't naturalistic, but I'm going to take that to be a requirement here.
So, a Heideggerian cognitive science,
a cognitive science that was systematically integrated with Heideggerian terminology,
requires that phenomenology to be compatible with naturalism.
Otherwise, we don't get off the ground.
Okay, so Rob Ruther, in a book called Cognitive Systems and the Extended Mind,
rejects the idea that cognitive science is ever on the duty
to respect the deliverances of phenomenology.
All right, so Rob says,
cognitive psychology does not give trumping power
to phenomenological reports or take them as revealing
in some unqualified way the details of the cognitive processes
occurring at the time of the report.
And further, a large body of empirical results
directly calls into question the reliability of subjects' reports
on their own cognitive processing.
Now, I should note that Rob here is explicitly criticising my attempt
to bring phenomenology and cognitive science together.
But I think it's immediately obvious to suspect everybody in this room
that the kind of enterprise that Rob Ruther thinks of as phenomenology
is not the kind of phenomenology that I'm taking to be in play.
So an initial response to Ruther here would be to suggest that
his criticisms assume that phenomenological analysis
is largely equivalent to introspection.
Now, interestingly, there's been some recent work in philosophy of psychology
that argues that actually introspection plays a much bigger role
in scientific psychology than people have been willing to admit.
So there is a kind of way of worrying here about
even if phenomenology were introspection,
whether Rob's claim would go through.
But let's just allow for the moment that the traditional skepticism,
one sees in cognitive psychology,
against introspection as revealing the underlying processes going on
when we think, let's say that skepticism is grounded.
Still, one's going to say, look, the phenomenology as I've characterised it,
the phenomenology that's attempting to mine, to articulate, to clarify, to amplify,
the conditions of possibility that make it possible to be experienced
to be the way it is, that's clearly not equivalent to introspection.
It's straightforwardly to introspection.
Nevertheless, Ruther puts onto something, I think.
Because even once one makes that adjustment,
some account needs to be given of how phenomenology
might reasonably contribute to cognitive science
within a recognisably naturalistic framework.
And meeting that constraint requires doing justice to a Rupert-like thought,
as I put it, about unqualified trumping.
So what Rupert suggests here is this idea that cognitive psychology
doesn't give trumping power to phenomenology
in some unqualified way, taking the details of phenomenology
to give a kind of direct mainline to the structures that psychology's interested in.
And that's true whether we think of phenomenology as introspection
or whether we think of it on the Heideggerian model that I recommend.
So Rupert's onto something and we'll need to resist that thought loads.
Okay, someone who's in the room, I know he doesn't mind this,
says Matthew Ratcliffe has also argued against the very possibility
of a Heideggerian cognitive science.
Sorry, the sum of the text is off the bottom here, but I'm not sure I covered it.
So Matthew's argued in a paper, I think, called
There Can Be No Cognitive Science of Dasein.
So Dasein being Heidegger's term for the distinctive human-mode existence.
Matthew's given what he takes to be an argument against the very idea of a cognitive science.
The idea he's pushing here is that if one adopts a Heideggerian framework,
then one can't really see any way of integrating that with cognitive science.
And here's the way Matthew's argument goes.
I'm going to reconstruct Matthew's argument a little bit.
I hope I don't do it any violence. He can tell me if I do.
I'm going to put it a slightly different way to him.
And I think this meets what he says and there's some quotes in the moment to show this.
So Matthew argues that according to any kind of Heideggerian analysis,
it would be worthy of being a Heideggerian philosophy.
We end up concluding that cognitive science tacitly presupposes
what he calls a sense of belonging to the world.
And this sense of belonging to the world is disclosed through phenomenological analysis.
I'll say more about this in a few moments.
And it's an aspect, we might say, of the way in which human existence is essentially in the world.
Of course, famously, in being in time, Heidegger caches out this inness not in terms of spatiality,
but in terms of dwelling.
One has a place in the world.
It's a place where one finds familiarity, if you like.
So this idea of sense of belonging to the world, I think, is equivalent to this sense of familiarity with the world
that Heidegger takes to be distinctive of the human impediments in the world.
So the first pass at explicating this kind of belongingness,
this is a first pass in the sense that it's kind of the first thing Heidegger says about it
in the first stages of being in time, in the existential analytic.
Of course, later on in being in time, we get much richer structures of this.
But when Heidegger first explicates his belongingness,
he does it in terms of the way in which an ordinary context of practical activity,
we make those contexts of activity make sense to us
in terms of structures that, in a sense, we bring to the world.
So the laptop makes sense to me in terms of my activity of text editing.
That text editing is part of writing a paper that's part of delivering something by a deadline
that's part of my project of being an academic, a way in which I make sense of my own existence.
So these kind of networks of referential significance that Heidegger does,
they're contexts that are defined by our projects and our activities.
And so they're kind of the way we make sense of the world in terms of structures with which we're familiar.
That's the first pass, as I say, as much more goes on in being in time than that.
So that's the first pass, but we'll say more about this.
Now, famously on Heidegger's analysis, science reveals entities as what he calls present at hand
rather than ready-to-hand and unready-to-hand items of practical activity.
So, as many of you know, when entities are revealed as present at hand,
they're revealed in terms of properties that are kind of contextually independent.
So weight in kilograms, a place in Cartesian coordinate system space, so on and so forth.
And Heidegger's thought is that that kind of objectification or revealing the world in terms of objects
is distinctive of the mode of sense-making that we might attribute to science.
Now, at this point, there's a kind of bifurcation.
This speaks to a point that was mentioned earlier.
If we think about worlds on this model, and both of these notions of world are in being in time,
there's more than one notion of world at work in being in time.
If we think of worlds as constituted by these kind of global networks of local contexts
of this kind of ready-to-hand practical activity, then, as Matthew said,
the entities of science are presented to us as strict to varying degrees
of the significance that they previously had as having lost something.
This is the thought. When you reveal an entity as present at hand through science,
through mathematicalization and so on, bring it under the laws of science,
the way in which one experiences or reveals that entity is as having lost
the significance of ordinary sense-making, ordinary world.
And if that's true, if that's part of the way in which it's revealed,
as having lost something, that's the central part of the way it's revealed,
then, of course, that prior world of ordinary activity might be equivalent to
the life world, I don't know who's so expert, then that's presupposed.
Otherwise, we couldn't experience the entities as having lost that significance.
So there's a sense in which it's presupposed.
So the world with which we're familiar, primarily, is presupposed by the worlds
as revealed by all, entities as revealed by science.
And this is hardly to talk about the science or revealing the world as present at hand anyway,
as something like revealing that, sorry, stripping the world of its worldhood.
OK, de-worlding.
But there's another way of thinking about this.
If one thinks of worldhood as the very structure of intelligibility itself,
and one thinks of science as a kind of sense-making, a kind of way of finding the world intelligible,
then, as Matthew concludes, both present at hand and ready to hand entities presuppose a world
within which it's possible to encounter entities in these ways.
So if one thinks of things that way, then this sense of belonging to the world
will be part of the sense-making of science, and so will be presupposed by that activity as well.
So I heard the one goes on this, one reaches this kind of conclusion.
And as Matthew describes it, it's a roughly transcendental argument against cognitive science.
Either way, our sense of belonging to our essential familiarity with the world
emerges as a transcendentally presupposed condition of the distinctive mode of sense-making
that's characteristic of science in general, and thus of cognitive science in particular,
and so cannot be brought within the explanatory reach of that science.
So that's the case.
OK, argument one on the table.
Argument two comes from Andrea Rayberg in a paper called Heidegger and Cognitive Science.
And in this paper, Andrea argues that for Heidegger, and here I think we're making a...
although one can make a case this Heidegger is in being in time too,
we're making a switch towards the Heidegger of the question concerning technology.
Andrea argues that for Heidegger, the objectification of entities
through mathematicalization, technological thinking, and so on,
of entities on which modern science depends, Andrea argues,
obscures two important features of the way which entities are entitled to us.
First of all, she talks about what she calls the self-differing nature of entities.
Now, this is a piece of a technical terminology she introduces,
but the idea is this, an entity can appear to us if we adopt a certain attitude towards it
as a present-up hand object for science and so on,
and mathematicalization and so on, or through those processes,
is revealed as a context-independent object in that way.
But of course it can be revealed to us in other ways.
So, you know, I can certainly study this as a piece of the physical world,
I can weigh it, I can measure it, and so on.
I can even talk about its subatomic structure and so on,
but I can also respond to it in a different way,
as indeed a laser pointer or a clicker or whatever.
And the thought being that in the very process of finding it intelligible in one way,
there's something about the dynamic of the way we find the world intelligible
that closes off other ways of understanding it at that moment.
But of course, in some sense, the thing is just the collection of those different dimensions
in which it may become available to us.
And this can be done on a historical time scale as well.
So, you know, the way in which we find the world intelligible
closes off other ways of finding the world intelligible
that certainly could have been available to us
if we had been born at different time in history and different cultures and so on.
So, objectification treats an entity as, as it were,
an object in the way that science might investigate it,
closes off, Heidi thinks, according to Rayberg,
not only this essential nature of entities as self-different,
as having these multiple faces as it were,
but also this essential, revealing, conceiving, dynamic of sentiment.
And what Andrew argues, I suggest Heidi argues,
is it's through this doubly obscuring character that scientific thinking
comes to present itself, or comes to be presented as,
as it were, the one measure of things,
the one dominant account of the way things are,
a kind of totalization process.
Right, now that's, that's the kind of way that
Andrew thinks Heidi thinks about science,
and of course cognitive science will be an example.
And here's the way she works.
Okay, so first of all she makes draws a conclusion about science.
The more vigorously a science pursues its object,
the more does the being, which it thus attempts to capture as object,
withdraw itself.
Right, so the self-different nature of entities disappears from view.
And then she just applies that to cognitive science,
with the extra twist of course, that the target of a
Heideggerian cognitive science would be Dasein,
would be Dasein in terms of being in the world and so on.
So, the more comprehensively cognitive science
tries to secure human existence, Dasein, as its object,
the more securely will Dasein escape objectification.
But if cognitive science were capable of giving up its essence,
it would be able to approach Dasein without reducing it
to the status of an object.
But then it would not be a science,
and it would not focus on human cognition,
but perhaps on its ways of being.
Just to note here, there's this extra twist at the end of Andrew's
argument that a Heideggerian cognitive science
that gave up its essence of science,
and then was able to approach Dasein in a fruitful way,
in terms of understanding,
wouldn't just lose its status as a science,
but it wouldn't be focused on cognition anymore,
but on ways of being.
Now, my own view is that that argument doesn't,
that being on its own doesn't do much work,
because a Heideggerian cognitive science already agrees
that we shouldn't be focused on some narrow definition of cognition.
A Heideggerian cognitive science already agrees
that we need to understand human existence through structures,
those kind of structures of being in the world and so on,
that Heidegger introduces.
So the only way that becomes a problem is if it's not possible
for a cognitive science to focus on those kind of structures,
and of course that would be true if the objectifying process
of science closed off those structures.
So I think in the end, that extra twist in the argument
doesn't add any pressure.
It's all about the objectification.
All right.
Two free arguments.
Rupert, Ratcliffe and Rayberg must be something about ours.
I'm going to give you a recipe now for having your Coke and eating it.
I.e., I want to suggest that once we understand
the relationship between phenomenology and cognitive science properly,
once we get clear about the essential commitments of naturalism,
the tension between Heideggerians and cognitive science
enough between phenomenology and naturalism evaporates.
And I think it does so in a way that absorbs everything
that's right in the arguments of Rupert, Ratcliffe and Rayberg.
And just to be absolutely clear,
one response you might have to what I'm about to do
is that I mangle the notion of the transcendent
and I mangle the notion of the natural so hard that they fit together.
So that's a suspicion that you might have.
I'll just open that up.
We'll see what happens.
So I'm going to start by introducing what I call a McDowallian lens,
in which to view things.
I'm not going to argue for this.
I'm just going to assume this is a way in my approach.
In a paper called The Content of Perceptual Experience,
McDowall introduces a distinction between what he calls constitutive.
He says explanation, but I want to avoid that word for not mentioning reason.
Constitutive understanding and enabling understanding, as I'll put it.
So, constitutive understanding, as McDowall introduces it,
identifies, articulates and clarifies the conditions
that determine what it is for a phenomenon to be the phenomenon that it is.
Whereas an enabling understanding, as McDowall understands it,
reveals the causal elements along with the organisation of
and the systematic causal interactions between those elements
that together make it intelligible to us
how a phenomenon of a certain kind could be realised
or generated in a world like ours.
And there I'm taking world to label something
like a purely physical universe or something like that.
I'm confessing that. I should have put that.
Alright, so, there's an assumption there, obviously, that one might disagree.
So, constitutive understanding.
One might think of it as the characteristic target of philosophy,
including high degree of phenomenology.
Although, of course, not only a philosophy, right?
There might be many disciplines that can contribute to constitutive understanding,
but it seems to have a close link to philosophy.
An enabling understanding is the characteristic target of empirical science,
including cognitive science.
Although, not only empirical science, right?
I mean, as a philosopher of cognitive science,
and I've got my other hat on,
I'm constantly arguing with people about the causal processes
that underlie the phenomena of cognition.
So, I do it in a philosophical way.
So, one doesn't want to get over-obsessed with forcing philosophy
and science into different categories, essentially, here.
But there's certainly two different kinds of understanding
at which these disciplines characteristic contribute.
In any case, I think highly gain phenomenology looks like it fits
into the put-six of the swap.
So, how are these two kinds of understanding related, according to McDowell?
There's no demand, of course,
that constitutive understanding needs to be reducible, too,
enabling understanding.
One would need to argue for that,
and it would lead to a kind of rampant scientism, in a way.
So, let's just ignore that position for a moment,
although I'll mention it then.
What McDowell suggests is that our two kinds of understanding
will engage in what he calls a perfectly intelligible interplay.
Now, he doesn't say much about this,
disappointingly little, in fact,
about what this intelligible interplay amounts to.
What I'm going to suggest in the next few minutes
is that not only did Heidi already have this interplay in view,
he actually gives us an account of it.
This will be a controversial,
we've had it here in Snowdale.
But anyway, comes to that in a moment.
So, here's one direction of influence here.
Phenomenology can isolate phenomena
for cooperative science to attempt to explain.
And, for instance,
Sean Gallagher and Dan Zahavi in A Phenomenological Mind
talk about perspective and incompleteness.
So, this idea that when I look at an object,
although I experience it as having various properties
on its backside and it's underneath,
I can't actually see those in terms of,
it depends how you use the word see, of course,
but I don't actually experience those
directly in some way.
That was mangled the way I put that,
but you get the point.
Nevertheless, we do experience the object
as having those properties.
And that's a kind of phenomenological deliverance
that one might think constrains
one's psychology of vision.
One's psychology of visual experience
needs to explain how that's possible.
So, that's one way in which the influence goes,
and an example of it.
Another way the influence goes, however,
and this is one that some phenomenologists
might find controversial,
is that the causal profiles discovered
by cognitive science may sometimes lead us
to revise our conception
of what the phenomena under investigation are.
There are so many examples of this.
OK, so MacDale's own example is a made-up one.
It's kind of nice.
He thinks about a frog and imagines that
we start out with a theory of,
I'm sorry, a pre-scientific set of observations
about the frog's behaviour,
which attribute quite a rich kind of perceptual contact
with its world to the frog.
And then the scientists come in
and they open the frog's head,
and what we find inside is just a homogenous lump of jelly.
Now, MacDale's thought is that,
faced with that datum that what's inside the frog's head
is not complex, it's not sophisticated.
We withdraw our attribution of
complex conceptual content to the frog.
And so that's his idea of a way in which
we might do a bit of science
that would affect our constituency of understanding.
More specifically in phenomenology,
and this is a refreshingly real-world example
that doesn't involve slashing up frogs,
recent research on mirror neurons, for instance,
I'm not going to go into details, don't have time,
but as some of you know, recent research on mirror neurons
I think has changed our phenomenological account
of intersubjectivity.
Here we can see the work of a synagoguer
and others, MacDafunch and others.
And also, down to how they gave this example yesterday,
Sean Gallagher's work on front-loaded phenomenology,
I won't say that again because, down already described it,
would be another example of that.
Now, immediately the Rupert argument is off the table, right?
Because if you adopt this picture of the relationship
between phenomenology and science,
then there is no unqualified trumping
of the science by the phenomenology.
It's supposed to be an interplay.
And we've got examples of how the influence
from cognitive science to phenomenology might go.
So the Rupert argument is already off the table.
We've got rid of this thought that the only way
to bring phenomenology into cognitive science
would be to adopt some unqualified trumping view,
where the phenomenologist gets to call the shots
and the cognitive scientist runs around
trying to work out the wiring.
So that's the end of the unqualified trumping view.
If you don't need to adopt it, Rupert's argument is off the table.
Okay, now let's push on.
Now, as I said, I think Heidegger already has the
McDowley intelligibly interplay view in his philosophy.
I can't really do justice to the interpretative work
I would have to do here, but I think it's the only way
to make sense of two passages that appear quite close
to each other in being in time.
So Heidegger says the ontological foundations of,
for him, it's anthropology, psychology, and biology,
we might just say cognitive science,
can never be disclosed by subsequent hypotheses
derived from empirical material.
They're always there already,
even when that empirical material simply gets collected.
This is, if you like, the phenomenology to science
kind of direction of travel.
Cognitive science assumes certain ontological foundations.
These will be the conditions that determine
the constitutive character of its target phenomena.
So, for instance, one might adopt a view of mine
which sees it as an essentially representational system.
There will then be arguments about what the
concept of representation means,
and these will be part of the constitutive foundations
of the science, the basic concept of the science,
as some of the times get said.
Okay, so that's, now, some of you will meet and go,
but that's surely not all there is to ontological foundations.
You're right, I'll come back to that in a moment.
Let's work with this for a moment.
So Heidi argues that these ontological foundations
cannot simply amount to further empirical hypotheses.
These can't be disclosed by subsequent hypotheses
derived from empirical material.
It doesn't follow from that, however,
that those foundations are wholly independent
of the ongoing empirical research.
It just doesn't follow.
It just doesn't say that the empirical science on its own
can't deliver a fully articulated, clarified account
of its own ontological foundations
using its own distinctively scientific methodology.
There are going to have to be some philosophy in there, right?
That's the thought, roughly.
Here's a second quote from Heidi, yeah?
The positive sciences neither can nor should wait
for the ontological labors of philosophy to be done.
The further course of research will not take the form
of an advance, but will be accomplished
by recapitulating what has already been ontically
i.e. scientifically discussed in this context,
and by purifying it in a way which is ontologically
more transparent.
So what's going on in this quotation?
It seems to me, as long as one understands
the further course of research, which I think one has to,
although one could have an argument about this,
as tagging a further work of phonological philosophy,
then what Heidi will be saying here
is that science can go off in its work.
And in doing so, of course, it will be making
certain assumptions about its own ontological foundation.
But then philosophy can come in, of course,
and help to clarify, articulate, amplify those foundations
and contribute in that way.
But note that this is accomplishment,
is a matter of recapitulating what has already been
ontically discovered.
Recapitulation was already ontically discovered
in this quotation.
The thought being, I think, that the only way to make sense
of this, I think, and Heidi doesn't quite say this,
but it's the only way I can make sense of this,
which suggests that through the empirical research, of course,
at certain points, will rewrite its own ontological foundation.
This will be a CUNY and paradigm shift,
or a rewriting of Lakatosian core assumptions of science.
The hard core, as Lakatosians call it.
So there are points where science does rewrite,
through its own, as it were, process of development,
does rewrite its own ontological foundations.
So in a sense, science doesn't need philosophy.
It doesn't need to wait for the ontological
labors of philosophy to be done.
Good job, too, about the time it takes us.
Right, but anyway.
So there's no way of making sense of this picture
without seeing the ontological foundations
as being sensitive, too.
Indeed, radically rewritable in terms of
ongoing empirical research,
or in the wake of, rather, ongoing empirical research.
So we now have something like the structured
McDowallian interplay in place, in Heidegger's work,
of course, with a phonological slum on the constitutive.
This is what I've called a neo- McDowallian.
I don't like having neo before words,
but anyway, that's what it is.
All right, quick objection and a reply.
How am I doing?
What happened?
Ten minutes or something.
Okay, quick objection and a reply.
You might think that the kind of ontological foundations
I've been talking about, such as the concept of representation
or, I don't know, the concept of a gene
or something like that in biology,
that these concepts are not, as it were,
deep enough in some sense.
That regional ontology, to use these early in term,
depends on fundamental ontology,
i.e. the ontology of the very structures
of sense-making that that's on.
And there's evidence, of course, of this dependence,
as Heidegger puts it, the question of being,
how everything is intelligible,
aims at ascertaining the a priori conditions,
not only for the possibility of the sciences,
which examine beings as beings of such and such a type,
and in doing so already operate with an understanding of being,
but also for the possibility of those ontologies themselves,
which are prior to the ontological sciences,
and which provide their foundations.
Well, so now you might think,
well, now we're in a different realm,
we're not talking about representations and genes anymore,
we're talking in terms of the temporal structures of existence
that Heidegger identifies in Division 2.
Well, you've got to be careful,
and this is where I'm going to say something radical
about the notion of the transcendental,
but I'm heartened by the fact that this notion of the transcendental
has already been scouted in a couple of previous talks.
Dan Estes said at one point,
well, look at the end who self thinks the transcendental
has to be part of temporality,
has to be within temporality.
Here, I would say, in terms of, has to be within history.
Right, that would be Heidegger's historicization
at the transcendental.
Once you do that, okay,
then I think you lose the thought that fundamental ontology,
even, can really be independent
of things we might discover through empirical science.
So this is the sort of radical claim
that some Heideggerians won't want.
Heidegger said,
well, he didn't quite say this,
but in a kind of famous Heideggerian tagline,
being is always the being of some entity.
It's very difficult to work out exactly what that means,
but there's no way of making sense of it, I think,
while insulating fundamental ontology from empirical impact.
After all, if the transcendental,
if the fundamental, if the final resting place
of fundamental ontology is part of history,
is part of the development of human kind,
and science is part of the activities
that human beings perform,
then those activities will have some effect on that.
So it seems to me one can't historicize the transcendental
and then say that science is outside of history
and so it doesn't affect it.
We lose that.
That kind of leap way of insulating
fundamental ontology from science.
Okay, so now I'm just going to...
I was hoping at the end,
I was hoping at the end to give you a bit of an example
of a Heideggerian cognitive science
that used this intelligent interface up.
I'm not going to get to that.
So I'm going to show rather, for the last few minutes,
exactly how to resist the arguments of Radcliffe and Raver
through this.
Yeah, no, we won't talk too much.
There we go. So how is the notion of continuity
that's the heart of naturalism to be understood?
Let's return to that issue first of all.
Now we might read continuity with science
as meaning reduction to science,
but that, as we said, is not mandatory.
So I'm going to read it in a way that I did in the 2005 book,
as meaning nothing more than consistency with science.
I'm going to call this minimal naturalism.
So minimal naturalism requires that if and when
there's a genuine clash between philosophy and empirical science,
so between phenomenology and cognitive science,
then it's philosophy that must ultimately give way.
I think the consistency requirement forces that.
This is a very similar formulation of naturalism
to the one that Hugh Price gives in naturalism
without representation.
Now, let's not run away with ourselves here.
There's no, even the most enthusiastic naturalist,
isn't going to demand that good science,
good philosophy give way to bad science.
So just because we're faced with some piece of madness
like Sheldrake's hypothesis doesn't mean we should,
because they count as science under some strange description of science,
we should just all give in to it, right?
There's no demand of that kind.
What this says is that where you've got
some apparently well-supported science,
philosophy, and you might have a philosophical theory
that some way is inconsistent with that for whatever reason,
it might require certain kinds of action or causation
that the theory doesn't allow
or have concepts that the theory doesn't recognize.
At that point, philosophy is on the back foot,
but there's always going to be room for negotiation
in this story.
But that's the kind of basic requirement.
So this secures, but doesn't mean anything more radical than,
the kind of enabling to constrictive influence
that is up working this kind of Heideggerian version
of the MacBowling Interplay that I introduced earlier.
So I'm going to take that to be a minimal requirement of naturalism,
just like this.
It's consistency with science that's driving the notion of continuity
and that it has this impact.
Minimal naturalism doesn't entail cognitive scientism, right?
Of course.
There's no requirement here that science is a measurable thing.
We've continuity understood in terms of consistency,
the fact that there are principle limits
on what cognitive science might explain,
no longer a threat to naturalism.
That's no way at all.
And of course, on the interpretation that I've been driving
of phenomenology, that I've attributed to Heidegger,
even the transcendental conditions presupposed by any particular science
and not immune to revision in the light of science here at your service.
So again, there's a balancing act here.
There's a dialogue, there's negotiation.
And I think this condition, the second condition,
is an underappreciative consequence, as I've said,
of Heidegger's domestic over the historic science notion of transcendental.
Okay, so on this moment, I just can't see, you know,
in a winery situation where, at least the general argument
that Matthew tries to drive on the back of a kind of transcendental shortfall,
just given the adjustments to naturalism and transcendentalism that I've made
and given them a value of a story,
I just think we're no longer in a situation where that argument buys.
Okay, and with as far as Andrea Rayberg's story is concerned,
well, you know, on the model I recommend here,
science does have the objectifying effect.
The practice of science does have the objectifying effect
that Andrea tributes to it or on Heideggerian grounds attributes to it.
And that objectifying way of thinking about human psychology,
right, in order to give scientific explanations of it,
does inform phenomenological analysis in the fashion required by minimal naturalism,
all right, but that doesn't have any consequence of the kind that Andrea's worried about, right?
It would if that objectifying scientific explanation
were taken to be a constitutive explanation of human being,
but no one's saying that, because we have the distinction between constitutive
and a naving explanation in place.
So we can have effects in science of phenomenology
without seeing the science as making constitutive level claims,
right, directly, at least directly,
and in that case, the kind of objectified approach to human beings
that drives the science doesn't have the effect of turning human beings
into objects as such at the constitutive level of understanding, right?
So because we're engaged in an enabling explanation,
not a constitutive level explanation, paradigmatically, when we're doing science.
So one has to be careful if those causal explanations of human activity,
naving explanations of human activity given by science are taken to be constitutive explanations of human being,
and then one would have a worry, but that's not required by the picture,
the Heideggerian picture that I recommended,
one which I think is entirely consistent with naturalism properly understood.
So this informing is possible without cognitive science
surrounding any of its modern science credentials, okay?
So I think Andrea's argument, too.
Right, I think I'd better stop there.
I won't give the example.
So, no, ten minutes, and somebody's going to want to share it.
Okay, thanks for that.
Now, so...
Yeah, that's it.
Right, okay.
Well, Matthew, I think you get first bite.
Thanks, Mike.
I agree with most of what you said,
and I feel like the mangling as well helps dialogue.
The slippery move, though I thought I'd like to hear a bit more about,
is this move from negotiating what Heidegger calls basic concepts
to negotiating our understanding of being.
Now, I think he'd agree with you about basic concepts,
and he says a bit later that I think to quote the science
is a dogmatic to an almost unbelievable degree,
the point being that they are dogmatic
when they're necessarily dogmatic,
and engagement with basic concepts
can and should be part of science and inquiry.
Indeed, he sees it as the most important part,
so all well and good there.
But he'd say regardless of whatever shifts in basic concepts
might take place, regardless of what conceptual filter
you should have in the background of your scientific practices,
there's a common way of revealing entities.
So science, regardless of these changes,
invariably relies upon encountering beings
as present-at-hand object to use whatever term you'd like.
And then the next move would be
the possibility of that kind of intentionality,
revealing beings in that way.
Presupposes our understanding of being,
which is essential to design,
and furthermore, that way of revealing beings
is constitutionally incapable
of getting at the understanding of being that he presupposes.
So I'm sure he makes that move,
because they're all over being in time.
Let me say two things.
So what you can do is say,
well, let's loosen up the present-at-hand attitude of science,
but then it becomes difficult to distinguish
a typically scientific attitude from other forms of attitude.
I'm not endorsing the position,
but I think that's the move that I think it would make.
Right, so let me say two things.
First of all, I was careful not to claim
that the susceptibility of fundamental ontology
to certain kinds of moves that science might make.
I was careful to claim that that was a consequence, I think,
of the historicised notion of the transcendental
that Haidae gives us.
I didn't say it was what Haidae says.
I'm clearly making a move here
that goes beyond a report of what Haidae himself says.
Now, it wouldn't be the first time in the pages of being in time
that there were things going on
that Haidae himself doesn't recognise,
or indeed it contradicts other things that he says.
So I think that's...
I'm making a claim here.
It suggests that once you historicise the notion of transcendental,
and you see science, indeed, as part of our historical way
of making sense of the world in a concrete way,
then I don't see any way of insulating it.
As long as you don't think what's happening here is fundamental,
the sort of concepts of fundamental ontology,
they're being reduced to the effects
that the concepts of science are working with.
Of course, there's no claim that, that's the second move.
There's a kind of influence on those things.
So, for instance,
I'll explain to you how you think about this, right?
So at the end of being in time,
we get the notion of origin,
or whatever translation you've got, temporality.
Of course, Haidae never thought that was a stopping point, right?
He thought that was as far as he got in being in time.
That's the most fundamental horizon we get in being in time.
But, you know, there could have been Division III and Division IV,
and we never got them.
And there's questions about whether the later philosophy
are those missing divisions.
But it seems to me that, honestly, be careful,
these are revisable notions, right?
Now, of course, science can't show
that there is no sense making going on.
But it may be that, for instance,
let me give you an example quickly.
For instance, if you, completely away from Haidae,
just an example of how this might work,
sort of relevant to Jim and Emma's sort yesterday,
it seems to be completely possible,
in evolutionary psychology,
to inform the way we think about our moral decision making.
Without suggesting.
So, for instance, it might say,
what kind of properties can human beings
really be sensitive to in the world,
and then we can't do some psychology of that.
Without, therefore, thinking that what's right and wrong
gets determined in terms of fitness values, right?
So, you know, you've got to think of these things
in a more subtle way.
So, the thought is that there could be influences
on the way in which our basic sense making structures,
the experience, that come from what science tells us
about ourselves as concrete and so as individuals.
Without, therefore, losing the thought
that fundamental ontology is primarily something
that's the business of constricted level understanding,
and that's primarily the business of philosophy.
So, I mean, I want to say that it's not quite
what Haidae says, but it's implied by,
and secondly, I want to resist a kind of worry
and consequence that one might see of that.
So, it's a sort of delicate balancing act.
Okay, I see where you're going.
Okay.
So, in your sense, captures what naturalists care about.
So, for instance, it seems to be compatible with that kind of theory
of philosophy that postulates a better of alien entities
that are possibly slated towards the world.
You see where I'm going.
So, that counts as minimally naturalistic,
but that wouldn't be naturalistic in another way.
Yeah, no, you're right.
No, the placeholder for minimal naturalism would allow,
if science starts to talk, you know,
if science that we think of as well-supported
starts to talk about wacky things
that we don't recognize right now,
then there would be a case for, you know,
perhaps philosophy that previously was rejected
to come back or something, I don't know.
But note that, given our contemporary understanding
of science in terms of the kind of physical process
that science talks about, the closure assumption
that David spoke about, and so on,
if that's what contemporary science is saying,
then that would be driving the kind of consistency conditions
when we actually cash in that.
You're absolutely right.
I think that question's an excellent question,
because it opens up the following problem
in Heideggerian scholarship,
which is that sometimes, I think,
Heidegger wants to be a kind of straightforward
scientific rears when he talks about handling.
He says at one point in, I think it's in the
basis of quantum knowledge, where he says,
you know, nature takes its revenge
on a wrong-headed approach.
There's always some hand-responsibility
to the way things are over to nature
when you adopt a certain attitude for science.
And sometimes he really does say, like,
he wants to be a kind of straightforward scientific rears.
And other times, that's clearly inconsistent
with things he says about those solid-sized
states of science.
So there's a problem there.
I think minimal naturalism, I characterize it,
will be consistent with Heidegger's story.
But the problem, the thought would be that
it's what's in the science that's driving
the specific consistency conditions.
Asking this question,
and it's following on from Matthew's response to you.
And I do have a sense, so I apologize to
all of you, this might be turning into a Heidegger conference.
I want to avoid that, because I think
it's the subject and the hand that's the most important thing.
I think what I think is really important
is this thinking of
a kind of transcendental empiricism,
which is an interplay.
That's a much better way of understanding
transcendental ways of thinking.
I think that's a kind of common theme for the conference.
If one wants any commitment to any
transcendental way of thinking, and some might not.
But a kind of Heideggerian
issue, I suppose,
is, and you can just say,
in some sense, what's important to me
is what we're thinking about,
not whether I'm correct about Heidegger or not.
So I excuse myself in advance.
The bit where
I kind of think, I don't follow
the step in your argument quickly,
is where you move from the
Heideggerian idea that we can't access being
except through beings.
And then the next point in your slide is empirical.
That this is something you do really empirical.
Right.
Well, I think there's a jump there.
Yeah, there is.
So I'm not saying
that maybe that is the way you can do it,
but I certainly don't think
Heidegger does it that way.
And I just think,
if I was going to be a nitpicking Heideggerian,
which I'm well capable of being,
is that the
idea that
we can only access being through beings
is not fundamental ontology.
In fact, I think he uses a different word
to describe it in the
lectures. I can't remember what,
meontology or something. He uses a different word.
I mean, it might not be a problem
because one of your ways of answering it is,
well, maybe, and I think Heidegger does,
maybe we should give up fundamental ontology.
And really,
but even if we give up fundamental ontology,
which I'm quite happy to,
I still think, as I say,
that's my question.
There's some sense to your thought
that it's distinct to being and being,
to the empirical.
I wasn't quite sure.
I mean, I said at one point,
there's a big step that I
is under-argued for. Is that?
But, in a way,
if I had the chance to
restructure some of this,
I wouldn't have used that
being,
is always the being of some entity idea
without marrying it
more directly to the historicised notion
that I think that's when you put those together
that you get the implication.
Yeah, I mean, of course,
I mean, I've got two, there's
the easy move, but it's not that easy.
There's one move I could make which is to say,
I think this is an implication of what Heidegger is saying.
He himself doesn't say that, and he has good reasons
independent of these kind of
considerations for not saying that,
for other things he wants to defend
and other things he takes to be important.
For instance, points to the fact that
possibly one move
would be the only way he sees
it possible to maintain a kind of
decent sense of freedom is to
somehow free does that up
from these kinds of explanatory measures,
perhaps to an extent that
even minimal actualism would be too much for.
So, yeah, don't get me wrong.
I think there'd be good reasons for resistance.
I'm sure the Heidegger in orthodoxy would be to resist it.
I still think that once you see science
as part of our historical sensemaking
practices,
then it's hard to see
and you think that
this transcendental becomes historicized.
These different sums can be put
in place at different times and so on.
I just don't see how to keep them apart anymore
to keep science apart.
So, from that point of view, I just want to
sort of dig in and say, I just don't see how to keep them apart,
but I do agree there's much more needs to be said there.
And I also don't want to claim
that it's uncontroversially
Heidegger's view.
Yeah, I'll be very brief because I don't want to dominate.
I just think that it doesn't necessarily have to be
empirical. It can be empirical.
Yeah, okay.
But it doesn't have to be.
No, absolutely, no, don't get me wrong.
I mean, one of the things that I think
I possibly didn't say this loudly enough or with enough conviction,
but
I also think that
the progress in understanding the fundamental concepts,
the regional ontological concepts of the science,
let alone what you might
somehow hive off its fundamental ontology,
I think progress in that can be made by
straightforward philosophical argument and
critique and so on.
I don't think science is the only...
I mean, there's a coonian under lackatotion,
depending on how real it's going to go,
understanding of science in which
science drives itself into these
dead ends and then rewrites its own
or at least
as a kind of, in some of the early coos
as a kind of religious conversion to a new science
kind of idea. But I think some of that
can be driven by philosophical reflection,
not just by the science. I just want to
get both processes in the picture.
Yeah, thank you for your talk.
I think Heidegger would have hated
cognitive science, actually.
I don't think he would have
kept him any place
for the kind of friction you talked about.
I mean, as we talk about this,
it's later philosophy, technology,
and what it says about medicine and the
sort of corner seminar, but what I want to say
is that that matters. I mean,
what you should do with phenomenology is
you should try to advance it, and of course
you should try to advance it.
You're in Heidegger and you can do it on
these grounds and call it Heideggerian
phenomenology. That's fine.
So I don't bother so much about this short
quote from Simon Saab where you try to
make room for this in Heidegger.
That's not the kind of
important question.
But given that there can be such a feedback
from cognitive science and other types
of phenomenology, from neuro-neuro
and other findings, which
at least I am very sympathetic
to this dialogic view,
what would you say about
the other way around with a specific example
of cognitive science?
I mean, what does Heideggerian
cognitive science in your version mean?
Would you sit there with a cognitive
scientist? Would it be a part of it?
Would it rather be a kind of
dialogue partner
or something like that? Very much
what you said here about cognitive science
identified it with science
like the third person perspective.
And then, per definition, that would be
no place for the kind of Heideggerian
phenomenology.
That's not true.
Okay, so a very quick note on the
first thing. I mean, I am interested
in it contributing to Heidegger
scholarship as well,
but I agree with you. There's a sense in which one
might say, well,
you can pick on Heideggerian
model and value that.
And then the thought was, well,
we can show in general terms how phenomenology
and cognitive science can fit together. Maybe
at that point you'd give up a lot of Heideggerian stuff
if you don't want it anymore.
I'm interested in both sides of that story.
But I'm particularly interested in
cognitive science. That's my background
fundamentally. My first philosophical work
was in that area without the Heideggerian stuff.
The way I see Heideggerian cognitive science,
I did say something about this,
although I didn't give any concrete examples.
I wish I'd had time to do so.
I mean, I think it's a
it's a sense it's a partnership,
right? Because in the same way
that standard philosophy is part of
cognitive science. It's quite interesting,
you know, cognitive science is an interdisciplinary
matrix and the disciplines that are part of
cognitive science has changed over the years.
When I grew up in cognitive science,
in a cognitive science department,
no one mentioned neuroscience.
Dirty word, right?
Because it was a purely
it was a kind of functionalist thinking
that thought you had to do cognitive science
at a kind of computational level that was free of neuroscience.
Neuroscience was kind of the implementation
the best thing about, like the electronics in a computer.
What we care about, the algorithms.
Now, that's no longer true in cognitive science.
Neuroscience is now possibly the
central disciplining contemporary cognitive science.
And there, you know, that's the way
cognitive science itself has changed.
Maybe artificial intelligence is no
longer as central as it was.
That's something like the shifting matrix of cognitive science.
So, cognitive science has always been
a multidisciplinary kind of endeavor.
In that sense, it's not quite like, perhaps,
physics. And
philosophy has always been part of that.
And I guess, whatever contribution
philosophy has traditionally made in cognitive science,
I think can be made by a kind of phenomenology.
Or it's an A kind, you know,
another way in which that might contribute.
So I see it as part of the process of cognitive science.
But what's important, I think, is that
if one, you know, when we're talking to
philosophers, if I go and talk to cognitive scientists about it,
they don't give a monkeys about it.
They kind of clashes with naturalism.
And so they just want to get some good ideas
on how to do some more decent experiments
or build some neat robots.
And the kind of hidey-gary in thinking has had
a big effect, actually, on the way people
have been building smart robots in the last period.
Right? Worked by, you know,
even though Rod Brooks doesn't admit it himself,
you know, he grew up next to Drogfus,
in a sense, you know, in a lot of the thinking.
So, I mean, it's different. Again,
in a lot of the audience, what I'm doing
is trying to show that there isn't a philosophical
problem about bringing hidey-gary and ideas into
contact with cognitive science. But then there's a whole other
world that opens up. Okay, so they're
consistently cognitive science.
So do they make any useful contribution?
Right? And then it's about the empirical work.
Let's say I would have given an example
of empirical work that's going on in cognitive
science that I think has been part of a dialogue
where phenomenology, particularly hidey-gary
and phenomenology, is playing a role
in helping the science go forward. So I do see it in that way.
Okay, last question, Havi.
Thanks, Mike. That was really interesting.
It's a shame the way you didn't
talk about the case study in more detail,
because I think it was one of the most
successful examples, I think, where
phenomenology interacted with
a branch of science in a way that
seemed to help solve
problems that seemed intractable,
things like the precipitation
as an idea that conditions
to be centralized and so on and so forth.
All of these things were really
resolved
or at least meant
to be promised once you introduce alternative
conceptions. But we've been saying
the word science in a few days now
is just getting a bit
uncomfortable about
not distinguishing
between areas of science
where the theological
viewpoint
makes an obvious contribution
that might be
some of the social sciences
like anthropology, sociology,
qualitative research
in its various forms
and so on. And areas
like physics where you might say
well, it's less clear what's going on.
So do you want to maybe say something
about science? I completely agree
with
the point you made.
I mean, I have to say here
cognitive science does adopt
this kind of objectifying way of being
that hiding attributes at some point
may be the right thing to say
is that there may well be disciplines
in and around cognitive science
perhaps some things to do with
psychiatry work that Matthew talked about
and things like that. Psychiatric work
that really doesn't quite adopt
that kind of objectifying way of being
and we still might want to count as science
in various ways. So it might be that there are some
sciences that don't quite fall under that net
and I shouldn't be more careful about that.
However, I do think for instance
that you think about cognitive science
and you start with it. So
we're going to use either computational
explanation or perhaps dynamic
system explanations of the human mind.
I think those
do fit
the kind of third person role
that I've been suggesting. Now of course
there's a whole
stream of thought that comes out of
Francesco Morella, Evan Thompson
and others where there's something wrong
about that. The whole point was that kind of
science forgets the first person perspective
and that we need to get that first person
perspective somehow into the
scientific methodology.
So that's another move one might... Wait, now
I'm suspicious about that because I'm actually
suspicious about the first person perspective.
I guess on general kind of hardy-gearing grounds
I don't actually recognise the first person perspective
as particularly a deep perspective. It's a kind of
secondary perspective, unlike the country
of Sweden.
So I'm a bit nervous
about that move. I don't want to make that move.
But there's a whole other way of doing this
which would say that what we need to do is rethink
what we mean by cognitive science so
as to take account of subjectivity and soul
in a way that we haven't done before.
I'm kind of being a bit more old-school about it here
and suggesting that even subjectivity might
or what we think of a subjective phenomena
can be, at least
in principle in cognitive science, one
cognitive scientist might think could be explained
by a kind of appeals to computational process
and dynamic systems expressions or whatever.
There's a bit old-school, I agree. But you're right
of course to point out that I've been far too
crude in my understanding of science.
Okay, I think we should stop now.
I know there are one or two other people who wanted
to raise questions.
But let's show our appreciation of Michael
for this.
