You're listening to The Great Simplification with Nate Hagins. That's me.
On this show, we try to explore and simplify what's happening with energy, the economy, the environment, and our society.
Together with scientists, experts, and leaders, this show is about understanding the bird's-eye view of how everything fits together,
where we go from here and what we can do about it as a society and as individuals.
Today's guest is Ocean Fisheries expert Daniel Pauley.
Daniel is a marine biologist who teaches at the University of British Columbia.
He is also the founder of the Ocean Fisheries Project The Sea Around Us.
Daniel is the author of numerous books and over 500 academic papers.
He's quite simply one of the world's foremost experts on the relationship between humans, oceans, and fish,
and on the state of the earth's oceans and the fish that live in them.
Today we talk about why fish are migrating northward because they need more oxygen due to warming water,
about the world passing peak fish, and about farm-raise salmon and many other topics not often discussed.
I expect you will enjoy and learn from this conversation with Professor Daniel Pauley.
Dr. Pauley, good to see you, sir. Good to see you too.
We haven't seen each other in a couple of years.
I have enormous respect for you and your work.
You are not very well known outside of your circles,
but everyone that I know who knows you refers to you as an uber-mensch,
someone who is dedicated to the oceans and a brilliant scientist.
I have a lot of questions for you. Let's dive in.
Many of the listeners of this podcast have heard of the concept of peak oil,
and probably fewer have heard of the concept of peak fish.
You're an expert on global fisheries.
Can you give us, just to start this conversation,
a view from the stratosphere on the state of the world's fisheries?
Has global fish catch already peaked and has declined?
What's the situation?
Indeed, the world fish catch has peaked in 96, quite precisely in 96.
Particularly in the North Atlantic, for example, where fisheries became industrialized,
the peak was achieved in 1975, but worldwide it was achieved in 96.
Basically, you have in the countries of the world that have good statistics
and active fisheries, industrialized fisheries, the peak was reached early,
and the catches are continuing to increase.
Some really, and some as an artifact of statistics that have to be optimistic,
and we have made a global review of our fisheries in the world,
and we have corrected statistics in so far as this is kind of specialized,
but when countries submit the statistics to the UN,
which is the only organization that compiles world's global statistics,
when the statistics method, the statistics method improve,
they don't correct retroactively the catch that they have.
In other words, they don't cover certain fisheries, now they cover them,
but they don't retroactively reintroduce the capture fisheries that were not covered before.
So you have an increase that is not real,
and when you correct for this point, then you can see that we caught earlier much more than now.
So there's two things going on.
We are 25 years past the peak in fish catch globally,
and also the decline from that point is understated because of statistics.
Yeah, and the UN, or the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in Rome,
because it doesn't correct the statistics retroactively,
it has peak catch that is not very pronounced,
but our reconstruction of the world catch has a very pronounced peak in 96,
and since then the catch declines about one million ton per year.
Out of how many total?
Of 120, 125, and it depends what you count,
whether you count the catch that is discarded or not.
So the official catch that FAO, the UN, produces is 80 to 90 million tons per year,
and the real catch of the world is about 130 million tons per year
because lots of fisheries are not monitored by the countries that are members of FAO,
and the FAO doesn't correct the statistics that they submit.
So using the best scientific guess of statistics,
how much of a percentage drop is the global catch today versus 1996?
About 10 to 20 million.
So 10 to 20 percent?
No, it is a little bit less than 20 percent.
Yeah, okay, 15 percent or so.
Is that all ocean fish or does that include freshwater fish?
It doesn't include freshwater fish.
The freshwater statistics are even more messy,
and we are in a process of looking at them,
and we expect the catch statistics to be much higher than reported
because African and other countries do not monitor very well the fisheries.
See, when you have to do that in space, which you do with freshwater fisheries,
as opposed to monitoring them along the coastline, it's more difficult.
So you are a world expert in the health of and the risks to global fisheries,
and we're going to get into your work a little bit later,
but how did you first get interested in this topic in fish and the oceans?
I didn't really get interested because of love for the sea or something.
I was studying in Germany with a firm intention of working in developing countries
because I was biracial, I still am actually.
I was biracial in Europe, and my identity was always questioned,
and I didn't want to live my professional life in Europe.
I started studying agronomy, but the faculty of agronomy was people with old Nazis,
and not figuratively Nazis, the real thing.
They were in the 60s, late 60s, early 70s still occupying lots of positions,
and I didn't like this situation,
and I moved in the same university to the Department of Sonography and Fisheries,
which was very good and very reputed, and I grew into that,
and my intention, again, when I studied agronomy and later fisheries,
was to acquire a skill that would be useful in developing countries,
and I have realized that.
I did my master in Ghana in 1971, I did the fieldwork for my,
and then after I had my master, I worked two years in Indonesia,
and then after my PhD, I worked 20 years in the Philippines,
and from the Philippines, I was working in tropical countries in general.
So, taking a step even further back, if I recall correctly from our discussions over a couple of dinners,
you were an orphan, so how did you actually get interested in science
even before you got interested in fishing?
I was not an orphan, but I was taken from a mother who was not married,
and my father was a passing GI, African American soldier,
and I was raised as if I had no parents, but I do have parents,
and I met them when I was 19, my mother,
and later, when I was 23, I came to the U.S. and met my father.
So, I was raised in a decades-in-context, very difficult circumstances,
but I was not an orphan.
But how did you get interested in science then?
Well, basically, I left Switzerland where I grew up with this weird family,
and I ended up being, I worked one year in hospital,
and as a volunteer, they fed me,
but after that, I had only the option of becoming a non-skilled worker,
and that is not a good prospect.
And in Germany, they had at the time, in the 60s,
a program of encouraging people from the working class
to get back to high school in the evening from five to nine,
five times a week, four years, for four years, and I did that.
I switched from French, which was my first language to German,
and then I did this course, four years, I got Germanified a bit,
and then when I was finished with it in 69,
I had the degree that enabled me to go to university,
and so I kind of translated from being mistreated kids
from working-class background to being a budding scientist,
and basically, I evaluated that physics was not for me,
because I'm not good enough in math,
and chemistry is too small.
The things that you deal with are too small.
The molecules and the atoms, too.
I don't like that, and I don't like microbes either.
They are too small, and so I wanted to do agronomy
because it's important, especially in the developing world,
growing food, and then I ended up doing fisheries,
which is also important in the developing world.
So thank you for that.
Can you give us a brief history of humans and oceans and fisheries?
Didn't most of our ancestors live near seas or oceans at one point?
Yeah.
When humans moved out of Africa, the first Homo sapiens,
and people in the world, they probably moved along coastlines
because coastlines are never that cold compared to the inland,
and the technology for living in the cold had to be developed.
Also, coastlines were rich in all kinds of food items and stuff,
so the hunter-gatherers that we wear,
they peopled the world along coastlines,
and in a process, they exterminated all the large, defenseless animals
that they could reach, and when they penetrated finally
into the inside continent, into the continent,
our ancestors in all continents wiped out most of the large mammals.
We know that from North America, where the mammoth and the mastodont
and all kinds of giant sloth were eliminated,
but it occurred in all continents.
Now, Australia, in Europe, also the mammoth were exterminated by people,
and we know that also from islands,
especially in the Pacific, where Polynesians,
every time they came to a new island,
they would wipe out the large animals,
the Moas in New Zealand, and so on.
So that's what we do.
But it's harder to wipe out things in the ocean
because they're more diffuse than on land.
Yeah, that's right, and that's precisely why
we're doing that in this century and not in previous centuries.
We save the hardest for last.
Yes, it's very true, actually.
As we first, as hunter-gatherers, we wiped out the large mammals
and other humans that were not our species,
and then we've invented agriculture,
which wiped out much vegetation that was there,
the vegetation we didn't like,
and we place it by vegetation that we like,
wheat fields instead of forest, kind of,
and then we invented the use of fossil energy.
And I think that the big transition is the use of fossil energy.
It started with the steam trawlers in 1880, about, in the UK.
The use of fossil energy is the big transition in fishing,
and this allowed us to make, to punch into marine ecosystem,
to remove lots of things.
We were wailing before, but wailing is the large animal
exposing themselves because they have to breathe is one thing.
But getting fish from one kilometer depth or one mile even depth,
that you need heavy technology,
and this technology was developed in the 20th century.
So, getting back to my first supposition,
could peak oil reverse peak fish?
Actually, I have wrote a paper like that in science,
in 2003 or something like that.
If you look at peak oil, it's very similar to peak fish.
The shape is very similar.
And I was stupid enough to make a prediction,
which you should never do,
that fisheries would have to be running down
when fuel costs become too high,
because the fuel costs render fishing in the high seas unprofitable,
and had not counted with the key factor, subsidies.
Fisheries, big industrial fishing in the depth and in the high seas,
could not be conducted without subsidies,
but they are subsidized.
Big time, and that's the reason why they continue,
but they heavily subsidize.
Why are they heavily subsidized?
Because that's a cheap way of getting protein to the populations?
No, the reason is that the big fleet owners,
they play golf with the ministers.
That's the only reason.
You're kidding?
No, no.
The subsidized fisheries do not produce fish.
They produce, they fish for subsidies, they don't fish for fish.
You could replace the subsidized fisheries that we have
by artisanal fisheries and smaller-scale fishing
that would not be subsidized,
and we produce as much fish as the present fisheries
that are subsidized would produce.
This would only require that for a while,
the older fisheries are permitted to retire,
and you would have less fewer fishers
because they are now super efficient compared with before,
and you would rebuild the stocks that have been decimated
and that are at very low level.
Then you could, without subsidies,
produce catches that are bigger than now easily,
but the subsidies are a purely political decision
by the elite of various countries.
And is there an activism fight against that?
Yes, there is.
In fact, there has been several initiatives
that almost succeeded at the WTO
because it's not only the left, politically,
or the conservatives group that are against subsidies,
but also market fanatics.
They don't like subsidies, right?
People who think that the market should self-regulate.
They don't like subsidies either.
So there have been several initiatives at the WTO
to get rid of that.
And last, various colleagues and various scientists
had succeeded in making such a stink
that the WTO was going to make this its major emphasis,
and Omicron came and the Ampetus was kind of lost.
But it is possible that the WTO
takes a big chunk out of subsidies.
So let's assume away climate and ocean acidification
for the moment, which is not a good thing to assume away,
but we'll get back to that.
But I read somewhere that if totally left alone
that an ocean fishery could completely recover
in like seven years, is that true?
Well, the seven years is probably very optimistic,
and it certainly, it would be true for short-lived fish
such as anchovies and sardines to recover fish like rockfish.
You need a card, you need a bit longer, say, double that.
14 years.
But yes, in principle, and in reality as well,
if you don't fish or fish very lightly,
the stocks will recover.
Nate, an important point.
The only country that has successfully rebuilt stocks
based on legislation is actually the U.S.
The U.S. has one of the probably the best
fishing policy in the world,
and they have rebuilt lots of stocks that were devastated previously.
But the U.S. alone is not sufficient,
and in fact other countries like Canada and Europe,
the European countries, they have similar legislation,
but they don't implement it,
and the result is that the stocks don't recover.
I wonder how much of that is due to our economic privilege
that we can afford beef and other things
and other countries don't have that luxury.
And also the privilege of importing 80% of the fish
that is consumed.
So you can afford to.
So this is a fish version of NIMBY.
So you invented the term shifting baselines,
which I use a lot in my college courses.
Can you explain what this means
and how this relates to fisheries?
So basically shifting baseline is the notion
that when something changes over several generations,
say any generation perceives the change
that occurs only doing their lifetime, their own.
In other words, young people, they become self-aware,
they become aware of the world around them,
and that becomes the baseline that they will use
in the course of their life to evaluate change.
And they will complain and they will,
maybe they will fight to maintain what they had
when they were young,
but they don't have the same relationship
to change that happened to their parents or their grandparents,
because these changes are not subjectively perceived.
They are not real.
So every generation resets the baseline
that it used to evaluate the world.
So it shifts that baseline.
And so you can have a situation where
in one film that is kind of amusing,
there is a young man who says,
oh, this big fish,
and it shows something that is about one meter.
And on the same dock,
an old guy is talking about the same fish,
or they were talking about two meters.
He's talking about a saltfish,
and a saltfish of one meter are small.
They are juvenile.
And to that young man, this were big fish,
because he didn't know that saltfish
get to be four meters tall.
But this is so relevant, not only to fisheries,
but our entire natural world.
This applies to many things in our society.
We only look at things day by day.
And even when I was a child,
we had windshields full of bugs that would hit our windows,
and we'd take it for granted.
And I have vague memories of that,
but it makes me worry, Daniel,
that the largest animal in the world
when young people are my or your age
is going to be a cow,
and people are going to be happy when they see a squirrel.
There is a thing that is...
I also use Shifting Baseline for teaching purpose,
and the example with the windshield.
Actually, I do remember the windshield of cars
being covered with dead bugs.
And this is an amazing thing.
And this is particularly scary with global warming,
because people get used to this normal.
And this is terrifying, if you think about it,
because every generation has another standard,
and young people will not want to get back
to the cold winter that we had when we were young.
They will not.
I'm happy when it gets really cold here,
knowing what I know,
I actually get emotionally happy,
because it feels like normal to me.
So how do we try to counteract the effects of Shifting Baselines?
Is there any strategy?
The only way we can deal with it scientifically
is by identifying periods for which we have lots of data,
so that we can construct a world that is credible,
that has various dimensions,
and use this as an anchor point to assess change.
The climatologists do that.
The oceanographers do that.
They choose different periods,
because it depends on the data that they have.
You cannot use a period going back...
For example, I know journalist George Mombiot of Great Britain.
He has a wife who is a paleontologist,
and they talk about elephants and rhinoceros in Britain,
and they talk about,
that would be nice to reintroduce them.
That is never going to work.
But for the kind of work that you work on,
you have to have a solid baseline.
And in fisheries, a solid baseline is stupid,
because it could be earlier,
but it is 1950. Why?
Because 1950 is the time where industrial fishing
had not restarted from World War II,
and where lots of countries became independent.
This before they became independent.
So you have pre-neocolonel situation,
and also this is the first year from which the United Nations
published annual review of the world catch.
So for our work, it's crucial to use 1950 as a baseline,
but people who do so-called stock assessment
for managing fisheries, they use the last 20 years.
And that's a big problem,
because the last 20 or 30 years is a period
where the big stocks have all been wiped out.
Right, so you see a 10% increase,
and you think it's a huge success,
but it's still 90% down from 80 years ago.
Exactly, exactly.
And then you have the testimony of young people
being utterly ridiculous.
You would see them, young fishers,
they would say, I've never seen so many,
the stocks has doubled in size.
Yeah, it moved from 2% of what it was before to 4%.
Right.
That's real.
That happens all the time.
Well, here's another complicating factor,
is you've probably seen in my work,
I talk about as humans, we have discount rates.
We care about the present more than the future.
So a discount rate, like climate change,
we don't think about the year 2100,
because it's too far ahead.
But when you're talking about a shifting baseline,
is we also, the discount rate goes backward,
and we can't remember the distant past.
We only look at the last few years
or the last 10 years or whatever, yeah.
Yeah.
So more broadly, how have humans,
and maybe it's just our modern culture,
become so untethered to the state of the oceans?
Because even in climate change circles,
the large risk to the oceans, ocean acidification,
sea level rise, declining oxygen, the Atlantic meridional,
ocean current slowing down, the risk to a canfield ocean.
These are all distant seconds in the media
that have fires, rainfall, temperature on the land.
Yeah, I agree.
But I don't think this is, we have become untethered,
because if you look at the older literature,
people have never been familiar at ease with the ocean.
Is that because we just live on land and we rely on land?
Yes, that's because we live on land.
For example, look at the older literature about 150 years ago.
The coastline was not seen as something that you wanted to live in.
That only poor fishers were living on the coastline.
The idea of looking at the coast and looking at the sea
and liking it is a modern idea.
And they have been, people who have written about that,
our love for the ocean is actually new thing.
If you read the Odyssey, again, the Greeks,
they didn't like the ocean.
They didn't have an emotional relationship to it.
They feared it.
It was a dangerous place.
It was inhabited by sea monsters.
It was not a world where people felt comfortable.
So we're one of the few generations of our species
to understand that there's more living area in the oceans
on this planet than there is on Earth.
And we're learning this at a really late date.
Yep, exactly.
And our relationship with the ocean and with water
is definitely wrong.
For example, I work on fisheries,
but I also work on the physiology of fish growth.
And you could say that's very esoteric.
But fish breathe water, right?
And there is no very little oxygen in the water.
So they have to work the head off
to get the water across the mouth
that they can extract the oxygen that they need.
That is the work that they have to do.
And on the other hand, for them, for fish,
it's very easy to grab something to eat.
But once they have eaten something, a smaller fish,
they still have to burn it, link it with oxygen, right?
Well, they have to extract from the water.
So the big work is not catching a prey.
The big work is getting the oxygen out of the water
into their bodies.
And every time they take their gills move,
how much oxygen are they extracting?
What percent?
The gills are very efficient.
About 80% is being extracted.
But moving that water is lots of work.
What I want to say is you find that in biology,
people have projected our mammal consideration,
which is we have to eat lots of food
in order to maintain our own temperature at a high level.
That's the reason why we are not reptile
eating every six weeks.
We need to eat all the time.
And so food is the thing.
But fish, it's not the thing.
The thing is for them is breathing.
And you can see the problem they have with breathing
in that they are moving now rapidly toward the poles
because the temperature gets higher.
Well, I'm no expert on this.
I'll just ask you, isn't it the ocean oxygen content
has already dropped 2% and much higher than that
in the shallows?
But there is the thing.
It's true that there is less oxygen in the water.
But the important thing is that fish
don't have their own temperature.
Their own temperature is that of the water.
And then the water temperature increases.
They need more oxygen.
How much is the water temperature increased
in the last 20, 30 years?
One degree, say?
That means they have to consume 10%, 20% more oxygen.
Because there's a multiplier.
They don't have to consume 1% more oxygen.
It's 10% or 20% more.
Is that what your work is called?
Gil oxygen limitation theory?
Yes.
And the problem is not so much that there is less oxygen
in the water.
It's true.
But the big problem is that they need more
when the water is warm.
So they have a double whammy.
They need more oxygen and there is less in it.
Now, you find, though, that most doctor work
and thesis work that students do is about food.
It's about the fish feeding.
Well, the problem is breathing.
And now it's being realized now because of global warming.
That fish have a problem breathing.
And that's the reason, for example,
while they move toward cooler water,
water that remains cool, toward the poles.
Because it's kind of like a behavioral homeostasis.
They don't know about climate change.
They're just trying to be in water that fits
their oxygen absorption capacity.
Exactly.
But in the literature, you find all kind of questions
that people ask themselves.
Are they moving in the northern hemisphere to the north,
toward the north?
Are they moving because there is more food there?
No.
They're moving there because they just want to breathe.
So this is a dumb question,
but we're like around one to one and a half sea,
depending on the boundaries,
warmer temperature in the earth.
Does that temperature equate with the one degree increase
in the oceans?
Are they kind of commensurate?
So most of the ocean is getting warmer.
And that causes the fish to want to move
forward in the south.
And you can see this.
I don't know if it's one degree here or there.
But in the US, you get fish now in New York
that before was in Florida.
In BC, where I live, you get fish now
that way before in California.
In Australia, you get in Sydney,
fish that way before in Brisbane.
Historically, when there was a big burst of CO2
at volcanic provinces and previous eras,
were all the fish near the poles?
They probably were floating dead on the water surface.
In other words, this moving toward the pole,
poleward, is a reaction that is a slow thing that they do.
But if the warming is sudden, like in a heat wave, they die.
When we met the last time, or yeah, you're right,
the only time that we met a few years back,
you weren't talking about this.
This sounds horrible to me.
I was unaware of this.
Basically, my work on this oxygen problem
was my dissertation about 40 years ago
and it was totally ignored.
And now it's because of global warming
that it's being revived and it's getting some attention.
It breaks your heart.
Because the other stuff that I do about shifting baseline,
about fishing down my food web and so on,
these are obvious things.
These are trivial things, in a sense.
But the oxygen thing is the most subtle thing
and you can think about it only if you get rid
of this mammalian bias that we have.
That food is everything.
So does this scale with the size of the fish,
like cetaceans, is the 1% change in oxygen?
No, no, no, they don't have problem cetaceans.
They don't have that problem because they breathe air.
Okay.
They don't have that problem.
Okay, so what about large fish?
Large fish are the ones that have most trouble
because the surface area of the gill,
divided by the weight, is lowest.
So in a short-term self-interested sort of way,
are people in Russia and Alaska
listening to this podcast happy
because they're going to have more fish
moved into their fisheries in coming decade?
Yeah.
There's no way you're not quite explicit about it.
This is one country that is located in high latitude
that will see for a while
an increase of the biodiversity
and an increase of the major stocks of fish,
whereas other countries, for example, in the tropics,
they are the losers again
because the fish that leave the water
are not being replaced by any.
So does this get into the difference in the fishing industry
between developed and developing nations?
And again, the poorer nations around the equator
are going to be at the short end of the stick
from their fish catch in coming decades?
Yeah, certainly.
Basically, if you present the fish catchers,
predicted fish catchers in latitudinal zones,
the cold-tempered countries will benefit
and tropical and sub-topical countries
will be devastated fishery-wise.
And you can see that on, for example,
on our coast, the salmon in California
are wiped out, right?
They are gone.
In Washington and Oregon, they are not doing well.
Is that because of this, gill-oxygen limitation?
Yes, because temperature is going up.
And in B.C., they are not doing well.
But in Alaska, they are doing very well.
And in Arctic Alaska,
there are salmon runs that are establishing themselves,
and we don't know about them
because they didn't have salmon before.
Oh, my God.
So it is happening.
This transition is already happening.
And with salmon, it's very visible
because there is a major industry built around salmon.
So we could argue, and everyone would argue,
on ultimately how climate change will warm the Earth.
On the one hand, I think the fossil fuel availability forecasts
are way over-optimistic.
But on the other hand, I think the biological feedbacks
are probably way underestimated.
But if we do go to 2C, 2.5C,
doesn't that have a massive implication
based on your gill-oxygen limitation for another...
Yes, but this is not will.
This is already happening.
If you go to a country like Britain,
they fish now, fish that were before, in Spain.
And the spined fish before that were in Morocco.
And in other words, the composition of the catch has already changed.
And we published in 2013 a paper in Nature,
which we call the Mean Temperature of the Catch, the concept.
And basically you assign to each fish species a preferred temperature,
which is very stable.
And you can compute then the Mean Temperature of the Catch,
which is the catch multiplied with the temperature of that fish.
And you average it over all species.
And you can see in all countries of the world,
in most countries of the world,
the Mean Temperature of the Catch
start picking up in the 70s and 80s.
The fish were very much smarter than us.
They picked up very early.
And the famous hockey stick that man and others...
You can see the fish doing it.
And we have reproduced this, for example,
with Chinese colleagues.
I have the Yellow Sea, which is cold.
The East China Sea, which is medium.
And the South China Sea, which is tropical.
You can see this effect in the Yellow Sea and in the East China Sea.
But in the South China Sea, you don't get this effect.
Why? Because the fish that leave are not replaced by fish
from even warmer temperatures,
because there is no hyper-tropic, right?
So this effect, you can see it everywhere.
And we have colleagues in Greece
that have reproduced that result.
And we have recently, another paper come out
that describes the contrasted Japan,
Australia with Indonesia.
Indonesia, the Mean Temperature of the Catch, doesn't change.
And in Japan, it goes up.
In Australia, it goes up.
Meaning all countries now are experiencing
change in the composition of the fisheries catch
that are due to migrations.
This changes one of the questions I had planned to ask you.
I was going to ask you what are one or two major things
that could be improved about our current fishing practices
and industry, but it gets back to the climate thing.
Yes, if I may.
These movements of the fish that are caused by temperature,
they can be anticipated, right?
And the first case that comes to mind
is the negotiation between Norway, the Faroe Islands
and Iceland about a stock of mackerel,
a very important stock of mackerel that they had to share,
because it was intermediate between their waters.
And the negotiation took five years.
During the five years, the mackerel moved
and ended up only in the exclusive economic zone of Iceland.
And at the end of the five years, they had an agreement,
but the Icelanders says, we are not going to do it
because we don't need to.
They now are in our waters.
And this problem, it sounds like a totally esoteric problem.
You have it also in the US,
because the coastal, say in South Carolina,
you have management by the state of the coastal fisheries.
But the stocks are now found, not in South Carolina,
they are in North Carolina.
And so they cannot spend five years
renegotiating an agreement or fishing them,
because in five years there would be no Jersey.
So I was going to ask you what can individuals do
to support replenishing the world's fisheries
and what I'm hearing, what I'm intuiting,
is the answer is not to eat less fish,
it's to use less dramatically, less fossil fuels.
Yes, at the end of the day, everything that we do,
if we don't reduce the fossil fuel and the emission,
and we should add also now the methane from the tundra
and so on, right?
But if we don't tackle that problem,
the other stuff would be completely useless.
Now, I should add though that every individual fish
has another preference.
Say a species of fish is about 15 degrees centigrade.
Well, they will be some at 13 and some at 17 and so on.
And the more fish you have in the water,
the more variants you have.
And we know that from COVID, right?
The more people are not vaccinated,
the more variants you have.
And it's also true for fish in the water.
So if you had lots of fish in the water,
you have some that can handle the higher temperatures.
What are the type of fish that are selected for
in higher temperatures?
Can you give some examples?
Oh, the groupers and snappers on Florida
can handle high temperature much better than caught in Canada.
That's an example.
But also within the species, there is also variation.
Like they are variation between us white humans.
We are small one, big ones, brown one and white one.
So you have a distribution around these means.
And if you have a temperature increasing,
there will be variants that can handle this temperature.
But if the population is very reduced,
because you have overfished it,
then there will be fewer variants, right?
And so what we can do and should do is reduce the effect,
the fishing effort that we have,
reduce the fishing quota.
We will have more fish.
We can fish them more economically, more profitably.
We will make more money.
We will supply markets better,
and there will be more fish in the water
that can handle the heat.
So by throttling down our consumption of fish
and the overfishing,
we will increase the diversity of the fish,
which makes it a higher likelihood that some fish
will make it through this bottleneck
to maybe replenish and heal the fisheries
and also maybe buy us time to solve the climate emissions, etc.
Yes, but Nate, at this point, what I tell people is,
yes, we must reduce consumption,
but the individual route I must tell my friend and my buddies,
doesn't work.
What works is not this horizontal,
horizontal, that friend-to-friend protest and action.
What works is vertical action.
We go, we raise hell,
and we distribute leaflet in front of a supermarket.
That works, and we change the politicians.
Politicians, we address them.
We cannot limit ourselves to acting as consumers.
We must also act as citizens,
especially if we live in democracy.
Yes, I've come to the same conclusion.
If someone is listening and they care about the oceans
and the fisheries and the future,
setting aside the emissions question,
which is a really difficult one,
what can individuals do to support
some of the things you've been discussing in there?
You join the environmental NGO,
you join a group that fights for these things that you believe in.
Depending on your disposition,
you join radical group or less radical group,
because they all need it.
Like in the civil rights, Malcolm X was needed,
and Martin Luther King was needed.
Both were needed.
In the environmental front,
there is a group that pushes
and groups that settle agreements.
You need both.
Depending on your temperament, you join them.
The point is that you cannot,
as individual working on your consumption,
hope to affect anything,
because your consumption is much of its virtual displaying.
Much of it is virtual displaying,
and it has no effect.
That's what I tell my students,
is rather than minimize their impact,
they should try to maximize their impact
in whatever passionate about it.
Given your temperament,
and if you were somehow the benevolent dictator,
and your sole goal was to improve the health of ocean fisheries,
what sort of wish list of changes would you implement?
I would immediately abolish subsidies
that are directed at making fishing effort cheaper.
And fuel subsidies and other subsidies.
If the fishing industry had no subsidies,
they would immediately stop fishing in remote areas
where they use lots of fuel.
Certain destructive methods, like trolling,
would be immediately abolished
because they are not profitable,
and the people who use this method
are fishing really for subsidies.
The subsidies are very important.
Another point is that I would set up
the network of marine protected areas
that we talked about all the time, but don't do.
Again, the US has done it in various parts of the world,
but like France, it's done mainly in the Pacific
away from nasty fishes that will protest.
Though there is, in California,
there is a good network of marine protected areas.
Without areas where you don't fish,
you won't have the big fish that maintain a population.
You need so-called big, what is it, boff?
Big, old fecund females that produce the eggs
that will replenish a population.
And without, they happen to be toffee fish also, right?
What the anglers want to have is boffs,
and they then go after the source
of replenishment of a population.
So you need areas where there is no fishing.
And with these two things,
you would actually really have fisheries doing much better.
And then I would, all over the world,
impose a system similar to the one that you have in the States,
where an old fish stock has to be rebuilt within 10 years.
And you have these legislations,
it's called the Stephen Magnusson Act,
and if other countries were having the same,
it would be in much better shape.
And then I would stop looking at fisheries
because we have a much bigger problem.
Is there any chance, Daniel,
that you envision in the next 30, 50 years
where world governments and leaders are populated
with ecologists and biologists as opposed to economists?
Could such a future exist?
Yeah, I can imagine it for,
because if you compare World War I with World War II,
in World War I, they drafted everybody,
scientists and non-scientists,
and sent them as cannon fodder to be killed in Flanders
and in France and so forth.
In World War II, all governments had the sense to say,
well, wait a second, do I really want to use my scientists
as cannon fodder? No.
You use them like Turing and the others
to decode, to develop radar system and so on.
So it was understood in World War II
that scientists can help deal with a crisis.
And I think that our civilization has the option now
of destroying itself
or beginning to look at what the science,
the virus discipline, offer.
And there is a good part of the population
and the political party in your country,
but in other countries as well,
that have decided to not listen, to go crazy.
But the alternative is that science is embedded
more and more and more.
And why do we need science all the time?
Because we always, we are pushing at the edge.
We are pushing everything to the edge.
For example, we have a huge population in huge cities
in terms of human protoplasm.
This is an ideal place for parasites,
to bugs and viruses to grow.
So you have to do lots of science
to maintain this population healthy.
Food, same thing, we have the system that we have.
We have no reserve.
We are at the edge.
So how do we not fall from the edge by using science?
So I think the more we push toward the edge,
the more we will need science
to prevent going over the edge.
So science will actually play a bigger role
or we will go down the tube.
I actually agree with you
and that's why I'm having these conversations
because there's so many issues.
Many people are aware of climate change.
Not so many people are aware of your area of expertise
and then there's economics and biodiversity
and social media algorithms and energy depletion
and now geopolitics.
I mean, the system science of our predicament
is really complex but it does fit together
and it does make sense.
So can you talk a little bit about your work?
You run an organization called C Around Us
as in Ocean and Sea.
We'll put all the details on the website
but can you give us like a one or two minute overview
of your work?
Basically, I'm a great admirer of Rachel Carson
and you know that Rachel Carson could write her book,
the most important book, The Silent Spring,
only because she became financially independent of necessity
and because she had written a successful book.
So the Sea Around Us made Rachel Carson in lots of ways.
So the Sea Around Us is a name that I gave to a research initiative
that I founded with a generous funding
from the Pew Child Trust in 1999
and we were the first two, three years
we were kind of floundering what are we going to do
with all these possibilities that we have
but we developed then this idea
of documenting all the fisheries of the world
in a standard way and basically there is
in much of the world two economies.
There is a formal economy that is embedded in statistics
and in the formal markets and financial markets and so on
and there is an informal economy that is well known
and in fisheries this is also the case.
There is throughout the world industrial fisheries
that well or badly managed
and there is small scale fisheries, artisanal fisheries,
subsistence fisheries and recreational fisheries
that are not managed and not even monitored.
They are pulled together under the heading
of small scale fisheries
and small means you don't have to care, right?
But actually small scale fisheries
make up about a third of all fisheries of the world
when you account for them.
So we put them on a map.
We put on a map the fisheries
and for example in the South Pacific
there is lots of small island states
that get the foreign exchange
by allowing Spain and China and other countries
to fish for tuna.
But the population doesn't eat the tuna.
The population eats reef fish
that are caught around the island.
But the Ministry of Fisheries
when they have one or the Department of Fisheries
doesn't care about that
it doesn't record what they eat.
This for example we know this
because the WHO, the World Health Organization
studies what people eat
and what people eat is fish.
But the Department of Fisheries
doesn't report any fish being caught.
So by linking different type of sources
we were able to reconstitute these fisheries that exist.
In the US for example
the fisheries that are run by the states
within 3 miles
they are not reported to the FAO as existing.
Also the subsistence fisheries in Alaska
which are quite substantial
are not reported.
And all countries, even developing countries
developed countries with good statistic system
they don't report fish.
Does that mean that the amount of catch
is underestimated?
Does that imply that the amount of fish left
is overestimated?
Yes and no.
So the underestimation is real.
It ranges from 10% in the US
to 400-500% in various countries.
For example in Central America
they report only fish that they export.
The other fish they don't care.
So they don't know in Guatemala
and in Honduras and so they don't know
what they catch.
And so the impact that all this fishing has
they have no idea what it is.
So when there are people
we have also in fisheries denialists
the same way that you have them in climate change, right?
So the denialists they look only at fisheries catchers
and they say it's a good shape
in developed countries and rich countries.
So they could be getting the wrong signal
on what's really happening.
They are getting the wrong signal.
And you have in fisheries the same kind of struggle
that exists in climate change.
Exactly the same.
And so that's what your work is calling attention
to that delta between.
Okay that's excellent.
While I have you and before I get to my final questions
that I ask all my guests
I'm just curious about two things.
Salmon is at the grocery store
and I eat salmon.
By A, not eat salmon at all.
B, you eat farm salmon
or C, eat wild caught salmon.
I live in British Columbia.
It's one of the few places together with Alaska
where you get more wild salmon
than farm salmon.
But we are also haunted by this industry
which is driven by Norway.
And they have polluted
a good part of the coast
and also in Chile
by producing salmon.
And they have polluted also the intellectual world
in that they think
that people believe
that aquaculture is reducing the pressure on fisheries.
And farm fish are supposed to reduce the pressure.
But it's true when it is the fish
for example tilapia or other herbivores.
But it's not or when the fish are not fish
and they are mussels and oysters and so on.
But when the fish are carnivores
which is the case for salmon
what you have is they have to be fed
and what are they fed with?
They are fed with fish.
Other fish.
The other fish edible, they are good fish.
Anchovies for example are very much liked in the world
except in the anglosphere.
The descendants of British settlers everywhere
they don't like fish.
Not really, not sardines.
But the Spaniards for example
they love sardines and anchovies and so on.
So is it better for me to eat anchovies
instead of salmon in the same way
that it's better to eat soybeans instead of beef?
What you would end up is getting the fish tastier
the fish more sustainable in the generic sense
and they contain more of the goodies
that you can get from fish there.
The omega-3 and so on.
All of this is better in sardines
than in Norwegian salmon
to which you add also colorant
because they would be grey.
They look that orange.
That is so weird to me.
Are sardines also subject to gill oxygen limit?
All fish, all water breathers.
So sardines are going northward?
Maybe not as badly as swordfish or a marlin?
No, they also do.
In fact, I just saw a paper last week
about the sardines in the North Sea
in making smaller.
They're getting smaller
because this is also, besides migration,
this is a reaction.
The fish get smaller.
So when we were spent a few days together,
I remember you and I had a very long dinner
and some wine because you...
No, I don't drink wine.
I was having wine, you were talking
and I was very fascinated
because you have so many experiences all over the world.
You speak four languages
and worked with all sorts of different people.
Do you have a favorite memory or experience
that you have from all this
or any lesson that you'd like to share?
Oh, gosh.
I should have thought about it ahead of time.
I was dreaming when I was a kid
or when I was a young man
of working in developing countries
where I would be useful
because this was the thing in the 60s.
You wanted to help the people and be useful, right?
Boy, I wish we could have that again, right?
Yes.
And you know what?
I've been able to realize this.
I've been able to be recognized
as somebody who has helped empower people
because I have developed tools and concepts
that people can use
to do their own research.
And that makes me feel really good
about what I've been able to achieve
to empower people.
And I continue to try to do that
and for what is worth,
I had 70 PhD and master's student
and for what is worth, 80% were women.
That's another point.
My students are mainly from developing countries
and women.
So this empowering thing I take seriously.
Now, there were some difficulties
and the point is that if you want to be innovator,
you have to have a hell of a thick skin
and because people will attack you for anything,
because essentially if somebody has not found something
and you find something, whatever it is,
you are saying, you're not saying it,
but they think that you're saying that they were stupid.
So every time you come up with something,
there is somebody who is aggravated by the fact
that it's not them.
And so you incessantly have to fight
to legitimize what you do.
You're preaching to the choir.
You can imagine the podcast I'm having on here
with Paul Ehrlich and Dennis Meadows and other people.
I mean, it is lots of things that people don't want to hear.
So thank you for your lifelong continued work
and empowering people.
So what kind of advice would you give
to people today, Daniel,
that discover and understand not only the state of fisheries,
but nature, climate change, the economies,
what's happening, the general human predicament?
I would say get involved in fighting what is not tolerable
and you will discover who you are in a process.
The nowadays emphasis on yourself and your identity
and your personality and stuff is probably misguided
because you discover that you ready,
you can at best discover that you're ready to do something.
So you might as well do it.
That's great.
Here's a personal question for you.
What do you care most about in the world?
For myself, I would like to be able to maintain work
and for the world as a whole,
I think I would be like the contestant in beauty contest.
Peace. Peace in the world is what we need.
I grew up in Europe that was reeling from World War II
and I'm very conscious of this.
And the notion that we are doing this
and doing the second or first day of a new land war in Europe
is profoundly disturbing.
What we need is peace.
And then we can sort out the problem we have,
which are big and which require that we work together
and a war is the worst that we can do in this context.
What are you most hopeful about in the coming decade or so?
Well, basically we are faced with the option
with the possibility of our total,
of the destruction of our civilization.
We are faced with the potential of that.
And maybe we won't do it and that will be marvelous.
Imagine if we make it all the good things that will have to be done.
So we make it.
And that is the thing that I hope for,
that the greater Thunberg and the other people with wonderful ideas
and ideals will have the chance to expand and to grow and to be.
Because the alternative, which is that we are now in the late 30s
with the Nazi coming up, it is hard.
It's hard to swallow that because it's completely gratuitous.
We don't need any of this.
We don't need war of choice.
We never needed war, really.
But the notion of a war of choice is disgusting.
Not enough people talk about peace.
It is as if it was naive to speak about peace.
I remember one time somebody was arguing against the open union.
The open union.
And this person didn't understand that it is the only thing
that had prevented the open countries from fighting war against each other for 60 years.
We never had 60 years of peace in Europe before.
Never.
And now we can see that two countries that are outside the open union are at it.
Ukraine and Russia.
Yeah.
Thank you so much, Daniel.
We will be in touch and I hope many people look at C around us and your work.
And we'll have all kinds of references on the website.
You're welcome.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform
and visit thegreatsimplification.com for more information on future releases.
