You
You
Your lecture is Professor Robert M. Hazen. Dr. Hazen is the Clarence J. Robinson Professor of Earth Sciences at George Mason University, a senior staff scientist at the Carnegie Institution's Geophysical Laboratory and founding Executive Director of the Sloan Foundation's Deep Carbon Observatory Project.
He is an award-winning educator and co-author of Science Matters, Achieving Scientific Literacy, and The Sciences, an integrated approach.
Dr. Hazen has been praised by The New York Times for writing with wonderful clarity about science. His most recent book is The Story of Earth, the first 4.5 billion years from stardust to living planet.
The biomineral Hazenite is named in his honor.
Dr. Hazen is one of the world's most important research centers in the world.
Dr. Hazen is one of the world's most important research centers.
Dr. Hazen is one of the world's most important research centers in the world.
Dr. Hazen is one of the world's most important research centers in the world.
Dr. Hazen is one of the world's most important research centers in the world.
Dr. Hazen is one of the world's most important research centers in the world.
Earth, the story of our planet is one of remarkable repeated change.
4.5 billion years in the making, our world is a unique product of the universal factory.
3rd planet from our sun, Earth has liquid water, active tectonic plates and a protective atmosphere.
And Earth is the one planet that plays host and mother to trillions of living, breathing organisms.
Earth is home.
But how did Earth begin?
And can we understand Earth's story as our own?
The answer is yes.
And we begin with clues that are all around us and beneath us.
The rich history of our planet is preserved in its minerals and rocks.
It's a story of transformation, pressure and of time.
It's the epic saga of our home planet, the origins and evolution of Earth.
And if Ron and Gustavus went over and said, tell you some more, but the Earth is set behind a level,
more specifically, it's set behind a rover, which may be a space first.
Apollo 17 astronauts took a photograph of Earth in 1972 that has become one of the most famous and widely reproduced images of our home world.
It's beautiful, showing both the grandeur of our planet and the emptiness of surrounding space.
It fills us with wonder and encourages us to ask, how did it all begin?
What has made our planet possible?
I'm incredibly excited at this opportunity to share with you an amazing adventure, the scientific biography of our home,
from its cosmic womb and eventual birth more than four and a half billion years ago to the present and on into the distant future.
I love this epic tale.
It's a story teased out over more than two centuries of research, and we're still learning more as we read the testimony of the rocks and minerals.
The resulting narrative represents the work of countless thousands of scientists, often collaborating across many disciplines as never before.
Many critical breakthroughs and findings are extremely recent, and I want to share with you how powerful and exciting the resulting story of Earth has become.
To get oriented, let's go backward together in time, leaping through vast stretches at each step.
Earth has experienced many startling, planetary scale transformations, each of which depended upon the one that came before.
Everything you are about to learn in this course reflects a new and evolving approach to understanding our planet.
On the one hand, the new science of Earth builds on centuries of discoveries, and yet the synthesis itself is quite new.
That's how science always works.
And because I've played a direct role in the creation of this new perspective, I want to tell you something about my own background,
my own path into this story, both to illustrate where Earth science in general and mineralogy in particular have come from,
and to give you a sense of the approach we'll be taking.
For the last two decades, I've been focusing on studies that reveal glimpses of the origin and evolution of Earth.
My colleagues and I tackle a wide range of fascinating questions.
How did the sun, Earth, and the other planets form in the solar system?
When and how did the moon form?
When did Earth get its first oceans in its atmosphere?
And how have these outer layers changed through our planet's history?
When and how did continents form and move?
And of course, the question we find most important of all, when, where, and how did life arise on Earth?
These are questions that fascinate and inspire scientists and non-scientists alike.
Through the course of our research, we've gradually come to realize a startling truth about Earth,
a truth all but hidden from you until recently.
For most of our planet's history, rocks and life have co-evolved.
Life first arose from minerals, as minerals interacted with the oceans and atmosphere,
but then, as life infested the planet, other minerals arose from life.
This is a startling revelation.
The geosphere and the biosphere have been and continue to be complexly intertwined through billions of years of history.
The way we think about Earth and about life has changed.
Minerology is a scientific study of all aspects of minerals, which are defined as naturally occurring crystalline compounds
that have a well-defined chemical composition.
A good example is the mineral quartz. It's the commonest mineral in beach sand.
A quartz crystal has a fixed composition of one silicon atom and two oxygen atoms, SiO2.
Minerals are the fundamental building blocks for all kinds of rocks,
and they're also critical components in the evolution of life.
Other familiar minerals include feldspar. That's the commonest mineral in Earth's crust.
And then, there's the familiar mica, which forms thin, flat sheets.
And there's calcite, the mineral that makes limestone in many kinds of animal shells.
But there's a strange thing about mineralogy.
In spite of the fact that minerals are clearly part of Earth's geological history,
indeed, minerals are fundamental to understanding Earth's history.
Minerology itself is a field that has long been taught in a matter rather divorced from the grand story of Earth.
In many highly respected mineralogy courses around the world, minerals are treated as idealized crystals.
On the other hand, and just as surprising, the geological study of mountain building or paleontology
has often been quite separate and independent from mineralogy.
To me, this has come to seem an inexplicable division for everything we know of Earth's distant past
ultimately comes from evidence locked in rocks and minerals.
Yet the majority of mineralogists rarely talk about the ages or the history of their samples.
Rather, for more than two centuries, mineralogical research has focused on the static physical
and chemical properties of crystals, investigations of hardness and color.
Chemical elements and isotopes, optical properties, crystal structures,
and external form have dominated the literature of traditional mineralogy.
It's even gone so far that the study of chemically pure and carefully controlled synthetic minerals
is sometimes considered preferable to measuring the properties of natural crystals.
So for the first two decades of my own research career in mineralogy,
I isolated perfect, tiny crystals of common rock-forming minerals,
squeezing them to unimaginable pressures between two brilliant-cut diamond anvils,
zapped those compressed samples with a beam of x-rays,
and measured subtle changes in their atomic arrangements.
We often tried to correlate those changes in structure with other changes in optical or other kinds of properties.
In fact, I had the opportunity to do this kind of analysis on moon rocks brought back by Apollo 12
and by Apollo 17, whose astronauts took that famous photograph of Earth from space.
However, my colleagues and I completely ignored geological time and geographical place
as we cared little about the age or location of our microscopic samples,
much less the geological processes by which they came to be.
And we never gave the slightest thought to biology,
which seemed as far removed from mineralogy as any scientific field could be.
We called ourselves mineral physicists,
and we allied ourselves with the non-historical sciences of chemistry and physics.
Now, a benefit of this seeming lack of historical curiosity among professional mineralogists
is that it has allowed for an impressive body of knowledge to form.
Mineralogy has long allied itself with the so-called hard sciences of physics and chemistry.
As opposed to the more historical sciences of geology and biology,
mineralogists know a great deal about chemical composition and crystal structure,
that is how the atoms are arranged, and physical properties such as hardness, fracture, strength, density, and color.
Mineralogists have learned a great deal about magnetic properties and electrical properties.
They've also measured compressibility.
That's the reduction in volume when a crystal is subjected to high pressure
and thermal expansion, which is the change in volume at high temperature.
Consider one classic example, the hardness of minerals.
Every mineralogy student learns the Mohs hardness scale,
named after the 19th century German mineralogist Friedrich Mohs.
He lived from 1773 to 1839,
and following a stint as a mining geologist,
taught mineralogy at the Mining Academy in Freiburg Saxony
and at the universities of Graz and Vienna in Austria.
At the time in the early 19th century,
mineral identification was dominated by chemical tests.
Mohs became a leader of what was then a new approach,
adding physical properties as a means to identify and describe minerals.
So we introduced a scale from 1 to 10 as a means to characterize minerals
based on their relative hardness.
The hardest known substance is the familiar gemstone diamond,
a form of pure carbon,
so it rates a 10 on the hardness scale.
It scratches everything else.
Remarkably, the other end of the hardness scale,
the softest mineral with the value of 1 on the Mohs scale,
is also a form of pure carbon called graphite.
It's so soft, it's used as the so-called lead in pencils.
In lecture 4, we'll see why carbon has the ability to form
such contrasting hard and soft minerals.
Well, in between carbon and graphite and carbon as diamond
are all the other minerals.
So number 2 after graphite is gypsum,
it's a very soft mineral often carved into ornamental objects
and also used in plaster.
And calcite, that common mineral that forms many clam and snail shells,
is 3 on the hardness scale.
That's pretty soft, but not as soft as your fingernail
at about 2.5, so calcite scratches your fingernail,
but your fingernail can't scratch calcite.
Feldspark, that's the common mineral found near Earth's surface,
has a hardness of about 5.
That compares to the sturdy mineral quartz,
which has hardness 7.
So quartz can scratch softer feldspar,
but feldspar can't scratch quartz.
And the beautiful gemstones ruby and sapphire,
both forms of aluminum oxide, have hardness 9.
It's almost as hard as diamond, which has hardness 10.
So I think you can see how the physical property of hardness
has proven useful in identifying minerals.
Hardness, like many other diagnostic chemical and physical properties,
is a useful way to distinguish different minerals,
but it tells you nothing at all about the history of your calcite
or feldspar specimen,
and this situation persists right up to today.
Go to your favorite Natural History Museum
and look carefully at the mineral collection.
You'll see exactly what I mean.
You'll find many beautiful crystal specimens,
some of which might be worth a million dollars or more,
and they're all lined up in neat rows,
and labels from the museum will tell you the name of the mineral
and its chemical composition,
often with information on the crystal system
and the location where each specimen was collected.
But unless the museum has recently reorganized,
it's most likely search in vain for any information
on the age of the crystal.
How long ago it formed?
Nor are you likely to find any hint regarding its geological context.
What kind of geological formation or how deep it formed?
You would never guess, for most of these impressive mineralogical exhibits,
that every crystal has a rich and fascinating history,
a story of how it came to be.
And you would certainly never guess that many of those crystals,
indeed most of the minerals on Earth,
owe their very existence to the pervasive influence of our living planet.
Returning to the most hardness scale,
for example gypsum and calcite and many other especially soft minerals,
they appeared abundantly on Earth only after primitive life
had begun to shape the planet.
I think the reason for this curious bias has to do with an old prejudice
that physics and chemistry are somehow more rigorous,
more scientific, if you will,
than the historical sciences of geology and biology.
There's a sense that physics and chemistry are based on real,
measurable aspects of nature, density, hardness, structure, composition,
where as much of geology relies on a kind of guesswork and storytelling
that can never be so absolutely rigorous.
So rather than tell stories about their crystal specimens,
rather than speculate on how and when those crystals formed,
mineralogists have long stuck to what they can measure with great precision and accuracy.
The same kind of narrow thinking may be reflected in the Nobel Prizes.
There are prizes in both physics and in chemistry, but none in geology.
So mineralogists perhaps not wanting to appear as second-class scientists
have framed their studies in the context of the hard sciences.
But even physicists learn to appreciate the unavoidable role of time
once Big Bang Theory came to be accepted within cosmology.
And that's the kind of change that has been taking place more recently
within the Earth sciences.
Experts in scientific approaches that used to be separate
are now talking to each other much more.
In fact, here's a good point to mention,
a second scientific tradition in geology,
oddly separated from the mineralogy I've been describing so far.
This tradition focuses on the history of Earth
by dividing Earth's history into distinct aeons, eras, periods, and epochs.
With each subdivision smaller than before,
you may have learned some of these names in school
like the Mesozoic Era or the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods
when dinosaurs flourished.
This study of geological time is critical to describing the story of changes
on our planet over immense intervals of time,
with four aeons used to mark the largest divisions of all.
In Earth's history, from the Hedean,
lasting the first 550 million years,
to the Archean, lasting almost 1.5 billion additional years,
to the Proterozoic stretching from 2.5 billion years ago
to about half a billion years ago,
and last, the Phanerozoic Aeon,
which is the most recent 542 million years.
So going backwards from the present, it's Phanerozoic, Proterozoic, Archean, and Hedean.
Note that the Archean Aeon is the time starting about 4 billion years ago
that probably marks the origins of life.
Now, I want to tell you a little personal story about the Archean Aeon
showing how origins of life research and mineralogy
intersected to offer a new view of planet Earth.
The scene was a Christmas party on December 6, 2006.
I was talking with my friend and colleague Harold Morowitz.
He's a professor at George Mason University, a theoretical biologist,
a leader in origins of life research,
and he's one of the most original thinkers in science.
Just sitting there, in the midst of a wide-ranging conversation,
Harold asked a deceptively simple, startlingly new question
that wound up changing my life.
He asked, were there any clay minerals in the Archean?
Now, remember, the Archean Aeon is the time starting about 4 billion years ago
when life is thought to have begun,
and it only took a moment for me to understand the implication of Harold's question.
See, clay minerals are extremely common today.
They can form huge deposits that can become soft and gooey when wet.
If you've ever tried to make a clay pot or walk through a clay soil,
you know what I mean.
Well, many origin scenarios for life rely on the ability of clay minerals
to concentrate and organize organic molecules.
Some of that research has described in my previous course, origins of life.
So if there weren't clay minerals in the Archean,
those theories of life's origins are fatally flawed.
But what was really mind-bending about this simple question
is the even bigger underlying suggestion that Earth's near-surface mineralogy
might have differed in the past from what we see today.
In 35 years as a professional mineralogist, I had never heard of such a question.
Ever since 1735, when the famous Swedish taxonomist Carl Linnaeus
introduced the mineral kingdom in his great classification scheme,
Systema Naturae, Earth's mineralogy has been treated as a fixed and static aspect of nature.
Linnaeus described the animal kingdom, the plant kingdom,
and the mineral kingdom all using the familiar binomial nomenclature of genus and species.
You know, names like Tyrannosaurus rex or Homo sapiens.
In the 19th century, mineralogists began classifying minerals
in terms of their underlying chemical properties.
But they continued to refer to mineral species.
And either way, for more than two centuries,
students in mineralogy have learned about each mineral species
by memorizing names and chemical compositions, crystal forms,
and such distinctive and immutable physical properties as color, hardness,
transparency, and magnetism.
Through all this, the dimension of time was never considered.
No one, it seems, bothered to ask if Earth's past mineralogy differed from that of today.
And so, biologist Harold Morowitz's question was naive.
It was uninformed.
It was at odds with conventional wisdom.
In short, it was the kind of question no mineralogists would have ever thought to ask.
And it was brilliant.
How could we experts have missed the obvious fact that Earth's mineralogy has evolved
in striking ways over the vast expanse of geological time?
But it evolved, it must have done, as even a cursory glance at geological history reveals.
Just look at the vast limestone reefs that couldn't have formed before the evolution of corals,
which didn't appear until about 500 million years ago, just in the last 12% of Earth's history.
My mind reeled at the implications.
And over the next few restless days and nights, a whole new framework for the science of mineralogy,
mineral evolution began taking shape.
That's how I came to introduce the concept of mineral evolution as a name
for this new way of bringing mineralogy together with the rest of geology.
In fact, this approach also became a way of bringing the Earth's sciences as a whole together
with the life sciences, and thus bringing together in a new way the old Linnaean kingdoms
of animal, vegetable, and mineral.
And what is new is this, the three kingdoms are no longer viewed as static,
and can no longer be studied in isolation from one another.
Mineral evolution.
This new framing of the science of mineralogy lies at the heart and soul of our course.
The grand eventful story of Earth is told in the testimony of the rocks
and the minerals that make these rocks.
That's also how I came to write my recent book, The Story of Earth,
which can serve as a companion volume to this offering in the Great Courses series.
Mineral diversity comes from chemistry, from the richness of the periodic table of the elements.
More than 80 different elements help to form the mineral kingdom,
but some elements are far more common than others,
and their relative abundances can only be understood by going even further back in time.
For you see, mineral evolution was preceded by element evolution.
The cosmos began with almost nothing but the lightest star-forming elements,
hydrogen, and helium.
Gradually, stars manufactured the rest of the periodic table,
first by the gradual processes of nuclear fusion to make the most common Earth-bound elements,
oxygen, magnesium, silicon, and iron.
Then, in great paroxysms, the rest of the periodic table emerged in supernova,
violet explosions of stars that seeded our Milky Way galaxy with planet-forming dust.
It took several million years for the first minerals to appear in the cooling,
expanding environments of exploding stars.
As near as we can tell about a dozen different mineral species formed early on,
what we call the ER minerals.
These minerals are locked into the microscopic dust grains
that are the ultimate building materials of planets like Earth.
And in a nice coincidence, some of the ER minerals also form popular gems.
Oluven, which is another name for the birthstone of August called Peridot,
and aluminum oxide, which is the main constituent in both sapphire and ruby,
and diamond, the oldest, simplest, and hardest of all.
It took millions more years for the first rocky planets to appear,
as stars and planets began a cycle of formation and destruction
that eventually led to our own solar system more than four and a half billion years ago.
Most of this course focuses on the subsequent assembly and evolution of Earth.
First, Earth differentiated into its great layers, the core, the mantle, and the crust.
The oceans and atmosphere, the geosphere and the biosphere.
Second, there were violent transformative events including the origin of the moon
and the extinction of the dinosaurs.
Third, there have been more gradual changes of ocean chemistry,
of supercontinents, of climate, and of life's origins and evolution.
This four and a half billion year history spans right up to the present day
when humans are playing such a significant role in changing our planet.
And we'll speculate about the future, indeed billions of years into the future.
But how can we possibly know what happened on Earth a million years ago,
much less a billion years ago?
What evidence can be brought to bear on events so far in the past?
That's where my love of mineralogy comes in.
The story of Earth and its evolution is a story of mineral evolution as well.
Everything we know of Earth and its history comes from studies of the rocks and minerals.
During these 48 lectures, we'll learn how planets process the dozen Earth minerals
ultimately to form the more than 4,700 different minerals we find on Earth today.
All of the chemical richness of Earth was locked into those earliest primordial dust grains,
but most elements are rare.
Their concentrations in the pre-solar grains were impossibly low,
a few atoms in a million or less.
Barring some remarkably efficient concentration mechanisms,
the chances of most chemical elements clumping together to form separate distinct minerals
was vanishingly small.
The mineral evolution story, therefore, is a four and a half billion year narrative
of successive stages of element selection and concentration through diverse physical,
chemical, and biological processes.
Earth's mineral history had at least ten distinct stages,
but we can combine those stages into just three broad eras,
each of which saw the appearance of new minerals at or near Earth's surface.
The first era, stages one and two, was in the early solar system,
which I'll describe in lectures 10 through 12,
and that includes the ancient period more than four and a half billion years ago
when planets formed from dust and gas.
Evidence for this first era is preserved today in the rich variety of meteorites
that fall to Earth.
One common group of meteorites, the chondrites,
represent the earliest solid objects in our solar system.
Chondrites clumped into larger and larger bodies all the way up to planetesimals,
hundreds of kilometers in diameter,
such large bodies partially melt and dense metals settle to the core.
When cosmic collisions fragmented planetesimals,
the results were diverse meteorites called achondrites.
The second broad era is Earth's own mineral evolution
before the arrival of life, stages three through five.
That's the subject of lectures 13 through 25,
beginning with the formation of the planet from thousands of planetesimals.
At the earliest stage of planet formation,
the separation and concentration of chemical elements was a dominant theme.
Earth's interior rapidly differentiated into layers of contrasting density.
Metal rich in iron and nickel sank to form the core,
which was overlaid by thick mantle composed primarily of magnesium silicates
and a thin outer crust enriched in a variety of elements
that don't easily enter the dense minerals of the mantle and the core.
In this way, Earth's near-surface environment
must have become relatively concentrated in dozens of rare elements,
including the light elements, lithium and beryllium,
the radioactive elements, uranium and thorium, and dozens more.
On worlds lacking significant water and other volatiles like Mercury and the Moon,
it's difficult to identify more than about 350 different minerals,
most the result of cycles of rock melting and recrystallization.
They aren't entirely devoid of water,
but these relatively small bodies are essentially frozen
into a relatively primitive mineralogical state.
Wet planets like Earth and Mars can resort to additional mineral forming tricks.
Hot water reacts with many rocks to form the new so-called hydrous minerals,
including sheet-like micas, needle-like amphibals
and a rich variety of fine-grained clay minerals.
These are signposts of a water planet,
and when mineral-rich water evaporates, it leaves behind common table salt,
as well as sulfates, nitrates, borates and more,
so-called evaporite minerals, where hydrogen is gone,
but oxygen is still present.
And if the surface of a wet planet cools to below zero degrees Celsius,
one can expect to find the tough, transparent mineral form of H2O, ice.
All told, a small wet planet like Mars can be expected to boast
about 500 different near-surface minerals.
Earth had other mineral-forming processes,
including large-scale production of minerals associated with granites
and even larger-scale processes of plate tectonics.
It took time, but such chemical processing
eventually led to more than 1,000 new minerals.
But try as we might.
We can't identify more than about 1,500 different minerals
that were likely to have formed on the early Earth
by physical and chemical means alone.
Something was missing from our survey.
The third broad era of Earth's mineral evolution is linked to life.
Stages 6 through 10.
I'll take up the rich topic of life, beginning with lecture 26,
which we will follow to the end of the course.
Once my colleagues and I formalized the mineral evolution paradigm,
once we started asking new questions about when and how new minerals came to be,
we quickly came to the conclusion that almost two-thirds of all known mineral species
must be the indirect consequence of the living world.
Biological processes must have begun to affect Earth's surface mineralogy
shortly after life's origins, certainly by about 3.5 billion years ago,
when large-scale surface deposits of iron minerals
were precipitated by flourishing microbial life
under the influences of changing atmospheric and ocean chemistry.
But the single most transformative event in Earth's mineral evolution
was the Great Oxidation Event,
a time about 2.2 billion years ago
when photosynthetic microorganisms began to flourish,
releasing copious amounts of oxygen into the atmosphere.
Prior to this remarkably sudden change in Earth's near-surface environment,
surface rocks weathered slowly.
But oxygen is a nasty, corrosive gas that attacks and alters most minerals,
often into new oxidized forms,
like the rust that coats exposed pieces of iron metal.
The most startling result of the mineral evolution story
is that fully two-thirds of all known minerals
fall into this rich category of species
that form when oxygen released by microorganisms
combined with water to alter previous minerals.
Earth's mineralogical richness, it now appears,
is an unmistakable sign of life
and a new way to search for life on other worlds.
And the mineralogical richness of Earth itself,
in turn, provided additional raw materials
for the further evolution of life on Earth.
Algae, diatoms, and grasses all made use of silica.
Calcium carbonate and calcium phosphate
combined with proteins in intricate ways
to form animal shells, teeth, and bones,
making possible the Cambrian explosion of new life forms
540 million years ago
and ultimately opening the way for the appearance of humans.
The new approach of mineral evolution has important implications.
The state investigation of mineral specimens
had been increasingly perceived as a 19th century pursuit
of diminishing concern to modern science.
But the new framework of mineral evolution
underscores the intimate connection between life and rocks.
Mineralogy thus becomes key to unlocking our planet's history
and plays vital roles in understanding Earth's storied past.
As we explore Earth's history together,
we will see epoch after epoch of change.
We will see the color of our planet's surface morph
from black to blue to gray to red, white, and green.
We will discover the origins of life
deeply rooted in the mineral world
and then discover how Earth was the only planet in our solar system
where an explosion of new rocks and minerals arose
because of the living world.
New kinds of rocks, new kinds of life, round and round,
all the while even unto the present day
the geosphere and the biosphere have co-evolved.
What an adventure!
Let's get started and to tell the story properly,
for it really is a single story.
We'll go all the way back to the true starting point
for any natural history to the very beginning,
now dated at 13.8 billion years ago
when energy itself and the simplest atoms first came into existence
to the big bang.
