The
one large-scale surface feature of Earth that is absolutely unique in the history of our
solar system is the terrestrial biosphere.
The green surface world of jungles and forests and swamps.
When we speak of an Earth-like planet, that green landscape is probably what most of us
have in the back of our minds, even more than the vast oceans.
After all, most of us don't spend our lives on the ocean, and Mars was likely a water
world early in its history, so oceans aren't unique to Earth.
We may live on a pale blue dot, but the most distinctive color in our lives is green.
In this context, it's easy to forget that Earth has only had jungles and swamps for
the past 400 million years.
Before that time, the dry surface was largely barren, with a few small plants and fungi.
In that sense, Earth has only been what we think of as an Earth-like planet for about
8% of its history.
In this lecture, I want to focus on the second half of the Paleozoic era, the time between
about 400 and 250 million years ago, when Earth first adopted its more or less modern
character.
This important interval includes three distinct geological time periods.
The first came the Devonian period, which began right in the middle of the Paleozoic.
That's when land plants became firmly established.
We find fossil evidence for some of the earliest land vertebrates as well.
Then the Carboniferous period, which spans the time from about 350 to 300 million years
ago.
That's when immense forests and swamps produced the plant material that would become coal,
but also when the first reptiles emerged.
And finally, the last big geological interval of the Paleozoic era was the Permian period,
which lasted from about 300 to 250 million years ago.
The Permian period began in a frigid ice age with very slow evolution, then entered a warming
time of rapid diversification of both plants and animals, and it finally ended with the
greatest mass extinction of all time.
Three interconnected threads related to the later Paleozoic era unify this lecture.
First is the dramatic evolution of life on land, both plants and animals.
New organisms were constantly coming on the scene, and the rate of evolution was at times
dizzying.
Second is the remarkable rise in the oxygen content of the atmosphere to the highest levels
ever recorded, and then a plummet to values much lower than today.
And finally, we have a correspondingly large swings in climate from hot to cold and back
to hot again.
Let's begin by examining the animal kingdom prior to 400 million years ago.
In the early Devonian period, the distribution and diversity of land animals was nothing
like it is today.
On the one hand, the early Paleozoic seas were rich with animal life.
The reefs of the Cambrian era now preserved in rocks from Wales to British Columbia to
Morocco to Siberia were thriving places with all manner of invertebrates.
Many like trilobites, barachyopods, bryozoa, and corals with hard mineral shells of carbonate
or phosphate.
And by 450 million years ago, marine vertebrates were well established as a variety of armored
and bony fish, including some large predators with massive teeth and jaws, and they quickly
came to dominate the oceans.
In that regard, the coastal reefs would have borne some resemblance to reefs of today,
yet terrestrial vertebrates had yet to make a pervasive appearance.
This transition from fish to land-dwelling amphibians is being clarified specimen by
specimen by a wealth of recent fossil finds.
And as you can imagine, animals' experience profound evolutionary advances as edible plants
emerged from the oceans and expanded across the landscape.
A host of invertebrates, including insects, spiders, worms, and other small creatures
were the first land animals.
Their fossils are very rare, but they occur in well-preserved deposits rich in the earliest
land plants, including the rhino-charitose Scotland.
Some of these fossils, notably beetles and spiders, are remarkably modern in appearance.
Vertebrates took much longer to colonize dry land.
The oldest vertebrates are primitive jawless fish that appeared in the fossil record about
500 million years ago and underwent more than 100 million years of gradual evolution in
the oceans.
Roughly 420 million years ago, the jawless fish were joined by armored fish with bony,
plated heads and jaws.
Some of those fish were monsters exceeding 25 feet in length.
And cartilaginous sharks and ancestors of the modern bony fish also appeared about that
time and diversified over the next 20 million years as well.
So by 400 million years ago, the diversity of fish had greatly increased.
At some point, a fish-like animal must have ventured on to land.
The recent discovery of a 395-million-year-old fossil fish from China, Canichthias kembalai,
is for now the leading contender for oldest land vertebrate.
This modest fossil species, represented by skull fragments only a fraction of an inch
long, provides the earliest signs of the evolutionary transition to four-footed land animals, or
tetrapods.
For at least 20 million years, these odd, clumsy, walking fish, what some paleontologists
have called fishapods, or fish feet, seemed to have flirted with a shallow, sometimes
dried-out coastal environment.
Over the next 10 or 20 million years, some fish developed primitive lungs and ventured
on to land for longer and longer stays, but many millions of years passed before the first
bony animal felt fully at home breathing air.
The oldest known fossil bones, of what was clearly a four-legged animal that could walk
on land, are found to rock about 375 million years old.
Even so, these creatures like tic-tolic found on Ellesmere Island in northeastern Canada
look like a two-foot-long walking fish with fin-like feet, and then by 365 million years
ago, the distinctive vertebrate acanthostega, though fish-like in its elongated hydrodynamic
body and long-finned tail, it had four distinct limbs with cute little toes.
So acanthostega may be interpreted as the oldest known amphibian.
It was an animal as well suited for life on land as it was for life in water.
As with most aspects of the history of life, fossils provide the unequivocal evidence for
this gradual transition from fish to amphibian.
And here's a classic case where paleontologists haven't just been lucky.
Thanks to the theory of evolution and its clear predictions, scientists know exactly
where to look for shallow water sediments from rocks deposited in tropical environments.
And they know to look at formations in very precisely bracketed age ranges between the
occurrence of well-developed fish at 400 million years and obvious land vertebrates at 350
million years.
So the discovery of tiktalic and acanthostega were in a sense predicted, even down to the
specific locations and specific rock formations where to look.
And there's been a corresponding blossoming of spectacular paleontological discoveries,
primarily from Asia and North America.
These numerous new fossil finds point to a 30-million-year interval of intermediate forms, each progressively
more suited to land, but still retaining distinctive fish-like anatomical features.
When you line these fossils up side-by-side in chronological order, it's really quite
striking.
By 340 million years ago, in the middle of the so-called Carboniferous Period, when
immense swampy forests were thriving in low-lying areas around the world, amphibians were the
biggest, most dominant animals on land.
For the next 40 million years, amphibians would be kings.
These primitive beasts include the Natural History Museum favorite, areops, which grew
to more than six feet long and weighed 200 pounds.
A number of complete skeletons had been found, and they're quite distinct, different from
their fish ancestors.
They had broad, flat skulls with ears specifically evolved to here in air.
They had splayed legs and five-toed feet.
They had lungs and other terrestrial adaptations as well.
Amphibians enjoyed that relatively brief interval of dominance, which was soon challenged by
the emergence of reptiles about 320 million years ago.
Reptiles differ from the amphibians in two key ways.
Unlike the thin-skinned amphibians, reptiles have a protective, scaly exterior, and reptiles
lay eggs with hard mineralized shells as opposed to the amphibians who typically must return
to water to lay their soft eggs.
Reptiles could thus spend almost all their time on dry land and expend to habitats and
places where amphibians could not easily go.
Gradually, the reptiles assumed dominance.
The earliest known true reptile fossils are the foot-long, lizard-like insectivore hylonomus
from rocks deposited about 315 million years ago.
In addition to the growing diversity of amphibians and reptiles, by the end of the Carboniferous
period about 300 million years ago, Earth's continents had, for the first time, evolved
to a strikingly modern appearance.
They had dense green jungles of tall, fern-like trees.
They had extensive swamps and meadows that were populated with a rich variety of insects
and spiders, tetrapods, and other creatures as well.
Hand-in-hand with life on land, Earth's near-surface rocks and minerals also evolved and they achieved
something close to the modern state of diversity and distribution.
In spite of these evolutionary developments, Earth had not achieved anything close to stasis.
This is before the climate got hotter, then colder, then hotter again.
Earth experienced what we might describe as uncomfortable extremes with droughts and floods,
not to mention asteroid impacts and supervolcano eruptions, but it's clear from the fossil
record that Earth and life have proven unfailingly resilient to such changes.
Individual species go extinct, but life has always found a way to adapt and radiate into
every available niche.
Life also can trigger great changes in Earth's environment.
The carboniferous period which saw that explosive radiation of land plants fundamentally changed
erosion patterns and the environments of coastal regions.
For the first time in Earth's history, stream banks were stabilized and rivers were more
confined to their paths for more of the time.
Plant roots led to deeper soils and more clay minerals, which supported rich ecosystems
both above and below ground.
Patterns of coastline erosions were also altered as vegetation slowed the flow of nutrient
runoff to coastal waters, while moderating erosion at the interface between land and
sea.
But the biggest effect on the near-surface environment involved the intertwined cycles
of carbon and oxygen.
For the first time in Earth's history, ferns and other land vegetation grew at a rapid
rate.
At the same time, fungi and the symbiosis of termites with bacteria had not yet evolved
to process the dead plant matter, so biomass was buried in prodigious quantities never
before, never since matched in Earth's history.
Deeper and deeper, these deposits of dead plant material became.
They accumulated in layers that were sequestered under more and more sand and silt until pressure
and temperature transformed vast volumes of former trunks, roots, branches, and leaves
into carbon-rich layers of coal.
In fact, the carboniferous period gets its name from these great deposits of coal.
A significant fraction of the world's fossil fuel reserves is still buried in the vast
carboniferous coal measures that are found around the world.
This large-scale removal of organic carbon from the near-surface environment had a remarkable
consequence.
As we've seen before, the composition of Earth's atmosphere reflects a number of interrelated
cycles with both positive and negative feedbacks.
So for example, the rise of oxygen after the snowball Earth episodes produced enough oxygen
to create a protective ozone layer, and that ozone layer in turn allowed life to colonize
dry land.
But the new plant life on land produced more oxygen, which increased atmospheric oxygen
and ozone even further.
That's a positive feedback.
On the other hand, just before those snowball Earth episodes, the atmospheric carbon dioxide
content was significantly reduced by continental rock weathering.
The reduction in CO2 contributed to global cooling, and eventually the snowball Earth.
But that ice cover slowed down or stopped carbon dioxide from being locked into the
oceans in engaging in rock weathering.
So CO2 built up, and eventually, after 10 million years or so, a runaway greenhouse
effect led to the hot house intervals that followed each of the global glaciation.
That's a negative feedback.
Other important feedback loops connected the oxygen cycle with the carbon cycle.
The equation written in a simplest form is that carbon plus oxygen makes carbon dioxide.
Now, the carbon in this equation is shorthand for organic matter, which includes plants
and animals, and their buried remains.
The oxygen in this equation is the oxygen in the air, as well as oxygen used to rust
iron and other minerals.
The carbon dioxide in this equation includes carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, but much
more importantly includes carbon dioxide dissolved in the oceans, and a host of carbonate
minerals that form limestone and other massive rock formations.
The commonest limestone mineral is calcium carbonate, or CaCO3.
There's always a balance in Earth's crust among these three chemicals, carbon, oxygen,
and carbon dioxide.
Now, think about what happens when vast amounts of carbon are locked away rather quickly in
the crust in the form of coal and other dead plant and animal matter.
That carbon is no longer bound to oxygen, so the oxygen is effectively liberated.
The more carbon that's buried, the more oxygen is liberated into the atmosphere.
As a consequence, in the carboniferous period, the oxygen content of the atmosphere appears
to have soared toward the end of the Devonian period at about 380 million years ago.
That's when amphibians were first getting a firm foothold on land.
The atmospheric oxygen was about 15 percent, or perhaps two-thirds of its modern value.
Then, as more and more plants were buried, oxygen rose relatively rapidly to 20 percent
at 350 million years, to 25 percent at 320 million years, to perhaps 30 percent or more
at the maximum about 285 million years ago.
Indeed, by some estimates, the atmosphere's oxygen content briefly soared to more than
35 percent, which is more than one and a half times the modern level.
So that's more than doubling the oxygen content of the atmosphere in less than 100 million years.
This surprising proposition that Earth's atmosphere has changed dramatically in the proportions
of such small molecules as nitrogen, oxygen, and carbon dioxide is not just speculation.
Evidence comes in part from carbon isotopes.
The lighter carbon-12 isotope tends to become preferentially locked into tissues, which is
then sequestered in coal, and compelling evidence comes from carboniferous period amber, or
fossilized tree sap.
Not only does the amber preserve fossil insects, but it traps tiny bubbles of the ancient atmosphere
that in some cases still hold 30 percent or more oxygen.
For a time, perhaps an interval lasting 50 million years from roughly 330 to 280 million
years ago, the unprecedented rise in atmospheric oxygen had extremely beneficial consequences
for animal life.
Oxygen is the key to efficient animal metabolism.
Animals effectively eat carbohydrate fuel and then burn that fuel with oxygen.
More oxygen in the atmosphere meant more energy and increased rates of animal metabolism.
And it's clear that some creatures took advantage of the extra oomph by growing much, much larger.
The six-foot-long amphibian aereops was eaten by the 15-foot-long reptile Demetrodon.
The most dramatic monsters, though, were the giant arthropods, exemplified by three-foot-long
centipedes, two-foot-long scorpions, and there were dragonflies with two-foot wingspans.
Regarding those giant dragonflies, not only did the increased oxygen support the high
metabolism of such a big insect, but it also enhanced atmospheric density and made flying
and gliding that much easier.
And it's easy to imagine other ways that animals benefited.
For example, some species must have migrated to previously uninhabitable higher elevations
with thinner air.
Of course, extremely high oxygen levels can have one obvious downside.
Forest fires triggered by lightning would have burned with much greater ferocity and
35% oxygen.
That's a natural negative feedback for some oxygen levels.
Some scientists have talked about carboniferous firestorms, while the fossil plant record
provides evidence for a higher occurrence of fire-resistant plants during that interval.
All in all, it sounds like a pretty exciting time on Earth.
As is evident by the air we breathe today with about 21% oxygen, those extremely high
oxygen levels did not last.
In fact, there was what amounted to a drastic and rapid drop by more than half an atmospheric
oxygen from over 30% to just 15%.
And that's between 270 and 250 million years ago.
That time span represents about the last third of the Permian period, which was one
of the most dynamic and devastating intervals in Earth history.
So what caused this rapid drop?
It appears there were at least three significant factors that coincided.
For one thing, the drop in atmospheric oxygen was preceded by a protracted ice age.
We'll get to that climate change in a few minutes, but it certainly reduced the extent
of rainforest and jungle-like habitats, which were dominated by big fern trees.
Instead, the cold climate contributed to the rise of hardy conifer forests.
A second factor was that the ice age was followed by a protracted dry spell over most of the
land, and that created a double whammy for oxygen levels.
It's possible that during the Permian period, Earth's continents had converged to form
a supercontinent, Pangea.
As is typical for large landmasses, the interior was a desert, which is recorded in thick deposits
of red sediments.
These so-called red beds are the marker rocks for interior deserts.
And that red color means that atmospheric oxygen was being locked into iron oxides in
the soils.
So the supercontinent became a large oxygen sink.
In addition, the land's vegetation continued to shift away from rainforests.
Conifers dominated because they protect their seeds from evaporation, unlike ferns.
And then a third factor was related to the drastic reduction of total coastline.
And the corresponding reduction in nutrient runoff to the sea.
There were no great global algal blooms.
So that source of oxygen was also cut off.
By the way, the transition to a desert-like climate had a big influence on terrestrial
animals as well.
As you can imagine, reptiles with their tough, scaly hides and hard-shelled eggs are more
suited to the desert climate than amphibians.
So the Permian period is marked by a significant radiation of reptiles.
The ancestors of turtles, of crocodiles, of dinosaurs, and many lizard-like groups first
appeared during this interval.
And some of those groups represent the ancestral vertebrate forms that would give rise to the
mammals.
Also, according to a significant fossil record, about 90 percent of insects at that time were
closely related to cockroaches, which, one can argue, are the most successful land animals
in Earth's history.
So I hope you're getting a picture of how very, very different the land-based ecosystems
were during the Permian, as opposed to the Carboniferous period.
Thus far in this lecture and the last one on the Paleozoic era, I haven't spoken much
about climate.
And I guess you could easily get the impression that climate was fairly stable.
In particular, it would be easy to assume that during the entire 150 million-year interval
between the early Devonian period and the rise of land animals, the Carboniferous period
rise of oxygen, and the subsequent collapse of atmospheric oxygen during the Permian period,
there was a long interval of relative warmth, perhaps even tropical climates, because of
all the ferns.
But it's simply not so.
The Paleozoic era was marked by many long ice ages, and each one had a big effect on
the biosphere.
To review these climate swings, we need to go back into the early Paleozoic era, into
the Cambrian period, when at least three major cold climate events causes pulse of mass extinction.
Each of these events is marked by sudden changes in the fossil record, in the distributions
of trilobites and corals, for example, and significant excursions in the carbon and oxygen
isotopes.
While a number of factors, including average global temperature and patterns of rain and
snowfall, contributed, perhaps the biggest factor in changing isotopes had to do with
the activity of microbes.
During warmer times, microbes eat organic matter more quickly, so that isotopically
light carbon is returned to the environment as CO2, and limestone in shells are correspondingly
lighter.
During cold spells, more of the carbon-rich biomass is buried without being eaten, hence
during colder periods, the oxygen and carbon and calcium carbonate tends to be heavier
than average.
The Cambrian period shows three very distinct intervals when carbonates are unusually heavy,
and each of those times is also marked by a shift in the fossils.
What caused those ice ages is a matter of debate, but we can call on the usual suspects
the same kinds of factors, albeit to a lesser degree, that caused the snowball earth events.
We have such positive feedbacks as the reflectivity of expanding ice sheets, which causes cooler
climates and more ice.
There's also the freezing of methane into deep hydrates, which tends to further draw
down that greenhouse gas.
And after millions of years of relative cold, there are the positive feedbacks from rising
greenhouse carbon dioxide, the release of methane, the retreat of ice, all of which
causes more warming and more release of methane.
So it's a temperature cycle that carried over from earlier times, but with a robust
terrestrial biosphere, the climate extremes of the neoproterozoic era were never repeated.
After the Cambrian came the Ordovician period, spanning the interval from about 488 to 444
million years.
Here the time span is defined by marked extinction events in the fossil record.
In particular, the end of the Ordovician period coincides with one of the largest mass extinctions
of all time, as many tropical species were wiped out by a severe ice age.
And this pattern of recurrent ice ages, every 10 or 15 million years or so, continued.
At least three small global cooling spells occurred during the Celerian period, between
444 and 416 million years ago, and another three during the Devonian period, which started
at 416 million years and ended at 359 million years ago.
So that's six ice ages and associated extinction events in 85 million years, and every one
of these cycles saw the loss of some tropical animals and an isotope excursion.
So in that context, the Carboniferous period that followed was one of relative warmth,
at least for the first 35 million years from about 360 to 325 million years ago.
That's perhaps the longest interval of climate stability during the Paleozoic era.
Then at 325 million years, there began what was one of the longest ice ages in Earth history.
That 50 million year relatively cold interval from about 325 to 275 million years ago saw
a significant extinction of tropical fauna, and then a long period of biological stasis,
with a much lower than average rate of extinction and correspondingly low rate in the appearance
of new species.
The hardy survivors include a greatly reduced population of trilobites, corals, and brachyepods
that persist in the fossil record for tens of millions of years.
Perhaps these forms were especially adaptable, and they could form a single contiguous population
around the Pangean supercontinent.
There's strong evidence that this late Carboniferous and early Permian ice age was far more severe
than the previous Paleozoic episodes.
For one thing, it was a lot longer.
Both the fossil record and the isotope values of carbonate appear to have been disrupted
for 50 million years, and the ice cover may have been much more extensive, at least for
protracted episodes within that ice age.
Perhaps the most striking evidence of the occurrence of unambiguous glacial deposits,
including glacial tillites, was scratched and worn cobbles in several rocky mountain
localities that were within a few degrees of the equator during that interval.
And as I indicated before, the ice age is implicated in Earth's changing atmospheric
composition since it started the cascade of events that led to the big decline in atmospheric
oxygen, particularly with the loss of lush rainforests.
You might be tempting to think of the late Paleozoic era, the time span from about 400
to 250 million years ago in very broad terms.
Oxygen started low, rose to greater than 30%, and then dropped back down.
Climate began warm, cooled during the Great Pennsylvania Ice Age, and then rose.
Terrestrial vertebrates emerged with amphibians dominant early, and reptiles taking over late
in that interval.
In a sense, that's an accurate broad brush account.
But the more detail we discover for that 150 million year interval, whether the fossil
record or evidence for glaciations or oxygen and carbon isotopes, the more complex the
picture becomes.
Superimposed on the broad features are numerous bumps and wiggles in climate, atmosphere, and
ocean composition, and life.
Life went through many crisis points with repeated episodes of extinction, followed
by intervals of evolutionary novelty.
It isn't that change was necessarily happening at a faster pace than before, though life was
evolving amazingly fast compared to the Archaean or Proterozoic eons.
It's just that we see more recent rocks in much finer detail.
The big picture is that for a span of many tens of millions of years, life when the Pangean
supercontinent flourished.
The climate was generally benign, resources were plentiful, and life evolved with abandon.
But then, rather suddenly, mysteriously, 251 million years ago, life collapsed in the most
calamitous extinction event in Earth history, an event known as the Great Dying.
