In the last lecture, we explored the great puzzle of Earth's anomalous moon.
It's so much larger than any other moon orbiting any of the other interplanets.
Where did it come from?
In the 1960s, three competing theories vied for acceptance.
The fission theory imagined the moon breaking away from a rapidly spinning Earth.
The capture theory relied on the intricate dynamics of a rogue planetesimal
that somehow was pulled into Earth orbit.
The co-accretion model suggested that the moon formed in place from Earth's leftovers.
Close scrutiny of the moon rocks and soils brought back by the Apollo missions
proved that all three of these pre-1969 pet theories were simply wrong.
What was this new evidence?
In fact, three new clues from Apollo rocks place severe constraints on how the moon came to be.
For one thing, it turns out the moon differs dramatically from Earth
in that it does not have a big dense iron-metal core.
Earth's core holds almost a third of its mass,
but the moon's tiny core is less than 3% of its mass.
This isn't a trivial difference as the moon's average density is only about two-thirds that of Earth.
Where is all the missing iron?
Second, moon rocks contain almost no traces of the most volatile elements,
notably nitrogen, carbon, sulfur, and hydrogen, which are so common at Earth's surface.
Unlike Earth, which is covered in liquid water and whose soils contain abundant,
water-rich minerals such as clays and micas,
no water-bearing minerals of any kind have been found in the Apollo moon rocks.
Something must have blasted or baked the moon to remove most of those volatiles,
for the moon is now an extremely dry place.
And the third key finding of the Apollo missions is based on the element oxygen,
or more specifically, the distribution of its isotopes.
Each chemical element is defined by its unique number of positively charged protons in the nucleus.
For example, oxygen is just another name for atoms with eight protons in the nucleus.
But atomic nuclei also hold a second kind of particle, the electrically neutral neutron.
Most oxygen atoms have eight neutrons.
Eight protons plus eight neutrons yields an isotope called oxygen-16.
There are also two rare isotopes with nine or ten neutrons called oxygen-17 and oxygen-18 respectively.
Those isotopes are present at a fraction of a percent in Earth's materials.
A key finding of the Apollo missions is that the oxygen isotope composition of the moon is indistinguishable from that of Earth.
So the two bodies appear to have formed from the exact same stuff.
This evidence proved that the fission theory, the capture theory, and the co-accretion theory were all wrong.
And that might sound pretty discouraging, but it didn't take very long for a new idea to emerge.
Planetary scientists have shown over and over again that they are nothing if not good storytellers.
So how do they come up with a completely new theory about the moon?
Look at the facts.
There are several orbital clues.
The moon orbits Earth in the same plane and in the same sense as all the other planets around the Sun.
Earth rotates in the same direction as well, though it does have a significant 23-degree tilt in its rotation axis.
That tilt is what causes our contrasting seasons.
Another curiosity that has to be explained by any theory is that one side of the moon always faces us.
That means the moon has to rotate on its axis once every time it goes around Earth.
They're also important chemical clues to the moon's origins.
The moon is more or less looking like Earth in its composition.
It has the same ratio of oxygen, isotopes, and the same distribution for most of the major elements,
though it does appear to have way too little iron or volatiles.
And what is perhaps the most striking characteristic, our moon is much larger in size relative to its host planet than any other moon in the solar system.
So planetary scientists had to imagine what sort of moon-forming event could have led to that combination of characteristics.
There are other clues that may have been conveniently ignored by earlier models.
In spite of the orbital uniformity of our solar system, there are striking exceptions.
For one thing, Venus rotates on its axis the wrong way.
That may not seem like much, but Venus is almost as large as Earth, and it's rotating the wrong way.
Even stranger is massive Uranus, the third largest planet after Jupiter, whose rotation axis is sideways.
So it seems to kind of roll along in its orbit around the Sun.
The moons, too, include oddities.
Neptune's largest moon Triton, which is comparable in size to Earth's moon,
orbits at a significant angle to the planet's rotation.
And in the opposite direction to the rest of the solar system.
Okay, this is an odd aspect to the culture of science.
One that may sometimes prove off-putting to those not in the game.
On the one hand, we come up with neat theories that package lots of odd facts.
So all the planets and moons orbit the Sun in the same direction, in the same plane,
which points to a common origin from a single swirling nebula.
But then we find exceptions to the rule, and those exceptions are either ignored or quickly explained away.
Venus rotates the wrong way, Triton orbits the wrong way.
No problem, there's always an explanation.
So how should you react when a scientist says all the planets orbit and rotate in the same way, except the few of them don't?
It might seem easiest to dismiss scientific explanations as just so stories.
Perhaps we just make stuff up to explain whatever odd facts come next.
A much better response is that nature is amazing.
It's rich, varied, it's complex, it's intricately interconnected with a long and messy history.
Anomalies are not just inconvenient details to brush aside.
They're the very essence of understanding what really happened, how things really work.
We develop grand and general models of how nature works, and then we use the odd details to refine the original imperfect model.
That's why scientists revel in anomalies.
If we understood everything, if we could predict everything, there'd be no point in getting up in the morning and heading to the lab.
Such a synthesis of systematic trends and niggling anomalies led to the concept of the big splash or big thwack model,
which arose in the mid-1970s in response to this urgent need for something new.
What began as a series of related but poorly constrained hypotheses coalesced into conventional wisdom
at a pivotal 1984 conference in Hawaii where planetary formation experts gathered to weigh all their options.
In such a heady environment, Occam's razor prevails.
That's the demand that the simplest solution to a problem consistent with the facts is likely to be correct.
And the big thwack fit the bill.
To understand this radical idea, think yourself back more than four and a half billion years to a time when the planets had just formed from all those smaller competing planetesimals.
As Earth grew close to its present diameter of more than 12,700 kilometers, it swallowed up almost all of the remaining bodies in the succession of huge impacts.
Those penultimate collisions with objects many hundreds of miles across would have been spectacular, but they had little effect on Earth, which was the much, much more massive protoplanet.
But not all impacts are equal.
In Earth history, one single event, one single day, more memorable than any other, stands out about 4.53 billion years ago when the solar system was perhaps 30 million years old.
Earth was not alone.
Two planet-sized objects, the black proto-Earth and a slightly smaller planet-sized competitor, they jockied for the same narrow ring of solar system real estate.
The smaller would-be planet, dubbed Thea, after the Titan goddess who gave birth to the moon, was worthy of planetary status, probably larger than Mars, maybe roughly a third of Earth's mass.
But there's a rule of astrophysics.
No two planets can share the same orbit.
Eventually, they will collide and the larger planet always wins.
And so it was with Earth and Thea.
The principle way that scientists attempt to understand what might have happened is through increasingly vivid computer simulations.
The laws of physics govern a big collision, so one can run thousands of simulations with all sorts of initial conditions
and see if a moon results.
The answer is intimately tied to the starting parameters.
The assumed mass and composition of the proto-Earth, the mass and composition of Thea, their relative velocities, the angle, the accuracy of the blow, all are critical.
Most combinations simply do not work, no moon forms.
But a few models are surprisingly successful and produce an Earth-moon system rather like the one we see today.
In one off-described version, the impact occurred as a solid side swipe, Big Thea smashing the bigger Earth slightly off-center.
Seen from space, that event would have played out in slow motion.
At the moment of contact, the two worlds seemed at first to gently kiss.
Then over the next four or five minutes, Thea was smushed like a ball of soft dough hitting the floor without much effect on Earth.
Ten minutes later, Thea was pretty much squashed while Earth began to deform.
Half an hour into the collision, Thea was simply obliterated while injured Earth was no longer a symmetrical sphere.
Super hot rocket and vaporized blasted out in luminous streams from the gaping wound and obscuring the disrupted worlds.
Another widely cited solution, first proposed in the 1970s and refined over the next two decades, was developed by Canadian-born theorist Alster Cameron of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
In his intriguing scenario, Thea was roughly 40% the mass of proto-Earth, again an off-centered impact, but this time, Thea more or less bumped against Earth, kind of bounced off as an elongated blob, and then was pulled back in for the cout de gras, a second thwack, in which Thea disappeared wherever.
In either case, the catastrophe obliterated Thea, which simply vaporized into an immense incandescent cloud, tens of thousands of degrees hot surrounding Earth.
Thea did its damage as well, a significant chunk of Earth's crust and mantle also vaporized and blasted outward to mix up with Thea's scattered remnants.
Some material escaped a deep space, but most of the savage remains were retained in orbit by Earth's gravitational grip.
From this roiling cloud, the dense metals from the cores of both worlds, they co-mingled and sank to form a new, larger core for Earth.
Mantle materials also mixed and vaporized, forming a hellishly hot, globe encircling cloud of vaporized rock.
For a violent time of days or weeks, Earth experienced an incessant rain of orange-hot, silicate droplets which merged with a shoreless, red-glowing magma ocean.
Imagine that. Ultimately, Earth seized much of what had been Thea, and thus emerged a more massive planet.
Not all of Thea was captured. Higher up in space, Earth became encircled by a vast accumulation of rocky, collisional debris, mostly an intimate mixture of the two planetary mantles.
Cooling rocky droplets stuck together, with bigger chunks sweeping up the smaller, and a sort of instant replay of the gravitational clumping that originally formed the planets.
The moon coalesced rapidly and may have achieved more or less its present size in just a few years.
The physics of planet formation dictate where the moon could have formed.
Recall from Lecture 9 when we discussed gas giant planets that every massive object has an invisible surrounding sphere called the Roche Limit,
inside of which gravitational forces are too great for a satellite to form.
That's why Saturn has immense rings, but no moons, inside about 50,000 miles from its surface.
Saturn's gravity prevents those icy particles from coalescing to form a moon.
Earth's Roche Limit is about 11,000 miles, or roughly 7,000 miles up from the surface.
Accordingly, models of moon formation locate the new satellite at a distance of about 15,000 miles up,
where it could grow in an orderly fashion by sweeping up most of the scattered bits and pieces from the big thwack.
And so roughly 4.53 billion years ago, the moon was born.
Earth found itself with a companion formed in part from pieces of itself.
Scientists quickly embraced this big thwack theory because it explains all the major clues better than any other model.
The moon lacks an iron core because most of Théa's iron wound up inside Earth.
The moon lacks volatiles because Théa's volatiles were blasted away during the impact.
One side of the moon always faces Earth because the angular momentum of Earth and Théa were coupled into one spinning system.
The big thwack also helps to explain Earth's anomalous axial tilt of about 23 degrees, a factor not well handled by any of the previous scenarios.
The impact literally tipped Earth onto its side.
Indeed, the realization that a late giant impact formed the moon has led to speculation about other planetary anomalies in our solar system.
Perhaps late big thwack events of one kind or another are common.
Maybe they're even necessary.
Perhaps that explains why Venus rotates the wrong way on its axis and why it lost so much of its water.
Perhaps a late giant impact caused Uranus to rotate on its side.
The moon's formation was a pivotal event in Earth history with far-reaching consequences that are utterly amazing and only just now coming into focus.
The moon of 4.5 billion years ago was not that romantic silvery disk we see today.
Long ago, it was far more looming, dominant, it was an unimaginably destructive influence on Earth's near-surface environment.
It all boils down to one amazing fact.
The moon formed only 15,000 miles from Earth's surface, not much farther than a plane flight from Washington, D.C. to Melbourne, Australia.
Today, by contrast, the moon is 239,000 miles away.
At first blush, it seems utterly implausible that a giant moon could just drift away from Earth like that.
But measurements don't lie.
Apollo astronauts left shiny mirrors on the lunar surface.
Laser beams from Earth bounce off the mirrors and they return to Earth to provide distance measurements accurate to win that tiny fraction of an inch.
And every year since the early 1970s, the moon has moved farther away.
About 3.82 centimeters per year, about one and a half inches per year on average.
Now, that doesn't sound like much, but it adds up over time, a mile farther away every 40,000 years at present rates.
Play the tape backward and it points to a radically different Earth 4.5 billion years ago.
For one thing, the moon looked totally different.
At 15,000 miles distant, the 2,150-mile diameter moon would appear gigantic, like nothing we've ever seen.
It spanned almost 9 degrees of arc in the sky, roughly 17 times the apparent diameter of the sun and blocking almost 200 times as much of the sky.
And that's not all.
The early moon was a violent body of intense volcanism, quite unlike the static silvery-gray object we now see.
The new moon would have been a spectacular vision.
Plotting out a big swath of sky, its surface would have appeared black with glowing red magma-filled cracks and volcanic basins easily visible from Earth.
The primordial full moon was equally dramatic.
The surface reflecting hundreds of times more sunlight than in our modern era.
You could easily read a book under its brilliant illumination, but astronomy would have been futile.
No stars or planets would be visible against the young moon's intense glare.
Even more dramatic was how fast things moved.
In space, there's no friction.
So angular momentum is largely conserved over billions of years.
The amount of spinning momentum measured by the sum of how fast the central planet rotates plus how far away its satellite's orbit doesn't change.
It doesn't change very significantly over time anyway.
Today, almost all the angular momentum of the Earth-Moon system is tied up in the orbiting moon, with its 239,000 mile distance and 28-day orbital period as seen from Earth.
The more massive central Earth with its leisurely 24-hour day is only a tiny fraction of the moon's angular momentum.
By the same token, the distant gas giant planets carry almost all the solar system's angular momentum, even though the central sun has 99.9% of the mass.
But play that Earth-Moon tape backward and things were once very different.
Four and a half billion years ago, with the moon only 15,000 miles away, everything was speeded up ridiculously fast, like an ice skater with super long arms doing a spin turning faster and faster as their arms are pulled inward.
For one thing, Earth rotated on its axis amazingly fast, once every five hours.
Now, it still took a full year, that's about 8,766 hours, to go around the sun.
That time hasn't changed much in the history of the solar system, but there were more than 1,750 short days per year, and the sun rose and set every five hours.
Such an estimate seems bizarre, untestable, but there are at least a couple of direct measurements that confirm this idea.
Coral reefs provide one compelling line of evidence.
Some species of coral display exceedingly fine-scale growth lines that record both subtle daily and more obvious annual cycles.
As expected, modern corals show about 365 daily lines for every year of growth.
But ancient fossil corals from the Devonian period about 400 million years ago display more than 400 daily lines per year, pointing to a faster rotation.
Days were only about 22 hours long back then, when the moon was perhaps 10,000 miles closer to Earth.
A second complementary measurement rests on the euphonic phenomenon of tidal rhythmites, which are finely layered sediments that revealed the daily, lunar, and yearly cycles of the tides.
Exacting microscopic studies of tidal rhythmites from 900 million-year-old rocks at Big Cottonwood Canyon, Utah, point to a world when days were only about 18.9 hours long, where there may have been as many as 464 days per year.
And the calculated Earth-Moon distance at that point was 218,000 miles.
That implies a recession rate very similar to that of modern times, about 4 centimeters per year, slightly more than one and a half inches per year.
No direct evidence yet documents Earth's tidal cycles more than a billion years ago, but we can be confident that things were a lot wilder 4.5 billion years ago.
In addition to five-hour days, the nearby Moon was much, much faster in its close orbit as well.
It took only 84 hours, that's three and a half modern days, to go around Earth, with Earth spinning so fast, and the Moon orbiting so fast, the familiar cycle of new Moon, waxing Moon, full Moon, waning Moon, played out in frenetic fast forward with every few five-hour days seeing a new lunar phase.
Lots of consequences follow from this truth, some less benign than others.
Such a big lunar obstruction in the sky in such rapid orbital motions, eclipses would have been a frequent thing.
Total solar eclipses probably occurred every 84 hours at virtually every new Moon, when the Moon was positioned between Earth and the Sun.
For some few minutes, sunlight would have been completely blocked, while the stars and planets suddenly popped out against a black sky in the Moon's fiery volcanoes, and magma oceans stood out red against the black lunar disk.
And total lunar eclipses occurred regularly as well, almost every 42 hours like clockwork, during every full Moon, when Earth lies right between the Sun and the Moon.
Earth's big shadow would have completely obscured the giant face of the bright, shining Moon.
Once again, the stars and planets suddenly popped out against a black sky as the Moon's volcanoes put on that amazing, ready show.
Monster tides were a far more violent consequence of the Moon's initial proximity.
Had both Earth and the Moon been perfectly rigid, solid bodies, they would appear today, much as they did four and a half billion years ago, 15,000 miles apart with uncomfortably rapid rotational and orbital motions, and frequent eclipses.
But Earth and Moon are not rigid.
The rocks can flex and bend, especially when they're molten, while Earth's watery oceans can swell and recede with the tides.
The young Moon, at a distance of 15,000 miles, exerted tremendous tidal forces on Earth's oceans and rocks, even as Earth exerted an equal and opposite gravitational force on the largely molten lunar landscape.
It's difficult to imagine the immense magma tides that resulted.
Every few hours, Earth's largely molten rocky surface may have bulged a mile or more outward toward the Moon, generating tremendous internal friction, adding more heat and thus keeping the surface molten far longer than on an isolated planet.
And Earth's gravity returned to favor, bulging the Earth-facing side of the Moon outward, deforming our satellite out of round.
These epic tidal disruptions lie at the heart of why the Moon keeps moving away from Earth.
After all, how does a 2,200-mile object drift from a mere 15,000 miles to 239,000 miles away?
The answer is found in the conservation of angular momentum.
Whatever angular momentum the Earth-Moon system had at its origin, it must still possess, in large measure, today.
Four and a half billion years ago, a great tidal bulge swept around the planet every few hours, in rhythm with Earth's five-hour day and the Moon's 84-hour orbital period.
Yet, because Earth rotates faster than the Moon orbits, the tidal bulge with its extra mass was always a bit ahead of the Moon.
That extra bulging mass was always in the lead, pulling on the Moon, transferring angular momentum from Earth to the Moon with every orbit.
The immutable laws of planetary motion, first proposed about 400 years ago by the German mathematician Johannes Kepler,
imply that the more angular momentum a Moon has, the farther away it has to be from its central planet.
At the same time, the Earth's tidal bulge pulls the Moon ahead, the tidal lead to form Moon pulls back on Earth's massive bulge,
with equal and opposite force, thus making Earth rotate slower and slower with every rotation.
That's where conservation of angular momentum comes in.
As the Moon orbited farther and farther from Earth, owing to its increased angular momentum,
Earth had to rotate slower and slower on its axis to conserve the total angular momentum of that Earth-Moon system.
Over four and a half billion years, Earth's rotation has slowed from once every five hours to once every 24 hours,
while the Moon has picked up a lot of angular momentum and in the process moved farther away.
Not every planet-Moon system has to follow this storyline.
If the planet rotates on its axis slower than its Moon, then inexorable breaking effect ensues.
Tidal bulges on the planet will trail behind, the Moon will slow down with each orbit and fall ever closer to its doom.
Eventually, the Moon will spiral into the planet and be swallowed up, and yet another variation on the big thwack theme.
Perhaps that's why Venus, with its wrong-way retrograde rotation, doesn't have a Moon.
Perhaps such a cataclysmic demise to a once-orbiting Moon explains why Venus lost its water
and is now a hostile, scouting, lifeless world.
Early in the history of the Earth-Moon system, these exchanges of angular momentum from the slowing Earth to the accelerating Moon were vastly greater than today.
In the first centuries after the Moon's formation, both bodies were girdled by turbulent magma oceans that could flex and deform.
The giant magma tides on Earth and similar magma bulging on the Moon probably caused the Moon to recede by tens or hundreds of feet per year,
even as Earth's rotation steadily slowed down from its initial frenetic pace.
Yet these enormous land tides could not have lasted for long, as the Earth-Moon distance increased, the tidal forces decreased even more.
A doubling of the distance cut the force of gravity by a factor of four.
A tripling of the distance and gravitational forces were but a ninth of their former strength.
When the distance eventually increased by 16 times, gravity was only a tiny fraction as strong, only one part in 256.
Repeated tidal stressing delayed the solidification of worlds, but when the few million years, the near-surface environments of both Earth and Moon were solid.
The rock record of the Moon reveals that deep underground magmas continued to crystallize for hundreds of millions of years.
Asteroid impacts excavated all sorts of interesting, deep-formed igneous rocks, some as young as 3.9 billion years, which now graced the lunar collections in Houston.
Land tides, the deformation of solid rock, were not trivial in those early days, but they were nothing like the mighty daily swellings of the early magma sea.
The Moon remains a luminous reminder that the cosmos is a place of intertwined creation and destruction.
Our nearest cosmic neighbor offers a mute testimony, while change is usually gradual and benign, there can be really bad days.
We're loath to imagine ourselves back to that violent frenzied time, magma oceans, incandescent silicate rain, epic land tides on a world utterly lacking in life-sustaining atmosphere or cooling water.
The story of Fea is dramatic and compelling, but is it correct?
Some scientists are now questioning details of that model.
We know that the isotopic signatures of Moon and Earth are remarkably similar.
Perhaps too similar.
After all, if the Moon came from pieces of Thea, then shouldn't the isotopic signatures differ more?
So some researchers are now revisiting George Darwin's old hypothesis that the Moon was a bud hurled away from Earth.
In fact, that's the kind of argument presented in a 2012 article in the journal Science, which proposed a new kind of big thwack.
In this version, it's a collision with Thea in which Earth was spinning so rapidly that the future Moon could have been created by mass transferred from the original Earth itself.
The authors even offer simulations to show how the excess angular momentum of a fast spinning Earth could have been transferred from Earth to the Moon.
That's an intriguing idea, though a lot more research is still needed.
Since it suggests that the Moon formed primarily from Earth rocks and not from Thea.
And even with the older theory, a lot of the Moon would have come from Earth's mantle.
So whatever theory wins out, when we see the Moon hanging in the sky, we can now say with confidence that when we look at the Moon, we're also looking at Earth itself.
