How much carbon does Earth hold?
What are the repositories of Earth's carbon, and how does carbon move among those reservoirs?
And how have those cycles of carbon varied through deep time?
These seem like simple questions, but full answers turn out to offer a great deal of insight
into our planet.
Carbon is the fourth most abundant element in the universe, according to data from stars
and observations of our solar system, but in Earth's crust, at least a dozen other elements
are more abundant than carbon.
Carbon seems to be missing from Earth's crust, so what's going on?
Well, we don't know yet, but plate tectonics and subduction are cycling at least some of
Earth's carbon deep into the mantle, and if so, that raises questions about what kind
of carbon is down there?
Diamonds?
Carbonate minerals?
Vast new petroleum and natural gas reserves, or maybe even extremophile life?
In this lecture, I want to discuss efforts by the Deep Carbon Observatory, a 10-year
billion-dollar research project to get to the bottom, so to speak, of carbon on Earth.
Then, after looking at a range of key unanswered questions about carbon, I want to focus on
methane, an important greenhouse gas throughout Earth's history, which is a timely and surprising
example of how it's so useful to understand carbon far below Earth's surface.
The Deep Carbon Observatory was initiated by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
Alfred P. Sloan was president and then chairman of General Motors during the time it became
the largest car company in the world.
Anyway, he made a lot of money, and he used some of that money to establish the Sloan
Foundation in 1934.
In any given time, the Foundation officers are likely to have one or more big 10-year
science programs that adopt an international approach to big global questions.
To give you an idea, one amazing recent program was the Census of Marine Life.
Ultimately, the Census of Marine Life engaged 2,700 scientists from 80 countries.
The idea was to organize a truly international effort with countries around the globe cooperating
in an effort to document what lives in the oceans, from the equators to the polar regions.
They set about surveying every sort of life form from coral reefs and fish to microbes
and plankton, and in the process they made wonderful discoveries including thousands
of previously unknown species of sea creatures.
In 2007, Sloan was thinking about their next 10-year program, their next big thing.
Then I happened to be in New York presenting an after-dinner talk on our NASA-sponsored
research to investigate the possibility of a deep subsurface origin of life.
By good fortune, Dr. Jesse Ozabell, a program officer from the Sloan Foundation, decided
to attend that presentation, and it triggered an idea.
He then read my 2005 book on the subject Genesis, The Scientific Quest for Life's Origin, and
a short while later, I got one of those unexpected phone calls.
You never forget, Jesse called me.
He introduced himself as representing the Sloan Foundation and asked if I considered
developing a plan for a 10-year international scientific program to study the deep origins
of life.
Now, he made it clear this was a big program in the hundreds of millions of dollars range,
and he offered an exploratory grant of $400,000 just to see if the international scientific
community was interested, and that's a pretty big incentive.
After some thought, I countered that a big program on the deep origins of life was too
narrow but that a global effort to understand the element carbon from crust to core had
real potential for fundamental discoveries, and here's why.
Carbon is arguably Earth's most important element.
It's key to understanding Earth's variable climate and environment.
Carbon has long been and continues to be the central element in our quest for energy.
Carbon is also the crucial element of life, and by extension, it's the core element in
the design of new drugs and myriad other products.
Carbon has a well-studied surface cycle of oceans, atmosphere, rocks, and life.
But we remain woefully ignorant of many of the most basic aspects of Earth's deep carbon
cycle.
While the Sloan Foundation agreed, and in May of 2008 we held a workshop-style conference
in Washington, D.C. with more than 100 scientists from a dozen countries to see if there was
sufficient interest and a cohesive set of scientific questions to warrant a huge investment
of time and money.
In short, the opinion was unanimous.
The role of carbon in Earth is of fundamental importance.
The result is the Deep Carbon Observatory, launched in the summer of 2009, and now in
full swing with about 1,000 researchers in 40 countries taking an active role.
The Carnegie Institution's Geophysical Laboratory is the headquarters of this ambitious 10-year
program to understand carbon in our planet, and our resolve is to achieve a new level of
understanding of carbon in Earth's deep interior.
There are so many things we want to learn about Earth's carbon.
Most basically, we want to know how much carbon our planet holds.
And it's amazing to me that at this point we don't know Earth's total carbon budget
to a factor of 10, or maybe even a factor of 20.
That's because we don't know if there's much carbon in the lower mantle or the core, where
even a few parts per million carbon would add up to much more than all the known carbon
in the crust.
Now, current estimates of Earth's total carbon content range from less than a tenth of a
percent to more than two percent, but scientists of the Deep Carbon Observatory are starting
to refine that number, and some of our latest estimates have been published in an open-access
volume called Carbon in Earth.
In this 700-page review, we suggest that Earth's metallic core may hold anywhere from a quarter
to one percent carbon.
And the mantle might hold even more carbon, some in the form of diamond and carbonates,
but maybe as a trace element in much more abundant deep silicate and oxide minerals
as well.
So many of us now think that Earth's total carbon budget is at least one percent of the
planet's total mass.
One of the most amazing hidden repositories of carbon is deep microbial life.
It turns out that just about anywhere you dig or drill into Earth's crust, whether
on land or at sea, there are microbes living in the subsurface.
Microbes have been found in drill cores as deep as three miles, and they seem to thrive
in deep sediments and solid rocks anywhere there is subsurface water, as long as the
temperature is below about 130 degrees Celsius.
Now, this deep life is sparse, typically with no more than about a million individual cells
per cubic centimeters.
Soils on the surface, by contrast, can easily have a billion cells per cubic centimeter
or more.
But if you integrate all those cells over all of Earth's upper crust, the number of
cells is absolutely enormous.
By some estimates, the biomass of living cells beneath the surface may be as much as 30 percent
of all the life we see at the surface.
Deep microbes, though largely hidden forever from our view, may thus represent a significant
fraction of all life on the planet.
Now, I have to say that all of that subsurface life, indeed all of life, is only the tiniest
fraction of carbon on Earth, but it's a really fascinating fraction.
Now, if deep microbes are a surprise, deep viruses are nothing short of astonishing.
There's now a lot of evidence pouring in that the subsurface also holds a vast amount of
viruses that live, so to speak, beneath the surface.
There is debate over the extent to which viruses are actually living since they lack those
typical cell parts they can't reproduce on their own, they don't quite have a metabolism.
They're just strands of DNA or RNA encased in a protein.
That's why they are far smaller than bacteria.
5,000 viruses put end to end might equal only the width of a fingernail, yet viruses
on Earth are so numerous that their total length placed end to end has been estimated
to equal the length of the Milky Way Galaxy times 100.
Deep viruses play a couple of key roles that are only just now coming into focus.
For one thing, deep viruses have a significant effect on carbon turnover, that is the rate
at which carbon atoms are reworked from one reservoir to another.
When viruses kill cells, their carbon atoms get reprocessed by other cells.
The deep turnover rate is thus many times greater than previously thought.
Once more, deep viruses play a key role in evolution by shuffling and swapping genetic
material among microbes, so microbes are constantly evolving by this lateral transfer of genes.
And that's because of the way viruses manipulate DNA.
Viruses introduce new genes, alter the structures of microbes, and break them down completely
into molecular fragments, and they have an absolutely, cosmically stunning amount of
genetic material to work with.
The deep carbon observatory has all this and more among its many objectives.
But what's perhaps most important to me are several legacy projects.
Those are research efforts that we hope to start, but which will continue long after
the DCO has ended its 10-year program.
For example, we have begun an effort to instrument every one of the approximately 500 active volcanoes
on Earth.
We envision a time when anyone can go to the web and find out what their favorite volcano
is doing.
Video feeds, gas analyses, seismic events, and so forth.
School classrooms, interested amateurs, and first responders could follow a volcano and
even try to predict eruptions.
Then we have a legacy project called the Global Senses of Deep Microbial Life, which we imagine
hooking up to something like Google Earth so you can click on any spot on the globe
and find out what's known about the diversity of microbes beneath the surface.
Other legacy projects involve building reference collections of diamonds, which have been notoriously
difficult to obtain from the big diamond companies.
That's why cooperative international effort is needed.
Diamonds are important to understand the Earth because they are the deepest objects
we can hold in our hands.
And they hold a treasure trove of information about Earth's interior.
Some diamond crystals hold deep Earth's minerals, other types of minerals, minerals that reveal
the rocks and minerals from as much as 1,000 miles down.
What's more, some diamonds display carbon isotope values that suggest biological processing.
How's that possible?
The idea here is that the carbon-rich remains of life are subducted deep into the mantle
where they're reprocessed into diamonds, and when those diamonds come back and reach
the surface, they complete a carbon cycle that can last a billion years.
That's why amassing a research collection of diamonds is so important.
And the Deep Carbon Observatory also wants to develop a big data infrastructure so that
researchers everywhere have immediate access to key data, not just on carbon compounds,
but all Earth materials.
And finally, we have a legacy program to design and construct new instruments.
And that takes us back to the methane question, because discovering the origins of Earth's
hydrocarbons is a centerpiece of the DCO's mission.
Earth's turn to the lightest of all hydrocarbons, methane, which is a good way to see all this
come together.
In each of the last three lectures, I made passing reference to the gas, methane, CH4,
which is a powerful greenhouse gas that may have played an important role in the history
of Earth's variable climate.
Now, when you hear the phrases greenhouse effect or global warming or climate change
today, the first chemical that comes to mind is probably carbon dioxide.
That's because atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide have been increasing year
by year.
And there has been a great deal of attention to humans burning large quantities of carbon-based
fossil fuels like coal, petroleum, and natural gas that produce CO2.
The problem that you'll commonly hear expressed is that fossil fuels that took hundreds of
millions of years to accumulate in what are now deeply buried layers of sediment are being
burned over the space of centuries.
Relatively rapid increases in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere might cause global temperatures
to rise, which would in turn cause significant shifts in climate, more severe weather, and
rising sea levels.
And all of those changes could have an adverse effect on human populations.
Well, it turns out that carbon dioxide is by no means the most effective greenhouse
gas.
In fact, methane or natural gas, that's the smallest hydrocarbon molecule with a central
carbon atom surrounded by four hydrogen atoms.
Molecule for molecule, about seven times more effective a greenhouse gas than CO2.
A sudden release of methane, therefore, would be expected to have a much more pronounced
effect on climate than a comparable amount of carbon dioxide.
Moreover, part of the concern is the potential positive feedback caused by any methane release.
Much of the methane stored near the ocean floor is trapped in a fascinating compound
called methane clathrate, which is an ice-like crystalline mixture of water and gas that
forms under moderate pressure and cold temperatures.
This freezing cold methane ice is amazing stuff.
It actually burns.
You can check out videos on YouTube.
Methane clathrate outcrops on the continental slopes and forms large deposits beneath the
ocean floor.
The vast quantities of methane, by some estimates, several times all other known methane reserves
combined are locked into these methane ices.
The methane in the methane ices must have formed as gas rising from below, either from
deeper microbes or from the mantle that reacted with cold ocean water.
There's also a lot of methane locked in methane clathrates and arctic permafrost, soils in
parts of Siberia, northern Canada, other polar regions that have been frozen for centuries
are now thawing and releasing methane at an increasing rate.
An extreme positive climate feedback might occur when ocean waters or tundra warm even
slightly, which causes the shallowest clathrate deposits to melt, they can release copious
amounts of methane gas, and this methane adds significantly to the greenhouse effect which
causes the oceans to warm even more.
Some scientists now point to a possible catastrophic neoproterozoic release of ocean floor methane
as a way to accelerate global warming, perhaps flipping earth from cold to hot in a matter
of decades.
A warming ocean is likely to cause the widespread melting of some of those methane-rich ices
that are now found in huge quantities beneath the ocean floor, and which would inevitably
add to the greenhouse methane to the atmosphere.
Increased methane would increase the greenhouse effect, causing even more warming, and warming
could release more methane.
That's a positive feedback.
Looking back to the neoproterozoic hot house earth episodes, many scientists suggest that
a sudden release of methane from shallow clathrates contributed to the warming in exactly this
way.
In a geological blink of an eye, perhaps much less than a thousand years, the climate
lurched.
If we are to understand the potential for this kind of sudden methane release, then we need
to understand the sources of that methane.
For billions of years, methane has accumulated in ocean floor sediments, and the growing
evidence now suggests that the methane is coming from two contrasting sources.
The first process, or rather, set of process, which relates to biology, there's no controversy
that some methane deposits result from methanogenic microbes that release methane as part of their
normal metabolic cycle.
These methanogens thrive in oxygen-poor ocean sediments that are found near many known methane
reserves.
Some very large and shallow natural gas deposits are thought to have formed by the sustained
action of these microorganisms.
So microbes can produce methane, but there is another important biological source as
well.
When biomass is deeply buried and subjected to temperature and pressure, methane is often
produced as a byproduct.
This so-called thermogenic methane is very commonly associated with both petroleum and
with coal deposits.
You've probably seen pictures of a flame high atop some oil wells and refineries.
That's where relatively small, non-commercial amounts of methane are being burned off.
You've also heard of coal mine disasters that occur when a spark ignites underground
methane seeps.
The methane can become trapped in pockets and suddenly released during mining operations
in both cases.
With methanogenic and thermogenic methane, it's clear that much of the deep natural gas is
a byproduct of biology.
Recent experiments at my lab and elsewhere point to additional non-biological sources
of methane from a much deeper source that doesn't rely on biology at all.
It now appears that in the deep crust and upper mantle where extreme temperatures and
pressures prevail, water and carbon dioxide can react with common iron-bearing minerals
to produce methane.
Experiments at high temperatures and pressures mimic these suspected deep earth reactions.
In one study conducted in 2004 at the Geophysical Laboratory, my colleague Henry Scott mixed
three common crustal ingredients, the mineral calcite or calcium carbonite, which is a common
carbon-bearing mineral of limestone, an iron oxide mineral FVO called wistite, which is
thought to be one of the three most common minerals in the mantle, and water.
Scott sealed these ingredients in a diamond anvil cell in which two gem quality diamonds
act as tiny anvils to compress reactants to pressures thousands of times greater than
the atmosphere.
He used a laser to heat the sample to more than a thousand degrees, which matches conditions
found in the upper mantle.
The diamonds of the diamond anvil cell are transparent, so you can observe the sample
in the process of reacting and changing.
Henry Scott could see tiny bubbles of methane forming in the sample chamber.
It turns out that the hydrogen of water had reacted with carbon from the calcite to form
natural gas with lime and magnetite as other byproducts.
Now lots of other laboratories have duplicated and expanded on this result.
Experiments in Russia, Japan, Canada and elsewhere in the United States have documented the synthesis
of hydrocarbons under a range of conditions that represent deep earth conditions.
The bottom line is that experiments show that methane can form and accumulate in earth's
crust both through biological and non-biological mechanisms.
These experiments have real relevance to the neoproterozoic global warming, for deep
methane may have contributed to the particularly strong positive feedback.
This neoproterozoic warming scenario depends strongly on the sources of methane.
If microbes and thermogenic alteration of biomass produce most of the ocean's natural
gas, then clathrate production probably slowed during the snowball episodes.
And methane release may not have played such a major role in the subsequent warming.
If on the other hand a significant fraction of deep methane comes from the lower crust
or mantle by non-biological reactions, then stores of natural gas would have built up
continually throughout any global cooling spell.
Even a snowball earth, that methane buildup could have triggered a much greater feedback.
So we want to know where that deep methane comes from.
The chemical rationale for deep abiotic methane production is supported by a growing number
of experiments.
Water plus carbon dioxide plus minerals react under a whole variety of conditions to make
methane at high pressure and temperature.
Nevertheless, the idea that such reactions contribute significantly to earth's crustal
methane reserves has not met with universal acceptance by the oil and gas industry in
the United States.
Natural wisdom in the States and much of the rest of the world, for that matter, points
to a biological origin of virtually all hydrocarbon fuels.
The history of this question is politically charged.
In the mid-19th century, the famed Russian chemist Dmitry Mendeleev, who is known for
his ubiquitous periodic table of the elements, he proposed that petroleum comes from a non-biological
source.
The capital fact to note is that petroleum was born in the depths of the earth, and it
is only there that we must seek its origin.
Mendeleev's hypothesis was promoted in Soviet Russia and in the Ukraine in the second half
of the 20th century, and to this day it informs Russia's successful oil and natural gas industry.
Some Russian geochemists still argue that virtually all petroleum derives from deep
abiogenic sources.
In their view, some very productive oil wells may be renewable resources, at least on geological
timescales.
These fields would continuously refill from below from those vast mantle reservoirs.
American petroleum geologists don't agree.
They have the experience of generations of research on North American deposits to back
their claims, and they cite a litany of evidence for an exclusively biological origin for petroleum.
For one thing, oil is only found in sedimentary horizons of an age and locality where life
once thrived.
Petroleum is always loaded with distinctive molecular biomarkers, and the isotopic composition
of oil is uniquely lifelike.
The trace elements of oil rich in nitrogen and sulfur and phosphorus also point to a
living source.
For many North American petroleum geologists, there's nothing more to talk about.
Whatever you think of this strong evidence, the debate between biogenic and abiogenic origins
of oil was revisited in North America by the iconoclastic Austrian astrophysicist Thomas
Gold, known to his colleagues as Tommy.
Tommy Gold taught at Cornell University and continued research and publication until his
death in 2004 at the age of 84.
He was best known for his realization that rapidly oscillating radio sources in deep
space, the so-called pulsars, are in fact rapidly rotating neutron stars.
Gold speculated on many other areas of science, from the physiology of hearing to the consistency
of the powdery lunar surface.
But his most notable publications outside of astrophysics were on the genesis of petroleum
and natural gas, and he was an unabashed champion of non-biological origins.
Petroleum looks biological, he argued, because there are abundant communities of microbes,
what he called the deep, hot biosphere.
Those deep microbes used abiotic hydrocarbons as their food, and so microbes overprint abiotic
hydrocarbons with their distinctive biochemical markers.
Based on this hypothesis, Gold advocated petroleum and natural gas exploration in unconventional
igneous and metamorphic rock hosts.
He was persuasive.
Based on his recommendation, a Swedish company drilled exploratory wells into solid granite
at the Silvan Ring Complex, that's the site of Europe's largest known meteorite impact
dating from over 360 million years ago.
That project yielded intriguing, though commercially unsuccessful results, and a lot of unhappy
investors lost their money.
The answer to this hydrocarbon question, the origin of hydrocarbons, is not yet resolved,
and here's where the Deep Carbon Observatory's instrumentation program comes in.
How can we tell if a methane deposit on the ocean floor was produced by a rock or by a
microbe?
Geochemists Ed Young and colleagues at the University of California in Los Angeles think
they have a way.
Theoretical calculations point to a subtle effect in the distribution of isotopes that
might be the key, but not with any ordinary measurement of heavy versus light isotopes.
Ed Young and co-workers want to measure isotopologs.
Isotopologs are molecules that are chemically identical, but that differ in the arrangement
of their isotopes.
For example, methane has 1 carbon atom and 4 hydrogen atoms, so it comes in several different
isotopologs.
Recall from our discussion of urm mineral isotopes in lecture 5 that 99.8% of all carbon
atoms are the less massive carbon 12, while 1 in every 500 carbon atoms is the more massive
carbon 13.
And a hydrogen also comes in a less massive version, technically hydrogen 1, but always
just called hydrogen, and the more massive hydrogen 2, which is always called deuterium.
The typical hydrogen to deuterium ratio on Earth is about 1,000 to 1.
It follows that about 1 in every 500 methane molecules incorporates carbon 13, while about
4 in every 1,000 methane molecules holds a deuterium.
OK, measuring trace amounts of either of these two heavy isotopes is hard enough, but Ed
Young and colleagues want to do something much more difficult.
They want to measure the doubly substituted methane isotopologs, that is, the roughly
1 in a million molecules of methane that holds both a carbon 13 and 1 deuterium, that's
denoted 13C H3D, or else 2 deuterium, so that would be 12C H2D2.
According to their calculations, the ratio of these two rare isotopologs in any given
sample of methane depends on the temperature at which it formed.
If a methane deposit formed at temperatures below 200 degrees, then it must be microbial.
But if it formed at temperatures above 1,000 degrees, then it is most likely abiotic from
the mantle.
This idea sounds terrific.
This measure of the ratio will know how the methane formed, but there's not an instrument
in the world that can determine that ratio.
Conventional isotope mass spectrometry can't distinguish the two isotopologs for two very
good reasons.
First, these two isotopologs differ by only a tiny fraction of a percent in mass, so the
instrument has to have superior mass-resolving power.
Second, the isotopologs are present at extremely low concentrations that can't be measured
by conventional analysis, so Ed Young and colleagues have designed a new instrument
that enhances both the mass-resolution and the molecular sensitivity.
One of the first actions of the decarbonate observatory was to help fund a $2 million
prototype instrument in England, specifically to measure the isotopolog ratios of methane.
It will take years to complete this spectrometer and find out if it works.
But many scientists think the time and effort is worth the risk.
And if, as some scientists suspect, a significant fraction of Earth's deep methane does come
from the mantle, then that might just help explain why the neoproterozole climate shifted
so far and so fast.
Of course, carbon shapes not only the environment for life, but also the very composition of
life as well.
Carbon is capable of forming multiple bonds with itself in more than 80 other elements,
making it an unmatched building block for chemical behavior.
In the next lecture, we'll see carbon usher in a tenth stage of mineral evolution centered
around biominerization.
And we will see how biominerals, in turn, allow for the invention of animals.
