Almost 14 billion years ago, at the beginning of all things, the Big Bang paved the way
for cosmic evolution. A sequence of freezings led first to the four forces and then to the
principle subatomic particles, leptons, and quarks. Eventually, when the universe was
only a few hundred thousand years old, the first atoms emerged, the first chemical elements,
hydrogen, helium, and lithium. That was it. None of the richness of the periodic table
of the elements had yet appeared. The raw materials of earth-like, rocky planets and
of the minerals that formed them did not yet exist. In this lecture, we'll see how simple
atoms of hydrogen and helium make stars and how stars manufacture all the rest of the periodic
table of the elements. This remarkable stellar mechanism of making chemical elements is a
process called nucleosynthesis. In this lecture, the third of our series, the third of our exploration
of earth's biography, we'll examine how the primordial hydrogen and helium from the Big
Bang eventually gave rise to the entire periodic table of the elements, which now numbers
close to 120 different observed elements, both natural and artificial. Okay, here we
need to define a few key words associated with atoms. First, an atom. An atom is any
charged object with a positively charged nucleus with one or more proton and usually neutrons
surrounded by one or more negatively charged electrons. So that's the most general term.
Then an element is an atom for which the exact number of protons is known. The number of
protons or atomic number also defines an element's position in the periodic table. Now, if you
look at the periodic table, you'll see that hydrogen is element one with one proton in
the nucleus. So it's found in the upper left-hand corner of the periodic table. Then helium
is element two, carbon is element six, gold is element 79. So they have two, six, and
79 protons in the nucleus respectively. During this course, we'll be looking at the behaviors
of almost half of the elements, each of which has its own mineral evolution story to tell.
Okay, an ion that's any atom that has a net electrical charge, that is the number of positive
protons in the nucleus is different from the number of negative electrons surrounding
the nucleus. We're going to pay a lot more attention to ions when we start looking at
Earth's most common rock-forming minerals. And finally, an isotope. An isotope is any
element for which you know both the number of protons and the number of neutrons in the
nucleus. Remember, the number of protons defines the element, but every element comes in a
variety of isotopes. Isotopes turn out to be fundamentally important in our understanding
of Earth's history. We'll come back to them again and again in this course. There's a
wonderful chart of the isotopes that I want to introduce. It's a big chart, sort of like
a much expanded periodic table, but in the chart of the isotopes, the number of protons
is on the vertical axis, while the number of neutrons is on the horizontal axis. That
means the chart of the isotopes has lots of squares, each corresponding to a unique combination
of protons and neutrons. In fact, there are more than 2,000 different isotopes on this
chart. Okay, think about what such a chart means. Each element is defined by the number
of protons, so each horizontal line on this chart corresponds to a different chemical
element. The bottom most row for atoms with one proton corresponds to hydrogen. The second
row is helium. The sixth row is carbon and so forth, but you see that every row has more
than one square filled in. That's because for any number of protons, for any given element,
there are several isotopes. Hydrogen has three different isotopes. The commonest hydrogen
one has a single proton. That's the definition of hydrogen and no neutrons. Then there's
hydrogen two with one proton and one neutron. That's the heavy form of hydrogen that we
call deuterium. Finally, there is a much rarer isotope, hydrogen three, that is one
proton and two neutrons. That important isotope is usually called tritium and it's a major
ingredient in hydrogen bombs. As you get to higher and higher atomic numbers, that is
elements with more and more protons, you notice two important trends. The first is that heavier
elements have a lot more isotopes. For example, magnesium is element 12. It has 22 known isotopes
from magnesium 97 neutrons to magnesium 40 with 28 neutrons. Now compare those 22 isotopes
to iron element 26, which has 27 isotopes ranging from iron 45 with 19 neutrons to iron
72 with 46 neutrons. Then mercury element 80, 80 protons in the nucleus. It has 40 different
isotopes from mercury 171 with 91 neutrons to mercury 210 with a whopping 130 neutrons.
You see how the number of isotopes grows significantly with atomic number. The other
obvious trend in this chart of the isotopes is that as the atomic number rises, the average
number of neutrons greatly exceeds the number of protons. This effect can be explained in
part by the electrostatic repulsion that occurs between two positively charged protons. Like
electrical charges repel each other. Positive repels positive and when you try to cram dozens
of positive protons into the same nucleus, the neutrons can act like tiny spacers. So
today we know of more than 2000 different isotopes, 2000 different combinations of protons and
neutrons. But I want you to imagine yourself back to a time 13.7 billion years ago. The
universe is much smaller than it is today. Atoms have formed and they're found in immense
slumpy clouds. They're slowly being reworked by the force of gravity. And there are only
six different stable isotopes. There's hydrogen 1 and hydrogen 2, that's deuterium. There's
helium 3 and helium 4 and small amounts of lithium 6 and lithium 7. That's it. So how
do we get from six isotopes to more than 2000? How do we get from three chemical elements
hydrogen, helium and lithium to more than 100? That story is absolutely pivotal in the
history of Earth, where without all the elements and isotopes, Earth could never have formed.
So let's talk about cosmic evolution and nucleosynthesis, the making of all those elements and isotopes.
The universe, the universe at this earliest phase, it's 13.7 billion years old. It has
none of the distinctive objects that we see in the night sky today. It probably took millions
of years for the first large hydrogen-rich stars to form. But when they did, the universe
entered a new dynamic era of cosmic evolution. Those first stars began as little more than
giant balls of hydrogen and helium. And they were shaped by two competing forces. On the
one hand, the force of gravity pulled mass inward to a common center. So vast portions
of the diffuse gas clouds were thus organized into spinning spheres. On the other hand,
our nuclear reactions pushing outward. At the core of stars, the temperatures and pressures
rose higher and higher until pairs of hydrogen atoms collided with such force that they fused
together in nuclear reactions. Each of these fusion reactions produced heavier atoms. But
the mass of the new atom was only slightly less than the sum of the pieces that fused
together. And that missing mass was converted to energy. Energy in accord with Albert Einstein's
most famous equation, E equals MC squared. Now, that equation means that the energy produced
in nuclear fusion reactions equals the lost mass times the speed of light squared, a very
very large number. As hydrogen atoms gradually fuse to make helium atoms, a star begins to
glow and it radiates its energy into the surrounding space. This phase of stable hydrogen burning
can last hundreds of millions to billions of years. Surprisingly, the smaller the star,
the longer it burns because temperatures and pressures are lower. Very large stars burn
up their hydrogen relatively quickly by contrast. So the sun, which is a rather modest sized
star, has been consuming hydrogen for about four and a half billion years. And that's
about halfway through its lengthy cycle. And I suppose it's very likely that some small
stars formed in the very earliest stages of the cosmos, that they're still burning
fitfully after more than 13 billion years. Though we'd be hard pressed to observe such
faint objects if they're very, very far away. Okay, now up to this point in the universe
there were no new isotopes, just shifting ratios of the same six stable isotopes that
were present after the Big Bang. Two isotopes of hydrogen, two of helium, two of lithium.
That situation was about to change. As hydrogen in a giant star's core is used up and as helium
accumulates, a new fusion process takes place. Remember, a star must balance two competing
forces, gravity pulling in, nuclear reactions pushing out. During hydrogen burning, those
two forces remain in quite stable equilibrium. The size of a hydrogen burning star doesn't
change much, nor does its total energy output. So for example, over the past four and a half
billion years, the Sun has only very gradually increased its energy production. And we suspect
that situation is going to persist for billions of years more. But when hydrogen burning ends,
it's a different story. Gravity continues to pull mass toward the center, which causes
temperatures and pressures to rise more, which can trigger another sequence of fusion reactions.
The use of three helium atoms begin to collide with each other at the inconceivable temperatures
and pressures of the star's deep interior. Those are conditions vastly more extreme than
anything we can reproduce in our laboratories. These collisions lead to a new, heavier chemical
element, carbon, with six protons. The isotope Carbon-12 also has six neutrons. Helium burning
also produces a small amount of the element beryllium. And if you look at the periodic
table, you see that hydrogen, helium, and lithium are in the first three spots. Two
helium atoms confused to make beryllium, that's element number four in the periodic table,
and three helium atoms make element six, that's carbon. And I should note here that nuclear
reactions are governed by some complicated selection rules. Certain combinations of protons
and neutrons are very likely, while others almost never happen. So hydrogen, helium,
carbon are much more abundant than lithium or beryllium, and element five, boron, that's
scarcer still. Helium burning is a lot more energetic than hydrogen burning, and this
increased energy production leads to a couple of important phenomena. First, the fusion
reactions of helium proceed much, much faster than those of hydrogen. So the star only spends
about 10% of its lifetime in that energetic state. If hydrogen burning lasts nine billion
years, say, as it might in the star slightly smaller than our sun, then the helium burning
stage will only last about a billion years. The second difference leads to rather dramatic
behavior. As helium burning doesn't start smoothly, rather we observe the beginnings
of a helium burning star to occur in fits and starts. Intense fusion reactions at first
cause the star to swell, but that swelling reduces the polar gravity which slows the
reaction so the star starts to contract. This sequence repeats over and over again with expansion
and contraction cycles lasting on the order of weeks, and that behavior leads to a brightening
and dimming of the star. The duration of the cycle of these Cepheid variable stars depends
on the size and energy output of the star. Recall that Edwin Hubble used that relationship,
a known brightness related to the duration of the cycle, to measure distances to nearby
galaxies. So the helium burning phase of stars and the consequent production of carbon atoms
has played a key role in our understanding of the universe. After a time, the helium
burning settles down into a much more stable state and much more energetic state. The star
emits thousands of times more total energy than its hydrogen burning phase. And it also
expands because the nuclear forces pushing outward are so much greater. The star becomes
a red giant. The temperature at the surface is actually cooler than it was before. Red
indicates a lower surface temperature of about 2000 to 3000 Celsius compared to perhaps 6000
degrees Celsius of our yellow sun. But the surface area is so much greater in a red giant
star that this represents a lot more energy. And now we enter a sequence of fusion reactions
each more intense, each faster than the last. Eventually the helium in the core is mostly
used up while the core becomes enriched in the element carbon. For smaller stars, including
our own sun, this is the end point of fusion reactions. There's just not enough temperature
and pressure to go farther, so the nuclear fire gradually dies out. The star contracts
more and more as gravity takes over. And the once giant star shrinks to something no more
than the diameter of a decent sized planet. That's only a millionth of its former diameter.
And here the consequences are somewhat counterintuitive. The star's total energy output is drastically
reduced because fusion reactions have all been stopped, typically to only a hundred thousandth
of its previous maximum. And yet the surface temperature rockets up to more than 10,000
degrees Celsius because the little remaining energy has to radiate out over such a small
surface area compared to before. So this small white hot star is known as a white dwarf.
That's the ultimate fate of our sun in perhaps five or six billion years from now.
But here we're more concerned with what happens inside very big stars, the ones that make
all the other elements of the periodic table. And thus lead to Earth-like planets.
Big stars, those 10 or 20 times the mass of our sun, have enough internal heat and pressure
to cause carbon atoms to fuse with other atomic nuclei to make a host of new isotopes.
The most important new elements are neon, element 10, sodium, element 11, magnesium, element 12.
So magnesium 24, one of the most important elements in the mineral kingdom, forms from
the fusion of two carbon-12 isotopes. And neon 20, a gaseous element that plays absolutely
no role whatsoever in mineralogy, it can form when carbon-12 fuses with beryllium-8 and so forth.
This is also the stage where the first atoms of that all-important element, oxygen, number
eight in the periodic table are produced. For example, when carbon-12 fuses with helium-4.
In fact, after hydrogen and helium, oxygen is the third most abundant element in the Milky Way
galaxy and in our solar system. Oxygen is also by far the most abundant element in the
minerals of Earth's outer layers. And you'll also note that we've completely skipped over
some elements like number nine, fluorine. They just don't form as abundantly.
By the way, hydrogen fusion and helium fusion haven't stopped at this point.
They've just moved to shells farther from the core. So you have a layered situation with carbon
burning in the core making neon and magnesium and oxygen, then a layer outside that where
helium fuses to make carbon and another layer outside that where hydrogen fuses to make helium
just like when the star first ignited. In an echo of what we've seen already, when carbon is
eventually depleted in the core, if the star is large enough and calculations suggest that any star
eight or more times the mass of the sun is large enough, then we enter still more stages of fusion.
Next comes neon burning. Neon-20 can fuse with a single neutron to form neon-21.
It can also fuse with helium-4 to make more magnesium-24. Here again, concentric layers of fusion
occur simultaneously. Carbon burning occurs in the next shell out, then helium burning,
finally hydrogen burning. By the way, it's estimated that the entire neon burning cycle of a star
only takes a few years. And as neon fusion dwindles in the core, oxygen burning takes over.
Remember, oxygen burning on the sun is yet another kind of nuclear fusion. It's not a chemical reaction
like a fire on Earth. In this important stage, oxygen-16 fuses with various other isotopes.
For example, oxygen-16 plus carbon-12 gives silicon-28. If you look at the periodic table,
you see that's element 14. It's one of the most abundant rock-forming elements on Earth.
Other reactions with oxygen yield the key biological elements, phosphorus, that's element 15, located right next
to silicon, and sulfur, element 16, which is one more space to the right on the periodic table.
So at this point, we have significant amounts of the most abundant elements on Earth-like planets.
Most importantly, there's carbon, oxygen, magnesium, and silicon, but several others as well.
About a dozen of the first 16 elements are present in appreciable amounts.
And the structure of the star is still layered like an onion. Oxygen burning in the core.
Then neon, carbon, helium, hydrogen. And this oxygen burning stage lasts from a few months to a year,
but there's still more to come. As oxygen burning slows, silicon fusion takes over in the core.
And here we see a remarkable sequence of rapid fusion reactions, each with leftover helium-4 nuclei,
each moving up two slots in the periodic table to make more even-numbered elements than odd-numbered.
We're moving up the periodic table. Silicon-28 fuses with helium-4 to make sulfur-32.
Now, we've already made some sulfur by the oxygen burning process, so here's the second pathway to sulfur.
Then sulfur-32 fuses with helium-4 to make argon-36. That's element 18.
And argon fuses with helium to move two more places to the right in the periodic table, calcium-40.
And this process keeps going on. Calcium-40 plus helium-4 gives us titanium-44.
Titanium-44 plus helium-4 yields chromium-48, and now we're up to element 24 in the periodic table,
but we're still not done.
Chromium-48 plus helium produces the vital element iron, and it's isotope iron-52.
Then iron-52 plus helium-4 gives nickel-56, and that should be it.
Up to this point, up to the production of nickel-56, every fusion reaction that I've mentioned produces energy,
because the product isotope always has slightly less mass than the sum of the reactant isotopes.
That lost mass has converted to energy, which keeps the star going.
By all rights, when we reach nickel-56, everything should shut down,
and nucleosynthesis, the making of new isotopes, should just stop.
In fact, things don't stop for two reasons.
First, these reactions occur faster and faster, so like a runaway train, the fusion reactions can overshoot the mark.
It takes some extra energy, but some nickel-56 fuses with helium-4 to make a little bit of zinc-60.
Zinc is element 30, and that's as far as these fusion reactions can take us into the periodic table.
To see what can happen next, let's focus in on part of the chart of the isotopes.
The portion that includes elements 22 to 30.
Think of this like a board game, where there are certain allowed moves.
Helium-4 addition moves us diagonally up, up to and over two places to the right.
So titanium-44 to chromium-48 to iron-52 to nickel-56, and all the way to zinc-60, diagonally up to the right.
But there are other moves as well, and these moves are the result of radioactivity.
Radioactive isotopes are inherently unstable.
The nuclei change spontaneously, and there are two principle ways the change can happen.
In alpha radiation, the nucleus spontaneously gets rid of a helium-4 nucleus.
So this is the exact opposite move to the helium-4 fusion sequence we've just seen.
And that's what happens to some of those unstable zinc-60 isotopes.
They simply decay back to nickel-56.
Now, it turns out that nickel-56 is also radioactive, and it relatively rapidly undergoes an intriguing process
by which a proton decays to a neutron plus a tiny energetic particle called a positron that just whizzes away.
On the chart of the isotopes, this is a diagonal move one space down because we lose a proton
and one space to the right because we gain a neutron.
Nickel-56 thus becomes cobalt-56, and remember the isotope number stays the same
because the total number of neutrons plus protons is exactly the same.
And then it happens again.
Nickel-56 becomes iron-56, and that is it.
Iron-56 is absolutely the most stable, lowest energy isotope of all.
There's nothing you can do to lower the energy per proton and neutron.
You can't add or subtract a neutron or proton without raising the net energy, without increasing the total mass.
In this sense, iron-56 is the ultimate nuclear ash.
It can't burn, and it is the logical endpoint of any fusion reactions.
So, think about the star's life up to this instant.
You've had many millions or even billions of years of hydrogen fusion, the helium fusion for a tenth that time span.
Successive stages of fusion lead to faster and faster generation of shells of fusion.
Hydrogen, helium, carbon, neon, oxygen, silicon, and that's the last stage.
Silicon fusion to elements all the way up to zinc with back reactions to make a lot of iron-56.
And all that occurs in just one day.
When the core converts to iron-56, the nuclear reactions stop.
All of the forces pushing outward, countering the immense gravitational forces pulling inward, stop cold.
And then the star simply collapses.
The star may have burned for a billion years, but in a process that lasts only a few seconds, the star is destroyed.
Gravity. Gravity is the culprit. Until that point, the star survived by balancing its two great inner forces.
Gravity pulling mass toward the center, nuclear reactions pushing mass outward from the center.
For many millions of years, a stable equilibrium between opposing forces persisted.
However, when the core filled with iron, the outward push just stopped and gravity took over in an instant of unimaginable violence.
The entire star collapsed.
Collapsed inward with such swiftness that it rebounded off itself and exploded in the first supernova.
The star was ripped apart, blasting most of its mass into deep, dark space.
Such a cataclysm might seem a completely random, chaotic event.
Hardly amenable to any kind of systematic description, yet recent research reveals how the entire periodic table,
indeed the entire chart of the isotopes of more than 2,000 entries can be formed from supernovas.
And the key is neutrons.
The supernova collapse and subsequent explosions is accompanied by an unimaginable flood of neutrons.
We call neutrons are those electrically neutral particles in the atom's nucleus that define which isotope you have.
While huge fluxes of energetic neutrons have a tendency to stick to any atomic nucleus that they find.
So for a brief time, perhaps only a second, a significant fraction of all the existing nuclei in one of those exploding stars,
become crammed full of extra neutrons.
These neutrons' saturated isotopes then undergo another radioactive process called beta decay.
An excess neutron inside the nucleus transforms into a positively charged proton, while a negatively charged electron goes flying off.
The result is a new element with the element number, the number of protons increased by one.
On the chart of the isotopes, this is a diagonal move, one space up and one space to the left.
The new element can capture more neutrons and undergo more beta decays.
So step by step, the heavy elements are formed and it kind of zigzag march up the chart.
So imagine an iron-56 isotope capturing some dozens of neutrons.
It's easy to see how you could quickly work your way up to much, much heavier elements.
Eventually, all the way up to uranium, element 92, which is the heaviest naturally occurring element on Earth.
By the way, the periodic table now features artificial elements way beyond uranium, all the way up to element 118.
Many of those artificial elements are made just like in stars by bombarding uranium and other heavy elements with neutrons,
and then watching for beta decay to elements with more protons higher up in the periodic table.
Now, it turns out there are two variants of this neutron capture process,
both of which contribute to the rich storehouse of elements that make planets.
In supernovas, the neutron capture occurs quite quickly, so it's called the R or rapid process.
In the instant following a supernova collapse, the entire periodic table of the elements can be formed in this amazing way.
This was the only way that the heaviest elements were manufactured in the first generation of stars following the Big Bang.
When those stars exploded, they seeded the universe with all the heavy elements, iron, and beyond, to form the next generation of stars.
So the second generation of stars in the universe formed with a small fraction of elements other than hydrogen and helium.
In addition, astrophysicists now recognize a slower neutron capture mechanism, the S process, which occurs in the most energetic red giant stars,
where helium-burning nuclear reactions can produce lots of excess neutrons that are then captured on iron nuclei from previous generations of stars.
So stars that begin their lives with some iron and other heavy elements can make a good portion of the periodic table even without exploding.
Sometimes, elements as heavy as lead, and because those big red giant stars have very intense solar winds that can blast off as much as 30% of their total mass,
some of those heavy elements can even make it out into space without the entire star exploding.
Still, the only source of the heaviest elements like uranium and thorium is supernovas.
By the way, this study of nucleosynthesis, the making of all the chemical elements in isotopes and stars, is still an area of very active research.
Theorists try to develop models of fast and slow neutron capture coupled with alpha and beta radioactive decay that can lead to the observed ratios of isotopes.
They also enlist giant particle accelerators to collide neutrons and protons and measure various isotopes to see how easily neutrons are captured,
how fast fusion reactions can go, how quickly isotopes decay.
Astronomers complement these studies with sky surveys of millions of stars in our galaxy,
and surveys that have led to the discovery of many stars that are extremely depleted in iron, which indicates they must have formed in the earliest stages of the Milky Way's evolution when iron atoms were still scarce.
The discovery of a few stars with only a 10,000th of a percent of the iron in our sun is especially critical because it points to the earliest generation of stars in which only the rapid neutron capture process could occur.
This helps to constrain all subsequent models of nucleosynthesis.
This exciting forefront research on fossil evidence of ancient stars will undoubtedly yield new clues about the origins of our own solar system.
So in this lecture we've seen a further critical phase of cosmic evolution.
This remarkable transition from only three elements and six stable isotopes to almost 100 elements and thousands of isotopes.
We've seen the remarkable evolution of energetic stars in the processes by which they first generated the chemical richness that we now take for granted.
And as we'll see in the next lecture, by the time the universe was 100 million years old, the stage was set for a totally new innovation, the formation of the first minerals in the cosmos.
