The snowball hot house cycle has ended, leaving behind an unprecedented amount of atmospheric
oxygen. Mineral evolution gives way to bio-mineral evolution. As multicellular animals invent hard
mineral shells, diversify, migrate, and find their way to every corner of the world.
We've journeyed through almost 90% of Earth's history. We've experienced epic changes on land
and in the oceans. But we have yet to meet a single animal or any kind of land plant for that matter.
Thanks to parallel advances in geology, geochemistry, and paleontology, we now understand both how and
and why it took so long for animals to emerge. Animals and plants also set the stage for the
next chapter of mineral evolution. Indeed, the rise of the animal kingdom, as we know it today,
would not have been possible without minerals. Conversely, the mineral species of the tenth
and final stage of mineral evolution turned out to be equally dependent on life.
Animals evolved, as did minerals, and this time the two kinds of evolution are even more closely
related than before. As we know, by about 650 million years ago, the concentration of atmospheric
oxygen had climbed to near-modern levels. Those elevated levels of oxygen, in turn,
are likely to have had a direct effect on the rise of complex multicellular life.
That's because the only way for organisms to adopt the active energy-demanding lifestyles of
jellyfish and worms was to have a concentrated energy source for rapid and reliable metabolism.
Increased oxygen in the atmosphere and by extension in the ocean's water column
would have provided chemical energy in a form that was much more effective than any
oxidant that had come before. Indeed, we see a strong correlation between the timing of the second
great oxidation and the earliest known multicellular organisms, which appear in the fossil record
about 630 million years ago. So that's just after the second global snowball glaciation
and one of the intervals when oxygen is thought to have spiked. To understand this startling
sudden rise of animal life in the neoproterozoic era, we have to look much further back in time.
In fact, more than a billion years earlier, just before the beginning of the boring billion,
the fossil evidence is sparse. As you might imagine for microbial life, but some of the rare
fossils that are preserved point to the rise of a wholly new kind of cellular life at perhaps
two billion years ago. Before that time, which is in the paleoproterozoic era,
all organisms appear to have been single celled life and these forms consisted entirely of cells
without internal structures, such as the cell nucleus. But before two billion years ago, cells
were simpler in their architecture and the DNA was not isolated into a separate compartment.
In many modern cells, by contrast, a central nucleus holds the critical genetic information
package in the form of strands of DNA. The difference this innovation makes is that replication
of the genetic material in the nucleus is separated from translating the genetic material into proteins
outside of the nucleus. This separation allows cells to share the same DNA in the nucleus,
but to express that shared genetic material in an increasingly wide variety of new proteins,
such as collagen for animals and pectin for plants. This more complicated kind of cell begins to
appear in rocks about two billion years old. For example, in the Nagani Iron Formation in
Michigan, where one finds exceptionally well preserved fossil microbes with clear evidence
for that nucleus, that's the internal structure that holds the DNA. Not only can you sometimes see
the nucleus as a sort of shadow cell within a cell, but these organisms are much, much larger
than most of the previous generations of single cell organisms. So how did that cell nucleus arise
roughly two billion years ago? According to an originally controversy, but now widely accepted
idea, first expounded by biologist Lynn Margolis, who spent much of her career at the Amherst
campus of the University of Massachusetts, one cell swallowed a second cell whole. Normally,
the bigger cell would simply digest the smaller one. But in this case, the bigger cell incorporated
the smaller one in a symbiotic relationship, perhaps in order to provide more protection
to the vital DNA. This rise of a new kind of cell, the eukaryos, or true nucleus cells,
forever transformed life on earth. I have to tell you a little bit about Lynn Margolis,
who was such a creative powerhouse and original thinker. She died still in her prime of invention,
in November of 2011, at the age of 73. She exemplifies the kind of wildly creative scientists
who is constantly coming up with new ways of looking in nature and then proposing hypotheses
that most of her colleagues think are a little bit wacky. And while most of the time her most
extreme ideas were probably wrong, once in a while she hit upon a really transformative approach.
Margolis's scientific career was devoted to understanding how groups of sometimes very
different organisms interact with each other and thus co-evolve. A central theme in her work
is symbiosis, by which two or more species merge their lifestyles to make one integrated communal
organism. And one fairly obvious example is the lichen family, which consists of a fungus
that attaches strongly to a hard surface like rock or tree trunks, and then algae that provides
chemical energy through photosynthesis. The fungus can't generate food by photosynthesis,
while the algae can't attach strongly to rocks, so the two species intertwine
and live their lives as one entity, the lichen. Fungiomulticellular eukaryotes that may have
appeared long before plants and animals, so their symbiosis with algae could have begun
correspondingly early as well. Many animals have symbiotic relationships with bacteria,
a termite eats wood, but can't digest cellulose of which the wood is made, while microbes that
live in special organs inside the termite can't survive isolated in wood, but can break down
cellulose into individual glucose molecules. So the microbes survive on the wood the termite eats,
and the termite survives on the glucose that the microbes leave behind.
Similarly, and even more surprising, the human microbiome project sponsored by the National
Institutes of Health has found that bacteria hosted by a healthy human body account not only
for 1 to 3 percent of our mass, but for 360 times more protein-coding genes than the human genome
itself. Leading some research to suggest that microbes contribute more genes responsible for
human survival than humans themselves contribute. All biologists agree about these and many other
symbiotic relationships, but Margolis saw symbiotic relationships and the sharing of biological
inventions as an even more pervasive theme in life's history. In a very real sense, she saw
nature as one extremely complex, intertwined symbiotic network that extended even to non-living
parts of Earth. She became well-known for her acceptance of aspects of the Gaia hypothesis,
by which Earth itself is a kind of living system that responds to its own environment.
And I have to stress that she wasn't some New Age mystic. She saw very concrete
feedbacks between the geosphere and the biosphere, some leading to global scale changes,
others tend to mitigate rapid and extreme changes in climate or in chemistry.
These and other ideas stood up quite a few controversies in large measure because the
idea of organisms evolving through symbiosis deviates from the more orthodox Darwinian view
of evolution primarily by the mutation and selection of individual species.
Nevertheless, everyone now agrees that Margolis was right some of the time, in particular her
theory of endosymbiosis, by which a bigger cell swallowed a smaller one two billion years ago
to create the nucleus is compelling and almost universally accepted today. And the idea has been
extended because modern plants, animals, and fungi are made of cells with many kinds of internal
structures that appear to have been earlier generations of small cells. So for example,
the mitochondria that act like tiny power plants and the chloroplasts that harness the sun's energy
and photosynthetic organisms, those tiny structures in eukaryotic cells along with the cell nucleus
all hold their own DNA. When a cell divides, each of those structures also devise. Furthermore,
these and other organelles in complex cells have their own cell membranes.
In 1968, when Margolis first proposed that each of these organelles evolved from earlier,
simpler cells that were engulfed and ultimately co-opted to perform specific biochemical tasks,
many biologists thought she was nuts. But when the mitochondria were found to possess their own
DNA, the pendulum swung in her favor and that is now the conventional wisdom.
Based on the fossil record, our best guess is that the transition to modern eukaryotes began
about two billion years ago and set the stage for much more complex multicellular lifeline
animals and plants to arise. By the neo-proderozoic era, complex eukaryotic cells with nuclear were
well-established. They had experimented for a billion years with microbial mats and other
multicellular colonies and they were about to begin a new era in cooperative biology.
More than 600 million years ago, single cell organisms learned how to grow and move as a
single entity. In short, they learned to become animals. The earliest unambiguous fossil evidence
for an ecosystem that was dominated by animals as opposed to microbes and algae comes from the
so-called Ediacaran period. That's a time interval that began about 635 million years ago, which was
shortly after the second of the three great neo-proderozoic snowball earth events. The first of these
rather distinctive symmetrical fossils to be recognized came from a terrain of 580 million
year-old rocks from the Ediacaran region in southern Australia. That's where the Ediacaran
fauna got its name. These fossils represent an array of soft-body animals, some of which are easy
to imagine as distant relatives of jellyfish and worms. Fossil impressions are not easy to interpret,
but they do have pleasing shapes, some like ornately lined pancakes called Dickinsonia,
or fancifully striated leaves like charnia. Unlike almost all microbes, these are big,
obvious fossils. Some of them are as much as two feet across closely related fossils that have been
found in many places around the world and rocks from a 65 million year span between about 610
and 545 million years old. By far the most remarkable Ediacaran site is probably the 633
million year old phosphate-rich doschanto formation of southern China. This amazing
deposit holds fossilized clumps of microscopic cells that are interpreted as animal eggs and
embryos. Individual clusters look just like the early stages of animal development today with
8 or 16 or 32 or even 64 cells arranged in a little ball. These structures, which grew in shallow
seas just after the second of the big Neoproterozoic global glaciations, appeared identical in every
respect to modern animal embryos. In this way, the severe snowball, hot-house climate cycle
ultimately played a central role in the evolution of the living world as we know it today. In fact,
it would be accurate to claim that the modern biosphere owes its very existence to that interval
starting 800 million years ago when Earth reached a climatic tipping point. And the co-evolution of
the geosphere and the biosphere has only increased in complexity and consequences in the time since.
What's perhaps surprising is how very long it took for life to venture onto land.
New chemical evidence obtained from shallow water sediments deposited about 575 million years ago
suggests that the great algal blooms of that post-glacial time period may have begun the
transition. Those are the earliest rocks that show evidence for green photosynthetic algae
that had the ability to survive on swampy land. That suggests that for the first time in Earth's
history there were patches of green slimy algae above ocean level along some shorelines. With
these new stable populations of photosynthetic life, atmospheric oxygen levels would have continued
to rise along with an increasingly protective stratospheric layer of ozone. That radiation
barrier effectively shielded Earth's solid surface from harmful ultraviolet solar radiation,
and that protection was an essential prelude to the emergence of the terrestrial biosphere of plants
and animals. Nevertheless, even after the establishment of that ozone layer, it took
perhaps another 100 million years for life to crawl onto land. Indeed, for many millions of years,
the most significant biological innovations took place in the shallow waters of sunlit coastal seas.
Based on the Ediacaran fauna, jellyfish and worms and microbial precipitated reefs appear
to have dominated the post-glacial oceans for perhaps 40 million years. The many varieties
of soft-bodied animals appear to have fed on sea floor detritus, and what seems to have been a kind
of ecological status quo maybe for tens of millions of years. That period of stability
didn't last though. It was dramatically altered by about 3, 530 million years ago when numerous
groups of animals learned how to construct their own protective shells out of hard minerals.
It's quite a mystery how this evolutionary development came to be. Of course, microbial life
had been depositing mineral layers for billions of years in the form of reef-like stromatolites,
but stromatolites are more like a simple layered platform in which the microbes could grow and
attach. That's a real advantage in a rough tidal zone, but stromatolites aren't shells.
Animal shells are different because they provide a protective armoring with an
elaborate mineral architecture. So we don't know how, but we do know when. Following the
Gaskier's glaciation, the last of the Neoprotoric ice ages, that's about 580 million years ago,
an unknown animal evolved the ability to grow its own protective hard parts
out of commonplace minerals, most often calcium carbonate or silica. Calcium was available in
essentially unlimited quantities in the ocean, so marine life had an advantage here over freshwater
life. And you can imagine how this innovation provided a tremendous advantage in the struggle
for survival. Predators aren't going to waste the energy to break a tough shell when they can eat
a nice soft-bodied worm. The realm of ocean life was transformed as the rule quickly became
make your own shell or die. The consequences for the fossil record are absolutely astounding.
The resulting layers of sediments are for the first time packed with amazingly diverse life
forms, corals, brachypods, bryozoan mollus, and my favorites, the trilobites. The sudden transition
from soft-bodied to shelly fauna constitutes such a dramatic change in sediments that the
time has been called the Cambrian Explosion. I have to confess that Cambrian Explosion is
quite a misleading term, at least in the sense that the transformation to a biosphere with
shells was not at all sudden. The timing is more like that of the mineral explosion we discussed
several lectures ago. In fact, the Cambrian Explosion is literally another stage within
mineral evolution as well, with a new propagation of minerals such as calcite, aragonite, and
dolomite, which are all carbonate minerals, as well as the phosphate hydroxyl appetite and
opal. And it took many millions of years of what might be thought of as experimentation in
biomineralization to catch on. As long ago as 580 million years ago, there were sponges that
had hardened spines made of hydrated silica or calcium carbonate. Some of those animals are preserved
in the fossil-rich doshanto formation in southern China. That's the same place where those fossil
embryos were discovered. And by about 550 million years ago, which is the tail end of the Ediacaran
period, the fossil record holds a variety of hardened tube-shaped structures formed from
carbonate minerals. Those armored burrows have been interpreted as the protected homes of worm-like
creatures on the ocean floor. The oldest clearly recognizable ecosystem with lots of shell-like
animal structures appeared about 15 million years later, roughly 535 million years ago.
These fossils are found at rocks of that age around the world. On an undergraduate field trip,
I had a chance to see one famous spot to collect these rare fossils at Nahant on the rocky
Massachusetts coast just north of Boston. But the fossils were just barely visible microscopic
specks, and their weathered shapes were so nondescript that we never had given a second
glance that the professor hadn't told us to. All of these spotty fossils were preamble to the
real explosion of the fossil record that occurred a few million years later, roughly 530 million
years ago. That's when all of a sudden many different kinds of beautifully preserved animals
with shells came on the scene virtually all at once. That's when the real evolutionary arms war
started. And here the explosion was indeed sudden because the armored predators rapidly
developed bigger and more effective teeth and claws, while their armored prey also got bigger
and surrounded themselves with thicker shells and sharp defensive spines.
Since that time, countless generations of shelled creatures have lived and died.
The innovation of carbonate bioskeletons transformed Earth's near-surface environment.
It led to the deposition of massive resistant limestone layers,
which represent ancient coral reefs and other shallow water accumulations.
These features punctuate the last half billion years of Earth history.
We find incredible fossil-packed limestone cliffs and ridges across the globe.
They form memorable landscapes in dozens of countries. The Royal Mountain of Montreal
in Canada, the tallest peaks of the Canadian Rockies, the White Cliffs of Dover,
and even the highest summit of Mount Everest. In the United States, limestone dominates the
landscape in dozens of famous localities, from the bluffs above Chattanooga, Tennessee,
to many of the most scenic peaks in the American West. In over many millions of years, limestone
dissolves to form the most famous caves, Carlsbad Caverns, Mammoth Cave, many more.
Fossils encased in limestone tell the story of evolution.
One of the most striking evolutionary developments at the time of the Cambrian
explosion was the first eyes preserved in the fossil record. It's easy to understand in a world
of predators and pray why eyes became mandatory for survival. And of all the Cambrian organisms,
the most prized are the sea creatures called trilobites, which are remarkable arthropods with
many segments and very often large compound eyes. I'm an avid collector of trilobites.
When I was seven or eight years old, I collected my first nearly complete specimen, not far from my
home in Cleveland, Ohio. I've been collecting them ever since. You might find them in many states,
Utah, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Georgia, Montana, New York. They come in an astonishing variety of
sizes and shapes. And I just want to describe some of my favorites. Some trilobites are smooth.
They have a very even shell, like Isotelus from New York. But Isotelus lived side by side
with a more spiny kind, Sororus. These inhabited the exact same waters at the exact same time.
And you'll notice in the Sororus, you sometimes have damage, actually evidence that it's been
eaten and had to repair its external shell. Well, we see bizarre sorts of trilobites with
appendages, snouts that some people have said were used to help stir up the muddy sediments
and perhaps find a more tasty meal. And then you have bizarre trilobites with kinds of spines
that it's really not clear what they were for. There's a kind of trilobite from Morocco called
Syphaspis. But in Morocco, they're always called the devil horn trilobite because of their twin
spiky horns sticking out of the head. Who knows what they were for. And then there are trilobites
like Arbenoquil, also from Morocco, that have the most incredible eyes, giant columnar eyes,
with hundreds and hundreds of individual eye facets, and actually little light shields to
shade those eyes from sunlight. Also lots of spines and truly an amazing kind of creature. So many
amazing trilobites. You'll even find them sometimes enrolled. So here you have an Isotelus, which has
been enrolled in its defensive position. And you can imagine how that protects it from other organisms.
So the initial 50 million year rise of bio mineralization was very gradual. But 530 million
years ago, life with hard parts suddenly seemed to be everywhere. In sedimentary rock sequences
from Montana to Morocco, it's possible to zero in on the exact layer when these fossils appear.
Notable examples in North America incur in northwestern Vermont and in the mountains of Nevada.
But my favorite place to study this abrupt ship to Shelley Animals is near the Oasis
village of Teot in the foothills of the anti-Atlas Mountains in western Morocco.
It's a visually stunning place. There are thousands and thousands of feet of carbonate
sediments that have been tilted and now stand nearly vertical on end, layer after layer.
They're exposed in the steep wall valley of the South River, and the rock layers provide a
continuous record of the time period from the end of the Ediacaran through the beginning
of the Cambrian period. The lower most thousands of feet of rock consist of thin limestone layers
that have no obvious fossils at all. You can walk a mile along the river's wide dry gravel strewn
bed, examine the rocks in detail, and find nothing more than the rare suggestion of a worm burrow.
Then as you approach the village, there's a limestone layer that looks from a distance,
no different from those above or below, and in the first fossils appear right at that layer,
the trilobite Eofalotaspis, one of the oldest known species, marks the beginning of that Cambrian
explosion. And then in layers a little bit above that strata, you start seeing the new species.
The commonest trilobites in the Teot area are the distinctive Chalbertella and also Daguanaspis.
Both of these are elliptical bugs, up to two inches long. One unusual fact about collecting
in the area is that one of the most productive and accessible outcrops lies smack in the middle
of a holy Muslim shrine. There's a small round domed white building that's surrounded by a low
rock wall, and it's full of trilobites. Local children collect there, and other local outcrops
to sell these Teot bugs to the tourists. When I was much younger, collecting trilobites was
all about finding the specimens. It's hard to overstate how thrilling it is to split open a rock,
to find a beautiful, complete animal that's been entubed for 500 million years.
I perspective deepened in the spring of 1970, when I was a senior at MIT. My first real paleontology
course was taught by Professor Robert Schrock. Bob Schrock spent four decades teaching at MIT,
where he was such a gentle, kind, a passionate teacher, and he was a giant in the field. Among
his many publications was Index Fossils of North America. It's a massive photographic reference
book with images of thousands of characteristic species from every geological time since the
Cambrian explosion. And it turned out that my wife Margie and I ended up being the very last two
students to study paleontology with Bob Schrock and take his paleontology final, which was administered
piecemeal over the space of an absolutely exhausting week. We were each given a tray of
100 unknown fossils, and we had to identify each species, provide detail on its geological age,
and then we had to draw the specimens by hand. Now that's old-school paleontology,
and let me tell you, I am no artist. Each pencil sketch seemed to take forever. But I can also
say, if you ever want to collect or learn about fossils yourself, there's no better way to see
a specimen in detail than to draw it. In fact, my collection of trilobites has grown over the
years to more than 2,000 specimens, and everything is now being given to the Smithsonian. And you
can see about 100 of the very best pieces on display at the Smithsonian's National Museum
of Natural History. You know, it was sad that that was Bob Schrock's last paleontology class,
but times had changed in MIT's geology department. The eminent seismologist, Frank Press, had taken
over as the new department chairman, and he pushed for a more quantitative and physics-based approach
to earth science. It was certain that identification of indexed fossils and hand-drawn specimens
were no longer going to be part of the undergraduate curriculum. The era of plate tectonics had shifted
education just as surely as it had the continents. But Margie and I were inspired by the course,
old school or not, and we developed a new passion for fossils. We spent many weekends camping in
the northeast, and here are some of the locations you might even try for yourself someday. You can
go to the coal measures of southern Massachusetts or Pennsylvania for fossil ferns, beautiful fern-shaped
leaves. There are limestones of northeast Pennsylvania and eastern New York, where you can find
massive chunks of fossil corals. There are old reefs of eastern New York and Cincinnati,
where you can also find brachypods, shell-like fossils that are abundant in those ancient rocks.
And then the shales and limestones of Delta, Utah, you can find fossils just about anywhere
you look on a piece of rock. There'll be trilobite fossils just to pick up.
One of the most important lessons we'd learned was that at any given time, several different
kinds of rock, what are known as different feces, are being deposited simultaneously
at different distances from the shore and at different water depths. The beach is where sandstones
form, often in the rough, shallow tidal zones. The clams and snails that live there have to have
relatively thick shells that can withstand the battering surf. Farther offshore are coral reefs
rich in all kinds of marine life forms. Reefs are preserved as resistant limestone, which can
be packed with fossils of stalked crinodes, starfish, snails, brachypods, and other animals.
Limestone reefs also hold lots of varieties of trilobites that tend to have large, multifaceted
eyes that could scan the full 360 degrees. Even farther offshore, in deep oxygen star waters,
you find deposits of black shales that accumulate slowly. Here you find very different animals,
including filter feeders and blind trilobites. Eyes serve no purpose in the black depths.
Each kind of rock tells a specific story of a time and a place. So you can imagine how a thick
sequence of varied sediments reveals changes in a place through time. The most dramatic sequences
of layered rocks types often occur in association with coal deposits, which formed abundantly in
swampy coastal zones 300 million years ago. So that's just inland of the sandstone, the limestone,
and the black shale sequence. It's common to find coal sandwiched between layers of sandstone,
which are in turn sandwiched between limestone and then shale. Such a cyclical sequence with shale,
limestone, sandstone, coal, sandstone, limestone, shale repeated over and over again reveals quite
dramatic repeated shifts in sea level. Lower, then higher, then lower again, likely in response
to cyclical advances and reteaches of polar ice and glaciers. These rocks and the hard-shelled
fossils they contain tell an inescapable story of constantly changing sea levels with periodic
variations of hundreds of feet. Rocks in their fossil ecosystems still have a great deal to
teach us. It's hard for us to imagine sea levels hundreds of feet higher or lower with the inevitable
drowning or stranding of all our coastal cities, but the recent sedimentary record is unambiguous
on this point. The land never stays the same.
