Where is Earth's missing water?
The oceans hold a lot of water, but they represent only a miniscule fraction of what would be
found in a similar mass of volatile rich sea-eye contracts, the most primitive carbon-rich type.
Recent findings suggest that lots of water might be stored at depths, perhaps 80 times the water
found in all the oceans. But even that prodigious amount of water pales beside the multiples more
of water that meteorites suggest must once have been there. Some things we know. From the earliest
days on Earth, volatiles were released in huge quantities from the deep interior as mega-volcanoes
pumped water, carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and other gases into a rapidly thickening atmosphere.
It is likely that within a few million years Earth's atmosphere became many times denser
than that of the modern world. Water would have rained down onto the cooling surface,
possibly forming wide shallow seas near the poles within the first few tens of millions of years.
Earth's axis of rotation probably did not yet have its current tilt,
so there would have been no change of seasons. And then came that big thwack which blasted
all the atmosphere, the incipient oceans away. Almost every molecule of water and air that
had found its way to the surface was lost to space. With remnants initially sequestered in ways
we are only beginning to detect on the moon. For Earth, the impact of Thale was like a giant
reset button, back to square one, with a globe encircling magma ocean and absolutely no atmosphere,
no oceans. We don't know how much of Earth's carbon dioxide, nitrogen, water, other volatiles
were lost in that catastrophic event, but it must have been a lot. For another half billion years,
hundreds of smaller scale impacts, objects from 10 to 100 kilometers in diameter caused
disruptions. Each of those events vaporized more of the oceans and may have ejected significantly
large quantities of volatiles into space. Following the moon forming event, but still within Earth's
first 100 million years, let's say 4.45 billion years ago, water vapor had become a significant
part of the atmosphere, somewhat like Jupiter today. Earth's rapid rotation produced severe
wind, shears, and violent weather. Thickening, turbulent dark clouds were accompanied by howling
winds, shattering lightning, unceasing torrential rain. As the surface of this storm-lashed land
gradually cooled and hardened, low-lying basins gradually filled with water, what would become
the oceans slowly formed? And perhaps you can imagine what it was like with volcanoes everywhere,
magma pouring out onto the surface. For a time, the expanding ponds and lakes must have caused a
global sauna, surface waters penetrating cracks and fissures where it contacted the hot rocks below
and returned to the surface as gargantuan geysers of roaring steam, super heated water. One important
consequence of these intense water-rock reactions was to speed up crustal cooling, which led to the
accumulation of even deeper lakes than seas, ultimately oceans. Rocks older than 3 billion
years are rare on Earth, and we don't know the exact timing of the first ocean's formations,
but provocative evidence is now emerging in the form of Earth's oldest crystals.
One important locality for such ancient deposits is the desolate and arid Sheep Ranching District
of Western Australia, known as the Jack Hills. The Jack Hills hold layers of sediments formed
from the accumulation of sand-sized mineral grains of rock and other minerals that eroded
from much older rock formations and have long since weathered away. A minute fraction of those
historic sand grains, less than one in a million, consists of the mineral zirconium silicate,
which has the distinct advantage of being one of the most resilient of all minerals.
The lustrous red zircon grains from the Jack Hills are smaller than the period
at the end of a sentence. They must have formed, as zircon crystals do today, as a minor accessory
mineral in igneous rocks that contained modest amounts of that rare element, number 40, zirconium.
But zirconium is too big to fit easily into the crystal structures of common minerals,
pyroxenes, olivine, feldspars. So as those minerals crystallize from magma,
and the proportion of solid increases, zirconium becomes concentrated in the remaining hot melt.
Eventually, at the tail end of solidification of the magma, tiny zircon crystals form.
Zircon crystals may be easy to overlook, but they have the brilliance and fire of diamond,
and provide a unique source of insight about early earth. For one thing, unless zircon crystals
are remelted and destroyed by heat, they last almost forever, far longer than earth history.
Zircon crystals have a high melting point, comparable to two of the earliest air minerals,
hybenide and spinel. It's not unusual for a single crystal of zircon to erode from the
igneous host where it first crystallized, then get incorporated as a grain in sandstone,
then erode from that sandstone to another, again and again and again for billions of years.
It's possible for one zircon grain to be recycled through a dozen different sedimentary rock formations.
Zircon crystals are also valuable for understanding earth history
because they tell time. They readily incorporate the radioactive element uranium,
which sometimes substitutes for much as one percent of zircon's atoms.
Uranium-238 has a half-life of about four and a half billion years,
so once a zircon crystal forms, its uranium atoms begin to decay to produce lead atoms.
Half of the uranium atoms transform on average every four and a half billion years.
That ratio of dwindling parental uranium atoms to the growing daughter lead atoms
provides an accurate estimate of the zircon crystals age.
Zircon provides yet another important line of evidence about its past.
Two of every three atoms in zircon are oxygen, and oxygen isotopes can provide information
about the crystal's temperature of formation. We saw when discussing the big thwack that one
line of evidence regarding the moon's formation history was this distinctive ratio, oxygen's
stable isotopes. It turns out that earth and the moon have identical ratios of oxygen-16 to
oxygen-18. That isotopic similarity implies that both bodies formed using materials a similar
distance from the sun in the same orbital space at about the same temperature.
In a similar line of reasoning, the ratio of oxygen-16 to oxygen-18 in a zircon crystal
points to the temperature at which it grew. Sampled and enriched in the heavier oxygen-18
isotope point to a cooler temperature of formation. For igneous rocks, the temperature
revealed by oxygen isotopes is potentially a sensitive indicator of the magma's water content,
because lots of water can lower the temperature at which zircon crystals form.
In addition, water near earth's surface tends to be even more enriched in heavy oxygen-18. That's
why zircon crystals with unusually high oxygen-18 are interpreted as having interacted with surface
water. So, why am I taking this digression to talk about zircon crystals? The reason is that
zircon crystals are like little time capsules. They survive billions of years. They endure many
cycles of erosion and deposition, and they can preserve details of the age, the temperature,
and the water content of their original environment. It's amazing that all that information can be
obtained from a crystal that you can't even see without a microscope. And what do we find?
First, the Jack Hill zircon crystals are really old. Many are more than four billion years old,
and the core of one remarkable ancient sand grain clocks in at 4.4 billion years. That grain also
has about a billion years of additional growth layers on the outside, so it's been through a lot.
That oldest zircon crystal, which is the oldest known solid fragment of earth,
has an unusually high concentration of the heavy oxygen isotope. Some scientists use
that data to conclude that when earth was only about 150 million years old, that's 4.4 billion
years ago, the surface was already relatively cool and wet, so that implies there must have been oceans.
Not all experts agree. For one thing, zircon crystals can be incredibly complicated. Interpretations
of earth history are confused by the concentric layers of younger overgrowth that mantle that
4.4 billion year old grain, as well as virtually all other zircon grains from the Jack Hills.
It's common for one single grain to display a billion year range of ages from its core
to its rim, and the ratios of oxygen isotopes are correspondingly variable. It's always possible
that the older core has been altered during more recent episodes of crystal growth. If so,
then the inferred characteristics of earth's ancient surface might be wrong.
That zircon story is still being studied, it's still being discussed, and we can be sure that more
of these ancient crystals will be found to shed new light. But whatever the outcome of those debates,
most experts agree that relatively shortly after earth's formation, probably no more than 100 to
200 million years after the moon's formation, earth had become a water world with an almost
continuous kilometer deep encircling ocean. From space, earth would have appeared as a deep
blue marble, swirled with clouds and the frequent cyclonic storms, but predominantly a beautiful
blue. By the way, the ocean's deep color, that blue color arises from basic optics.
Sunlight bathes earth's surface in all the rainbow colors, reds, yellows, greens, blues,
yet water absorbs primarily the red and orange wavelength of the spectrum. Our eyes perceive
that dominance of the scattered blue wavelength of light.
And what of the land? Was there any? Where was it? Today continents cover almost a third
of earth's surface, but in the Hedean Eon, the first 500 million years of our planet,
continents hadn't formed. The principal reason why some of us conclude that earth was almost
completely covered by one primordial ocean is that the hidden magma ocean wasn't strong enough
to support much basalt topography. Great mountain ranges had not yet formed, so earth was close to
spherical. On such a world lacking highs and lows, water would cover everything in one relatively
shallow body. There must have been some land, but it was primarily in the form of isolated
volcanic cones that poked above the waves. There may have been thousands of such landforms,
but individual cones would rarely have exceeded a few tens of kilometers in diameter. Each was
founded by a rubbly black beach. These black smoking islands randomly dotting the globe
provided the only solid features to break the beautiful blue monotony.
What was that first ocean like? Was it hot? Probably a lot harder than today's ocean,
given the global magma ocean beneath. Was it salty? Again, probably, yes, salt is the most
distinctive property of ocean water today, but it might seem logical that earth's first ocean
started out with few dissolved chemicals as fresh water. In fact, recent evidence suggests that
the early oceans quickly became much saltier than it is today. That's because sodium chloride and
other salts readily dissolve in hot water. Fluid rock interactions on the Hadean earth
must have extracted much of the available salts quite rapidly. Now today, as much as half of earth's
sodium chloride may be tied up in underground salt domes and other evaporate deposits that formed
when ancient salty seas dried up. So a lot of salt is locked in thick layers deep underground.
But during earth's first half billion years, there were no large salt deposits because there
were no continents. The conclusion is that salinity of the first oceans may have been twice that of
the modern world. And what did the ocean's pH? Was the Hadean ocean acidic? Was it basic?
The answer may lie with atmospheric carbon dioxide, which coupled with salinity controls the ocean's
pH. Most experts agree that CO2 content of the early atmosphere was at least hundreds,
if not thousands of times higher than today. Right now, we're at about 400 parts per million
carbon dioxide, though that level is rising every year. Much more CO2 in Hadean air,
but much more CO2 in the water as well. And the connection to pH lies in the tendency of CO2
to combine with rainwater to form carbonate, H2CO3.
In the ocean, this carbonate partly breaks in two. To hydrogen ions, which quickly combine with
oxygen to form hydronium ions, those are the H3O plus ions, plus so-called bicarbonate ions,
which are actually just an H3O minus group. That reaction means a net addition of hydrogen ions.
And by definition, that's an increase in acidity, perhaps driving the oceans to a pH as low as
5.5. Such acidic conditions have a chain of consequences. For example, acids accelerate the
weathering of basalt and other rocks, which adds even more salts to an already salty ocean.
There's one additional big wrinkle associated with early Earth in its globin-circling ocean,
and that has to do with the sun. According to a growing body of astronomical observations and
astrophysical calculations, a star like our sun undergoes a very slow brightening over its 10
billion-year lifetime. By current estimates, the young sun 4.4 billion years ago was only
about 70% of its current brightness. That's a lot less solar energy hitting Earth.
What's more, this state persisted for at least another one and a half billion years. If the sun
were suddenly to dim today by that extreme amount, 20% or more, that Earth would rapidly go into a
disastrous ice age, perhaps freezing solid from poles almost to the equator, most life would die.
Only the most resilient organisms, primarily deep subsurface microbial life and animals living
around active hydrothermal zones associated with volcanoes, would survive such a catastrophic
climate change. So, did Earth freeze over? And if not, why not? Evidence for abundant surface
water at least as far back as 3.5 billion years is unambiguous. Geologists find substantial layers
of water-deposited sediments from both shallow and deep water environments. What's more,
fossil evidence reveals that life began and thrived at that time, but that the ocean remained
liquid. A much hotter Earth must have helped. It took a long time for the primordial magma ocean
to cool, and there was a lot of hot molten rock and other volcanic activity to keep the surface
warm. It was as if the entire ocean was sitting on a big hot plate. But that wasn't enough to keep
things unfrozen for half a billion years. The leading hypothesis to explain the faint sun
paradox, but has been until relatively recent, recently the textbook explanation, is an exaggerated
greenhouse warming, an effect caused by the extremely high atmosphere concentrations of
carbon dioxide. Those are the same high CO2 concentrations that probably caused the oceans
to be acidic. One problem with this scenario is that the mineralogy of rocks surviving from
between 3 and 4 billion years ago is lacking in much of the iron carbonate rocks, which should
have formed under a thick carbon dioxide atmosphere. A second clever idea is that Earth in its early
black, then blue phases, must have absorbed much more of the sun's energy than the surface does
today. Oceans absorb more sunlight than land. And that effect was very likely exaggerated
long ago by relatively high concentrations of iron in the earliest oceans, an iron that would
later be locked up in other molecules. That increased solar absorption might also have been
enhanced by a relative lack of light scattering clouds. See, today many clouds are nucleated by
plant-generated particles and chemicals dust, the effect of mountain ranges. Billions of years ago,
there were no plants. There was no biologicalness. And there was no mountain range to speak of to
trigger cloud formation. Yet another hypothesis, one that's gaining a lot of traction, suggests that
the early atmosphere had a significant concentration of methane, CH4. Methane could affect global
climate in at least two ways. First, it's a potent greenhouse gas. Molecule for molecule,
methane is much more effective than carbon dioxide. In addition, high in the atmosphere,
methane exposed to ultraviolet radiation would have undergone chemical reactions that synthesized
a rich variety of organic molecules, including possible building blocks of life. And some of
those organic molecules could have caused a thick, heat-trapping smog-like haze, possibly even
transforming the Blue Earth into a distinctly orange world, reminiscent of Saturn's Big Moon Titan.
In any case, even though we don't have a complete picture of why Earth remained wet
and unfrozen under the ancient, faint sun, we have more than enough explanations to keep us
busy with more research. With the formation of Earth's black crust and the birth by volcano of
the global ocean and atmosphere, we have come to stage three of Earth's mineral evolution.
Up to this point, minerals have formed before the planet as a whole. First, a dozen ur minerals
in the cooling envelopes of big stars. Then, stage one, with 60 or more minerals
that condensed in primitive chondrites. And stage two, with about 250 mineral species
from planetesimals that experience differentiation and alteration by heat, water,
impacts all of those minerals still fall to Earth and the other planets and moons of our inner
solar system. All of those 250 species have been present continuously at or near the surface of
Earth since the crust first hardened. But the third stage of mineral evolution requires a
planet-sized body. This makes possible the crystallization of peridotite, the partial
melting of peridotite to form basalt, and the production of residual melts and other fluids
concentrated in rare elements that had not previously played much of a role in mineral evolution.
All terrestrial planets, as well as Earth's big moon, participated at least part of the way
in this next stage. In all these rocky bodies, magmas produce new kinds of silicates, including
the chain siligate group for amphiboles. Silicate minerals in the familiate garnet group are good
examples, since they are found in minor quantities across many kinds of rocks. New minerals of the
elements titanium, manganese, sulfur, chlorine, also are likely to have formed. All told,
igneous processes may have resulted in another 100 species, for a grand total of perhaps 350
minerals. And that's it for Mercury. And probably the moon as well. The moon might differ in some
way because of its early collision with Earth, but we haven't found any other mineral-forming
processes that would have diversified those relatively small, dry worlds on their own.
There simply wasn't enough internal heat. There wasn't enough water to drive the cycles of melting
and freezing that are so critical to separating and concentrating elements. My colleagues and I
estimate that all the mineral diversity that would ever be on the moon and Mercury was achieved
more than 4 billion years ago. The story for Earth and Mars is quite different. Those planets
are a lot wetter than Mercury or the moon. Or Venus for that matter. And this difference
caused a divergence in their mineral evolution. Water enhances mineral formation in at least
three ways. First, as we've seen, water dissolves a variety of elements and this holds the potential
to transport those elements from one place to another. In addition, water greatly lowers the
melting point of rocks, which means a planet's inner heat can accomplish more in the way of
partial melting and fractionating rocks. And finally, a huge number of mineral species on
Earth incorporate water. Almost 60% of all no mineral species are hydrous, so a wet planet
can make a much greater diversity of mineral species than a dry one. What we find is that
fluids are the real key to mineral evolution of stage three. And even stages four and five,
both of which we'll discuss in later lectures. New minerals arise when dozens of different
elements that initially are extremely rare become concentrated in one fluid or another. And that
fluid phase could be the molten magma, or it could be a hot, water-rich liquid, or it could be
something more exotic, enriched in sulfur or carbon. It just needs to be a fluid that separates
from the magma or the solid rock. A part per million uranium, or beryllium, or a part per billion
mercury or cesium simply cannot form a separate mineral. But if you repeatedly concentrate those
elements into a fluid, hot, salty, brine, for example, then you can achieve concentration
factors of a billion times or more. That's exactly what happened on Earth, and to a lesser extent
on Mars. Let's look at Mars first. This is the smaller planet and has less heat to play with.
Abundant evidence reveals that Mars was a water world early in its history. A shallow ocean probably
covered most of the northern hemisphere to an average depth of perhaps approaching a kilometer.
Given all the volcanism on Mars, there must have been widespread active hydrothermal zones,
places where hot water flowed through cracks and fissures of the crust and altered and dissolved
the basaltic veneer. One immediate consequence was the formation of a salty ocean and the
consequent production of evaporite minerals along the Martian ocean margins. As on Earth,
sodium chloride, the mineral halite, would have been a major evaporite mineral. Lustrous
cubic crystals would have blanketed shorelines as the salty ocean dried up and waned.
Salt is soft, and much of those deposits will by now have eroded away, or perhaps
library under layers of sandy sediment, but common salt is surely there.
Dozens of other evaporite minerals, though less abundant than sodium chloride,
would also have formed. It's likely that Mars also has potassium chloride, what geologists call
sylvite. Chlorides combining both magnesium and potassium were certainly there too,
as were numerous hydrated variants. Hydrated minerals are those that incorporate a few
molecules of water in their crystal structure. A good example is a soft potassium magnesium
chloride like carnalite, with potassium magnesium three chlorines and six H2O molecules.
Recent Mars missions have identified abundant sulfate minerals as well, and here the mineral
diversity really begins to skyrocket. Take the magnesium sulfate minerals for example.
These minerals include the electron donor element magnesium, which gives a way to electrons,
and an electron acceptor called sulfate, with the central sulfur atoms surrounded by four oxygen
atoms. That sulfate group accepts two electrons, so it has a minus two charge.
The core of these magnesium sulfate minerals is thus a one-to-one ratio of magnesium to sulfate.
Virtually all of the magnesium sulfate minerals, and there are more than 50 of them,
also incorporate water. Perhaps the most familiar of these is epsomite, also known as epsom salt,
with seven molecules of water. But there are also chisorite, with one molecule of water,
a one-to-one ratio of magnesium sulfate, cranzwikite and starkiite, but with four,
pentahydrate with five, hexahydrate with six, and meridiania, with 11 molecules of water for every
MGSO4 molecule. Meridiania was not correctly described or given its current name until 2007.
It's only stable below two degrees Celsius, or about 36 degrees Fahrenheit, so it's most commonly
found in icy brines. Meridiania was sampled from a frozen pond in British Columbia, but it was named
after the meridiani planum, the meridian plains of Mars, because of the strong presumption that this
particular magnesium sulfate was going to be discovered there. Other electron donors also
form sulfates. Potassium sulfate is arcanite, while sodium sulfate is centroidite, and there are
dozens more hydrated forms as well. There are also lots of sulfates with mixed electron donors,
combinations of sodium, potassium, magnesium, and others. Two of these probable sulfate minerals
are water-free, a sodium magnesium sulfate called vanthoffite, and a potassium magnesium sulfate
called langbenite, and there are dozens of hydrated sulfides, some of which also have chlorine.
Perhaps the most important and distinctive sulfate mineral in Mars, however, is the potassium
iron sulfate called gerosite. The formula is one potassium, three irons, two sulfates, and then
six OH groups. On Earth, gerosite often forms in places where old mind dumps rich in sulfide
minerals contaminate local ponds or streams. It's a signature mineral for acid mine drainage.
The presence of gerosite has been confirmed on Mars by a variety of spectroscopic techniques
and is highly suggestive, not only of an evaporative environment, but also one that's
extremely acidic. That acidic environment probably resulted from the high carbon dioxide content of
the atmosphere. All told, the near-surface environment of Mars may have dozens of different
evaporate minerals, none of which would have played any significant role in the first two stages of
mineral evolution. The oceans of Mars and early Earth would have led to many other
water-rich minerals as well. Prominent among these would have been a significant number of
hydroxide minerals, minerals in which OH groups bond to electron donor elements like magnesium,
aluminum, or iron. We've already met the magnesium hydroxide brucite when we discussed
serpentinization in the achondrites, but now there are also aluminum hydroxide such as diaspore
and gibbsite, iron hydroxide such as ferrehydrate and gerothite, and manganese hydroxide such as
manganite and pyrochroid. Moreover, combined with later changes on Earth, water will eventually
go on to create thousands of hydrated minerals, including water-rich variants of most of the
minerals we've met so far. That's because water, with its positive and negative charred sides,
combined to almost everything. The planet-wide igneous processes of stage three make it easy
to incorporate water into a variety of crystal structures, and later changes on Earth allow
many more water-rich minerals to be created. What we've seen is that in a water-rich world
like Mars or Earth, there are likely to be lots of hydrated mineral species.
Of all the groups of hydrated minerals, none is more important on Mars
on Earth than the clay minerals. Clay minerals tell an amazing story and have played a key role
in the near-surface transformations of both Mars and Earth. We'll be meeting these important
minerals again and again starting in the next lecture where we will wrap up our look at stage
three hydrated minerals created in the context of planet-wide volcanism, and we'll turn to granite,
an abundant stage four rock that first leads to the formation of continents, microcontinents on Earth.
