Reproduction is the hallmark of life.
Every proposed definition of life has to include self-replication, and that's why so much
emphasis is placed on figuring out what was the first collection of molecules that can
make copies of itself.
Three different models have been in competition to describe that first self-replicating system.
They are the reverse citric acid cycle, autocatalytic networks, and self-replicating RNA.
Let's take a look at these three ideas.
By far the simplest of these three models, and consequently the scenario that many researchers
prefer is based on a very well-known cycle of a few small molecules called the citric
acid cycle.
You may have heard of this cycle by one of its other names, it's sometimes called the
Krebs cycle or the TCA cycle, or you may have learned about it how it works in a high school
biology class.
The idea here is to build up bigger molecules from smaller pieces.
Start with acetic acid, which is only two carbon atoms, and react the acetic acid with
carbon dioxide, that's CO2 to perform pyruvic acid with three carbon atoms.
Then pyruvic acid undergoes a second reaction with CO2 to make oxaloacetic acid with a background
of four carbon atoms.
These initial reactions are followed by other simple chemical reactions that produce progressively
larger molecules, up to citric acid, which has six carbon atoms.
So far we've just been adding small molecules to make bigger and bigger molecules, but this
cycle becomes self-replicating because the citric acid molecule splits into two pieces.
Two smaller molecules, one of which is acetic acid, the other oxaloacetic acid, but those
two smaller molecules are both part of the original cycle.
So now you have two cycles going, one started with acetic acid, the other with oxaloacetic
acid.
And in that way, one cycle of molecules becomes two, two cycles becomes four, and so on.
This elegant reproducing cycle of a few small molecules has something else going for it.
It turns out that it's easy to synthesize many of life's essential building blocks,
including amino acids and sugars, by simple chemical reactions with the core molecules
of the citric acid cycle.
For example, just take a molecule of pyruvic acid, add ammonia, that's a nitrogen atom
surrounded by a triangle of three hydrogen atoms, and you get the essential amino acid,
alanine.
And many other important molecules of life can be made in two or three steps by such
simple reactions.
One of the most convincing arguments in favor of the TCA cycle is the first self-replicating
system is that it's obviously very ancient.
It's a kind of biomolecular fossil, if you will.
Just about every known living cell on earth has the citric acid cycle buried deep inside,
so some of us suspect it's a primordial characteristic that may have descended from the very first
life form.
Now it's important to remember that such a molecular cycle by itself is not alive.
But the citric acid cycle does have the potential to make countless copies of one set of molecules
by using other chemicals in the environment as food.
By the way, there's one more fascinating aspect of the TCA cycle that I think points
to its very early origins.
Today every step of the TCA cycle is helped along by a protein molecule called an enzyme.
Those enzymes speed up the reaction rates sometimes by a million times or more.
Well, it turns out that all of these enzymes have at their very core a tiny cluster of
atoms, typically iron or nickel, plus sulfur.
That atom cluster helps to shuffle electrons, which is the key to all chemical reactions.
And what's amazing is that those clusters look like tiny bits of iron and nickel sulfide
minerals that we know were present on early earth, especially in deep volcanic zones.
So some of us wonder if these minerals triggered the first TCA cycle.
And enzymes came later as a way to make the cycle run faster.
The citric acid cycle with just a dozen key molecules forming a self-replicating loop
is the simplest model of molecular reproduction in play right now.
At the opposite extreme of chemical complexity, we find a competing model called the self-replicating
autocatalytic network.
This is a self-organizing model of life's origins that was championed by Stuart Kaufman,
who's a pioneer in studies of complex systems.
Kaufman conducted groundbreaking theoretical studies at the famed Santa Fe Institute in
New Mexico.
Okay, here's the idea.
It's likely that the prebiotic soup grew richer and richer in its variety of organic molecules.
It may have eventually incorporated hundreds of thousands of different kinds of small carbon
based molecules from different sources, including meteorites, Miller-Yuri processes, hydrothermal
vents, and more.
And at some point, when organic molecules became concentrated, for example, in a drying
tidal pool, some of those carbon based chemicals would have triggered more reactions that made
more new kinds of molecules.
At the same time, other reactions would have accelerated the breakdown of less stable molecular
species.
And you can picture the result.
The concentrations of some molecules increase while others decrease.
Kaufman's idea of an autocatalytic network takes this idea to an extreme.
He says there would develop a collection of molecules, maybe a thousand or even 10,000
different species working in concert that favor the synthesis and stability of themselves
while they accelerate the destruction of any molecule that isn't in that network.
This is the molecular equivalent of the rich get richer with some lucky molecules in the
network, but most out.
It would be difficult to claim that such a molecular network is alive.
But think about its properties.
The network does make copies of itself.
It uses its surroundings to gain energy and food.
It grows.
It's far more complex in its chemical activities than most non-living chemical systems.
Now a principal objective, objection to Kaufman's autocatalytic network idea is that it's really
untestable.
Even if you knew in advance what one thousand or ten thousand different molecules to include
in the cycle, and even if you could afford to buy all of those chemicals and run the
experiment, there's no analytical technique that could be used to monitor the relative
proportions of all those chemical species.
At this point, no one has a clue as to what chemicals to use.
As Kaufman, he says, well, that's for the chemists to figure out.
So as intriguing as his idea might be, and it might really be the way life got started,
no one is about to prove it anytime soon.
Okay, there's a third original life scenario called the RNA world that's clearly the front
runner.
It's the one idea probably favored by most biologically trained origin researchers.
The RNA world model is based on a molecule that is, at least for now, hypothetical.
It's a molecule of the genetic chemical RNA that's learned to make copies of itself.
Now to understand why this RNA world scenario appeals to biologists, we need to think about
the two most critical functions of life.
Remember, first there's metabolism, which means making and assembling life's molecules
into cell, and then there's genetics, which is transferring information on how to make
life's molecules from one generation to the next.
In modern cells, it's the complexly folded proteins that run metabolism.
But the latter like molecule DNA stores and copies the information needed to make more
proteins.
It's a chicken versus the egg problem because the protein molecules assemble the DNA, but
DNA is necessary to assemble the proteins, so which came first.
And it turns out that RNA may be able to do both jobs at once.
RNA is an elegant polymer.
It's a long strand made from numerous individual molecules called nucleotides.
The nucleotides come in four different types, designated A, C, G, and U, that line up like
beads on a string or letters in a sentence.
You can construct any imaginable sequence from RNA letters just like a coded message.
And it turns out these RNA letters hold genetic information in exactly the same way as DNA.
So RNA can fulfill the role of DNA.
At the same time, RNA has the ability to fold up into complex shapes that have the ability
to catalyze some biological reactions.
And that's just what proteins do.
In fact, it's now known that RNA molecules play key roles in assembling all proteins.
So in RNA, we have a molecule that does both key tasks, carrying genetic information and
catalyzing protein formation.
Of all life's diverse molecules, RNA is the only one that seems to do it all.
Hence, this RNA world has attracted a lot of supporters, and RNA experts often dominate
at origin of life meetings.
But there are problems.
Foremost among them, no one seems to be able to come up with any chemical mechanism to produce
RNA nucleotides, much less to produce the vast numbers of different strands of RNA required
to generate at some random kind of self-replicating RNA molecule.
But let's say, just for argument, that applause of a way to make RNA in nature did exist, and
that lots of strands of RNA were assembled, almost all of those varied strands would have
done absolutely nothing.
They might have simply survived or gradually degraded.
So the assumption has to be that a select few strands possess some kind of survival
mechanism.
Perhaps they folded up to become more stable, or maybe they latched on to a secure mineral
surface and were protected, or maybe they accelerated the destruction of other rival molecules.
Such behaviors would be familiar examples of the struggle for molecular competition in
the prebiotic soup.
The central and is yet unproven assumption of the RNA world hypothesis is that one of
these vast number of prebiotic RNA strands learned the useful trick of how to make copies
of itself.
It became a self-replicating molecule.
This idea is unproven, but it may not be so far-fetched.
After all, strands of RNA are a lot like strands of DNA, which we know is able to make copies
of itself, and RNA, like DNA, can incorporate mistakes, and this RNA is easily mutated.
So even if the first self-replicating RNA molecule was inefficient or sloppy, it would
have quickly found itself competing against all sorts of slight variants of itself.
And some of those mutants inevitably would have been a little more efficient at making
copies, a little faster, or with a little less energy, or maybe in a warmer or saltier
or sunnier environment, and I have to confess that an RNA molecule that could do all that
make copies of itself while evolving would seem to fulfill all of the minimum requirements
for life.
That so-called naked RNA molecule is a self-sustaining chemical system capable of incorporating novelty
and undergoing Darwinian evolution.
It's likely to have taken a long, long time, maybe hundreds of millions of years for that
first crudely self-replicating molecular system to emerge.
Take your pick, a relatively simple TCA cycle, or a complex autocatalytic network, or maybe
self-replicating RNA, or something we haven't thought of yet.
But Earth had vast amounts of time and surface area with which to try out different chemical
combination.
So it's plausible that versions of all three would have been given a chance.
Unimaginable numbers of different molecular combinations were being tried out on trillions
of trillions of varied mineral surfaces across almost 200 million square miles of Earth's
wet surface for many millions of years.
That's combinatorial chemistry that we could never repeat in our laboratories.
All it took was for one, just one of those inconceivably immense numbers of molecular
combinations someplace, some time, to work.
Some combination of molecules learned to make copies of itself.
That was the moment of life's origin, the moment when everything changed.
And here we come to the fourth and final step in life's origins.
You recall that making the small biomolecules like amino acids and sugars came first.
Then was the selection and assembly of those molecules into larger structures.
And ultimately, a collection of molecules became self-replicating.
But how exactly can a collection of molecules evolve?
What is the natural process that would drive such a phenomenon?
And here we can be confident that we know the answer and understand the mechanism.
The answer lies in selection.
What's the driving force behind all evolving systems?
We live in a world that rewards certain essential functions related to survival.
In such a world, the molecules that are most functional will always be the ones most likely
to survive.
And molecules that don't make the grade are doomed to be eliminated.
The power of natural selection, whether for molecules or living creatures, is not just
idle conjecture.
It's now being conducted in the Boston-based laboratory of Harvard biologist Jack Shostak,
who demonstrated over and over again the power of selection in molecular evolution.
Let me tell you about a typical experiment.
Shostak's team begins with a random mixture in water of about 100 trillion different RNA
sequences.
That's a one with 14 zeros, a lot of different RNA strands.
Each of those RNA molecules consists of a random 100-letter string of the four genetic
letters A, C, G, and U.
And that means that each molecule in that immense collection folds up differently into
a different shape.
So the entire collection of 100 trillion molecules is confronted with a task.
For example, they're exposed to another molecule with a distinctive shape.
And those distinctive molecules are attached to little beads.
So you have a beaker with coated beads and then a water solution with 100 trillion RNA
molecules.
Now, the vast majority of RNA strands will do absolutely nothing.
They'll just continue floating around in the solution.
But a tiny fraction of the RNAs will bond tightly to the target molecule.
These target molecules dangle out into the RNA-rich solution like little hooks.
Think of it as Velcro that latches onto just the right kind of material.
So almost all RNA molecules have the wrong shapes and can't interact, but a few of the
original RNAs stick tight.
And that's why selection is so powerful.
It rewards molecules that work, and you can enhance the process by cycling.
So Shostack's team throws out the old solution that still has almost 100 trillion different
RNA strands that didn't stick.
And then they carefully recover the few RNA strands that did stick because of those fortuitous
shapes.
They use a few standard tricks of genetic technology to prepare a new batch of 100 trillion RNA
strands.
At the same time, every one of the new strands is a sloppy copy of one of the old strands
that stuck.
So these are mutant strands that are offspring of one of those original few functional strands.
And here's the power of selection and variation.
By repeating these simple steps, you generate a new population of functional RNA strands.
But some of these second generation variants happen to bind much, much better than any
strand in the first generation.
And if you repeat the whole process a few more times, the resultant RNA strands keep
getting better and better at binding until the very best mutants have the maximum possible
binding to the target molecule.
These RNA strands achieve a kind of perfection.
You could not engineer a better molecule for that function.
The whole experiment in Shostak's lab takes a few days.
It's less than a week to transform from random strands to a perfect binding molecule.
If you were to ask a team of the world's most brilliant chemists with the most powerful
computers to design such a functional RNA molecule from scratch, they would find the
task to be virtually impossible.
We simply do not have a method to predict how a long RNA strand will fold up, nor can
we predict how it might attach to other complexly shaped molecules.
And here we have an important message for those who would deny the power of evolution.
Evolution by natural selection is the fastest, the most demonstrably reliable path to attaining
function.
The contrast, intelligent design of biomolecule structures from scratch is immensely more
complicated.
Engineering is unlikely to be either fast or even functional.
And contrary to some criticisms, there's nothing random about selection.
Selection always picks the configuration that works, which leads some to say that if God
created life, she is smart enough to have used evolution.
We certainly don't yet know all the details, but somewhere, sometime in Earth's first
billion years, a collection of molecules learned that self-replicating trick.
It's clear that any collection of molecules with even the slightest useful function had
an advantage in the pre-bottic soup.
But no function was more valuable than the advantage conferred upon groups of molecules
that could make copies of themselves.
Such a self-replicating system ensured its own survival by producing more or less identical
offspring.
The molecular copying process must have been messy.
So some of those molecular copies were mutants.
Most mutations were lethal or conferred no significant advantage, but a few fortuitous
alterations allowed offspring to outshine their parents.
The system evolved through chance-copying errors.
Whatever the original self-replicating molecules might have been, some offspring tolerated more
extreme conditions of pressure or heat, acid, salt, some replicated faster, or they found
new sources of food, or were more ruthless in destroying less-fit molecules.
It's likely that some molecules enjoyed even greater advantages by binding to protective
mineral surfaces or finding refuge within a safe, encapsulating membrane.
The first self-replicating molecules were without competition, and so it's likely that
they engulfed all of Earth's nutrient-rich zones in a geological instant.
It's hard to imagine any microscopic object engulfing Earth, but consider this.
Just for argument, say that the first self-replicating molecule was pretty inefficient.
It took a full week to duplicate just once.
By contrast, many modern microbes can replicate in a matter of minutes.
But let's say a week.
So week after week, two molecules become four, four becomes eight, eight becomes sixteen,
and so forth.
At that leisurely rate, it would have taken about a half a year to form a clump of 100
million self-replicating molecules.
You'd barely be able to see such a molecular cluster.
It would take another 20 weeks or so for the mass of molecules to fill a thimble.
And continuing at this rate, it would take another 20 weeks for all life to fill a good-sized
bathtub.
So we're up to maybe a year and a half after the first self-replicating set of molecules
appeared, and you'd be hard-pressed to see any change of any sort on planet Earth.
Yet at this point, things changed fast.
Continued doubling every week would produce remarkable transformations.
After 20 more weeks, miles of life-infested waters would have appeared along the coasts
or in an inland lake or perhaps a deep sea environment.
And it would take only two years, if you assume, that a single initial collection of molecules
doubled every week for Earth to hold a million cubic kilometers of living stuff.
And in just a few more weeks doubling every week, you'd have enough biomass to fill the
entire Mediterranean Sea.
So life once begun may have spread quickly, but those earliest life forms were primitive
in the extreme.
The simplest single-cell organisms had not developed the complicated mechanisms to harvest
sunlight.
They probably survived on the chemical energy of nearby minerals, and they can't have had
much effect on Earth's geology.
There were no great changes in the near-surface distribution of rocks, for example, nor were
there any new mineral species attributable to life.
Now it is likely that some biologically mediated rock formations occurred, and some of Earth's
oldest surviving rocks we find distinctive localized red and black-banded iron-rich formations.
And shoreline-hugging carbonate reefs, these early signs of life, some dating back more
than 3.5 billion years, are found in remote parts of Australia, South Africa, Canada.
It's evident that some microbes were able to modify their environments by producing
layers of minerals.
But the key here is that those minerals would have formed anyway, albeit much more slowly.
Life simply learned to accelerate the production of minerals, and in the process the cells
got chemical energy they needed to survive.
In this sense, the earliest life forms were like catalysts or enzymes that speeded up
favorable chemical reaction.
Before exploring the dramatic changes that life gradually imposed on Earth, let's step
back and think about the context of life's origin in the bigger planetary picture.
In contrast to later stages of living Earth, when life transformed the surface time and
time again, as far as we know that first molecular life made little mark.
In fact, we're not even sure when life began.
Detailed studies of Earth's most ancient sedimentary rocks, which were laid down in
shallow oceans or lake environments about 3.5 billion years ago, preserve what are unmistakable
fossils of microbes.
We see dome-like rocky structures called stromatolites, typically a few inches to a few feet across.
They form when microbes deposited one thin layer after another of minerals in shallow
reef-like settings.
There's also ample evidence that microbial mats covered parts of the sandy shoreline,
where they consolidated and patterned sand in tidal zones, much as they do today.
There are even a few places where what look like actual microbe fossils have been preserved
as microscopic carbon-rich spheres.
These fossils aren't at all that spectacular, but you can sometimes convince yourself that
they have distinctive cell walls, but no older fossils, at least none that are incontrovertible,
have been found.
There are traces of carbon and other critical bio-elements, and some altered rocks as old
as 3.85 billion years ago, but those tantalizing chemicals by no means have convinced the geological
community of life.
So how long ago did life arise?
Here the answer depends as much on philosophy as science.
If you harbor belief that life is a cosmic imperative, that it emerges early and often
on any viable planet or moon, then you'd probably start with the hypothesis of a stable biosphere
very early, perhaps as early as 4.4 billion years ago.
That's within Earth's first 150 million years.
After all, all the key ingredients were there, oceans, atmosphere, energy, perhaps as many
as 500 different minerals, those from stage 3, and small carbon molecules.
There's no doubt that the giant impacts of asteroids and comets would have challenged
life.
Perhaps the hardy microbes that learned to live hot and deep in protected rocky homes
beneath the ocean floor were the best survivors.
And if you think that life's origins are easy, then perhaps life came into being more than
once maybe many times before Earth settled down.
And if that's so, then those 3.5 billion year old fossils represented ecosystems that had
been evolving for almost a billion years.
On the other hand, if you incline toward the opinion that life's origins are difficult
and correspondingly rare in the cosmos, then an origin date closer to 3.5 billion years
would seem to be more likely.
Perhaps life is so very unlikely that it took a billion years of chemical experiments,
a bigger repertoire of minerals, maybe a thousand minerals or more, and trillions of
trillions of different mineral-molecule interactions throughout hundreds of millions
of cubic miles of ocean crust before just the right combination occurred.
It's possible that those few fossil remains from 3.5 billion years ago marked the true
beginnings of the biosphere.
My best guess is that it's somewhere in between.
That life began on an interval from about 4 billion years ago when most intensive asteroid
bombardment slowed down to 3.8 billion years when we start to see some pretty convincing
isotopic evidence that life was influencing the surface environment.
So I want you to imagine yourself back to that ancient Earth.
To a time some 4 billion years ago, Earth's surface was unbelievably hostile.
The weather was probably hot and steamy, maybe hotter than any place on Earth today.
But radiation hit Earth with full force because no ozone layer yet existed to block it.
The globe was largely ocean-covered, but giant volcanoes were everywhere, above and below
the water surface.
They spewed noxious gases like smelly hydrogen sulfide into the atmosphere.
Impacts of meteors, the size of city blocks, and largest still were a common occurrence.
Comets also crashed through the atmosphere, pulverized the surface.
But land there was, was mostly barren black basalt, perhaps with the growing areas of
gray granite.
It's very possible that the world of 4 billion years ago was utterly lifeless.
If you could time travel and stand on one of those ancient, active volcanic islands,
perhaps on a black lava beach with shallow tidal pools, you'd see nothing alive.
Chemical analysis of the water might reveal nothing but a dilute solution of organic
compounds and salts.
If you could then skip forward a couple hundred million years to about 3.8 billion years ago
and visit the same kind of spot, I doubt if much would have appeared to change.
The volcanoes are still violent, though perhaps a little less intense than before.
Meteorite impacts are still common, though at a somewhat slower rate, with fewer really
big hits.
And Earth's surface is a little bit cooler.
But now, if you could scrutinize the tidal pools, you'd see a kind of cloudiness, maybe
a surface scum that wasn't there before, maybe even rounded mounds of carbonate minerals.
Under a microscope, you might see tiny ancestral forms of bacteria or archaea swarming in the
water.
So the changes were subtle at first, but those microscopic specks of life were the harbingers
of incredible global change.
Details of the origin of life remain a mystery, but what is known and what we've also seen
in mineral evolution, for instance, in the creation of Earth's pegmatites and the rare
minerals they make possible, is the role of deep time, given a span of time almost impossibly
beyond our own experience.
Plus, an entire planet of sufficiently varied raw materials that becomes possible for trillions
and trillions of different combinations of molecules that each have their moment in the
sun, or maybe in the hydrothermal vent, as the case may be.
And such an enormously vast process of selection can eventually allow previously impossible
behaviors to emerge.
Indeed, if life could begin on Earth by a purely natural process of molecular selection, then
life could also begin by similarly vast processes on any of the presumed billions of Earth-like
planets circling other stars throughout our galaxy, not to mention the billions of other
galaxies that lie beyond the Milky Way.
Given the unimaginable profusion of stars and planets, it seems almost inconceivable that
we are alone in the universe.
Since writing my book, The Story of Earth, I've often been asked to name the single
most transformative event in Earth's history.
And there's no question that life was it.
For no other event before or since life's origin led to such dramatic and irreversible
changes in our beautiful planet.
