In the last lecture, we saw how three rare and distinctive ancient rock types, black
carbon-rich chert, black carbon-rich shale, and mound-like stromatolites, have provided
compelling evidence for life on Earth more than three billion years ago.
To these three sources, paleontologist Nora Nofke has added a fourth, the sandy shoreline
rocks that were altered by thick microbial mats.
Most sandstone formations consist of regular layers of sand, some lighter, some darker,
with point to the gradual accumulations of small grains of rock.
You can imagine how erosion from mountains, cliffs, bluffs inland are swept by wind and
water to the sea, wherever so slowly they build up these layers.
Nora Nofke began her studies of microbial mats by looking at modern sandy deposits.
Most places you visit are like the beach, just wide expanses of tan sand where you can
lie and soak up the sun and watch the water.
But in select places where there are wide tidal flats in a sunny, lagoon-like beach
environment that's usually protected from violent surf, microbes can start to stake
a claim.
They grow thicker and thicker mats of interlocking filaments that bind and trap sand grains to
form a cloth-like coating over the beach.
It's usually pretty slimy and smelly, not the kind of beach you'd want to visit for
your holiday, so most of us aren't aware of these amazing ecosystems.
But Nora realized that such microbial mats could represent an extremely primitive ecosystem,
one that's decorated Earth's shallow tidal zones almost since the dawn of life.
And so she began her quest, looking at Earth's oldest sandstones for signs of wrinkled mats,
of sand grains that had been subjected to binding and trapping of dried and cracked
surfaces and of mats that had been ripped apart and rolled up like little carpets during
violent storm events.
Nora developed a keen sense for these subtle features.
She perfected her field techniques by starting with relatively recent sandstones that had
little alteration, and then worked backward in time.
And almost everywhere she looked, she spied subtle features pointing to microbial mats.
These features must have been on view for previous generations of field geologists, but
they had been completely overlooked.
In 1998, when she was still a young graduate student, Nofke identified these diagnostic
crinkly mat textures on the surfaces of 480 million-year-old sandstone rocks in a famous
location in the French Alps, the Black Mountain.
In 2000, after moving to Harvard University for postdoctoral work with the eminent paleontologist
Andrew Noll, she pushed the record of microbial mats farther back by identifying what to her
had become familiar patterns in 550 million-year-old rocks of Namibia.
I think it's safe to say that paleontological community didn't pay a lot of attention to
these findings.
If you think about it, the fact that microbial mats may have existed half a billion years
ago was not all that newsworthy.
Overall, every geologist and paleontologist would have agreed that Earth's atmosphere
had become oxygen-rich by that time, and microbial mats must have been a part of that story long
ago.
Yet, even though the existence of ancient mats was probably obvious to most scientists,
it appears that no one before Nora had taken the time to scrutinize a variety of modern
mat systems to systematize the kinds of features, the kinds of settings in which they arise.
And then, the big step recognized the similar kinds of traces preserved as unambiguous fossils
in ancient sandstone rocks.
And just one year later, the year 2001, came the big turning point for all her systematic
work.
That's when Nora Nofke made the first of what are now seen as groundbreaking discoveries
in sandstone formations more than 3 billion years old from South Africa and Australia.
Now, it's not all that surprising that microbes would have colonized coastal areas with sturdy
mats after the Great Oxidation Event.
We know that filament-like algae are a major source of oxygen, we know they produced a
lot of oxygen in our atmosphere, and we know they format today.
But 3 billion years ago is a long time, at least 600 million years before the presumed
Great Oxidation Event.
There was simply no reason to believe that oxygenic photosynthesis started much before
2.4 billion years ago, and so no one expected indeed many paleontologists were probably
highly skeptical of claims for an ecosystem that relied so heavily on sunlight so very
long ago.
But here's an important point.
Black shell represent deep subsurface ecosystems where any microbes relied on the chemical
energy of rocks to survive.
Research microbes should have been around since the dawn of life more than 3.5 billion
years ago.
But there is really no reason to suspect photosynthetic surface life until about 2.5 billion years
ago.
Now, stromatolites are certainly surface deposits formed by layers of microbes, but the protection
provided by these rocky mounds appears to be explanation enough.
Stromatolites didn't have to be photosynthetic, though it now seems likely they were.
Microbial mats are different.
You see, it takes a lot of metabolic energy to build up mat structures and bind up all
that sand.
The only logical reason to do so is to anchor yourself in a sunny environment.
So most paleontologists agree that if you find a microbial mat fossil, you are finding
incontrovertible evidence for photosynthesis.
So the trick is to find the oldest microbial mat fossils, and that is an exceptionally difficult
task.
Microbial mat features are subtle.
They involve slight irregularities in the surface topology of a sandstone outcrop.
The outcrop has to be weathered to expose one ancient flat surface, and you can imagine
how challenging it is to spot such features in the overhead glare of the midday sun of
the South African or Australian deserts.
But Norris told me of exhilarating moments of discovery late in the afternoon at the
end of long and often fruitless days of searching as the sunlight streams across the barren
rock.
You've been staring at rocks for hours, seeing nothing, and then all of a sudden as the sun
gets lower and light rakes across an outcrop, surface the telltale wrinkled sandstone markings
stand out in stark relief.
She told me how those structures seemed to pop out everywhere.
Once she made one of her most unambiguous and thrilling discoveries at the final hour
of the final day of an otherwise frustrating arduous African field excursion, that outcrop
eventually came to grace the cover of the prestigious scientific journal Geology.
Norinovsky first came to me in the year 2000 at the suggestion of her Harvard mentor paleontologist
Andy Noll.
Andy and I were in graduate school together, but he was in paleontology, I was in mineralogy,
so our careers naturally took us in different scientific directions.
But then we both became more involved in scientific efforts to understand the origins and distribution
of life in the universe, and we had more and more to talk about.
Andy realized that Novsky's scientific case for ancient microbial maps was based almost
entirely on surface topographical features that, well, suggestive of ancient life admittedly
at times required a pretty vivid imagination.
For those of us who had not spent decades looking at modern map structures, it was pretty easy
to overlook or dismiss odd ripple marks or wrinkled rock surfaces.
That's why Noll pushed Nor to improve her case for maps by getting down to the microscopic
level and adding analytical data on the minerals and chemicals and isotopes that were still
preserved in those distinctive layers.
So our strategy was to take very thin polished slices of rock perpendicular to the presumed
matte layers and then use an arsenal of analytical techniques to look for traces of ancient carbon
or concentration of distinctive minerals.
We all felt that these analytical data could provide a kind of smoking gun for some of
the oldest, yet what might seem to many scientists as ambiguous, matte-like features.
And here's an interesting aspect of the sociology of science.
You can find a rock with clear, matte-like features, at least clear to Nora, who's studied
them for 20 years.
And many geologists who haven't been trained to see these fossils will just shrug.
But if you provide a table with chemical analyses of unusual minerals or isotopes, then it somehow
seems more scientific.
And that's a real key to getting your ideas accepted by the broader scientific community.
I have to tell you the story of the very first specimens that Nora brought to us.
It was really an object lesson in why such analyses can be critically important if the
outcrop data are somewhat ambiguous.
So Nora is ambitious and she's always expecting to find matte structures in old rocks.
Quite naturally she gets excited when a new potential matte fossil comes to light, especially
if it could be the oldest example.
The first rock samples and thin sections I received were rushed by FedEx from Cambridge,
Massachusetts, to the geophysical laboratory.
It was the highest priority.
These thin sections contain thin, wiggly black layers in a sandy sediment that's 3 billion
years old.
And that would have been the record in the year 2000.
Andy and Nora needed confirmation of two facts.
First, that the black features are indeed carbon-rich.
And second, that they have life's requisite isotopic signature that is about 3% less of
the heavier carbon-13 isotope compared to the average crust.
Our job at the geophysical laboratory was to analyze for carbon.
Now this isn't always the way research works, but Nora had already written up a paper for
science.
It was sitting in Cambridge, Massachusetts, ready to submit, only awaiting those two numbers,
carbon concentration and isotope ratio.
And we were lucky that my Carnegie colleague Marilyn Fogle, she was the carbon isotope
expert at the geophysical lab, she was willing to help with the rush job.
Marilyn looked at the samples, she told me the steps, first you crush the rock, the rock
with those black bands, you grind it to a fine powder, then you put a few micrograms
of the powder into tiny containers of pure tin foil.
Way the samples finally fold the foil cups into tiny balls the size of a little BB.
The isotope machine does both measurements and it's easy to use.
Just feed the samples, the carbon isotope standards, one by one into a furnace at the
front end of the machine.
The furnace vaporizes any carbon-containing compounds to carbon dioxide gas, and that
gas flows into a sensitive mass spectrometer that separates and measures carbon-12 and
carbon-13.
The whole process only takes a few hours to obtain the total amount of carbon and the
all-important isotope ratio.
So you can imagine Nora was sitting in Cambridge waiting for our call, she was hoping for something
in the minus 25 to minus 35 range, which mean less of the heavier carbon-13 isotope and
be typical of some other microbial mats and at least consistent with biology.
Certainly the value had to be about minus 20 or even more negative than that.
The machine told us a different story.
The carbon isotope ratio was close to zero.
And that's a value that everyone agrees has nothing to do with biology.
Rather, that value of zero is the classic and unambiguous signature of inorganic carbon.
It's the kind of isotope value that comes from fluids in the mantle and then is deposited
as thin black valence of pure carbon graphite.
So the bottom line was that the suggestive black features in Norinovsky's samples were
carbon-rich, but they were unambiguously not biological.
Well, that episode proved to be an important object lesson for us.
We proceeded very carefully to analyze thin black wiggly features in many other ancient
sandy sediments, including rocks from South Africa, Australia, and Greenland.
And many of those specimens were much more convincing.
Over and over again, we were able to measure carbon isotope values in the minus 20 to minus
30 range, meaning about 3% less of the heavier carbon-13 isotope.
We also found other convincing evidence that microbes had produced mats and flourished along
the sandy shorelines more than 3 billion years ago.
And of course, there's a lot more evidence than just black smudges or traces of biomolecules.
You can see the evidence for microbial mats in the field at the scale of an outcrop.
You can hold that evidence in your hand and carry specimens back to the lab.
Our first collaborative paper published in the journal Geology in 2003 presented what
was pretty compelling evidence for 2.9 billion-year-old microbial mats and sandstones of the Mozan
Group at a site about 30 miles southeast of Pretoria in eastern South Africa.
The isotope and chemical analyses were presented side by side with photos of the obvious wrinkle
structures at the scale of outcrops.
Though there was only a trace of carbon, we found a convincing isotopic signature of
minus 24, close to the conventional value of roughly minus 25 or 30.
At the time, these were the oldest known microbial mat fossils, but that would soon change.
Three years later, we collaborated on a study of microbial mat fossils from the 3.2 billion-year-old
Moody's Group, slightly north of the Mozan fossils and quite near the town of Barberton.
Nor included color photos of wrinkled surfaces and roll-up structures alongside the chemical
and isotopic data, which showed a negative carbon isotope value of about minus 21.
Again, this value was consistent with biologically processed carbon.
And recently, we've been working on specimens from western Australia in rocks almost 3.5
billion-years-old. The evidence is sketchier, which isn't surprising for rocks at all,
but if there's something there, I suspect that Noronovsky will find it.
So microbial mats are the new evidence to watch.
After all, there's no question that microbial mats were a common feature of shorelines and
earth more than 3 billion years ago, and it's certain that those microbes use sunlight as
their energy source. But a key question remains, do the mat-forming microbes produce oxygen,
or rather did they use sunlight for simpler photochemistry?
Modern microbial communities reveal the evolutionary history of a variety of sun
harvesting strategies, and many of those mechanisms don't produce oxygen. In fact,
it's likely that the very first microbes using photochemistry to harvest the sun's energy
did not give off oxygen as a byproduct. That's why details of those 3 billion-year-old
mat-forming microbes use how they use the sun's energy is going to remain a hot topic for some
time to come. What we can say for sure is that these fossils date not only the earliest appearance
of photochemistry, but also some of the earliest appearances of life itself.
Whatever new fossils are discovered, the big picture of earth's gradual oxidation
is widely accepted by geologists. The history is divided roughly into three parts. During
earth's first 2 billion years, prior to about 2.4 billion years ago, earth's atmosphere was
basically lacking in oxygen. As we saw two lectures ago, there are numerous lines of evidence that
early earth's atmosphere was devoid of molecular oxygen. There's mineral evidence such as the
occurrence of unweathered pebbles of pyrite and uraniumite. There's chemical evidence,
and the anomalies of such elements is cerium and iron in ancient soil deposits. And there's the
smoking gun of sulfur isotope data, the sulfur isotope fractionation based not on mass, but on
UV radiation that could only have occurred before the rise of oxygen in a protective ozone layer.
Just about everyone agrees with this scenario. Then we see that rather sudden change in the
characteristics at about 2.4 billion years ago, which has been interpreted at the time when oxygen
rather quickly rose to a few percent of modern levels. Rocks younger than 2.4 billion years lack
the mass independent fractionation of sulfur isotopes. And that change parallels the rise
of photosynthetic microbes, which caused the dramatic cumulative changes that are thought to
have occurred between about 2.4 and 2.2 billion years ago. That was a key change. And so far at
least, it was an irreversible change that transformed Earth's near-surface environment
and paved the way for even more dramatic changes in Earth's geology and biology.
The next 1.5 billion years or so, the interval lasting to perhaps 700 million years ago,
that includes almost the entire proto-resilic ion, is generally presented in graphs and tables
as a time when the level of atmospheric oxygen stayed more or less constant
at a couple of percent modern levels. However, this is not a universally held idea.
And a lot of my colleagues think oxygen contents must have gradually risen during that time,
with smaller fluctuations up and down. After all, it's almost never a good bet that Earth did just
exactly the same thing for one and a half billion years. For example, Andy Noel at Harvard thinks
the atmosphere just kept getting gradually more oxygen rich. And I suspect that there were some
significant swings up and down in total oxygen, depending on where the continents were with
respect to the equator and how much rock weathering was taking place. You see,
more rapid weathering can consume a lot of oxygen. So that long stretch of time when
Earth's atmosphere is supposed to have had a stable 1% oxygen or more is a simple placeholder
rather than a measured result. Finally, as we'll see when we turn to the second great oxidation
event in lecture 38, the period between about 700 and 600 million years ago, and again between
300 and 200 million years ago, there thought to be intervals when atmospheric oxygen spiked
in concentration largely as a result of feedbacks with the biosphere.
The great oxidation event 2.4 billion years ago had many important consequences for Earth.
Regardless of the timing and magnitude of the great oxidation event, I wanted to describe
some of those consequences. In the year 2008, my long-time colleague, Dmitry Spragensky,
who's a professor of geochemistry at Johns Hopkins University, and I presented a claim
we've been building up to in this course, that the great majority of different kinds of minerals on
Earth are the consequence of life. For centuries, really, for the entire history of mineral research,
the tacit assumption had been that the mineral kingdom operates quite independently of life
and that the minerals we see on Earth today have pretty much always been there.
In sharp contrast to this view, the mineral evolution approach you've been learning in
this course emphasizes that the geosphere, the rocks, and minerals, and the biosphere,
all kinds of life forms, have co-evolved. Indeed, it turns out that fully two-thirds of all known
mineral species, and that number is now approaching 5,000, could not have formed prior to the great
oxidation event. That means that most of Earth's rich mineral diversity doesn't exist on any
other body in our solar system and probably could not occur on a non-living world.
This idea also transforms our view of some all-time favorite mineral species, such as the
semi-precious stone turquoise, deep blue, azurite, brilliant green, malachite, each of which turns
out to be an unambiguous sign of life. I'd like to present you with some concrete reasons for how
we reach these conclusions by taking a quick side trip into the field of aqueous geochemistry.
In 1965, geochemists Robert Garrows of Northwestern University and Charles Christ of the United
States Geological Survey published a now-classic book, Solutions, Minerals, and Equilibria,
in which they showed how to calculate what minerals can form under what near-surface conditions.
For a time, this volume was required reading for all Earth scientists,
but fashions and science changed. I think it's safe to say that many of today's geology students
have never heard of Garrows and Christ, much less studied the approach in that book.
Their central idea is that each kind of mineral can only form under a limited set of chemical
conditions. Some of these parameters are obvious. You can't form minerals of copper or uranium
unless there's a significant amount of copper or uranium in the environment. You can't form
carbonate minerals unless there's a supply of carbonate, that's CO3 ions in the environment.
What is probably not so obvious is that any element that occurs in more than one oxidation
state is extremely sensitive to the amount of oxygen in the environment.
So for example, recall that iron can occur in three different oxidation states, as a metal,
or in the plus two state that often leads to dark green minerals, or in that plus three state
that typically produces rusty red minerals. The amount of oxygen in the environment can be
measured in many ways, but perhaps the most intuitive ways is with a fraction of total
air pressure contributed by oxygen, what's known as the partial pressure of oxygen.
Today, the partial pressure is about two tenths of an atmosphere, which is just another way of
saying that oxygen is roughly 20% of the atmosphere. And everyone agrees that the amount of oxygen
early in Earth's history was much, much lower than our current two tenths of an atmosphere.
But Dmitry Spragensky and I argued that the partial pressure of oxygen before the great
oxidation event was pegged at about 10 to the minus 72nd power, that's 72 orders of magnitude
less oxygen than today. At first, the idea sounds crazy, but when you go to Geryls and
Christ and look at their graphs, they immediately support this idea. What controls the amount of
oxygen on early Earth is all the iron present in its plus two form. The oceans were loaded with
plus two iron. So were the early soils and all that plus two iron created what is known as an oxygen
buffer. As long as there was ferrous plus two iron in the oceans and the soils,
then any stray oxygen molecule in the atmosphere was gobbled up when it contacted the surface.
There was so much iron that it just dominated the chemical state of Earth's surface,
so we just go to tables and Geryls and Christ and find that the oxygen levels
were locked in at 10 to the minus 72 power. There's lots of other important mineralogical
evidence that points to an anoxic early environment, and here it's evidence based on some of the
minerals that did form at the surface. One notable example is the iron carbonate mineral
Sidorite or FeCO3. That's a mineral that commonly occurs in Earth's history, but rarely forms today.
Sidorite is the carbonate of plus two iron, and it can only form under extremely low
partial pressures of oxygen, even lower than 10 to the minus 72. There's a useful graph
in Geryls and Christ that outlines this point by showing the range of conditions under which
Sidorite forms, given varying amounts of carbonate and of oxygen, and it's very restrictive. Only a
small area in the plot where carbonate is enriched and oxygen is lacking, but those are the only
conditions in which Sidorite can form. Their graph says that anytime we find iron carbonate in rocks
and we find it commonly in rocks older than two and a half billion years, then the atmosphere
contains essentially no oxygen, and the same kind of evidence can be extracted from many other
minerals, from unweathered pyrite, from unweathered geratinite, from oceans rich in sulphide, from the
presence of cerium and soils, from lots of other science, if you know what to look for.
The nice thing about Geryls and Christ is there are lots of diagrams that reveal the conditions
under which different minerals might form and are stable. One is a revealing graph of copper
minerals that form under varying conditions of carbonate on the horizontal axis, oxygen on the
vertical axis. So this graph is just like the one for iron under varying conditions of carbonate
and oxygen. It's just wonderful how each mineral gets its own graph and has so much information
conveyed in such a compact way. Anyway, the copper graph in Geryls and Christ includes fields
for two of my absolute favorite minerals, the copper carbonates azurite and malachite. On the
graph they're in regions of relatively high carbonate content. These are also two of the
best known minerals because they're extremely common as alteration products near copper mines,
and they're extremely colorful. You can find both azurite and malachite used as ornamental stones
and in jewelry, and they always make some of the most spectacular specimens in mineral museums.
In addition, the graph shows three different minerals in the part of the graph that's carbonate
poor. At the bottom with the least oxygen is native copper metal, the shiny copper colored
metal of pennyus. Above that, with an intermediate amount of oxygen is the copper oxide cuprite,
Cu2O, with a 2 to 1 ratio of copper to oxygen. Since oxygen always has a valence of minus 2,
that means the copper is a valence of plus 1 in cuprite. And above cuprite, with twice as much
oxygen relative to copper, is another copper oxide, tenorite. That's CuO, the 1 to 1 ratio of
copper to oxygen, and thus copper is in the plus 2 valence state. That's copper's most oxidized
state in nature. These two graphs, the one with iron carbonate and the one with copper carbonate,
are broadly similar. They both have carbonate minerals stable on the right side and oxide
minerals stable on the left side. They also have very similar scales on the horizontal axis for
partial pressure of carbon dioxide. Copper and iron carbonates only form when the partial pressure
of carbon dioxide is greater than about a thousandth of an atmosphere. Lower than that, and you enter
the realm of oxide minerals. However, the vertical scale of partial pressure for oxygen is different
for iron compared to copper. In the case of iron minerals, the scale is bigger and goes from one
atmosphere pressure of oxygen at the top to ten to the minus one hundredth power at the bottom.
That's a huge range that takes you from oxygen free iron metal at the bottom to the oxide of iron
three plus, which is basically rust at the top. And we call that before the great oxidation event,
we're sitting at about ten to the minus seventy second power. That's the buffer created when iron
coagists in the two plus and three plus states at the same time. For copper by contrast, the scale
goes from one atmosphere of oxygen at the top down to only ten to the minus sixtieth power at the
bottom. That may sound like a terrifically small number and it is, but it's twelve orders of magnitude
higher than the oxidation state that was prevalent before two and a half billion years.
So that means that various minerals turn out to be impossible on early earth. You can't form
tenorite, the oxide of copper in the two plus state, because it only forms above ten to the
minus thirty seventh power of oxygen. You can't form cuprite, the oxide of copper in the plus
one state, because it only forms between ten to the minus thirty seventh power and ten to the minus
fifty second power. And you can't form azurite and malachite because they require oxygen contents
greater than ten to the minus forty fifth power. In fact, the only copper mineral allowed turns
out to be native copper metal. Let me emphasize the broader point. An important textbook published
in 1965 and studied by a generation of mineralogists clearly describes the conditions under which
various minerals are possible and impossible. That information together with ever more precise
data from paleochemists about conditions on earth before and after the great oxidation event
allows us to identify which minerals could coexist before that event and which could not.
And the reasons for the limited mineralogical repertoire before the great oxidation event
are not difficult to understand. It turns out that these beautiful copper minerals,
along with thousands of other mineral species, form in the shallow crust by interactions of
oxygen-rich waters with pre-existing minerals. These waters resulted from the exchange of oxygen
between the air and the water. But oxygen-rich waters simply could not have occurred before
two point four billion years ago. But oxygen did not remain scarce forever. And the next lecture
will look at how the arrival of oxygen made possible an amazing new range of mineral species.
