We have arrived at the two-thirds mark in our survey from the Big Bang to the dramatic
changes of Earth's epic history.
The time is two billion years ago, we are now well into the protozoic Eon, and the diversity
of mineral species on Earth is about to take its greatest leap forward.
Earth now has some of its most important modern features.
Our home is large, rusty continents bounded by blue oceans, and of course, Earth has become
a living planet with abundant microbial populations, including great masses of slimy green photosynthetic
algae and coastal waters.
Nevertheless, Earth two billion years ago was a very different world from today, a very
hostile world.
The land was still utterly barren and lifeless.
The sun's harsh ultraviolet radiation was virtually unhindered by the small amount of
atmospheric oxygen and the tiny amount of resulting ozone.
Without a breathing apparatus and a protective suit, any human time traveler would still
perish quickly in that alien environment.
What we find then is a planet in the midst of a long transition to the green living world
we think of as an Earth-like planet.
Let's review where we are in terms of mineral evolution.
Four and a half billion years ago, Earth had formed, and thus had incorporated all of the
250 or so mineral species that are still found today in the varied meteorites that fall to
Earth, the minerals of stages one and two.
Stage three of Earth's mineral evolution featured igneous processes, partial melting,
fractional crystallization, crystal settling, and other processes associated with Earth's
separation into the basaltic crust, the peridotite mantle, and the iron-metal core.
On a volatile, poor world like Mercury or the Moon, these inevitable events lead to
perhaps 350 different minerals.
On Earth, abundant water led to more mineral richness, with clays, hydroxides, ices, and
evaporite minerals upping the total to perhaps 500 different mineral species, and that was
the state of our planet four billion years ago at the dawn of life.
Stage four of mineral evolution depended on Earth's abundant store of inner heat.
Unlike Mars or Mercury, our planet is large enough, and thus has enough heat to partially
re-melt large volumes of basalt and thus produce granite.
This process of re-melting concentrates numerous rare and exotic elements, beryllium and boron,
lithium and cesium, niobium and tantalum, uranium and fluorine, which ultimately generate
hundreds of new rare and exotic minerals.
Yet such selection and concentration of unusual elements takes a lot of time, more than a
billion years by our estimates.
So the distinctive, pegmatite minerals of stage four probably didn't first start appearing
until about three and a half billion years ago, well after the origins of life.
And then comes stage five, plate tectonics, the seduction of immense slabs of wet crust
into the hot mantle, and the subsequent partial melting of those deep penetrating slabs to
generate massive volcanism at the surface, literally changed the way Earth works.
Before plate tectonics, heat flowed to the surface primarily in the form of great vertical
plumes of magma rising from the deep core mantle boundary.
These plumes transferred lots of heat in an efficient way, but I doubt they generated
lots of new minerals.
And that process may have dominated through Earth's first billion years.
However, by three billion years ago, the new lateral tectonics had taken over.
Subduction caused great volumes of crust to be reworked.
The crust is where all the exotic elements concentrate, because they have nowhere else
to go.
So plate tectonics provides a means to rework those elements, select and concentrate them.
Hundreds of new minerals appeared.
For example, accompanying the massive metal sulfide deposits, they're the largest mining
districts on Earth today.
Thanks to granite formation and plate tectonics by three billion years ago, Earth had achieved
an inventory of minerals approaching 1500 different species.
Nevertheless, until the great oxidation event, that was it.
The rise of oxygen by photosynthetic algae changed everything.
Here microbial life will be called chemo-litho-autotrophs, could only speed up mineral-forming reactions
that were already energetically favorable.
Those reactions would have occurred anyway, and microbes simply catalyzed the process.
But when microbes learned to harness the sun's energy, they could drive chemical reactions
in totally new directions.
They could employ Earth's abundant supplies of water and carbon dioxide.
They could drive their biochemical reactions to make biological molecules, and oxygen was
a waste product.
That oxygen gradually built up in concentration in the atmosphere to change the chemical state
of the surface.
Given such a radical chemical transformation of Earth's outer layers, a mineral explosion
was inevitable.
In this lecture, I want to look more closely at the rise of mineral diversity in the protozoic
ion.
A few years ago, this lecture would have been based almost entirely on speculation, informed
speculation to be sure, with sound theoretical grounding, but speculation nonetheless.
But thanks to recent and exhaustive research, we're gaining a remarkable picture of exactly
when and where mineral diversification took place, with two important conclusions.
First, it took a long time, a billion years or more, for the mineral diversification to
follow the great oxidation of it.
And second, new minerals appeared not steadily, but during short episodes of intense activity
associated with the formation of supercontinents.
Let's look in detail at some of these new data to see the evidence.
The first comprehensive mineral evolution survey of any chemical element was undertaken
by my friend and colleague Ed Gru, who's a professor at the University of Maine in
Orano.
We met Ed briefly back in lecture 23 on pigmatites.
Ed is the world's leading authority on the minerals of the rare element beryllium.
Recall that beryllium is element 4 in the periodic table.
It's surprisingly rare, and it's the first of the so-called alkaline Earth elements,
right above the more abundant magnesium and calcium.
Like magnesium and calcium, beryllium readily gives up two electrons to become a plus two
ion in crystals.
But beryllium is very small, and thus doesn't easily fit into the larger crystal sites with
six or eight surrounding oxygen atoms.
Beryllium always wants to be at the center of only four oxygen atoms, and that means
it needs its own distinctive crystal structures.
In this respect, beryllium is what's called an incompatible element.
It simply doesn't fit into ordinary rock-forming minerals, and so it becomes concentrated in
the leftover fluids.
And those are the fluids that form pigmatites during the gray Earth of stage 4 mineral evolution.
What Ed Gru has done for our understanding of stage 7 mineral evolution after the Great
Oxidation Event was even more remarkable.
First, he cataloged every known beryllium mineral.
It turns out there are 106 approved species.
Then he tracked down all the localities where each of those 106 minerals had been reported.
And then he dove into the obscure geological literature in a dozen different languages
to find out how old each mineral locality might be.
This was a massive effort.
The data are scattered through many hundreds of papers, many of them difficult to find.
But Ed was able to produce a landmark graph in which he plotted age extending back 3 billion
years on the horizontal scale and the cumulative number of beryllium minerals that had appeared
on Earth on the vertical scale.
Now, had we been asked in advance to guess what we'd find, I suppose that we would have
said a gradual rather continuous rise in the diversity of beryllium minerals through Earth
history.
That's not what Ed found.
Instead he observed very distinctive pulses of mineral forming events.
The oldest known beryllium mineral found in rocks 3 billion years old is beryll.
Recall from lecture 23 that beryll is an aluminum silicate that occurs in many pegmatites and
is the principal beryllium ore.
Aquamarine and emerald are prized colored gemstones of beryll.
A few more beryllium minerals appear before a small pulse between about 2.8 and 2.6 billion
years.
Then a much bigger pulse occurred, a tripling of the number of beryllium minerals at about
1.8 billion years.
Following that there are additional episodes at about 1 billion years and then a big increase
during the last 500 million years.
These intervals turn out to be very significant.
Ed grew followed his beryllium study with an even more ambitious project on all the
minerals of boron, element number 5.
There are well over 200 boron minerals, so this was a huge challenge to compile all
that data.
Like beryllium boron does not easily fit into any common rock forming mineral.
It adopts a plus 3 charge like aluminum, but it's too small to fit comfortably into the
crystal sites of most aluminum minerals.
One family of boron minerals, the colorful tourmaline, stands out as the oldest mineral
containing boron.
We suspect tourmaline was first because it can form at relatively low concentrations
of boron, but it's also a tough mineral that can persist as sand grains when most other
minerals weather away.
Anyway, the oldest dated boron mineral is tourmaline, which appears in rocks more than
3.5 billion years old.
All other boron minerals are more recent than tourmaline.
And just like beryllium minerals, we see pulses of mineral formation at about 2.8 billion
and at 1.8 billion as well as at 1 billion years ago.
And then in the last 500 million years, boron minerals display a very rapid diversification,
and that effect may be as much as anything a reflection of the fact that many boron minerals
weather away quickly.
In fact, dozens of boron minerals are water soluble and only occur in dry places like
Death Valley, where former salty lakes like the Great Salt Lake in Utah have evaporated.
You might recall old advertisements for 20 mule team borax, while those ads were referring
to big boron mining districts in the desert southwest of the United States.
The point is that a lot of boron minerals just couldn't survive very long and appear
only in relatively young rock formations.
So what do these episodes of mineral formation at 2.8 billion, 1.8 billion, and 1 billion
years have in common?
It turns out, they're all times during which it's now thought that supercontinents were
being assembled.
Perhaps the most astonishing occlusion of the theory of plate tectonics is that entire
continents shuffle about the surface of Earth, moving from one hemisphere to another, from
poles to the equator, over times of hundreds of millions of years.
And inevitable consequence of such continental motions is that from time to time, continents
collide.
Details of those collisions are preserved in many lines of evidence.
Paleo-magnetic studies of once molten rocks reveal the latitude and orientation of continents
at the time when those rocks cooled, so we find that continents that are now widely separated
appear to have been joined at earlier times.
Fossils tells the locations and ages of coastal beaches, of coral reefs, deep water environments,
and certain distinctive fossil species like dinosaurs and land plants of a specific age
are found on continents now widely separated, but which must have once been joined.
And continental collisions themselves have profound geological consequences that can
be mapped and dated, not the least of which are pulses of mineralization.
What these varied studies reveal is that on perhaps five separate occasions in Earth history,
most averse continental material converge in a series of collisions into a single supercontinent
surrounded by an even larger super-ocean.
As you might imagine, the details of the exact position and shape of those supercontinents
becomes increasingly uncertain the farther back in time we go.
Two lectures from now will look more closely at this supercontinent cycle and the five
major episodes of supercontinent assembly.
Continental collisions produce minerals because collisions induce melting and melting mobilizes
mineral-rich fluids.
Many of the most important ore deposits arise at these times and places of supercontinent
assembly.
Abundant granites and their associated pegmatites lie along these continental suture zones.
Indeed, the larger and as yet unanswered question might be why we don't find more mineralized
zones during the long intervening periods of supercontinent stability and then break up.
So what are these episodes that appear in Ed Gru's diagrams of beryllium and boron mineralization?
The earliest well-documented supercontinent formed from about 2.8 to 2.5 billion years
ago, when most if not all the continents clumped together to form the one gigantic supercontinent
called Kennerland.
Details difficult to sort out because rocks of that age are sparse and generally quite
altered by heat, pressure and of course time.
But mineral deposits especially in Australia, South Africa and Canada paint a fuzzy picture
of Kennerland.
The supercontinent may have been stable for only about 100 million years from 2.5 to 2.4
billion years ago.
That's just before the Great Oxidation Event.
And then the Kennerland breakup correlates with the Great Oxidation Event.
Indeed it seems likely that the increased coastline created by splitting Kennerland and
then the increased flow of nutrients from the newly exposed coastlines caused the immense
algal blooms that then caused the oxidation.
So here's a classic example of the geosphere and plate tectonics having an effect on the
biosphere which then has a huge effect on the geosphere.
That's the co-evolution of the geosphere and the biosphere.
Next came the supercontinent of Columbia, also known as NUNA, which began to assemble
about 2 billion years ago.
It's thought to have been a stable supercontinent for about 200 million years from 1.8 to 1.6
billion years ago.
And then it broke up and had separate continents, not unlike today's globe.
For perhaps 400 million years.
Roughly 1.2 billion years ago the supercontinent of Rodinia began to form.
By 1 billion years ago Rodinia was stable and lasted for a quarter of a billion years.
Another period of breakup and then isolated continents followed starting about 750 million
years ago.
All this suggests that the supercontinent cycle is clearly implicated as a key factor
in the diversification of Earth's near-surface mineralogy.
Nevertheless, life and the rise of oxygen in the atmosphere is at any doubt the number
one cause of mineral richness on Earth.
I presented some of the quantitative evidence for mineral forming power of oxygen in the
last lecture.
Most known oxide and hydroxide minerals simply cannot form without the abundant oxygen that's
been produced by life.
What about Mars?
Some of my colleagues have countered with an observation of the red planet Mars.
For some form of rusting has obviously taken place.
Isn't that evidence that Mars has been oxidized and could possess a deep mineral diversity
similar to Earth's?
What's clear is that Mars has a small amount of oxygen in its atmosphere and that's a consequence
of the photo dissociation of water.
The Sun's ultraviolet radiation causing the breakdown of water to hydrogen plus oxygen
high in the atmosphere.
Some hydrogen escapes to space so oxygen builds up in the atmosphere.
The total amount of oxygen is trivial compared to Earth.
Mars is red because it has a little bit of surface oxidation like a very thin coating
of red paint.
A little bit of oxygen in the Martian atmosphere can't penetrate very deeply into the Martian
crust.
In fact, you may recall seeing the results when Curiosity rover drilled down into the
Martian crust early in 2013, the surface is red.
But even a millimeter below the surface, the rock is dull gray, not red.
The crucial difference between Earth and Mars and presumably other small planets like it
is that Mars can't experience the dynamic circulation of oxygen-rich subsurface waters
that produces Earth's astounding mineral diversity.
Not everyone agrees that the great oxidation event marked a clear beginning of oxygen in
Earth's atmosphere.
Professor Ariel Anbar, who is a dynamic geochemist at the Arizona State University, has described
ancient records rather differently.
He titled a provocative article in the journal Science.
This is in 2007, A Whiff of Oxygen Before the Great Oxidation Event.
To the average reader, that title explicitly claims that molecular oxygen was present in
Earth's atmosphere at least locally by two and a half billion years ago or a hundred
million years before the Great Oxidation Event.
Their claim was that a local concentration of algae created a microenvironment with atmospheric
oxygen that modified the local minerals.
Anbar and co-workers studied the abundances of various oxygen-sensitive trace elements
that occur in a 200-foot thick sequence of black shales from Mt. McRae in Western Australia.
The same rock studied by Roger Summons in his quest for ancient biomolecules.
These finely layered rocks were deposited in a relatively deep, offshore environment
of an ancient ocean just about the time that Kennerland was a stable supercontinent.
The black shale appears monotonous to the eye, but these layers contain chemical surprises
when examined closely.
There's a 30-foot section of rock near the top of the shale that's enriched in two key
elements, molybdenum and rhenium.
Those elements tend to remain locked in rocks in their more reduced plus four state unless
they're oxidized to molybdenum six plus or rhenium seven plus, and that oxidation can
only occur if there's an eager electron acceptor like oxygen available.
The key here is that their more oxidized forms, both molybdenum and rhenium, they readily
dissolve in water and then they can flow down rivers and into the ocean where they concentrate
in black shales on the ocean floor.
All of us agree that these molybdenum and rhenium dating are telling us something about erosion
2.5 billion years ago.
Molybdenite is the commonest mineral of molybdenum, and as we're going to see, it often incorporates
rhenium as well.
I have a sample here with molybdenite layered on top of granite, which makes it look very
sturdy, but molybdenite is actually an exceptionally soft and easily abraded mineral similar to
graphite.
It's only one on the Moe's hardness scale.
So suppose a molybdenite bearing granite or ore body might have been exposed on an ancient
mountain slope above the sea where the Mount McRae shale was deposited, mechanical weathering
could have produced microscopic bits of soft molybdenite that were carried to the sea and
settled to the black muddy bottom that became the Mount McRae shale.
And even if the molybdenum and rhenium were oxidized at the surface, that doesn't mean
that oxygen did the deed.
Oxidation without oxygen might sound a little confusing, but Dmitry Sprygensky and I have
shown that there are plenty of ways to move and transform molybdenum, rhenium, and other
elements without invoking oxygen.
Which common molecules as sulfate, or nitrate, or even carbon dioxide could have done the
electron-accepting trick in the absence of any O2.
So the more attention-grabbing storyline that a whiff of oxygen from early photosynthetic
cells was modifying Earth's minerals even before the Great Oxidation Event seems unlikely,
especially given the evidence we've seen that there wasn't any atmospheric oxygen
before 2.4 billion years.
In fact, it turns out that even with significant atmospheric oxygen as occurred after 2.4 billion
years, that's simply not sufficient to increase mineral diversity right away.
That's because subsurface waters, not air, are necessary to dissolve, to transport, to
chemically alter, and otherwise modify the upper few thousand feet of rock.
New minerals aren't formed primarily right at the surface, though there are certainly
some new types that occurred as older rocks were weathered in air.
But most of the numerous new minerals that arose for the first time after global oxidation
formed underground in the upper mile or so of the crust.
My group is cataloged long lists of minerals, more than 200 uranium minerals, almost 400
copper minerals, and hundreds more minerals of iron, manganese, nickel, mercury, molybdenum,
many other elements that arise in this way.
Many of these minerals form when oxygen-rich waters circulate through metal-rich ore bodies.
We've also proposed that prior to the rise of oxygen, such mineral-forming reactions
simply could not have occurred.
But even long after the atmosphere had oxygen, the subsurface waters were highly reduced,
and no new minerals occurred.
Until recently, that statement was more of a conjecture than anything we could prove.
But we now have new data that makes a convincing case for how very long it takes the subsurface
to become oxidized, and thus generate new minerals.
And this data comes from the same two elements, molybdenum and rhenium, that Arielle Anbar
and his colleagues measured in the Matt McRae Shale.
I'll look at this study in much greater detail in lecture 38 when we explore some of the
surprising consequences of biological feedbacks on the mineral kingdom.
But here's a quick overview.
It turns out that that commonist molybdenum mineral, molybdenite, or molybdenum disulfide,
that's MOS2, always contains a small amount of the heavier element, rhenium.
These are two chemically very similar elements.
One is almost directly below the other in the periodic table.
The rhenium easily enters the molybdenite structure.
It turns out that the rhenium has a radioactive isotope that's ideal for dating individual
molybdenite deposits, and that's information that our geologists always want to have.
So it's rather easy to go into the vast geological literature on molybdenum mines and extract
information on both the ages of different molybdenite specimens and the rhenium contents.
Our team gathered data on hundreds of molybdenite samples from around the world, and we found
a remarkable correlation.
The oldest molybdenite samples from the Archean eon before two and a half billion years ago
have very low rhenium contents.
Samples from the protozoic eon post-dating the Great Oxidation event have on average
more rhenium, and molybdenite samples from the last half billion years of the current
eon have much higher average rhenium contents.
The trend is obvious.
Rhenium contents in molybdenites have increased dramatically over the past two and a half
billion years, and especially during the last billion years.
But why?
Well, this goes back to the fact that rhenium is only mobilized in an oxidizing environment.
Rhenium will enter molybdenite if it's transported by subsurface waters in its 7 plus state,
and then joins molybdenum.
And our data make it clear that subsurface oxidation didn't really get going until perhaps
a billion years after the Great Oxidation event.
And that's what led to the majority of mineral species found on Earth today.
And so we come back to life and oxygen released by life as the key to understanding the mineral
explosion.
By Earth's two billionth birthday, our planet had changed irreversibly.
The first dramatic changes had occurred quite a bit earlier in land as Earth's outermost
exposed rocks rusted.
By 2.4 billion years ago, oxygen-driven surface weather began to break down iron-bearing granite
and basalt into brick-red soils.
As Earth's near-surface environment changed, the land shifted its appearance from predominantly
black basalt and gray granite to red.
And from space, Earth's converging continents 2 billion years ago might have appeared something
like the modern red planet Mars, though with big blue oceans and white clouds covering most
of the surface.
Rust was perhaps the most obvious and most superficial of many profound mineralogical
changes that were taking place.
We now estimate that the Great Oxidation Event paved the way for as many as 3,000 new
mineral species.
And all of these species were previously unknown in our solar system, indeed possibly
unknown on any planet that has not evolved an oxygen-generating biosphere.
We document hundreds of new chemical compounds of uranium, of nickel, copper, manganese,
mercury that simply could not arise on a non-living world.
Many of the most beautiful crystal specimens in museums, blue and green copper minerals,
purple and magenta cobalt species, yellow, orange uranium ores, and many more, they're
signs of an evolving living world.
It's difficult to come up with any scenario by which these wonderful mineral species could
form in an anoxic environment.
And it's equally difficult to devise a way that significant oxygen can accumulate in
the atmosphere of a dead planet.
So life is directly implicated in the formation of most of Earth's more than 4,700 known mineral
species.
And this co-evolution between geology and biology is not a one-way street.
Remarkably, some of these new minerals provide life with new and unique environmental niches,
and some of the new minerals formed by oxidation provide a new source of chemical energy for
microbes.
Most way, life has continuously co-evolved with the rocks and the minerals.
Oxygen is an element of transformation, and it is the element of mineral diversity.
The molecular oxygen that's pumped out of plants and algae by photosynthesis is always
hungry for electrons, and so oxygen atoms react with all manner of minerals.
Oxygen weathers away rocks and forms nutrient-rich soils in the process.
The billion-year period after the Great Oxidation Event is also when the reign of simple single-celled
microbes called prokaryotes began to give way to more complicated single-celled organisms
called eukaryotes.
This was when cells for the first time developed a nucleus, as well as a variety of specialized
organelles.
In fact, it's now widely thought that life's simple cells of the previous billion years
may have combined to create the more complicated forms.
For example, simple cyanobacteria capable of photosynthesis could have moved inside
other cells to serve as chloroplasts, the organelle of photosynthesis in eukaryotic cells.
Similarly, mitochondria, the so-called powerhouse organelle founded all eukaryotes, are thought
to have originated as bacteria that moved inside the membrane of cells during this period.
Both chloroplasts and mitochondria have their own DNA, and there's some thought that their
move to symbiosis within a single cell may have been encouraged by a need to adapt to
the increasingly toxic conditions of an oxygen environment.
In a remarkable way, oxygen also paved the way for life's explosion onto land.
When concentrations of atmospheric oxygen first rose to significant levels more than
two billion years ago, all photosynthetic life forms had to live in the oceans.
The sun's ultraviolet radiation was too intense, and lands were absolutely barren of life.
But oxygen created Earth's ultimate sunblock, and thus paved the way for life's eventual
expansion across the globe.
You and I are not independent of oxygen's story, either, for we all experience oxygen
in the most intimate exchange.
But this very moment, with every breath, molecules of air become part of us.
Even as a small part of us becomes the air, an unending series of chemical reactions with
oxygen, our tissues are replaced over and over and over again throughout our lives.
Just as Earth's atoms recycle constantly among air, sea, and land, and all its living forms,
we are the beneficiaries of two billion years of co-evolution, a grand biological and geological
solution to the challenges of oxygen.
