Earth often undergoes change at a stately pace, measured in hundreds of millions of years.
We've just seen how that still mysterious interval from 1.85 billion to 850 million years ago
provides ample evidence for the vast scales of time and space that we have to embrace
if we're going to understand Earth history. That boring billion year interval also underscores
the inexorable processes of the ever so gradual changes that have characterized
every stage of our planet's evolution and which continue to operate today.
What's obvious from the geological record is that by 850 million years ago Earth's
near-surface environment had changed irreversibly from its state a billion years before.
The increasingly oxygenated ocean margins of the fragmenting Rodinian supercontinent teamed
with algae and other microorganisms while the dispersing continents were poised to burst with
new life. The mysterious and not so boring billion holds important lessons for us today.
Earth certainly has the potential to settle into stasis. For 100 million years or more,
our planetary home can find a stable and benign balance of its many competing forces.
Many factors have come into play, gravity and heat flow, sulfur and oxygen, water and life,
and all of those factors can find and maintain a stable equilibrium for hundreds of millions of
years. But it need not always be so. If pushed too far, Earth can become unbalanced and reach
tipping points with consequences to climate and to life that are difficult to anticipate.
Growing evidence suggests that rapid changes may disrupt the near-surface environment in a matter
of years. And that appears to be exactly what happened next. The protozoic ion, which encompass
most of the second half of Earth's history, nearly 2 billion years from 2.5 billion to 542
million years ago, was a long time interval of sharp contrasts. In its first half billion years
or so was perhaps the most newsworthy as it witnessed the great flourishing of photosynthetic
algae and the consequent rise of atmospheric oxygen, oceans transformed from their ancient
iron-rich state as the immense banded iron formations were deposited on the ocean floor.
The living world of cells also transformed with the innovation of complex cells with
nuclei, the precursors of all plants and all animals. The middle billion years of the protozoic
ion was much less eventful, though far from downright dull. And then we come to the final
frenetic 300 million years, which constitutes the tail end of the neo-protozoic era. That was
perhaps the most dynamic time interval of all the protozoic, with continental breakup and assembly,
repeated radical climate swings, epic shifts in ocean and atmosphere chemistry, and the rise
of animal life. And you might wonder how such radical changes could have all taken place in
a few hundred million years when the previous billion years was so uneventful. It turns out that
feedback loops hold the key to understanding such surprising changes. Earth systems of water,
rock, atmosphere, and life are complexly interconnected. Air, water, and land may appear
to us superficially as separate spheres, which change over very different scales of time. After
all, the weather report varies daily. Ocean shorelines change over millennia, rocks cycle over
millions of years, and supercontinents take hundreds of millions of years to assemble and
break apart. Yet every earth system affects every other in ways both obvious and also ways hidden
from view. This realization brings us to what ecologists call the law of unintended consequences,
namely when you're dealing with a complex system you can't change one characteristic
without changing other aspects and often in ways that are difficult to predict.
Let me tell you about three recent examples of the law of unintended consequences.
The most amusing of the three has to do with the rare flowering plant, the Peters Mountain
Mallow, that's only known from the forested southwestern part of Virginia. In an effort to
preserve the dwindling population of these plants, the forestry service did everything it could to
prevent forest fires from wiping out the remaining few examples. But they couldn't stop one fire from
sweeping through the area and it appeared that every last Peters Mountain Mallow was destroyed.
The assumption was that in spite of their best efforts, the plant had gone extinct.
That was until the next spring when the forest was covered by new mallows. You see, it turned
out that the Peters Mountain Mallow requires the heat of a forest fire to germinate the next generation.
By preventing forest fires, the well-meaning forestry officials were actually disrupting
the ancient life cycle of the plant. It's now widely realized that forest fires,
far from being destructive, can be essential to the health of forest ecosystems. For example,
by keeping tree falls and underbrush under control, preventing forest fires for many years can also
cause much more destructive blazes fueled by the accumulated piles of fallen dead branches.
A second, more serious example of the law of unintended consequences occurred in the Aral Sea,
which is a large body of water located in Central Asia. In the mid-20th century, the Aral Sea was
ranked among the four largest lakes in the world, with a total surface area of more than 25,000
square miles, or about the size of the state of West Virginia. Two large rivers feed the
Aral Sea in a region where the land is largely arid desert. In the 1960s, the government of what
was then the Soviet Union decided to divert some of the water in those rivers to irrigation systems
that they hoped would produce large crops of cotton for export. I suppose they thought that
taking a little water from two big rivers wouldn't have much of an effect, but it was a disaster
for several reasons. First, the irrigation system was poorly designed. The water flowed through
unlined ditches and it just disappeared into the ground with estimates that as much as 75% of the
water was lost. Then, to save the cotton farms, more water was diverted and the Aral Sea began to
shrink. To make a long and sad story short, by 2007 it was only one tenth the size that had been
a few decades earlier. The results of the shrinkage were striking. The Aral Sea fishing industry,
which had employed tens of thousands of people, simply disappeared with dozens of fishing boats
stranded high and dry in the desert. What's more, industrial waste and agricultural runoff that had
been carried into the sea became incorporated into the large salt flats that were left behind by the
receding waters. These dangerous wastes were picked up by the wind and breathed in by people
living in the area, causing major health problems. In 2010, the Secretary General of the United
Nations declared the Aral Sea one of the planet's most shocking disasters. Fortunately, in the 21st
century, the countries in the region began a program to restore the Aral Sea and the results of
their efforts are encouraging. A system of dams has allowed water levels to increase. There's been
a modest restoration of the fishing industry as well, but it's pretty shocking to think that one
of the world's largest lakes can disappear in a matter of decades through seemingly small changes.
The third and most sweeping environmental disaster is also the poster child for the law
of unintended consequences. That's the Lake Victoria disaster. This episode has even become
the focus of a documentary film called Darwin's Nightmare. Now, go back to the optimistic boom
times in Central Africa in the 1960s when beautiful Lake Victoria as the largest lake in Africa was
becoming a prime tourist destination. The millions of people who live on the shores of Lake Victoria
know firsthand about that law of unintended consequences because what was once a rich
fishing ground and the source of most of their protein has been radically altered by the introduction
of a single new species, denial perch. Sport fishermen seeking a greater challenge for the
growing tourist market introduced this large aggressive predator into the lake. The perch thrive
and rapidly ate up populations of smaller fish that not only provided an essential part of the
local diet, but also controlled populations of algae and parasite-bearing snails. Unchecked,
live algae spread over the lake surface while dead algae sank, decayed, and consumed oxygen
in deeper water where fish used to live. Snails have also multiplied and have become a serious
health hazard because they carry parasites that can affect humans. Native fishermen now rely on
Nile perch, which weigh up to several hundred pounds each rather than smaller fish, but this
change carries its own ecological consequences. Unlike the small fish that were sun-dried,
Nile perch must be roasted over fires. Lake Victoria's shoreline each year stripped of
more trees for this purpose is suffering extensive soil erosion and further unanticipated changes
to the lake's ecosystem. A single new species has thus drastically altered a vast ecosystem.
Okay, we've looked at three examples of complex systems and the law of unintended
consequences, the Peters Mountain Mallow, the Aral Sea, and Lake Victoria. What do they have in
common and what lessons can we learn about earth? Well, first of all, they were all set in motion
by human actions and that clearly didn't happen to our planet hundreds of millions of years ago,
but more generally in each instance a complex system was disrupted by changing just one thing
and that one change, something as small as introducing one new species or
diverting a part of a river, led to a cascade of consequences. It's possible to analyze these kinds
of system change in terms of positive and negative feedback loops as well as tipping points.
Let's look at a house which serves as useful, though not an exact metaphor for our home planet.
Like earth, a house is a complex system with many interconnected parts
and when you buy a house you should find out many things. When was it built, for example,
as well as the age and configuration of any additions or major renovations? You want to obtain
details about the materials used in the construction of your house as well as information about their
installation from the foundation to the roof. Of course, it's essential to learn about the plumbing
system and the source of water as well as the air handling system, the furnace, the air condition,
and the sources of energy. If you're a smart home buyer you'll also find out about all kinds of
potential risks from fire, from carbon monoxide, and there's termites and carpenter ants, there's
radon, asbestos, leaks, mold. You may have noticed that this homeowner checklist is a good metaphor
for the way geologists think about earth. We want to understand earth's origins and major
transitions, the nature of the rocks and minerals, the movement of water and air, the sources of
energy, the risk from geological hazards. Your house also displays many of the same complex
behaviors that we see at the scale of earth because different systems are interconnected
in sometimes surprising and unexpected ways through negative and positive feedback loops.
These two terms mean almost the opposite of what you might guess. Consider the familiar example of a
cold winter day. As temperature drops below your comfort level, the thermostat responds by turning
on the furnace and the temperature rises for a time. Once the house warms up, the thermostat
senses that the change is complete and the furnace shuts off by the same token on hot summer days,
the air conditioner trips on if the inside temperature rises too high and then shuts off when
things have cooled down. These are negative feedback loops where changes in your house's
temperature are linked to processes that mitigate the changes. So in a negative feedback loop,
change is met and canceled out by the negative of the initial change. In a similar way, earth
operates through the operation of many negative feedback loops that help the planet maintain
climate in a more or less narrow range of conditions of temperature, of humidity,
composition, at and near the surface. So for example, warming oceans results in more clouds,
which reflect sunlight back into space and cool the oceans. Likewise, rising concentrations of
atmospheric carbon dioxide cause global warming. The warming accelerates rock weathering, but
rock weathering gradually consumes excess carbon dioxide and leads in turn to cooling.
On the other hand, houses occasionally display self-reinforcing or positive feedback. When the
increase or decrease in some environmental condition is amplified, ironically, these so-called
positive feedbacks often have very bad or unpleasant consequences. Perhaps the most familiar example
is a fire that starts to burn out of control. As long as a fire is confined in a fireplace,
it behaves in a more or less stable and predictable way. However, if uncontrolled,
the growing heat of a raging fire causes the fire to spread even more rapidly.
And a similar effect can occur with cold. Imagine what happens if your heating system
fails on a cold winter day. The water pipes can freeze and burst, which causes cold water to
flood your home, making the house even colder and less livable. Many of the greatest uncertainties
regarding Earth's changing climate today focus on this kind of potential positive feedback loops,
where one change might trigger even bigger cascading effects. Eventually, such a complex
system out of balance can reach a so-called tipping point, where a set of reinforcing changes push
the entire system into an entirely new state. So, for example, rising sea levels will lead
to coastal flooding, which might result in more evaporation and more rainfall, which in turn
might cause even more coastal flooding. A warming ocean is likely to cause the widespread melting
of methane-rich ice at and beneath the ocean floor, which could add the greenhouse gas methane to
the atmosphere and cause even more warming, which could release even more methane.
It's difficult to predict when and how extensive such climate tipping points might be, but we have
only to look at the runaway greenhouse effect of our neighboring planet Venus with its thick
carbon dioxide atmosphere and 900-degree Fahrenheit surface temperatures to see the
potentially catastrophic effects of positive feedback.
Venus likely reached its methane tipping point very early in this history,
perhaps within the first 100 million years, and it has never recovered.
Like a house, Earth can enjoy long periods of relative stability and gradual drift,
or it can experience sudden and dramatic change that may disrupt ecosystems worldwide.
The boring billion, to the extent that it was really boring, must have been a consequence
of many negative feedbacks that more or less moderated the near-surface environment and
held major changes in check. Naturally, change did happen. Nothing in Earth's surface could stop
plate tectonics, which is driven by the second law of thermodynamics, and the imperative that
heat must find a way to move from Earth's hot core to the cool surface. Nevertheless, in spite
of ongoing plate tectonics activity, including the great slow-motion migrations of land masses
and the assembly and breakup of supercontinents, Earth's climate during the interval that encompassed
the mesoproterozoic era seems to have been fairly stable.
There's no evidence for great ice ages, and it appears that the chemistry of the oceans
remained both anoxic and sulfur-rich. The paleontological record similarly shows
nothing that would suggest that life evolved in any new characteristics with planetary
consequences comparable to photosynthesis. Scientists who specialize in studying rocks
of this age conclude that there weren't any major tipping points to alter the atmosphere,
the continents, or the oceans between 1.85 billion and 850 million years ago.
That age of stability was about to change with the breakup of Rodinia about 850 million years ago.
Earth was about to reach its first tipping point in a long time, and the next few hundred million
years experienced some of the most remarkably rapid and extreme near-surface fluctuations in our
planet's history. About 850 million years ago, most of Earth's many continental masses were
still clumped together near the equator in the dry and utterly lifeless Rodinia supercontinent.
The immense ocean of Mirovia, perhaps only punctuated by a few isolated arcs of volcanic
islands, surrounded this denuded rusty red mega-continent. The inhospitable atmosphere
contained only a small fraction of today's oxygen budget, too little to form much of an
ultraviolet protective ozone layer. So if you were to travel in time to that ancient red land,
and if you had a reliable supply of oxygen and very strong sunblock, you might be able to survive
along the coast, and you'd have a bland diet of algae, but be assured that life would be
desperately difficult on that desolate Neoproterozoic world.
Like all supercontinents before and since, Rodinia could not last. The great equatorial land mass
was like a heat-trapping lid, and thermal energy continuously built up, melting and thinning
the crust and eventually rifting the supercontinent into more manageable fragments. In the aftermath
of the breakup, a combination of events conspired to push climates to previously unknown extremes.
For most of Earth's history, the climate has been moderated by negative feedbacks.
Climates have varied throughout Earth's history, to be sure with warmer times of limited ice caps
and glaciers and high sea levels, and other times of extensive glacial ice and low sea levels.
But there's no evidence that these fluctuations reached life-threatening extremes prior to 850
million years ago. However, beginning about 850 million years ago, the climate was very
important. Several changes disrupted the former equilibrium and pushed Earth to a climatic
tipping point. The most important global transformation was the gradual fragmentation
of equatorial Rodinia. The first of several rifts was 850 million years ago, when the Congo and
Kalahari Kraitans, what are now parts of Southern Africa, began to separate to the southwest of
the otherwise intact supercontinent. About 800 million years ago, a second small rift zone
isolated the West African Kraitan, which appears to have moved in a southerly direction from the
main landmass. Rodinia's breakup had accelerated by 750 million years ago, when extensive volcanism
and flows of basaltic lava reveal major new cracks in the crust. The supercontinent basically split
down the middle north to south as a great rift zone separated Ur to the west and continental
clustering of Laurentia, Baltica, Amazonia and other smaller Kraitans to the east. Rifting on a
global scale had huge consequences, with rifting came tens of thousands of miles of new coastline
and an associated acceleration of coastal erosion and sedimentation. Dynamic sedimentary basins
formed in the growing seas between diverging continents, and for the first time in a long time
the rock record picks up again. That almost complete cessation of sedimentary rock deposition
that had begun in the Mesopotamia era had lasted almost a quarter of a billion years,
that is for the entire lifetime of Rodinia. And with the new pulse of sediments came mineral
nutrients and when nutrients, photosynthetic microbial life, green and purple and brown algae,
flourished in the shifting, fragmenting world. The ocean, which had long limited life expansion
by its meager store of phosphate, molybdenum, manganese, iron, other essential elements experienced
a blossoming as never before. Paleontologists tell the story of a time of shallow sandy tidal
zones with thick mats of slimy green filaments and offshore waters choked with smelly algal rafts.
The tectonic events associated with Rodinia's destruction conspired to alter Earth's oceans,
atmosphere, and climate. And here we see the dramatic and unexpected intertwined consequences
of change. Atmospheric oxygen rose in part because of the profligate coastal algal blooms,
but also in a positive feedback because increased production of algal biomass
led to rapid burial of organic carbon. Okay, there's a tricky sequence of causes and effects here.
Throughout Earth's history, carbon-rich biomass has been one of the most important consumers
of oxygen. The more biomass that's produced in decay, the faster oxygen is consumed.
You can think of modern forest fires as representing an unusually rapid and efficient
way of how biomass that isn't buried can also consume oxygen. By the same token,
as carbon-rich black biomass that is materials like coal or oil are buried more quickly,
the more quickly oxygen levels also rise. Think of it this way. There's a certain
large number of oxygen atoms in the crust available to make rocks or to make atmosphere.
Those oxygen atoms can be bonded to carbon atoms in the forms of carbon dioxide gas in
the atmosphere and limestone and rocks, or they can bond to each other as atmospheric oxygen.
The more carbon atoms that are buried as black biomass, the more oxygen atoms are left over
to bind in themselves and form the oxygen molecules we breathe. But how can we possibly
know if biomass was buried and if oxygen levels rose 800 million years ago?
Rocks almost never preserve a record of the atmosphere and trapped gas bubbles,
so there's no direct measurement possible. But it turns out that limestone, which precipitates as
carbon-rich mineral layers on the shallow ocean floor, preserves a subtle telltale record of
the atmosphere. It's the stable carbon isotopes in the limestone that point to changes in the
production rate of algae. Life's essential chemical reactions, such as the conversion of
water and carbon dioxide to sugar in photosynthesis, almost always concentrates the lighter isotope
carbon-12 relative to the heavier carbon-13. Consequently, the carbon in biomass, and in
the protozoic ion, when I say biomass, I'm really saying algae, whether it's dead or alive,
is always isotably light compared to the inorganic carbon in limestone.
During normal times, when microbial life flourishes and light carbon is depleted from the oceans,
limestone from this time displays a complementary heavy isotope signature. At times of unusually
rapid biomass burial, as more of the lighter carbon isotope is systematically removed from
the oceans, the leftover carbon that makes limestone is even heavier on average. Sure enough,
limestone deposited along the shores of fragmenting rodentia 790 to 740 million years ago is unusually
heavy, in some cases more than 1% more massive than in ordinary times. That means that algae must
have bloomed far and wide and been buried at an unprecedented rate. And here we see the
feedbacks that ultimately affected Earth's climate. The climate that had been stable for a
billion or more years, microbial life consumes that greenhouse gas carbon dioxide, which is
constantly pumped into the atmosphere by volcanoes. In normal times, CO2 inputs the atmosphere from
volcanoes and other deep sources pretty much balance the carbon dioxide that's consumed by
photosynthetic life, plus the weathering of rocks, plus the uptake of CO2 by the oceans.
That's a global balance that keeps atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations relatively constant.
It's not always a perfect balance. Just over the past century, for example, atmospheric CO2
has been rising steadily. However, during the neoproterozoic era, the opposite happened. Pulsars
of rapid algal growth consumed carbon dioxide at unprecedented rates, so CO2 levels may have dropped
to their lowest levels in more than a billion years. Indeed, possibly the lowest levels in
Earth history up to that point. This change rapidly reduced the contributions of carbon dioxide to
greenhouse warming. For a time, warming would have enhanced rainfall and coastal weathering,
which added more nutrients to promote even more algal growth. So that's one feedback loop that
ultimately had the effect of reducing the amount of atmospheric carbon dioxide and thus
cooling the planet. There were probably a number of other climate-altering feedback loops as well,
each of which interacted with the algal bloom story in ways that aren't yet completely obvious.
One of these that may have accelerated Earth's cooling is a fascinating and rather convoluted
feedback loop related to both plate tectonics and to CO2. The rifting of Rodinia must have
resulted in tens of thousands of miles of new sea floor volcanoes, not unlike the 40,000 miles or so
of mid-ocean ridges on Earth today. These volcanoes manufactured hot ocean crust that's less dense
and therefore more buoyant than old cold ocean crust. Now such hot, relatively buoyant crust
must have significantly raised sea levels compared to before. It follows logically that the period
after 750 million years ago when Rodinia was fully broken up and rifting was proceeding all
around the globe was probably a time of extensive flooding and shallow inland seas. And here we
need a chain of causes and effects. Indulin seas mean more evaporation and increased rainfall on the
continents. More rainfall leads to more rapid weathering of exposed rocks along the shoreline
and the burial of those weathering products in offshore sediments. But rock weathering rapidly
consumes the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide and those lower CO2 levels in turn can lead to more
global cooling. And here we see how integrated the Earth system is. Changes in plate tectonics,
in ocean chemistry, in sedimentation, in microbial life, and in climate are interdependent.
You simply cannot study any one attribute of Earth in isolation from the others. It must be
obvious that these stories of the distant past stories of a planet that would be all but unrecognizable
to us if we could visit its alien surface hold powerful lessons for us today. Feedback loops
have been very much in play throughout Earth's history and remain so in our modern world.
The details of such complex feedback loops hundreds of millions of years ago are still being resolved
and new ever more intricate chains of causes and effects are being proposed all the time.
But it's clear that the neoproterozoic Earth, after its long period of stability,
was poised for epic changes.
