By now, you've probably sensed that a lot of controversies swirl around the study of
ancient Earth, the composition of the oceans and atmosphere, the timing and nature of life's
origins, the extent of land versus water, and many other subjects provoke heated debates
at conferences and in publications.
And in this climate of uncertainty, the story of Earth's earliest land masses stands out.
I doubt if anyone has the nerve to commit fully to more than a sketch map of Earth's
surface three billion years ago, at least not yet.
There is some tantalizing evidence for the first continent-sized land mass called Urr
that may have formed about 3.1 billion years ago from several scattered, cratonic pieces
of what are now South Africa, Australia, India, and Madagascar.
It's also sometimes called Valbara for two of its cratons, Cap Val, now in South Africa,
and Pilbara, now in Western Australia.
One interpretation of paleomagnetic data from all of these Urr-forming regions is that what
are now separate cratons were once sutured together and remained that way for most of
Earth's history.
It appears that their movements across the globe were virtually parallel for more than
two billion years, and thus they were probably all linked together.
Indeed, magnetic data suggests that what was at least the core of the continent of Urr
may have persisted for almost three billion years, and only began to split apart about
two hundred million years ago.
The earliest true supercontinent, that is the earliest single land mass that appears to
have incorporated most of the cratons, has been dubbed Kennerland after the ancient Kennoran
Pluton that it incorporates.
Kennerland is thought to have formed about 2.7 billion years ago from the continent of
Urr and lots of other smaller pieces.
It's fairly easy to date this assembly interval because each time one craton collided with
another a suture zone was formed, while epic compressional forces pushed up a new mountain
range and generated magmas that reveal rock ages.
First features are found clustered in rocks around the world with ages between 2.7 and
2.5 billion years old.
This interval suggests a sequential growth of the supercontinent.
Paleo-magnetic data also reveal that Kennerland was at low latitude.
It probably straddled the equator for most of its period of assembly and stability.
Of course, large land masses with mountain ranges like Kennerland also mean episodes
of large-scale erosion and the first great accumulations of thick sediment formations
along the continental margins.
The character of erosion 2.5 billion years ago was probably rather different from today.
Most early earth modelers describe an ancient atmosphere in which oxygen was totally absent,
while carbon dioxide levels may have been hundreds or thousands of times greater than
in our time.
If so, then rain would have fallen as drops of carbonic acid that ate away at the land
and transformed hard rocks to soft clays.
Rivers carried these clay minerals into the shallow coastal slopes of the encircling
ocean where thick delta-like wedges of soft muddy sediments accumulated.
By about 2.5 billion years ago, about the same time that oxygen began to accumulate
in the atmosphere, Kennerland experienced the inevitable flipside of supercontinent formation.
Geomagnetic data revealed the divergence of air from other cratons as Kennerland began
its protracted period of fragmentation.
The numerous cratonic pieces were scattered from the equator to the poles, newly opened
shallow seas between the diverging pieces led for a time to thick deposits of diagnostic
shallow marine sediments.
In many respects, with the breakup of Kennerland, Earth's geography 2 billion years ago was
similar to today in that the continents were widely dispersed around the globe with several
intervening oceans.
So it was that by 2 billion years ago the supercontinent cycle was in full swing and
that made the boring billion a lot less boring.
The next supercontinent episode, and one a lot more sharply in focus than Kennerland
thanks to all of the younger and much better preserved suites of rocks, began about 2 billion
years ago at a time when Earth boasted at least 5 separate continent-sized landmasses.
The largest among these was the Laurentian supercreton, which was a conglomeration thought
to incorporate at least half a dozen cratons.
Laurentia was thousands of miles across and it encompassed much of what is now central
and eastern North America, in fact specialists in ancient landmasses sometimes refer to
this clustering of cratons as the United Plates of America.
A second large landmass separated from Laurentia by a substantial ocean was Ur and the much
smaller Baltica and Ukrainian cratons which now form the core of Eastern Europe and cratons
representing what are parts now of South America, China and Africa were also large islands approaching
continental size.
Paleo-magnetic data and a number of mountain belts suggest that between 2 and 1.8 billion
years ago these varied lands collided at convergent plate boundaries.
The resulting supercontinent has been variously named Columbia or Nina or Nuna or Hudson land
though my sense is that Columbia which is named based on persuasive geological evidence
from the vicinity of the Columbia River along the Washington-Oregon border that seems to
be winning out.
This vast barren land roughly estimated to have been 8,000 miles long from north to south
and 3,000 miles wide from east to west incorporated almost all of Earth's cratons.
In other words at the onset of the boring billion virtually all of Earth's cratons were
gathered within an area roughly the width of South America and the length of North and
South America combined.
Well as you can imagine the problem of arranging 30 plus cratonic fragments into one extinct
supercontinent is daunting.
Think about it this way today the typical plate moves about 2 inches per year and rates may
have been significantly higher 2 billion years ago when Earth's interior had more thermal
energy.
So simply multiplying 2 inches per year times 2 billion years that's 4 billion inches or
more than 63,000 miles.
In effect each craton has traveled a distance equivalent to 2 and a half times around the
globe and each craton has taken a path that's different erratic.
That's why it's not at all surprising that multiple models compete for acceptance.
In the case of the Colombian supercontinent two rather different stories were proposed
almost simultaneously in 2002.
One model was published by G. Chemist John Rogers of the University of North Carolina
and his colleague Indian geologist Santosh Madhava who is now based at Koichi University
in Japan.
They propose that Lorencia what is now most of North America form the core of Colombia.
In their view the continent of Earth was sutured to the west coast of Lorencia while portions
of Siberia, Greenland and Baltica were positioned to the north.
And parts of what are now Brazil and West Africa lay to the southeast.
Remember they had to keep track of the positions of more than 30 cratons.
And then in the same year, Guxian Jiao of the University of Hong Kong and several colleagues
came up with a somewhat different configuration in which Lorencia has Baltica sutured to its
east instead of its north coast while Lorencia's west coast has east Antarctica and China instead
of Ur.
Now given the great age of Colombia what must be seen is the preliminary nature of these
reconstructions the agreement between the two science teams is actually quite remarkably
good.
Nevertheless, I'm sure that many debates will arise as the locations of one craton or
another are shuffled and debated.
But most experts do agree on was that by 1.85 billion years ago with the assembly of Colombia
the stage was set for the boring billion.
Whatever the exact details of the Colombian supercontinent we are fairly confident that
the interior of the landmass was a hot dry terrain with a great expanse of rusty red
desert.
There was no vegetation and certainly no animals as multi cellular life hadn't yet appeared.
Earth may have appeared as a strangely lopsided world with its one great reddish colored landmass
surrounded by an even more expansive as yet unnamed blue super ocean.
With all the continents concentrated together near the equator it's likely that the poles
held only modest amounts of ice.
With minimal ice caps the ocean levels would have been correspondingly high maybe even
high enough to invade some coastal regions with shallow inland seas.
So that's the great equatorial Colombian supercontinent which is supposedly the starting point for
the dullest time in Earth history.
But what exactly does dull mean in this context?
What characteristics of our planet were stable for so long?
Was it global climate and rainfall?
Or the nature and distribution of life?
Or the composition of the ocean?
Or the atmosphere?
And if little change did occur over a very long period more than a billion years ago
how could we be sure?
What measurements would we make and what uncertainties would remain?
I want to tell you about the research of Professor Linda Kaye at the University of Tennessee in
Knoxville who is one of the few scientists who has chosen to specialize in rock formations
that were deposited between 1.85 billion and 850 million years ago.
She did her undergraduate degree at MIT working with John Grotsinger who is a leader in the
study of Earth's oldest rocks from before 2 billion years.
Then her PhD advisor at Harvard was paleontologist Andy Knoll who has made fundamental contributions
to our understanding of life's evolution particularly over the last billion years.
So Linda Kaye was in a unique position to notice that the 2 billion year old Earth described
by Grotsinger was strikingly different from the 850 million year old Earth described by
Knoll.
She concluded that something interesting must have happened during the Boring Billion.
And so she is devoted a significant portion of her career to investigating the Mesoprotorozoic
era.
That's the 600 million year span from 1.6 to 1 billion years ago.
As Linda Kaye puts it, the Boring Billion is fascinating for one of two possible reasons.
One possibility is that it was a time of big changes and we've simply missed something
profound.
If so, then we have much to learn about how to read those old rocks.
We have to invent new ways to study Earth's geological record because if Earth did evolve
in dramatic ways, then some kind of record of those changes must have been preserved in
the subtleties of isotopes or trace elements or distributions of minerals or maybe fossils.
On the other hand, if the Mesoprotorozoic is in fact part of a billion year interval of
little change, then that too is remarkable.
We've seen that change is the central theme of Earth's story, so a billion years without
any significant transitions in the near-surface environments would represent something unique.
Is it really possible for Earth to experience a billion years when all the feedbacks of
climate and life were in such perfect, harmonious balance?
Linda Kaye's description of the Mesoprotorozoic centers around Earth's dynamic surface and
the fact that its plate teaconic shifts continents, Earth's behavior changes.
It's not simply that its land masses constantly shuffle, collide, split, suture.
Our globe looks radically different every hundred million years or so.
On the most superficial sense, oceans open and close up, mountain ranges rise up, they
erode away, and the number and shapes of continents keeps shifting.
What's really significant is what these surface changes do to alter dynamic processes at and
near the surface.
The boring billion began with the Colombian supercontinent as a lone and relatively long-lived
supercontinent that persisted more or less intact from 1.8 to 1.5 billion years ago.
However, just because there was one single large land mass, that doesn't mean that plate
tectonics had stopped.
One notable feature of supercontinents is that they continue to grow slowly around their
edges because ocean plates subduct under their margins and new volcanoes rise just inland
near the coast.
Today a good example of this coastal expansion can be seen along the Pacific Northwest coast
where such majestic and potentially dangerous volcanoes as Mount Rainier, Mount Hood, Mount
Adams, and Mount St. Helens are still active.
So it's certain that some portions of the Columbia coastline were similarly active.
And it's also certain that even more continental crust was added to Columbia as it experienced
episodic rifting and ultimately break up into smaller continents and islands.
A big land mass like Columbia traps mantle heat and must eventually crack and fragment.
About 1.6 billion years ago, the continent of Ur began to split off from Laurentia and
the rest of Columbia moving to the west.
The newly formed ocean basin between Ur and Laurentia saw the deposition of a massive
sedimentary sequence with layers of sand and mud that reached amazing thicknesses of more
than 10 miles.
You can see the remains of this epic deposit today as prominent layered outcrops that decorate
much of western Canada and western Montana in the United States.
This thick sequence of rocks is called the Belt Purcell Supergroup and it underscores
how new continental rocks are formed even as supercontinents split apart and erode.
The rifting of the Colombian supercontinent into two diverging continents had other consequences
as well.
Laurentia and Ur were still more or less at the equator and that means there were still
no continents at the poles, which in turn means that there probably wasn't any significant
ice buildup at the poles.
We have to conclude that ocean levels were still relatively high.
Indeed, based on sediments formed at that time, we know that much of Laurentia's newly
exposed west coast was flooded by shallow seas.
Unlike today when about 30% of the globe is land, it's likely that less than a quarter
of Earth's surface was dry and that state persisted for perhaps 200 million years as
thick sediment formations accumulated in shallow waters around the globe.
No ice also means no glaciers.
So the interval from 1.6 to 1.4 billion years lacks in such general glacier remains as piles
of ice-rounded cobbles and boulders, layers of rock powder that are found in most other
geological ages.
So it's evident that as Columbia broke apart, supposedly dull mesoproterozoics saw a great
deal of change, even if those changes were geologically familiar.
But that's not the end of the supercontinent cycle during the boring billion.
The fragments of Columbia scattered across the globe for perhaps 200 million years, but
a collection of continents can only diverge for so long before they start to converge
once again.
So it was that about 1.3 billion years ago, Ur, Laurentia, and other mesoproterozoic
continents began to reassemble into a new supercontinent called Rodinia, named for the Russian word
for motherland or birthplace.
The evidence here is strong.
There's a worldwide pulse of mountain building events preserved in rocks formed between 1.3
and 1.1 billion years ago.
In Europe, in Asia, in North America, each of those mountain ranges represents a suture
where two converging continents collided and crumpled.
You won't be surprised to learn that the exact geography of Rodinia is still a matter of
some debate, but there are a lot of constraints on any model, including geological and paleomagnetic
data and the arrangement of cratons on today's globe.
One area of agreement is that the Rodinian supercontinent was located near the equator
with Laurentia, what is now most in North America, at the center.
And significant fragments of what are now other continents accreted to the North, South,
East, and West.
A widely-sided model has Baltica and portions of what are now Brazil and West Africa to
the Southeast, with additional fragments of what is now South America to the South, portions
of Africa to the Southwest.
However, at this stage, I think it's safe to say that the relative positions of much
of what is now Australia, Antarctica, Siberia, and China are uncertain.
Rodinia seems to be distinctive in one important respect.
All earlier supercontinents were probably incomplete.
That is, they may well have been one or more large, isolated big islands, something like
a smaller version of Australia or Antarctica.
The evidence comes from minor sediments that represent coastal sedimentary deposits that
formed during the period of Colombia's presumed stability about 1.6 billion years ago.
However, a curious lack of similar sedimentary evidence suggests that once Rodinia was completely
assembled about 1.1 billion years ago, virtually all of Earth's land was clustered tightly
together.
This circumstance results in a 250-million-year interval between about 1.1 billion and 850
million years ago, unlike any other in Earth's history, at least going back more than 2 billion
years.
Basically, there are no sedimentary rocks from that age range.
That lack points to the fact that there were probably no shallow seas between continents
of the type that saw the deposition of the 1.6 billion-year-old built personal supergroup.
That's why geologists have concluded that all of the continents must have fit neatly
together, and that there weren't any large inland seas, so you can easily imagine a
hot, dry, equatorial supercontinent of Rodinia with a desert-like interior, not unlike Australia
today.
Think of that. For a quarter of a billion years, the sedimentary rock cycle basically
shut down.
So now we see that from a plate tectonics point of view, the boring billion was pretty
intense. Between 1.8 billion and 850 million years ago, two supercontinents, Colombia and
then Rodinia, were assembled, each producing a dozen mountain ranges by continental collisions,
and in between those two great gatherings of lands, when the Colombian supercontinent
rifted apart, we find some of Earth's most impressive sedimentary rock deposits. That's
a significant amount of geological change for a boring time interval.
And so far, we've only looked at one quarter of Earth's surface. That's solid land.
Whatever the exact geometry of the continents, every expert is in agreement that the supercontinent
Rodinia must have been completely surrounded by a much, much larger super-ocean. This ancient
globe encircling body has been named Merovia, after the Russian word for global. If in fact
the Mesoproterozoic era was boring, then Merovia is the principal reason why.
Think back to the previous half billion years, when the Great Oxidation Event, which was
a pivotal geological transition, but was primarily a time of changes in atmospheric chemistry.
Earth's atmosphere went from having essentially no oxygen, to maybe a percent or two.
That's an epic chemical change as far as the surface environment goes, but to Earth's
vast oceans, such a change in the composition of the atmosphere was insignificant, because
the oceans contain more than 250 times the mass of the atmosphere. A small change in
the composition of the atmosphere, even a 1% increase in oxygen, can't have an immediate
effect on ocean chemistry. It takes a very long time for oceans to change, in this case,
about a billion years. It's not possible to measure directly the composition of the
ancient oceans, so geochemists who want to understand ocean history study rocks and
minerals that formed in these oceans. They measure a host of chemical elements and their
isotopes, because the oceans hold at least minor quantities of almost every element in
the periodic table. The details of all that chemistry can be quite overwhelming, but will
focus on five key elements, each of which tells us something about how oceans change
through time. The main storyline is provided by oxygen, sulfur, and nitrogen, all of which
are found in the atmosphere and play key roles in life, as well as the metals, iron, and
molybdenum. Let's put this in perspective by thinking about what came before and just
after the boring billion. Prior to the Great Oxidation event 2.4 billion years ago, the
oceans were rich in dissolved iron, but iron could only have been maintained if the water
column was utterly devoid of oxygen or other oxidants, because oxidants would have caused
iron oxides to precipitate. The oceans also had to be low in sulfur, because sulfur and
iron would have precipitated out as the iron sulfide pyrite. The atmospheric changes 2.4
billion years ago altered the oceans' iron cycle in two significant ways. Some iron must
have been removed as iron oxides in shallow coastal waters, both directly by reaction
with oxygen or indirectly as oxidized weathering products washed into the sea from the land.
In addition, atmospheric oxygen rapidly weathered in eroded sulfur-bearing minerals, which
flowed into the oceans and also reacted with iron. In combination, these chemical changes
triggered the massive deposition of so-called banded iron formation, commonly known as biffs.
We discussed these distinctive ocean floor sediments when looking at how the living earth
of 3.5 billion years ago already featured layer upon layer of red and black iron minerals.
You may have seen them used as ornamental stone, and they represent most of the world's
easily accessible iron ore reserves. Biffs didn't form all at once. 2.4 billion years
ago, the oceans held a lot of iron, so biff deposition continued episodically for another
600 million years or so. Anyway, by the time we get to the boring billion 1.85 billion
years ago, the oceans were still anoxic, but they had lost most of their dissolved iron.
Now, let's fast forward about a billion years and compare. By 800 million years ago, it
appears that earth's oceans were pretty much oxygen-rich from top to bottom. The crux of
the boring billion is what happened to the oceans in between. That's the reason this
time has been called the Intermediate Ocean. In 1998, geologist Donald Canfield at the
University of Southern Denmark offered the fascinating proposition that sulfur, not oxygen,
played the central role in earth's changing ocean. In fact, lots of us in the field now
refer to a sulfur-dominated mesoproterozoic ocean as the Canfield Ocean. Canfield's clever
thesis appeared in the December 3rd issue of Nature after almost a year's delay by initially
reluctant reviewers. It was titled A New Model for Proterozoic Ocean Chemistry, and that short
paper transformed the way many of us think about the nature of earth's oceans through
deep time. The basic idea is simple. First, the great oxidation event produced enough
oxygen to influence gradually the distribution of many oxygen-sensitive elements, including
iron, which was rather quickly stripped out of the water column and deposited as biffs.
But there wasn't nearly enough oxygen in the air to change the chemistry of the oceans
all at once. One of the first big chemical changes was that enhanced weathering and oxidation
of minerals on the land, and that introduced lots of sulfur in the form of sulfate runoff
into the oceans. Hence, the intermediate ocean lost its iron, was still poured oxygen unlike
today, but gradually became enriched in sulfur. And it took a billion years for oxygen from
the atmosphere to displace the sulfur. Once you know what to look for, there's lots of
evidence to support this idea. For one thing, the fossil record reinforces the view of a
static intermediate ocean with equally static biological evolution. I find it wonderful
that some rocks deposited between two and one billion years ago preserved microscopic
fossils of amazing quality. In North America, we have the 1.9 billion-year-old gun-flint
chaired. In Northern China, the 1.4 to 1.5 billion-year-old Gaoyuzhang formation, and
in the Euro mountains of Russia, the 1.2 billion-year-old Avzion formation all contain minute
fossil microbes that are so perfectly preserved that you can see some in various stages of cell
division. These cells look exactly like modern living cells, but in spite of their amazing
preservation, there's absolutely nothing novel about the life from that time in history. Cells
from that billion-year interval look the same as those that came long before, and those that came
long after. And I think that's because the long period of the anoxic, sulfitic intermediate ocean
brought both good news and bad news to life. On the one hand, the influx of sulfate was a
positive thing as it provided an excellent source of energy for some microbes that gained energy
by reducing the sulfate to sulfide, which is a molecule of nothing but two sulfur atoms. Many
hints persist in the fossil record, including distinctive molecular biomarkers and sulfur
isotope data that point to thriving coastal populations of green and purple sulfur bacteria
in the mesoproterozoic era. Now, similar sulfur-eating microbes persist today in some anoxic
environments where they produce organic sulfur compounds that, by the way, they just smell awful.
Linda Kay likes to joke that the mesoproterozoic was the smelliest time on earth. That's kind of
a riff on Roger Buick's dullest time on earth life. When was it smelly, I once asked her,
and she replied, I think it was smelly the whole time. Well, the really bad news for life was its
absolute reliance on the element nitrogen. The only readily available source of nitrogen
on earth is nitrogen gas. That's N2 in the atmosphere. About 80 percent of the atmosphere
today and an even higher percentage, one and a half billion years ago. The problem is that life
can't use nitrogen gas. Instead, cells require nitrogen in its chemically reduced form called
ammonia or NH3. Out of necessity, life has evolved a clever protein, an enzyme called nitrogenase,
which takes nitrogen, the gas form, and converts it to ammonia. But there's a big problem. The
nitrogenous enzyme depends on a cluster of atoms containing sulfur plus a metal. And that metal
is either iron or molybdenum. But neither of those metals was widely available in the intermediate
ocean. Iron had been almost completely removed during the formation of biffs. And molybdenum,
which is readily available in the modern ocean, has an affinity for sulfur as well as oxygen,
is only soluble in water when the water is relatively oxidized. And during that anoxic
time of the intermediate ocean, effectively during the entire boring billion, both molybdenum and iron
were only in the oceans along weathering coastlines in relatively shallow water.
Don Canfield's Sulfide Ocean has been followed by a stream of publications linking mesoproterozoic
geochemistry, paleontology, and tectonics. A couple of decades ago, specialists in those disciplines
didn't always have a lot to say to each other, but today the fields are inextricably linked.
And we now see the core reason why the boring billion was a time of little change. It took a
billion years for the oceans to become oxygenated. Meanwhile, life was bathed in sulfur and starved
for nitrogen under intense pressure to adapt, barely hanging on in the narrow coastal zone of the
continents. Next time we'll see how a complex collection of causes including moving continents,
microbes, and sedimentary rocks finally brought the boring smelly billion to an end.
