As we approach the most recent periods of Earth's epic story, we begin to realize how
certain kinds of global scale events have occurred over and over again, and we see the nature and
consequences of these now familiar themes in ever greater detail. Individually, these themes,
shifting continents, ice ages, climate change, variations in ocean and atmospheric chemistry,
the evolution and radiation of life, and of course, mass extinctions, have been a part of Earth's
story for billions of years. All have played and all will continue to play interconnected roles
in Earth's evolution. All are also especially key to understanding Earth's most recent geological
era, the Cenozoic Era, also known as the Age of Mammals. We set the stage for the Cenozoic Era
with the most famous mass extinction of all time, the event at the end of the Cretaceous period
that killed the dinosaurs and many other groups of plants and animals. In spite of its fame,
the terminal Cretaceous extinction event was, according to the fossil record, only perhaps the
fifth worst incident in terms of species loss. The previous extinctions at the end of the Ordovician
period 450 million years ago, and the end of the Triassic period 200 million years ago were
probably more severe, and the Great Dying at the Permian Triassic boundary 251 million years ago
was probably the worst of all. As many tetrapods and the great majority of marine invertebrates,
including all the trilobites, were among the enormous range of animals that disappeared.
But the mass extinction 65 and a half million years ago was unmatched in the number of large
animals that disappeared, since this time saw the loss of all the dinosaurs, as well as the big
swimming reptiles like mosasaurus and plesiosaurus, and the flying reptiles including pterosaurs.
Many distinctive kinds of metazozoic plants also vanished, as did entire groups of insects
and other terrestrial invertebrates. Marine shell fossils, including clam-like
polysopods and snail-like gastropods, suffered, and the last of the ammonites also vanished completely.
For many years, this episode was known as the Cretaceous tertiary, or KT, mass extinction,
and the geological periods immediately following the Cretaceous were called the tertiary,
and the quaternary, or third and fourth periods of Earth history.
These names provided an evocative reminder of a much older and much simpler,
four-part geological timescale that was proposed by European geologists almost two centuries ago,
in that archaic system, the primary and secondary rocks represented the older layers of Precambrian,
Paleozoic, and Mesozoic ages. The names primary and secondary were dropped long ago,
but for some reason tertiary and quaternary survived into the early 21st century.
But in 2004, the International Commission on Stratigraphy changed the officially approved
division of the Cenozoic era into three periods, Paleogene, Neogene, and Quaternary.
The Paleogene period is by far the longest of the three, stretching from 65.5 to 23 million years ago.
The Neogene period, which is about half as long, goes from 23 to 2.59 million years,
and the Quaternary period spans only the last 2,590,000 years. So the name tertiary is now
completely abandoned, and Quaternary is reserved for the most recent period, the last 2.6 million years or so.
As a consequence of these changes in nomenclature, the old K-T boundary and associated mass extinction
is now officially designated as the Cretaceous-Haleogene extinction event, or the K-P-G boundary.
The most scientists in the field still talk informally about the K-T boundary.
Unlike any other mass extinctions before or since, the K-T event is marked by a distinctive
worldwide geological marker, a specific thin layer of fine-grain sediments, only a few millimeters
thick at many sites, that serves as a sharply defined timeline. We'll get to the discovery
and chemical details of that layer in a few moments. Suffice it to say that below this seemingly
innocuous layer are the last Mesozoic era rocks, and the very tail end of the Cretaceous period,
when the greatest variety and sizes of dinosaurs prevailed. And above that K-T marker, that layer
shows the first rocks of the Cenozoic era and the Paleogene period, which are utterly devoid
of any dinosaur remains, except for the birds. As insignificant as that unassuming thin layer might
seem, it tells a story of catastrophic global change. The loss of all the dinosaurs is a pretty
obvious worldwide change in the fossil record, and when the geologists recognized more than a
century ago. However, for most of the last century, the relevant data were severely limited to rather
qualitative measurements, and the exact positions nipping into the K-T boundary layer hadn't yet
been recognized. First and foremost, in describing the extinction event, were the distributions
of fossils just above and just below the presumed transition from the Mesozoic to the Cenozoic eras.
Big vertebrates like dinosaurs might seem the obvious place to start, and paleontologists have
tried hard to document the youngest species of dinosaurs, their exact stratigraphic positions,
and so forth. But big vertebrates are relatively rare, at least compared to fossil shells, and because
they're big, it's sometimes difficult to place their exact age within a sequence of rock layers.
A big leg bone might be more than a foot thick, and thus could span many thousands of years of
sediment layers. Big fossil shells that you can hold in your hand are useful in that they yield
immediate and obvious markers in the field for extinction, but microscopic organisms are much
more likely to reveal details of how a mass extinction event occurred. Unlike big bones or
shells, you can usually pinpoint the age of a microfossil to a single layer, a fraction of an
inch thick. So, while reports of the most recent dinosaur, ammonite species provide important
clues about the timing of the mass extinction, tiny shells are the real key to discovery.
The smallest common shells in cretaceous and paleogene sediments are called
foraminifera, or forams for short. They are beautiful, highly sculpted objects, usually
less than a tenth of an inch long. Their shapes are typically tightly coiled spirals, sometimes with
beautiful ornamentation, not unlike larger gastropods such as snails or whelks.
They occur in abundance in many marine sediments, and they evolve so rapidly and come in so many
distinctive forms that it's possible to do very detailed stratigraphy based entirely on meticulous
separation of these microfossils layer by layer. When paleontologists undertook these vitally
important and very tedious studies, they found an astonishing and somewhat puzzling trend in the
distribution of 4M species. Prior to the mass extinction, distinctive cretaceous 4M flourished.
In one study of marine sediments from a 20-foot thick section of marine sediments in Tunisia,
paleontologists found almost 50 different foraminifera species in the lower few feet of rocks,
right up to what is now recognized as the KT boundary. And then at one specific horizon,
one layer of sediment, a fraction of an inch thick, more than half of the species disappear all at once
and forever. And many of the surviving cretaceous 4Ms go extinct in the next few inches of sediment.
Remarkably, within another few inches, five new distinctly paleogene 4Ms appear for the first
time, with a half dozen more appearing in the next two or three feet of sediments.
That pattern is very characteristic of mass extinctions. Many species go extinct at more
or less one time, and many new species arise shortly thereafter. However, detailed studies
of the 4M and if we reveal an interesting wrinkle, perhaps a dozen of the cretaceous
forms went extinct a few inches below the KT boundary before the big mass extinction.
This pattern is also reflected in the chronological distribution of ammonite species,
all but a handful of which disappeared in the million years before the mass extinction.
That premonitory loss of species suggests some kind of significant environmental stress
many thousands of years before the actual mass extinction.
So the question becomes, based on these paleontological data,
what caused the cretaceous paleogene mass extinction?
Few topics in the history of life have been subject to so much debate.
Countless scientific papers and conferences have appeared on the subjects with competing theories
falling into and then out of favor. For a long time, the idea of severe climate change associated
with the major volcanic event was the leading contender. Beginning approximately 66 million
years ago, one of Earth's most extensive mega-volcanic episodes was the production
of the Deccan Traps in West Central India, stretching all the way from the Arabian Sea.
This was an outpouring of basalt lava that is even today over a mile deep and spread over
an estimated area of 200,000 square miles. Sulphur dioxide and other gases released during
an 800,000-year interval that spanned the KT boundary must have placed a huge environmental
stress on Earth, altering climates and perhaps explaining the premonitory extinctions of some
ammonites and foraminophora. Opinions shifted dramatically following a seminal scientific
paper published in 1980 in the prestigious journal Science by geologist Walter Alvarez
and his father Luis Alvarez, who was a Nobel Prize winner, and chemists Helen Michelle and Frank
Asaro. This paper was especially unusual in its day for the highly interdisciplinary nature of the
authors, a characteristic much, much more common today. They reported that sediment sections taken
across the KT boundary in three widely separated localities all held extremely high concentrations
of the rare and massive element iridium in one thin layer. This distinctive iridium
anomaly is now known to occur in every place in the world where the thin KT horizon is preserved
and it can approach 1,000 times the background levels of iridium. Alvarez and colleagues proposed
that this unusual chemical feature was a result of a large asteroid impact since much of the
iridium on Earth's early surface may have sunk toward the core while many meteorites and other
objects from the early solar system remain enriched in iridium. Subsequent studies also
identified other distinctive impact characteristics at the KT boundary including shocked mineral grains
and soot from what may have been a global-scale forest fire. Additional strong evidence comes
from the discovery of a giant impact crater with associated rock melting of the correct age,
65 and a half million years old, centered on Chicxalub in what is now the Yucatan Peninsula of
Mexico. Geophysical surveys revealed the now buried crater more than 100 miles in diameter,
which suggests the effects of an asteroid between six and nine miles across. And drilling
into the presumed crater has produced a sequence of tell-tale rock types, impact brushes of
rock fragment, molten zones, and shock-deformed sediment layers. Such an impact would have had
unimaginable consequences. The superheated shockwave blast from the impact would have leveled forests
for a thousand miles around and begun immense fires. A mega tsunami would have followed with
perhaps a 1,000-foot wave sweeping across the Atlantic Ocean, devastating large portions of
Europe and Africa. In fact, North and South America were not yet joined at this point,
and another enormous wave may have thus swept across parts of the Pacific Ocean to Asia.
Even more devastating would have been the climatological aftermath, as the skies were
darkened by vast quantities of vaporized rock and dust, not to mention all the soot from continental
scale fires. For a period of many, many months, the sun's radiation would have been all but blocked,
causing an impact winter. The sudden release of carbon dioxide and sulfur compounds from the
impact site would have produced acid rain, while photosynthesis would have been shut down on a
global scale. Much about the patterns of the KT mass extinction, what species survived, what species
vanished, supports this impact hypothesis. On the one hand, any animal that depended directly on
eating plants or eating the animals that ate the plants was in trouble. Almost all of them died
out. Such well-known herbivorous dinosaurs as triceratops, pachycephalosaurus, and
ankylosaurus, along with their predators, most famously the raptors and tyrannosaurus rex, succumbed.
And those are only the most obvious losses on land. By contrast, omnivores and scavengers
seemed to do all right through the KT crisis. Most insects, worms, fungi, and gastropods that
could feed on dead plant and animal matter appeared to have survived the disaster. And their survival
means that eight insects or worms, including birds and almost all the small rodent-like mammals
from the Cretaceous, also emerged from the crisis. Of the large land animals, crocodiles were
particularly successful. Not only were they scavengers, they also had the ability to burrow and
slow their metabolism for months at a time, thus hunkering down during the worst of the post-impact
trauma. And that goes for the mammals as well. All mammals at the end of the Cretaceous were small,
probably burrowing animals, and many scientists think they were nocturnal. Otherwise, the raptors
and other carnivorous reptiles at the time would have devoured them. So the mammals also were well
suited for survival. Similar effects on the food web are seen in the oceans. For example, many types
of colonial corals rely on symbiotic photosynthetic algae. The loss of most algae meant that an
estimated 98% of these colonial corals became extinct. The associated stresses on reef ecosystems
led to the simultaneous extinction of many coexisting reef animals, including echinoderms,
brachyepods, and crustaceans. By contrast, deep water, non-photosynthetic corals, and a variety
of deep filter feeders were much less affected by the near-surface environmental changes.
The population of phytoplankton must have been hit especially hard, and those losses also had a
cascading effect on the food web. Many for minifera feed on the organic remains of phytoplankton,
so they suffered as well. Small crustaceans fed on these microorganisms, and ammonites fed on the
crustaceans and turned in when the ammonites went extinct. So did their dominant predator,
the large marine reptiles called mosasaurs. As with the land animals, marine scavengers
fared much, much better. Most groups of sharks, rays, and skates survived, as did 90% of the
bony fish. In river, lake and pond ecosystems seemed to have fared especially well, with the
widespread survival of frogs, salamanders, turtles, lizards, and snakes. The ability of some of these
animals to burrow, hibernate, and bury their diet clearly played a significant role in their
survival during the months of darkness. Given all the supporting evidence, first that there
clearly was a huge impact event at 65 and a half million years ago, and second that the patterns
of extinction are fully consistent with the consequences we might expect from such an event,
it's easy to see why an international panel of geologists endorsed the impact hypothesis
in a 2011 report. What remains unsettled is the extent to which the other factors may have
contributed as well. Surely those vast deccan traps in India caused environmental changes
at a minimum, and they may have done a lot worse than that. And that would explain why we see
significant extinctions in both land and marine species during the several thousand years before
the KT impact. Added to that influence, there's also geological evidence that the lake Cretaceous
period saw a rather dramatic fall in global sea levels. Many localities of mid-Cretaceous deep
water black shale show a distinctive lake Cretaceous sequence of overlying rocks trending from limestone
representing reefs, the sandstone representing a beach, and ultimately to terrestrial soils
that point to this shallowing trend or regression of the oceans. The cause is not known.
There doesn't seem to be a big ice age at that time, which always leads to lower sea levels.
Now some scientists suggest that the mid-ocean ridges became less active, and thus cooled,
contracted, and settled under their own weight. Now this idea might seem to contradict the assumption
that plate tectonics is a steady, stately mechanism, but there are scientists who think that deep
convection and the surface tectonics is more of a herky jerky kind of process. So this idea of
slowing and cooling may deserve more examination. In any event, as in previous times, the loss of
continental shelf environments can severely stress marine ecosystems and lead to the loss of diversity.
Added to these scenarios, one more wrinkle is provided by the suggestion that the Chicksalube
crater may have been just one of a multiple-impact event, not unlike the fragmented impact of
Shoemaker-Levy 9 onto Jupiter in July 1994. Having read many of the relevant articles,
I tend to conclude that some combination of causes and perhaps all of the above makes the most sense.
The Deccan traps were one source of biological stress, as were the lowering sea levels. Then a
great asteroid impact pushed many species over the edge. Whatever the cause or causes of the
cretaceous paleogene extinction event, it left the world devoid of organisms in many key ecological
niches for both plants and animals. Repopulating those niches took millions of years, but flowering
plants on land and mammals on both land and at sea ultimately made the most of the opportunity.
Within a few million years, flowering plants or angiosperms had replaced the gymnast's
sperms that had dominated in the cretaceous. The rise of mammals, including us, was similarly
gradual at first, with most mammals remaining small and rodent-like, though they were remarkable
exceptions like the titanotheres, including brontotherium, megacerops, and titanotherium,
which were larger than today's rhinoceros. But within 15 million years, such diverse forms
as ancestral whales, bats, horses, and elephants had appeared to occupy the niches left vacant
by the reptiles. The first primate ancestors also appeared during this time.
Climate change may have played a role in mammal diversification. Around 55 million years ago,
Earth experienced a relatively rapid thermal maximum, lasting maybe 100,000 years,
with temperatures and carbon dioxide levels far above what we have today. Some researchers
suggest that increased CO2 levels would have promoted smaller animal species and may have
stimulated greater diversity of mammal species at this time. Then, a major cooling event followed
at about 49 million years, perhaps promoting the evolution of somewhat larger animals,
and this is what early precursors for several familiar mammals, such as whales, horses,
bats, and elephants, seemed to have first appeared. And there were many additional cyclical changes
in average global temperatures, ice distribution, and sea levels throughout the Cenozoic era.
Those variations are not unlike changes associated with the temperate conditions of
more recent times. With each change, there were biological winners and losers, and the world's
ecosystems evolved. The plate tectonic stories also much more clearly in focus than in earlier
times. All the continents continued to shift to their modern locations. One big change during the
age of mammals is how land masses that had been separated into north and south for 150 million
years now began to regroup and come together in new ways. The northern supercontinent containing
both Europe and North America began to separate, widening the Atlantic Ocean an inch or two a
year while shrinking the Pacific Ocean by a similar amount. The southern supercontinent
broke apart sooner and over the past 50 million years, Africa has pushed towards Europe to produce
the Alps, while India has collided with Asia to raise the Himalayan Mountains. Peaks in both of
these high mountain ranges are rather new, only about 10 million years old. North and South America
marked a third joining of north and south with a land bridge at Panama forming just about three
million years ago. Australia, by contrast, has gone its own way, rifting away from Antarctica
about 50 million years ago and sheltering marsupial forms of mammal life such as kangaroos that were
outcompeted and when extinct on the larger continents. More important, having the large
isolated continent of Antarctica over the South Pole allowed a circumpolar current to form over
the last 10 million years that has blocked the approach of warm water and warm air and thereby
facilitated the formation of a long-term ice cap that now holds more than 2% of Earth's near-surface
water. Meanwhile, the Arctic Sea at the North Pole was increasingly surrounded by continents,
so it was also cut off from warm recurrence and thus it does not behave like a large ocean.
Together, the enclosed Arctic Sea and the continent of Antarctica have made Earth cooler
than it otherwise would have been. Throughout this course, I've emphasized how Earth's living
and non-living parts, life and the rock record, are intimately tied to each other. Again and again,
we see that new rocks and minerals lead to new life forms and vice versa. Among all the changes
of the last several tens of millions of years, two stand out as particularly illustrative of this
co-evolution of the geosphere and the biosphere. The first example has to do with coral reefs,
which have alternately flourished and been decimated across Earth's history. Witness massive rock
formations on land such as the towering Guadalupe Mountains of Texas, which are the remains of
Permian reefs that probably perished in the Great Dying 250 million years ago.
Similarly, the great majority of colonial corals capable of building reefs again when
extinct at the KT boundary, but many other types of corals survived. And then for more than half
of the Paleogene era, from 65 to about 30 million years ago, there were few coral reefs. Why should
that be? Three competing theories have been proposed, and each of them underscores the
feedbacks that occur between life and its physical environment. One possibility is that the ocean
chemistry was unfavorable for the formation of the minerals and corals. Two different mineral
forms of calcium carbonate, calcite and oreganite, have predominated at different times in the
Phanerozoic Eon, depending on the ratio of magnesium to calcium dissolved in the oceans.
Ocean chemistry before about 30 million years ago favored low magnesium and the deposition of
calcite. The coral species that survived the KT extinction required the higher magnesium
conditions favorable to oreganite as they do today. A shift in ocean chemistry may have
thus contributed to the sudden appearance of abundant reef ecosystems after 30 million years ago.
A second hypothesis relates to atmosphere chemistry. High levels of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere influence the ocean and will lower the pH of the oceans. The oceans become more acidic.
The calcium carbonate of coral reefs and other marine invertebrates with carbonate shells simply
can't form under those more acidic conditions, so reef building was sharply curtailed until 30
million years ago when carbon dioxide levels dropped to near modern levels.
And a third possibility is that photosynthetic algae that are critical to reforming corals,
those types of algae that form a symbiotic relationship with colonial corals, suffered
such an extensive extinction during the sunlight crisis of the endcretaceous impact event that
there were simply no coral ecosystems possible. Those kinds of algae aren't generally preserved
in the fossil record, so there's no easy way to know for sure. But if the original coral symbiotes
all died off, then evolution would have to repeat itself, and that kind of innovation can take time.
In fact, genomic studies of modern reef algae suggest that they diverged from other free
living varieties only about 30 million years ago, just when reef systems reemerged.
Whatever the cause or combination of causes, extensive new reef ecosystems were both affected
by the global environment, and they altered the environment. Reefs modify wave and erosion
patterns. They serve as foundations for more sedimentation, and they create new and vibrant
interacting communities of rock and life. A second profound cooperative change in the geosphere and
biosphere relates to continental interiors and the evolution of grasslands. For much of the early
paleogene era, most continents were covered by forests, which became for a time the dominant
terrestrial ecosystem. But about 25 million years ago, perhaps because of changing ocean currents
and continental positions, the average climate became much drier at the same time a host of
hardy new plants. The grasses and weeds became widespread. Now, these plants are characterized
by tough, silica-rich fibers called phytoliths, which give grass its distinctive characteristics.
Extensive grasslands were established on several continents. Think of pompous grasses
in South America, which can grow 10 feet or more. A host of flowering plants well-suited to
grassland environments, collectively termed weeds, also populated open spaces in grasslands,
and initiated an explosive radiation of several angiosperm taxa. At the same time,
insects diversified in remarkable ways, with many new species dependent on specific plants.
Mice and rats, which fed on the proliferation of seeds and insects, increased a thousand fold
in diversity, with a major expansion about 15 million years ago. A similar pattern is seen in
songbirds starting about 20 million years ago, and snake diversification to more than 10,000
species soon followed with a major pulse about 10 million years ago. Large mammals also co-evolved
with the silica-based grasslands. Large open spaces with lots of vegetation make ideal environments
for the survival of swift-running herbivores like deer, antelopes, and horses. These animals
feature a whole new style of molar teeth with extremely long crowns and tough enamel, which
evolved to process those abrasive silica-bearing phytoliths of grass. Thus, for the past several
million years, the classic grassland and prairie ecosystems so familiar from stories of westward
expansion in North America have been a constant feature of the terrestrial environment.
Added to these evolutionary novelties were the first primates. Mammals with grasping hands and
larger brains well adapted to living in trees. The first monkeys, squirrel-sized fruit eaters,
appeared about 35 million years ago, and are preserved as fossils in North Africa.
The dramatic tectonic and climate changes that led to extensive grasslands also affected primate
evolution, notably in the appearance about 15 million years ago of apes well suited to walking
the ever-increasing distances between forested areas. In fact, lower sea levels allowed a land
bridge to connect Africa with Europe and Asia, and walking primates from Africa spread across Europe
and Asia by about 13 million years ago, where they ate new foods and diversified,
but mostly retreated to Africa and Southeast Asia when temperatures turned colder.
These transitional creatures were our direct ancestors.
While the rate of evolutionary change may seem more rapid in the Cenozoic era,
that's partly a consequence of our access to more complete rock sections, with better preservation
than from any earlier time. Now, this is not to say that the rate of change in Earth's
near-surface environment is a constant. In particular, the last few hundred thousand years have seen
what may be an unprecedented acceleration of change thanks to a new unique factor in the
co-evolution of the geosphere and biosphere. That factor is the appearance of an entirely new
family of mammals nurtured on the living grasslands of Africa, the human family.
This new epoch is the Pleistocene, and it starts two and a half million years ago,
but because humans, very recent humans, mark yet another turn in the story of Earth,
we're also going to explore a further epoch in geological time known as the Anthropocene.
