For half a billion years, Earth has been a water world, but below the surface, something
is happening. Heat from below and water above actively drive the planet into a fourth stage
of mineral evolution. Black basalt partially melts to produce hard gray granite. Because
granite is much less dense, the granite floats on basalt, like corks on water.
These masses of granite become the cores of continents in the beginnings of dry land.
The principal focus of this lecture is the fascinating way that heat and water led to the
formation of granite and numerous associated new minerals. Before the origin of life,
internal heat and abundant water were to be the two principal forces driving planetary mineral
evolution. To look at the role of water, let's return to Mars and what are perhaps the most
distinctive water-bearing minerals at the surface of any wet planet, the clay minerals.
I have to admit that clay minerals are poorly defined. There are rather broad-classed minerals
that don't have a precise definition, but I guarantee that you know a clay mineral when you
see or feel one. Soil made of dry clay is very hard and difficult to crush by hand.
Well, powdered clay is very smooth, but when wet clays occur, they're sticky, they feel smooth,
and you see that it changes colors. That's why the Native Americans could use clays as paint.
Sometimes they're red, they can be orange, green, browns, or even black.
The familiar look and feel of clay are explained by two key formal criteria for identifying clay
minerals. First, at a minimum, all clay minerals are extremely fine-grained, with typical particle
sizes of about one micron. That's about one millionth of a meter or a few ten thousandths of an inch
across. There aren't many materials in our everyday lives that feature such tiny particles.
Sand grains typically have diameters that are a hundred to a thousand times greater,
meaning the volume of a typical sand grain is more than a million times that of a clay particle.
Even dust grains are much, much bigger. The only thing comparable might be talcum powder,
which just happens to be the clay mineral talc. The incredibly tiny grain size means that it's
almost impossible to see any individual clay crisp lights in a light microscope. That makes clay
minerals tough to describe and to classify. This fine-grained character also helps to explain
one of the most familiar properties of clays, namely their behavior when they're wet.
If you've ever used wet clay to make pottery or had to walk across a stretch of wet
clay-rich soil, you'll know what I mean. It's sticky, it's clayy stuff. It can be extremely
slippery when it's wet as well. I remember one amazing geology field trip in Montana when a group
of us were walking across the terrain of clay-rich mounds and it began to rain. So this entire field
area became like this sticky quagmire, but it was so much fun. We'd all try to climb to the top
of these low-rounded hills. They're maybe 20 feet high and pretty steep and it was almost impossible
to do it. We had to claw at the clay and every few inches we'd go up and then we'd slide back a
few inches almost as far, but if you made it to the top you could slide down the hill in your back
and get this great slippery ride and by the time the rainstorm was over we were all just covered
with this thick gray clay from head to toe. It was a mess and it was it was so much fun. I still see
friends who are now distinguished professors at prestigious universities and we just laugh
like kids about that experience. So extremely small grain size. That's one of the characteristics
of every clay mineral, but that's not enough. Even dust in the lunar regolith can be
comfortably small, but there's no known clay minerals on the moon. So the second essential
characteristic is that all valid clay minerals have to have a layered atomic structure with
silicate tetrahedra length in flat sheets. In other words, clays are members of the layer
silicate structural group. These layers are what allow clays to be so slippery. Recall the
essential features of layer silicates. First, the key building block is a five atom group
with a central silicon atom surrounded by a tetrahedron of four oxygen atoms. These tetrahedra
have the neat ability of sharing corners with each other so that you can have structures with chains
or rings or layers or frameworks. So in clay minerals, which are all layered silicates,
there are layers of six membered rings of tetrahedra like little three-sided pyramids
with all the points facing in the same direction. Now those tetrahedra can be linked to other kinds
of atomic layers in a rich variety of ways. We'll come back to the clay minerals in more detail
in several upcoming lectures, but let's take a quick look at the most important clay layer structures.
The simplest clay minerals including serpentine with magnesium and kaolinite with aluminum
feature a single tetrahedral layer bonded to a so-called octahedral layer. The octahedral
layer features seven atom units with one central magnesium or aluminum atom, and each of those
atoms is surrounded by six oxygen atoms. These octahedra share edges with each other to make
a uniform flat layer. This two-layer sequence of a tetrahedral sheet bonded to an octahedral sheet
is the thinnest possible kind of clay mineral. Serpentine and kaolinite have this repeated
structure that's only 7.7 billionths of a meter thick. These layers of alternating molecules
are only a little thicker than the layers of carbon atoms that we discussed for graphite.
Now, four and a half billion years ago, there certainly must have been lots of serpentine
on both Earth and Mars. That's because serpentinization, that's the metamorphism
of rocks involving water, was such a dominant process when hot water circulated through basalt.
The magnesium silicate minerals in basalt reacted with hot water to produce clays and other new
minerals. It's also possible to make thicker layers with an octahedral layer sandwiched
between two tetrahedral layers. For example, that sequence is about one billionth of a meter
thick and it's found in lots of different clay minerals, and all the mica minerals as well.
And some of those clay minerals might have contributed to the near-surface mineralogy
of ancient Mars as well. The most familiar example of those common clay minerals is talc.
It's a hydrated magnesium silicate. That's the mineral of talcum powder. And another common clay
is pyrophilite, which has aluminum in place of magnesium. And then there's even thicker sequences
in which that whole three-layer sandwich of a tetrahedral than octahedral than another
tetrahedral layer alternates with a single octahedral layer. And that leads to a clay mineral
such as chloride with a repeat distance of 1.4 billionths of a meter. Chlorite is almost as
soft as talc and produces a green powder when scratched with a fingernail. But those are only
some of the building blocks. You see different kinds of clay layers. Serpentine and talc and
chloride can easily stack on top of each other, so it's common to get complicated mixed-layer
minerals with almost random sequences of layers. Virtually every clay is different, so the study
of clay minerals is a very specialized branch of mineralogy. Clay mineralologists even have
their own society. They have their own journals. Now one of the exciting discoveries of recent
Mars missions is that the surface of Mars is just covered with clay minerals. Satellites in orbit
around the planet measure the way light is reflected off the surface, the way that certain
wavelengths are reflected and other wavelengths are absorbed. This is what's known as a reflectance
spectrum, and clay minerals have distinctive reflectance spectra. In fact, each major group
of clay minerals has a slightly different spectrum, so planetary scientists now have mapped large
areas in the Martian surface according to the dominant kind of clay. All told, by adding up
all the hydrous minerals that might have formed on Mars, that's the hydrated evaporate minerals like
sulfates, the hydroxides, the clay minerals, there might be an additional 150 minerals that
couldn't have formed on dry mercury or the moon. So we have a dozen ur minerals, then 60
chondrite minerals in stage one. We have 250 minerals in stage two, and all the way to 350
minerals on mercury or the moon, and then add 150 water-rich minerals, and we're up to 500
stage three minerals on Mars and Earth. But that's where Earth and Mars part company,
because Earth is a much larger planet, and it has a lot more internal heat. Earth's extra heat added
to water equals more mineral diversity. Earth was about to double in mineral diversity, and that's
what I refer to as stage four of mineral evolution, the formation of granite and the origins of the
continents. When we think of Earth, we envision the planet of today, a planet of amazing contrast.
Earth is about one third land, two thirds water. From space you see a melange of colors, oceans of
blue with brown and green continents and swirling white clouds. But 4.4 billion years ago, I suspect
the things were different. I imagine lots of scattered black volcano cones forming islands,
which were the only places where dry land poked above the blue shallow oceans. The big difference
between then and now is continents. A continent is defined as a large volume of rock at Earth's
surface that's less dense than the underlying formations, and therefore floats much higher
than the surrounding crust. On Earth today there are six or seven continents, depending on how you
count. There's North and South America, Africa, Antarctica, Australia, and Europe plus Asia. In
fact, Eurasia is one big continent. Sometimes it's called a supercontinent, but that's a misleading
name for Eurasia, given what counts as supercontinents earlier in Earth's history. In any case,
about a third of Earth's surface is taken up by the continents. But that hasn't always been true.
Very early in Earth's history, there were no continents, and it must have taken a long time
to build them up. The growth of continents was a huge step in the episodic differentiation of
Earth into zones of distinct composition and character. Differentiation was a sequence of
chemical and physical processes that began long before Earth formed. Over and over, the chemical
elements that once formed our solar nebula have been separated and concentrated into new zones.
At the biggest scale of the solar system, the inner rocky planets, Mercury,
Venus, Earth, and Mars became concentrated in such elements as magnesium, iron, silicon, and
of course oxygen as intense solar winds swept gaseous hydrogen and helium away from the heavier
elements. Those lighter elements became concentrated in the distant domain of the gas giant planets,
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. So the rock-forming elements were separated
from the lightest gases. Then on Earth, the dense metallic elements, iron and nickel,
separated by gravity to the core. While Earth's mantle became correspondingly enriched in magnesium
silicates, recall that the main rock type in the mantle is peridotite, named for the magnesium
silicate olivine, or peridote, in its gemstone form. The chemical formula olien is Mg2 SiO4,
so the bulk mantle composition is about two to one magnesium oxide to silicon oxide,
with smaller amounts of calcium and aluminum. That means the mantle is on average about one-third
silicon oxide. The next big stage of element separation occurred when peridotite was partially
melted in the mantle to produce basalt. The resulting basaltic magma is relatively enriched
in calcium, aluminum, and silicon, and recall that the dominant minerals in basalt are pyroxene
and feldspar. These minerals have about a one to one ratio of silicon oxide to magnesium oxide,
plus calcium, plus aluminum. So basalt is about 50% silicon oxide. That's compared to about 33%
silicon oxide for peridotite. Basalt is also about 10% less dense than peridotite, so basalt magma
rises to the surface to make the first crust. Another episode of element separation occurred
when basalt erupted explosively onto Earth's surface. Water and other volatiles quickly separated
from the basaltic magma as superheated steam and other gases. These gases cooled to form the first
oceans and the atmosphere. So Earth became even more layered, solids, liquids, gases, and each
layer had its own chemical composition. The story of continent formation, which is also the story
of granite, repeated this fruitful history of element separation and concentration through
heating. As the outermost crust of black basalt cooled and hardened, it created a lid-like cover
that trapped Earth's inner heat. Inevitably, as the basalt crust thickened and was heated more and
more, it began to partially melt just as peridotite had partially melted before. Now this wet crustal
basalt, as it was reheated from below, started to melt at relatively low temperatures. Water
lowered that initial melting temperature to perhaps as cool as 1200 degrees Fahrenheit.
As with peridotite, basalt didn't melt all at once. As heat build up, the percent of basalt
melting gradually increased, first just a few percent, then 10 percent, eventually up to 20 or
25 percent partial melting. And again, in an echo of the way peridotite melts, the resulting magma
was quite different in composition from the basalt that was melting. Most strikingly, this new melt
was much, much richer in the element silicon, as much as 65 or even 70 percent silicon oxide,
compared to 33 percent in peridotite and 50 percent in basalt. This partial melt also concentrated
the alkali elements, sodium and potassium. Those elements are in the first column of the periodic
table, and they are enthusiastic electron donating elements. Recall that sodium readily gives up
an electron to chlorine in common table salt or sodium chloride. This new silicon-rich magma
was at least 10 percent less dense than the basalt from which it was produced. So the magma
inevitably pushed its way toward the surface, forming an entirely new kind of crustal rock
called granite. Granite is so familiar. It's the rugged gray building stone of countertops and
of continents. Four mineral species dominate virtually all granites. Beltsvars, which are
mineral with an alkali element plus aluminum and silicon, are the most abundant. They come in two
principal varieties, one with more potassium, the other with more sodium. These feldspar minerals
would have combined in granites to give Earth's earliest granites their monotonous grayish white
color. Almost as abundant in many granites is the mineral quartz, which forms clear,
colorless crystals of pure silicon dioxide. Quartz grains are among the most resilient
minerals on Earth, so weathering of granites would have produced Earth's first white, sandy beaches.
Most granites also hold a few percent of one or more dark, iron-bearing minerals.
Look closely at a polished granite countertop, and you'll see blocky pyrroxine grains or
sheet-like mica flakes or elongate amphibole crystals. Now a key characteristic of the
magma that form granites is its ability to incorporate water in a hot fluid that also
selectively concentrates dozens of rare trace elements, beryllium, lithium, uranium, zirconium,
tantalum, boron, cesium, rubidium, many many more. The presence of all these rare elements in
concentrated form often leads to scattered tiny grains of new relatively rare minerals,
and we'll learn some of the amazing mineralogical consequences of those
element concentrations later in this lecture. For now, a good example of a mineralogical novelty
is zircon, which concentrates the rare elements zirconium. Recall from the last lecture how those
little red zircon crystals were extracted from old sediments from the Jack Hills of Australia,
those special crystals provide evidence for an early ocean 4.4 billion years ago,
and those tiny zircons also point to granite formation at that early stage because they have
the distinctive heavy oxygen isotope signature of a cool and wet origin. What's more, some rare
zircon crystals seem to have inner inclusions of quartz, and that's the mineral that was hardly
ever formed before granite. That's why lots of experts suggest that the quartz-bearing zircon
crystals are the last surviving remnants of the earliest granite crust, the earliest traces of
continents. Up until the formation of granite, Earth was pretty much like its planetary neighbors,
Mercury, Venus, and Mars. All those bodies must have started with something like an iron core
and a peridotite mantle, and all produced copious amounts of basalt that formed their black crusts.
But with a partial melting of basalt and the formation of lots of granite, we see the first
really significant divergence of Earth from those other inner planets. You see, granite formation
not only requires a lot of basalt near the surface, but it also requires a lot of internal heat
to remelt the basalt. Mars and Mercury are simply too small. They don't have enough heat.
It's likely that relatively small volumes of granite have been produced on Mars and Mercury,
but nothing like the deeply rooted granite continents of Earth. Venus is a lot larger and
has correspondingly more inner heat than Mars and Mercury, but Venus also appears to be a lot
drier than Earth. That means it's harder to melt basalt and harder to produce much granite.
So Earth really does seem to be a mineralogically unique world in our solar system.
The rise of granite on Earth caused a number of profound changes,
not the least of which was the landscape. Black basalt, which formed Earth's primordial crust,
was constantly softened by heat from below, with its average density about three times that of
water. It never could support much topography. It's true that a few of the most actively growing
volcanoes might have built mountains that rose a mile or more above the ocean,
but there are probably no great mountain ranges, nor were there any extremely deep ocean basins
before the rise of continents. Granite changed that. Granite has a significantly lower average
density of about 2.7 times the density of water. That means that granite floats on basalt and on
peridotite. It can pile up in great mounds rising miles above the surface like an iceberg
floating on water. Your everyday experience with ice drinks makes the point. Ice is 10%
less dense than water, so about 10% of an ice cube or an iceberg's volume sticks out of the water.
And if the piece of ice has a tapered shape, then significantly more than 10% of its height
can poke above the water. Indeed, a 200-foot tall iceberg will often have 30 or more feet
exposed above the water's surface. That's the tip of the iceberg. By the exact same token,
granite is typically about 10% less dense than the basalt on which it rests. So as fresh granite
piles up on top of the partially melted basalt crust, the granite forms mountains. These mountains
are simply iceberg-like protrusions. A mile-thick granite body floating up basalt might produce
a small mound that rises almost 1,000 feet above the mean level of basalt or crust.
By the way, the average height of Earth's solid surface today is about 2 miles below sea level.
Over time, as more granite accumulates to thicknesses of many miles, big mountain ranges
miles high can form simply by this kind of buoyancy. Today, the Rocky Mountain Chain of Western
North America has granite roots as much as 40 miles deep and corresponding mountain peaks
that are almost three miles above sea level. Think about the forces that might cause a mountain
range to form. A mountain is a huge thing. Typically, several cubic miles of rock rising
way above the surrounding landscape, so you need a really big force to counter gravity.
Geologists see two basic ways to do it. The one that's more often evoked today is lateral tectonics.
If two great masses of rock are pushed together from the sides, they sort of shmush up and they
form a mountain change. That's one of the key ideas of the theory of plate tectonics,
which we'll meet in Lectures 24 and 25. But early in Earth's history, it's not obvious
how big lateral forces would have been generated. The crust was simply too thin and hot and plastic,
at least according to a lot of current thinking, so we have to resort to a different kind of
mountain building by vertical tectonics. Back in the late 1960s, when I took my first
geology courses at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, this power of buoyancy and driving
all kinds of geological change was still textbook orthodoxy. I still remember we used a 1965 edition
of the richly illustrated classic textbook, Principles of Physical Geology by British geologist
Arthur Holmes. Geology called this buoyancy of some less dense rocks on top of more dense rocks
isostasy. We learned about the driving force of vertical tectonics that is mountain building
by buoyancy, the way a granite mountain rose up was called isostatic readjustment.
And I love the neat little woodcut that was used in that and most other textbooks,
virtually unchanged from 19th century geology texts, it showed a line of little rectangular
wooden blocks of different heights floating in water. In the woodcut, the taller blocks
projected higher out of the water, just like a mountain. We also read the conventional wisdom
of how ocean basins gradually fill with thick layers of sediments, how those sediments melted
to form more granites, how new mountains rose up in their place. And I have to say it all made
perfect sense to us. It was a compelling explanation, even if it was only partly true.
So how early did granite formation begin? Seems logical that pretty early in Earth's history,
perhaps within the first hundred million years, some modest sized land masses that were rooted by
buoyant masses of gray granite must have begun to form. After all, there was a lot of basalt crust,
there was a lot of heat to partially melt that basalt. The oceans weren't very deep,
so a mass of granite didn't have to rise very high to poke above the waves.
I imagine those first isolated bits of continent, they must have been utterly barren,
they were certainly windswept, and their coastlines would have been battered by intense waves.
As the granite slowly eroded, rock fragments of quartz and feldspar
gradually accumulated to form meager sandy beaches. In my imagination, those earliest
granite islands on Earth were isolated, only a few hundred kilometers across and probably low
and rounded in profile. Earth's first continental fragments gave no hint at the scale of the
continents to come. So Earth's surface gradually became more interesting with both black volcanic
cones, gray granite islands. But how did the early Earth shift from a predominantly volcano dotted
basalted world to a planet with wide gray granitic continents? By what process do lonely granite
islands expand to the kind of hemisphere-spanning land masses that we see on the globe today?
At this early time with predominantly vertical mountain building, no obvious mechanism could
have caused isolated granite masses to coalesce into expanses of dry land the size of today's
continents. You know, one of the most enjoyable aspects of the Earth's science
is creative storytelling. Geologists have never been shy in inventing clever stories,
and a good idea can gain traction even if the supporting evidence is sparse.
Among the more intriguing ideas to emerge in recent years suggests that giant impacts played a
central role in continent formation during Earth's first billion years, and here's how it works.
For at least a billion years after the moon forming impact of Fea, there must have been
huge impacts from time to time. There were dozens of huge asteroids up to 100 miles across.
They were left over from the time of planet formation, and from time to time,
they smacked into Earth. So imagine a scenario four billion years ago. You have a hot plume of
upwelling magma rising to the surface beneath a young ocean crust. Many dozens, if not hundreds,
of such hot, buoyant magma plumes must have risen from Earth's deep interior. That's the most
efficient way to transfer Earth's inner heat by the efficient process of convection. And above
each of these plumes, there were megavolcanoes that erupted huge amounts of basaltic lava
along with water vapor and other gases. Simultaneously, all that heat caused significant
re-melting of basalt crust and generated a lot of granite that sickened the land.
We can scarcely imagine the catastrophe as a 50-mile diameter asteroid slammed into a cluster of
volcanoes above a mantle plume. The impact would have eradicated every trace of land within a
radius of 300 miles, a vast area simply obliterated. The impact would have caused a giant, bowl-shaped
lake of magma, and would have showered the adjacent surface thousands of miles around with
immense blobs of magma and blocks of shattered rock. This unimaginable cosmic insult would have
blocked the rising mantle plume. That mantle plume had to find a new path to the surface. Now,
here's the cleverest aspect of this purely hypothetical model, which posits an acceleration
of early continent development. You see, the mantle plume was diverted. In many instances,
that diverted plume would probably have taken a sideways detour and thus heated
another patch of ocean crust. That would have created a new cluster of volcanic islands
somewhere adjacent to the asteroid crater. But every once in a while, such a plume must have
found itself shifted to beneath a mini-continent of granite. And once the plume was positioned
beneath such a thick, heat-trapping lid of granite, overlying basalt, that new heat source would
probably have partially melted even more basalt to produce granite in abundance. And that new
granite would have expanded and thickened the land in a way that accelerated the formation
of continents. Now, admittedly, this story is untestable by direct experiment, but it makes
a lot of sense. I think it's probably part of Earth's earliest continent-forming narrative,
and a billion years of that kind of near-surface processing would have generated an ever-increasing
inventory of volcanic ocean islands with complex intermixing of basalt and granite cores.
Heat worked its magic. Ever so gradually, the grey land arose from the sea as big islands may
have covered a few percent of Earth's surface by three and a half billion years ago. Nevertheless,
no continent-sized landmasses had yet formed. But then, along came plate tectonics, and almost
everything changed. Throughout this lecture, Earth's vast store of inner heat has been a central
theme. That heat arose from two major sources, first was the great amount of heat released,
as all those planetesimals and asteroids and comets converted their gravitational potential
energy into heat. Calculations show that the total heat released by this process was more
than enough to melt the entire planet from core to crust. And added to that was an amount of heat
almost as great from all the radioactive elements that were swept up in the formation process.
We still have a lot of radioactive uranium and thorium and potassium and other long-lived
radioactive elements. But early on, there was a lot more, including all sorts of short-lived
radioactive elements that dumped huge amounts of heat into the planet's interior. So that was
enough to melt the planet through and through all over again. Through Earth history, a lot of that
heat energy has gradually escaped into space, and Earth has cooled accordingly. But there's still a
lot of inner heat. This heat is what causes rocks to partially melt, for peridotite to produce basalt,
and for basalt to produce granite. And that's not the end of the mineral forming sequence. Even
granites, too, can partially melt. And when granite melts, it can concentrate fluids rich
in the most incredible variety of rare elements. Granites lead, and will lead us to the next
lecture, to the rocks that mineralologists dream about, to the amazing rocks called pigmatites.
