Great scientific discoveries often require decades, if not centuries, of painstaking observations
and data collection. It's rare that a big new idea springs forth from only one mind or
that a new point of view takes root quickly. So it was with the discovery of plate tectonics,
which we now recognize as Earth's dominant geological process. Indeed, the establishment
of plate tectonics is in many ways a scientific story that spans most of modern science. In
this lecture, we're going to look at work leading up to plate tectonics, which was anticipated by
at least four centuries of research. The once heretical ideas that entire continents somehow
shift across the globe came only in the sharp and convincing focus during what became an
international rush of discoveries in the 1960s. But science reaches a tipping point. Once the
mass of evidence piled up, geology went through one of the most rapid paradigm shifts in the
history of science. That's why within just a few years of my undergraduate courses at MIT,
every geology textbook had to be completely rewritten. In a blink of an eye, lateral tectonics
replaced vertical tectonics. The Earth science community quickly came to realize that lateral
movement of tectonic plates plays the central role in such diverse phenomena as global climate,
vertebrate evolution, or deposits, continent formation, and the diversification of the mineral
kingdom. I suppose that in some respects, some lines of evidence against vertical tectonics
that is mountain building by buoyancy should have been pretty obvious. In North America,
we look to the Rocky Mountains as our grandest range. And it's not so difficult to imagine
buoyancy playing the key role in their uplift. But the Rockies only rise about 14,000 feet at
their tallest points. They're absolutely dwarfed by the five and a half mile height of Mount Everest
and the rest of the mighty Himalayan Range. It's even harder to imagine the greatest ocean depths.
But think about this. The oceans average about two miles deep, yet Earth's deepest ocean trench,
which is located off the Mariana Islands in the South Pacific, plunges to an astonishing
seven miles. How could such an extreme depth be maintained on a planet ruled by nothing
more than gravitational rise and fall? Such an extreme depth could not possibly be sustained
by buoyancy alone. So we have to conclude that vertical tectonics can't be the whole story.
There have been subtle hints pointing to lateral tectonics, the vital role of sideways motion
driven by heat as opposed to gravity in Earth's geological evolution. The first striking evidence
came with a charting by 15th century explorers who collectively produced the first accurate maps of
the coastlines of the New World. By the early 1600s, the rough outlines were delineated and the
striking conformity of the east coast of the Americas and the western shores of Europe and
Africa were obvious to anyone who looked. Many details are mirrored on opposite sides of the
Atlantic. Both continental margins have a broadly S-shaped contour. Embayments on one side match
the coastal bumps on the other. The suggestive curl of South America's tip fits the southern end
of Africa. It all looks like the fifth of two jigsaw puzzle pieces. Early attempts to explain
such matching features were unsuccessful, if not downright bizarre. Harvard University astronomer
William Henry Pickering enthusiastically supported George Darwin's fission origin of the moon as
a molten blob hurled into space from a rapidly spinning Earth. So he suggests that the Atlantic
ocean opened wide on one side of Earth in response to the moon being ripped from the Pacific ocean
on the opposite side. Others thought they glimpsed the mighty hand of God in that great Atlantic
S-shape. They speculated that the Atlantic coastlines were the shores of Noah's flood. The deluge was
unleashed a few thousand years ago to create the great ocean and, as the Bible says, divide the
lands. Systematic surveys of rocks, minerals, and fossils might have helped resolve the question.
But 400 years ago the field we call geology hadn't even been named, much less pursued in any
systematic way. The very practical economic pursuits of mining and agriculture, not science per se,
were the driving forces behind the earliest geological surveys of the late 18th century.
What's more, these surveys were strictly state and national affairs. Almost no attempt was made
to match up geological formations across political boundaries. And there was no thought that the
riches of one principality could be linked in any coherent way to those of any other,
unless a particularly valuable deposit straddled the territory of two nations. Prior to plate
tectonics, gold was quite literally where you found it. So you can imagine that attempts to
match up geological features across the great expanse of the Atlantic Ocean between South Africa
and Brazil, for example, or the USA and Spain, was not of much interest. So even after the field
of geology got its name in the 18th century and began to be pursued as a science, most geologists
weren't thinking about correlating features across oceans. Nevertheless, I find it really
surprising that the very first detailed transatlantic geological comparisons were made by a meteorologist.
It was the German scientist Alfred Wegener, who spent a good part of his career in the Arctic.
In fact, he died there on the Greenland ice sheet during a heroic winter rescue mission.
Most of Wegener's professional life was devoted to the origins of weather and climate,
hence his interest in the climate-sensitive Arctic. However, Wegener's most memorable and
lasting work by far related to what has been called continental drift, which is a pioneering and
much maligned contribution to lateral tectonics. His inspiration for this odd digression into
geology occurred during World War One. Alfred Wegener was serving as a reserve lieutenant
in the German army when he was shot through the neck during the Belgian campaign. He was relieved
of further front-line duty and thus was given a chance to devote his convalescence to study.
Like many scholars who came before him, Wegener was struck by the evident fit
of the Americas with Europe and Africa across the Atlantic Ocean. Some had simply dismissed
the fit as coincidence, but Wegener cast a wider field of view and realized that similar
continental matches could be seen in the coastlines of East Africa, Antarctica, India, and Australia.
In fact, it turns out that all of Earth's continents can be rather easily clustered together
to make one supercontinent, which he dubbed Pangea. Wegener also realized that one could test
the hypothesis that the continents were all once joined together by looking for identical
marginal features. He and others catalogued evidence from the recently published geological
surveys of coastal regions of Europe, Africa, the Americas. These treatises, published in
many languages by many independent authors, point to numerous intriguing correlations across the
wide Atlantic Ocean. Among the most obvious correlations are great mining districts, such as
the extensive stream-hosted alluvial diamond fields of Brazil and Africa. These economically
important zones form a single large deposits when the continents are juxtaposed. There are also many
examples of similar distinctive fossils on both sides of the Atlantic. Rock layers holding the
distinctive fossil fern quosopterus line up almost exactly. As do other beds with unusual
fossil trilobites and early vertebrates. Wegener detailed these observations and argued that such
geological and paleontological correlations can't be simple coincidence. Now Wegener wasn't shy
about promoting his ideas. The continental drift hypothesis first appeared in print in 1915,
and he kept expanding and elaborating on the idea. Three subsequent German editions were published,
each one much more detailed than the last, and there was also a widely available 1924 English
translation entitled The Origins of the Continents and Oceans. And then many other editions in various
languages followed. The continental drift hypothesis gathered some interest and support. As more data
came in, so did some support for the idea that continents were once joined together and later
drifted apart. In 1917, for example, a committee of paleontologists cataloged more than a dozen
instances of distinctive fossil bearing strata matching up across the oceans. Now they proposed
that there was once some sort of land bridge between the continents now washed away. More
support came from South African geologist Alexander Dutoy, who was especially enamored of Wegener's
ideas. He was able to obtain a grant from the Carnegie Institution. That's the same institution
that supports my lab. And then he visited Eastern South America, recorded more examples of trans-oceanic
matchups, and published his work in 1927 and 1937. So some scientists took Wegener pretty seriously.
In spite of the growing evidence that the two sides of the Atlantic somehow match up,
most members of the Earth science community were unpersuaded. And there was a good reason for this.
Newton's first law of motion tells us that nothing happens without a force. So if continents were
somehow drifting apart, then there must be a huge force at work. Begener simply had no answer for
that objection. In fact, his default suggestion was merely that continents somehow cut a path
to the even harder underlying rock of Earth's crust. Well, without a reasonable mechanism for
continental drift, most geologists were openly contemptuous of the idea. Until an epic global
scale force could be clearly established, continental drift was just doomed to be another
crackpot idea by a geological amateur. And there are some pretty brutal quotes from this era.
One of the milder one came from Cambridge physicist Harold Jeffries, who summed up the
British viewpoint in 1923 when he wrote that quote, the physical causes that Wegener offers
are ridiculously inadequate. And leading geologists in America were equally unconvinced and perhaps
less restrained in their rhetoric. Roland T. Chamberlain of the University of Chicago's geology
department mocked continental drift in a 1926 symposium on the subject. He said,
Wegener's hypothesis in general is of the footloose type in that it takes considerable
liberty with our globe and is less bound by restrictions or tied down by ugly facts than
most of its rival theories. If we are to believe Wegener's hypothesis, we must forget everything
that has been learned in the last 70 years and start all over.
Not everyone was so dismissive, but the ideas of some Wegener supporters were sufficiently wacky
to generate more negative than positive feedback. The key was to come up with some kind of novel
mechanism for continental shifts. One amusing school of thought posited that earth is shrinking,
perhaps because it's slowly cooling and thus contracting, or maybe by the collapse of gas-filled
chambers in Earth's deep interior. It doesn't really make sense if you think about it, but the
proposal was that portions of Earth's surface gradually fall inward like a broken archway.
So if the continents once were linked by land bridges, as some paleontologists propose based
on fossils, then you can imagine continuous solid land from the eastern coasts of Africa and Asia
all the way to the western coasts of the Americas. And when that great archway collapsed, what remained
was today's Atlantic Ocean. But this model simply doesn't work. The basic geometry of a sphere first
set down by Euclid thousands of years ago shows that while a simple archway can collapse,
there's no way that a volume of continental rocks covering an area the size of the Atlantic Ocean
could collapse into anything. So another group of earth scientists proposed the exact opposite
that Earth has been expanding and continues to expand to this day. Somehow, according to this
scenario, Earth inflates like a balloon over geological time. It must have inflated a lot.
The expanding Earth community points to a time hundreds of millions of years ago when the entire
surface was covered only in continental crust. This thin brittle crust had to crack and split
apart as Earth inflated. In fact, if you play an animation of a supposedly expanding Earth backwards,
then you do arrive at a remarkable point when all the diverse continents slide neatly together to
cover almost a perfect sphere. That's about three-fifths the size of our modern planet.
But finding a reasonable mechanism to expand Earth over hundreds of millions of years has
proven to be a serious drawback. Some scientists have invoked the steady internal pressure of
expanding gases, but it's really hard to imagine how to trap that much gas beneath the surface.
Others point to possible gradual phase transitions of some minerals from more dense
to less dense forms. Here's how that idea works. Earth's interior is filled with extremely dense
mineral phases. Some minerals are more than twice as dense as those on the surface. Now,
that's quite reasonable. We know, for example, that the high-pressure diamond form of pure carbon
is about twice as dense as the low-pressure graphite form. Moreover, some high-pressure minerals are
less stable than their lower-pressure counterparts, so if Earth formed with a lot of high-pressure
minerals, some of those minerals started to transform, then Earth's total volume has to increase.
What's more, as Earth gets larger, the pressure in the mantle in the core gradually
lessens because more mass is farther from the center and the force of gravity is correspondingly
less, which means that more minerals can transform to their less dense, larger volume
minerals, and that keeps driving Earth's expansion. This hypothesis has never been a mainstream idea,
but it does have real staying power. If you were a scientist who thought the geological and
topographic matchups across the Atlantic Ocean are real, then you needed some kind of explanation,
and before there was any other viable mechanism for forming the Atlantic, the expanding Earth
hypothesis was about as plausible as you were going to get. A significant number of prominent
Earth scientists seriously considered expansion from the 1920s to as late as the 1960s, and even
today there's still an active, if marginalized, community of expanding Earth enthusiasts who
hold conferences and they publish journals. Nevertheless, most scientists gladly abandoned
any notion of a shrinking or expanding Earth as soon as a compelling new idea took its place,
and that idea was plate tectonics. This leads us to a fundamental point about geology.
Technology is great. There's no way modern Earth science could have made the advances
and discoveries it has without technology, but at its very core geology is about the solid stuff
that forms our planet. Everything we know of Earth ultimately comes from the testimony of
the rocks and minerals. As we learn more and more about esoteric approaches to Earth sciences,
ion probes, mass spectrometers, gas chromatography, magnetometers, it's easy to lose sight of the
fundamental importance of the rocks themselves and of trekking to remote locations across the globe
to retrieve samples, document their geological context. No matter how sophisticated our labs
might become, there is simply no substitute for the arduous, often dangerous, utterly
exhilarating study of our planet in the field. And what we find all across the globe are three
basic kinds of rocks. You find igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic rocks, which collectively make
up Earth's great cycle of rock formation. Think about what we've learned about rocks on earliest
Earth. When it was formed, there were no rocks anywhere. During Earth's initial accretion and
certainly again following the impact of the Earth was entirely molten. It was a glowing magma ball
orbiting the Sun with no solid land, no oceans of water, no atmosphere, but as surface temperatures
dropped below the melting point of rocks, a black crust solidified, much as that first layer of ice
forms in a pond in winter. Those first solid rocks at Earth's surface were examples of igneous rocks,
rocks that form from the hot molten state. Basalt is an igneous rock, as is granite.
Igneous rocks come in two principal types, both of which we've met frequently in Earth's early
stages. Volcanic rocks or extrusive rocks form quickly at Earth's surface as magma solidifies
in air. These are by far the most spectacular of all rock forming events with red hot fountains and
flows of lava oozing down the slopes of growing volcanic cones. Basalt comes to the surface in
this way crystallizing quickly into small grains. Similarly, if the raw materials for granite erupt
to the surface, they can produce a fine grain material called rhyolite. Volcanic rocks also
include accumulations of ash, cinders, other debris that can travel long distances in the air
before they settle into layers at the surface. You may recall recent events in Iceland or Alaska
or Mount Etna in Italy where volcanic ash disrupted air travel. The second major type of igneous rocks
harden underground, typically forming larger grains and are called intrusive rocks. You can imagine
how in the vicinity of a volcano there are reservoirs of magma underground and some of that magma
solidifies before it gets to the surface. So for example basalt often exploits underground cracks
near volcanoes to form vertical breaks called dykes and horizontal or slanted layers or sheets
of igneous rock called sills. The raw materials for basalt also crystallize more slowly underground,
producing a more coarse grained intrusive rock called gabbro. A great example is the palisades
on the Hudson River near New York City which formed in this way. Less dense than basalt or gabbro,
granite is perhaps the most common intrusive rock in earth's continental crust. Granite is tough,
as valued as a building in ornamental stone, the wing that is particularly famous for its many fine
granite quarries. Earth's first crust was composed almost entirely of igneous rocks, but sedimentary
rocks, the second of our three major groups, account for two-thirds of all rocks exposed on
earth's surface today. They form wherever fragments of other rocks accumulate into layers. You can
imagine that process occurring on early earth. When the first rains began to fall on the first
igneous rocks, the process of weathering began. Small mineral grains were washed off those recently
hardened volcanic rocks, basalt and granite, lots of grains, quartz, belt spark, pyroxene,
and the occasional tiny red zircon. They flowed down through streams and rivers, were laid down
into layers in shallow lakes and on the ocean floor. Weathering also occurred by chemically
dissolving rocks and by the mechanical action of water freezing in cracks. Over time, thick layers
of sediment accumulated, especially in big, fan-like deltas at the mouths of rivers. These
sediment layers can reach incredible thicknesses in many places on earth right now, like the
Mississippi River Delta that extends into the Gulf of Mexico. Sediments are miles deep.
Sediments start as loosely consolidated grains, just like the sand at the beach,
but when sediments are buried deep, the temperature and pressure increases, and hot water flows
through the sand and silt layers dissolving and re-depositing glue-like chemicals. All that pressure,
the heat, the effects of mineral-laden water welded the bits of sediment together into new
layered rocks. Depending on the grain size, we have conglomerate with big pebbles or sandstone with
medium-sized grains or shale and mudstone made of finer grain silt and clays, and when lots of
dead plant matter accumulate, you can get sedimentary deposits of peat or of coal.
Every sedimentary rock tells an amazing story. Some very uniform sedimentary rocks form at the base
of a single mountain or cliff from one kind of rock. That's common on volcanic islands like
Hawaii, where a lot of the sand on a black beach comes from weathering of basalt. But at other
places, the collection of sand grains accumulates from many different localities. Imagine the big
delta at the mouth of the Mississippi River. Those grains come from cliffs in Minnesota,
valleys in Pennsylvania, mountains in Texas, more. In the same way, the sediments deposited near the
mouth of the Colorado River carry bits of history for much of the North American West.
A great and relaxing way to get an appreciation of sedimentary rocks is at the beach. Just pick up
a handful of sand and you'll see every grain is different. Some are light colored, others dark.
Some are smooth, others angular, and think how each grain once was part of a far away rock.
As that rock weathered away, that grain was chipped off, carried to your hand by wind and by water.
Eventually, probably millions of years from now, the sand you hold in your hand will be
transformed into solid rock. Indeed, the story of a single sand grain provides a good metaphor
for the way that all earth's atoms are recycled. Those atoms are always shifting around, but it's
always the same matter recycling over and over again. So far, all the sedimentary rocks I've
mentioned formed from tiny particles or sediments. But many sedimentary rocks formed directly by
chemical precipitation from water. One familiar example is salt deposits from a dried up salty
lake. There are places where immense layers of salt have accumulated. Some of those have been
mined for centuries for table salt. But lots of other chemicals can form rocks by precipitation.
The most common of these is limestone, which forms from calcium carbonate.
Early in Earth's history, carbonate minerals were deposited directly from the ocean. Later, by
contrast, most carbonate was formed by living sea creatures, especially corals, so most big
limestone formations are clear signs of life. In fact, limestone often holds beautiful fossils
of ancient animals that lived near those coral reefs. Wherever you travel around the world,
you're likely to encounter many common varieties of sedimentary rock. They're really easy to spot
in road cuts and outcrops because of the distinctive layered appearance. In fact, some of the most
amazing scenic places in North America, Bryson Zion National Parks, the Grand Canyon, the
Canadian Rockies, and many other places feature spectacular sedimentary rock formations.
The rich variety of metamorphic rocks encompasses the third great group of rocks on Earth. As
igneous or sedimentary rocks are slowly buried deep, they're subjected to intense heat,
and pressure, and they can transform into new kinds of rocks. For example, shale or mudstone
will turn into layers of brittle hard slate. That's a kind of rock sometimes used for roofing shingles
or old-school blackboards. And even higher temperatures and pressure slate transforms
into phylloid, which has more luster and then into beautiful banded schists and ultimately
nices, which often have crystals of garnets and other high-pressure minerals. You can recognize
road cuts and outcrops of these metamorphic rocks because they look like a giant cross-section of
a swirled marble cake. Sandstone quartz also metamorphizes when it is exposed to high temperature
and pressure. The original sand grains confuse into a solid mass known as quartzite. And when
a limestone is subjected to high pressure and temperature, it can transform into marble.
If you ever travel the roads of Vermont, chances are you'll pass an outcrop or a road cut
of distinctive greenish white cast, a rock with intricate bands and swirls. Marbles take a high
polish and have been prized for many centuries by sculptors and architects. Igneous, sedimentary,
metamorphic rocks all participate in the rock cycle. Igneous rocks once form can be weathered
to form sedimentary rocks or they can undergo metamorphism. Layers of sedimentary rocks can
also be transformed into metamorphic rocks. And all three kinds of rocks can be partially melted
and reformed as new igneous rocks. In this way, the rock cycle never ceases.
There's one more crucial aspect to understanding the rock cycle, and that's time. It often takes
immense spans of time, hundreds of millions of years to make new rocks or transform them.
This discovery of deep time was made more than 200 years ago by the Scottish geologist James
Hutton, who lived in Edinburgh from 1726 to 1797 and who's often called the founder of modern
geology. James Hutton reached his great insight near the town of Jedbur, where spectacular sea
cliffs reveal vertical layers of rock overlaid by horizontal layers. Now how could such a sequence
have occurred? Hutton studied these remarkable cliffs and he realized that he was seeing the
end product of a long chain of events. The obvious first step must have been that a sequence of
sediments was deposited in the normal way as horizontal flat layers, one on top of another.
Step two, those layers had to be buried sufficiently deep that hot mineral-rich
fluid cemented them into sedimentary rocks. Then third, some kind of tectonic activity
must have disrupted those layers, pushing them from the sides, thus breaking and folding them
until they were tilted nearly vertically. And after that, third step, those vertical layers
of rocks had to be lifted up and eroded down to create a new surface with a vertical base
exposed. That's step four, but we're only halfway done. After still more tectonic activity, the
vertical beds of rock found themselves at the bottom of an ocean or a shallow sea, so rocks
had to sink or else sea levels had to rise. And then another sequence of sediment layers was
deposited on top of the older contorted rocks and then those sediments had to be buried and
turned into solid rock. And finally, another episode of uplift and erosion has brought the rocks
to the surface where the ocean is eroding a steep cliff and exposing everything to Hutton's view.
Well, Hutton not only recognized this complex sequence of events,
but he also realized that all those processes, sedimentation, burial, uplift, tectonic forces,
more, they're acting today, albeit very slowly. He concluded that the same geological forces
must have been operating for an almost unimaginably long time. Each step of the formation process
must have taken tens to hundreds of millions of years. In order for a formation like the one at
Jedburg to exist, Earth had to exist not for thousands of years or even hundreds of thousands
of years, but for many hundreds of millions of years. Thanks to Hutton and his successors,
we now know the Earth's age is more than 4.5 billion years and the existence of structures
like the one at Jedburg become comprehensible. In the words of Hutton himself, the testimony of
the rocks offered no vestige of a beginning, no prospect of an end. Hutton had captured a crucial
feature of what we call the rock cycle, where surface rocks are ceaselessly broken down and
become the raw materials for creation of new rocks. And once we combine the ideas of this lecture,
continental drift, and Earth's great rock cycle and the power of deep time, we're ready to explore
the force that unifies all of these observations and provides Earth's mightiest agent of change,
plate tectonics.
