We've come to the penultimate lecture of our journey through Earth history, and as with
the previous lecture, I want to look ahead at changes that most certainly will happen.
In many respects, we can expect Earth a million years from now to be a mirror on our own times.
Our planet will not have changed very much.
The continents will have shifted some, but no more than 30 or 40 miles from their present
relative locations, so the globe won't look all that different.
The sun will still rise every 24 hours, and the moon will still orbit Earth every 27 days
or so.
At the local scale, some things will have changed quite a bit.
In many places, slow, accumulated geological processes will transform the landscape.
Those wonderful Miocene Age cliffs in Calvert County, in Maryland, I told you about collecting
fossils there in lecture 6, those cliffs are eroding as much as a couple of feet a year,
and the county is only about 5 miles across, so I suspect that Calvert County will have
disappeared completely.
At present rates, Calvert County won't last 50,000 years, much less a million.
At the same time, in other states, geological processes are adding new real estate.
There's a new ocean floor volcano off the southeast coast of Hawaii's Big Island that's
already almost 2 miles high, though it's still completely submerged.
It's growing larger every year, and perhaps a million years from now it will be a big
new Hawaiian island.
In fact, it's already been named Lauihi.
Meanwhile, the older, extinct Hawaiian islands to the northwest, including Maui, Oahu, and
Kauai, will all become smaller through wind and wave erosion, and these ways the next
million years of Earth's geological story will simply mimic what's been happening
for hundreds of millions of years.
The next 50,000 years of Earth's story is in rather sharper focus.
Geologists are now scrutinizing the recent rock record to see what's in store, and they
conclude that by far the most significant changes to Earth's geography will come not
from shifting continents, but from rises and drops in sea level.
Surprising new research suggests that these changes are inevitable, and that they can
approach 10 feet per century.
Lots of factors contribute to sea level, some more obvious than others.
In the long term, the process of plate tectonics plays a big role.
For example, changes in the rate of sea floor volcanism have an influence as more or less
lava solidifies on the ocean floor.
Sea level drops when there's less ocean volcanism, and sea floor rocks cool and contract.
Another factor related to plate tectonics is the position of continents.
The presence or absence of big shallow seas like the Mediterranean, and the assembly or
breakup of supercontinents affects the extent of shallow coastal waters which in turn affects
the global sea level.
Yet, another subtle factor is the thermal expansion of ocean water, which increases
the volume of oceans during periods of global warming.
That effect alone can increase average sea levels by as much as 10 feet.
Yet these and other mechanisms of sea level change are minor compared to the dominant
role of ice.
On historical timescales of a few hundred to a few thousand years, the depth of the
oceans is tied primarily to the total volume of Earth's ice, and that includes the polar
ice caps, glaciers, and continental ice sheets.
The equation is simple.
The greater the volume of water tied up in ice on land, the lower the sea level.
If we're going to say with any confidence what will happen in the future, we have to
have a method of determining the depth of historic oceans.
We now have a very accurate measure in the form of satellite observations of ocean levels,
but those are measurements that are restricted to the past two decades or so.
There's a somewhat longer record, perhaps a century and a half in some places, of tide
gauge measurements, but those values are intrinsically less accurate and are subject
to local idiosyncrasies.
Going back into the recent geological record, we can resort to mapping a variety of ancient
shoreline markers in some places that are clear raised beach terraces, which can be
dated by fossil shells.
Those features can be found in sediments dating back tens of thousands of years.
The problem is that those kinds of elevated features can only reveal periods when the
water level was higher.
A similar kind of data can be obtained from the positions of fossil corals, which have
to grow in the ocean's relatively shallow photix zone.
One complication is that those older rock formations often have experienced episodes
of uplift or subsidence or tilting, so the actual sea level change is obscured.
To tease out sea level changes, many scientists are now focusing on what might seem a less
obvious indicator of sea level.
That is the ratio of oxygen isotopes in tiny seashells.
Oxygen isotopes may be the best key to unlocking the volume of Earth's ice in the past.
If we know the volume of ancient ice, we can make a pretty good guess about sea level changes.
This connection between ice volumes and oxygen isotopes is tricky.
In lecture 21 we saw that the most abundant oxygen isotope, fully 99.8% of what we breathe,
is the lighter oxygen, 16.
Only about 1 in 500 oxygen atoms is the heavier oxygen, 18.
So about 1 in every 500 water molecules in the ocean is heavier than the average.
When the sun heats ocean water at the equator, water with less massive oxygen, 16 evaporates
faster than oxygen, 18.
So water in low-latitude clouds is less massive on average than the oceans from which they
came.
Those clouds rise to cooler zones where water with the heavier oxygen, 18 isotope condenses
into rain drops a bit faster than oxygen, 16.
And that means the cloud's oxygen becomes even less massive than it was before.
Now when those clouds inevitably move to the poles, their water molecules have become much
lighter on average than the oceans.
And when the polar clouds add snow to the ice caps and glaciers, those less massive water
molecules are locked in the ice, while the oceans become enriched in heavier water.
During those times when ice is at a maximum when 5% or more of earth's water is frozen
solid, the oceans become significantly enriched in heavy oxygen, 18, and during times of glacial
retreat, oxygen 18 levels in the oceans decline.
The trick is that shells which have preserved as fossils record the oxygen isotope history
of the oceans.
So geologists conduct careful layer by layer measurements of oxygen isotope ratios in microscopic
shells which in this way reveal how the extent of earth's ice cover has varied through time.
One group doing this kind of research is led by geologist Ken Miller at Rutgers University
in New Jersey.
They've spent many years analyzing a thick deposit of marine sediments extending back
100 million years that covers coastal New Jersey.
They extract those microscopic fossil shells called foraminifera or forams that we met
three lectures ago.
Each tiny form preserves the oxygen isotope record of the oceans at the time when it grew.
By measuring oxygen isotopes layer by layer, Miller and colleagues get an estimate of the
ice volume through time.
I think their conclusions are absolutely astounding.
It turns out that over and over again in the relatively recent geological past, earth's
ice caps and glaciers have advanced and receded, with correspondingly large changes in the
sea level on a timescale of few thousand years.
Miller and colleagues find that at the height of recent ice ages more than five percent
of earth's water was trapped in ice, which means that sea levels must have been lowered
by more than 300 feet from their present mark.
One such period occurred about 20,000 years ago when the low ocean level created a land
bridge between Asia and North America across what is now the Bering Strait.
Some archaeologists think that was the original passageway for humans and other mammals to
come to the New World from Asia.
The globe looked very different back then.
There was no English channel and a dry valley connected the British Isles to France.
Those times were in sharp contrast to times of maximum warming when glaciers largely disappear
and ice caps got a lot smaller.
The evidence is clear that sea levels may have repeatedly risen by as much as 300 feet
higher than today.
Think about that, a 300 foot sea level rise would submerge hundreds of thousands of square
miles of coastal areas around the globe.
And these changes haven't occurred just once or twice.
Miller has documented more than 100 cycles of significant glacial advance and retreat
in the past nine million years.
In the last million years alone, sea levels have risen by more than 100 feet and fallen
by a similar amount at least a dozen times.
That means, according to this model, there were a dozen wild swings of 200 feet or more
in ocean level.
What could cause such extreme changes?
Details certainly vary from cycle to cycle, but these events are clearly periodic and
are probably related to the so-called Volankovitch cycles.
About a century ago, Serbian astrophysicist Militon Milankovitch discovered that three
well-known variations in Earth's orbit, elliptical orbit, tilt of the axis, and a slight wobble
in its rotation axis, result in cycles of climate change with intervals of roughly 20,000, 41,000,
and 100,000 years.
Solar energy exerts a profound effect on global climate, and these variations collectively
affect the amount of sunlight hitting Earth.
Currently, all three are moderating the amount of sunlight.
Given that context, what can we say about the next 50,000 years?
Unless the human race comes up with some pretty extraordinary global engineering plans, we
can be confident the sunlight Earth absorbs will go through cycles, and sea levels will
continue to vary dramatically.
At times, probably over the next 20,000 years, ice caps will grow, glaciers will advance,
and sea levels will decrease by 200 feet or more.
Remember that low level that has occurred many times over the past million years.
The biggest change will be to coastlines.
A 200-foot drop in sea level means the east coast of the United States will shift dozens
of miles to the east as more of the shallow continental slope is exposed.
All east coast harbors from Boston to Miami will be high and dry inland cities.
New ice and land bridges will connect Alaska to Russia and the British Isles to mainland
Europe.
Of course, in the case of sea level, what goes down must also go up.
It's very possible that over the next 1,000 years sea levels will increase by more than
100 feet.
That's not a huge rise by geological standards, but it will dramatically alter the map of
the United States.
A 100-foot rise in sea level would submerge almost all the coastal plain of the east coast
shorelines, which shipped up to 100 miles westward.
Every major east coast city, including Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Wilmington, Baltimore,
Washington, Charleston, Savannah, Jacksonville, Miami, and more would be completely submerged.
Only a few skyscrapers will poke above the waves.
Los Angeles, San Francisco, San Diego, and Seattle would drown.
Indeed, almost all of Florida, except for what would become an island on the panhandle,
would be gone.
The distinctive peninsula would be completely submerged in a shallow sea.
Almost all of Delaware and Louisiana would be underwater, too.
And it's hard to imagine the consequences of a 100-foot rise in sea level in other parts
of the world.
Entire countries, Holland, Bangladesh, the Maldives would be no more.
And because coastal areas are so heavily populated, billions of people would lose their homes.
There could be no doubt about these coming changes.
Global record is unambiguous.
And if, as most experts predict, global climate change is accelerating, then waters will rise
soon, perhaps as much as a foot per decade, a whopping 10 feet in the next century.
Such changes will pose severe challenges to human society, but they'd have very little
effect on planet Earth.
So let's now narrow our focus to the next century.
The time that will have the greatest impact on our children and their children.
It's just a fact of human nature that most of us don't care about the distant future.
A few billion years, or a few million years, or even a thousand years is just too far away
to lose sleep.
We're much more concerned with the short term.
How will your child or grandchild be able to afford college in 10 years?
Will you get that raise next year?
Will the stock market go up next week?
What's for dinner?
If we want to adopt that near-term view, then we probably have little to worry about, barring
an unforeseen cataclysm like an asteroid impact, Earth next year, or next decade is
going to seem pretty much like it does today.
By and large, the difference is from one year to the next will be small, maybe too small
to notice.
Not certainly true, we may experience an uncharacteristically hot summer, or big wildfires, or a croup-croup-withering
drought, or maybe a spade of unusually severe weather, but those changes are incremental
and not out of the range of past experience.
We can be absolutely certain that Earth will continue to change.
Earth always changes, hotter or colder, wetter or drier, higher sea level or lower sea level.
Now present indicators point to a coming episode of significant global warming and melting
glaciers, and these changes are very likely accelerating because of human activities.
And these changes could have pretty significant consequences for human civilization.
I saw some of these possible consequences first-hand in the summer of 2007 when I participated
in a Cavalry Futures Symposium in remote Illuliset, Greenland.
Illuliset is a picturesque fishing village on the west coast, and it's a short distance
south of the Arctic Circle.
It turned out to be a perfect choice for a discussion of the future, because striking
changes were happening immediately outside our conference center as borne out by a 1,000-year-old
oral tradition at Illuliset.
The harbor is located near the calving front of the mighty Illuliset Glacier.
That harbor has served as rich fishing grounds for a thousand years, and for a thousand years
the fishermen had to resort to ice fishing in the winter, because the harbor always froze
solid every year.
But in 2000, for the first time in a thousand years, the harbor was open and unfrozen in
the winter.
And it's been that way every winter since.
In the past decade, the giant glacier has been receding at an astonishing rate, almost
six miles in three years after many decades of stability.
And there's another telltale sign of change.
For a thousand years, Illuliset and nearby native villages were free of insect pests
year-round.
But in 2007, the mosquitoes and black flies arrived in August for the very first time.
Now, these are admittedly anecdotes.
But every sign points to fundamental systematic changes in climate as similar kinds of changes
are occurring across the globe.
Old timers who have worked in the Chesapeake Bay report consistently higher high tides
than a few decades ago.
Every year, the Sahara Desert is encroaching farther north and turning once fertile farmland
into dust.
Arctic ice shells are melting and breaking off at increasing rates, average global temperatures
for air and for water arising.
The pattern is clear and consistent, and it's one that Earth has experienced many times
before and will experience many times in the future.
Global warming can have paradoxical effects.
As we saw two lectures ago, the Gulf Stream is a vast ocean current that carries warm
water from the equator to the North Atlantic.
It is powered by temperature differences between the equator and higher latitudes,
and thus transfers heat from the tropics to northern Europe.
If global warming reduces that temperature contrast as many climate modelers suggest,
then the Gulf Stream might slow or even stop.
Paradoxically one consequence of this warming would be to make the British Isles and northern
Europe much colder than they are today, and other ocean currents would also be affected,
and the alteration of the current from the Indian Ocean to the South Atlantic past the
Horn of Africa might cause a big shift in the mild South African climate, while changing
the monsoon rains that keep parts of Asia wet and fertile.
And then that biggest change as ice melts, sea level increases.
Predictions vary, mostly from the range of several inches to three feet in the next century.
But there are big uncertainties.
If Antarctic or Greenland melting accelerates, then much faster increases of up to a foot
a decade, ten feet over the next century, may result.
There are suggestions that such rapid sea changes have occurred in the past.
A few feet over a century may be manageable in most populated coastal areas, for a while
for a generation or two, most people won't have to worry, though inconvenient events
like the flooding of New York's subway system during Hurricane Sandy in October 2012 may
become a lot more frequent.
Changing climates may not be kind to some animal and plant species.
Loss of North Polar ice is reducing the habitat of polar bears, and adding significant challenges
to that shrinking population.
Rapidly shifting climate zones will also stress many threatened species, most notably
birds which are susceptible to alterations in migratory nesting and feeding areas.
A recent report estimated that a two degree rise in average global temperature can trigger
extinction rates among birds about 40% in Europe, and perhaps exceeding 70% in Australia's
rainforests.
At least a third of the 6,000 known species of frogs, toads and salamanders are also endangered
because a deadly amphibian fungal disease that thrives as temperatures rise.
Large animals whose habitats are disappearing are in even more danger.
In fact, unless we develop new genetic technologies, then it's likely that species such as tigers,
polar bears, humpback whales, pandas, gorillas, and countless thousands more will disappear.
It can be little doubt that we're entering a time of accelerated extinction.
So if climate change is a constant aspect of Earth's behavior, should we be concerned?
Turns out that rates of change, not change per se, are the biggest concern.
Most of Earth's changes like sedimentation, erosion, opening oceans, rising mountains
are extremely slow compared to a human lifespan.
These phenomena take hundreds of millions of years.
It's easy to adapt, so we simply don't need to worry about those changes.
Other geological events are all been instantaneous.
Great earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, or heaven forbid and asteroid impact.
Humans are not as well prepared for the once-in-a-century storm or earthquake, much less the truly
catastrophic once-in-a-thousand-year disaster like a mega-volcano.
Nevertheless, it's clear from Earth's story that such events are an integral part of our
planet's past and our future, and humans have always learned to adapt and, at least
as a species, we survive such natural disasters.
In between those very slow and very fast events are a variety of cyclical geological processes
that would usually occur over hundreds or thousands of years that include shifts in
climate and sea level and in ecosystems.
Change changes are usually noticeable only over several generations, and it turns out
that these are the kinds of fluctuations for which we have the most uncertainty.
Climate, sea level, and ecosystems all are subject to feedback loops, and all of them
can reach tipping points.
If the climate is pushed too far and positive feedback loops kick in, then it's possible
that a switch in climate that normally takes a thousand years could happen much faster,
maybe even in a decade or two.
A significant topic of scientific discussion these days regards tipping points.
Are we approaching a climate tipping point?
If so, how severe will it be, and is there anything we can do or should do to mitigate
the change?
There's no question that atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide are increasing faster than
at any time in the known geological record.
Will that increase cause an enhanced greenhouse effect, and will warming trigger an even faster
methane release?
We simply don't know, and global models aren't yet accurate enough to predict.
And that's the thing about tipping points.
It's really difficult to see them before they've happened.
Look at the events in recent history.
The housing bubble bursts.
The people of Egypt revolt.
The stock market crashes.
We recognize what has happened only in retrospect, only when it's too late to do much about it,
and the same might be true for Earth's climate.
But change is nothing new to Earth.
Every stage of Earth's epic history, the big thwack, the origin of life, the great oxidation
event, snowball Earth, the rise of the terrestrial biosphere, experience change, climate change,
sea levels change, oceans and continents change, the rains and winds change, fertile valleys
and dry deserts change, and the nature and distribution of life across Earth's surface
and within the seas change.
Global change is a fact.
It's a given.
We can no more stop these changes than we can alter Earth's trajectory through the cosmos.
It's also good news that no matter what we do, we cannot possibly destroy life on Earth,
or even stop its evolution.
Life has insinuated itself into every niche of the globe from high in the atmosphere to
deep underground.
There's life in frozen Arctic ice, in boiling acid pools, and on specks of wind-borne dust
many miles above the ground.
So whether there's a global rise in temperature or increased water and air pollution or overfishing
the oceans, life will go on.
For billions of years to come, our planetary home will rotate on its axis and orbit the
sun.
For billions of years, Earth will be a living planet with blue oceans, green lands, and
white clouds.
For another billion years, at least, Earth will be no less beautiful than it is today.
As to recent discussions about global warming, the basic fact is that the carbon dioxide
level has increased by about 50% from less than 300 to more than 400 parts per million,
and it's still climbing where the speed apparently unmatched in possibly hundreds of millions
of years as a result of extensive burning of carbon-based fossil fuels.
Some changes in climate have to follow, as surely as the laws of physics, the higher
average temperatures of oceans and land must release some methane from methane hydrates,
both from the Arctic tundra and from offshore continental slopes.
As a result, Earth will get hotter.
It's already happening.
And as a consequence, ice will melt, and ocean levels will rise.
We can watch this happen year to year.
Climate change may create challenges for some regions of the globe, but those changes are
really nothing new for Earth.
I'd be remiss in this lecture series if I didn't at least ask why should we care whether
human actions are causing these changes.
And here, many of my colleagues and I conclude that our concern should focus not on change
per se, but on what is appearing to be the extremely rapid rate of change.
The geological record holds clear clues about how fast Earth's environment has changed
in the past.
Recent studies suggest that the composition of the atmosphere, unless the possible rate
of greenhouse warming, is changing faster than at any other time in at least many tens
of millions of years.
The testimony of the rocks and their fossils also reveals that life experiences great stress
at tipping points, for example, during times of sudden climate shifts.
The fossil record has also cleared that ecosystems don't always adapt quickly or successfully
when long-established patterns of temperature and rainfall are disrupted.
Biological productivity, and that includes agricultural output, may drop suddenly.
And it appears that when climate change is rapid, the larger animals often go extinct
at a higher rate.
Given the present world population, a significant drop in food production would have extremely
serious consequences.
It's important to remember that the kinds of changes we're talking about have happened
many times before in geological history.
The boundary between land and water has at times been hundreds of feet lower, at other
times it's been hundreds of feet higher, but never before in Earth's history have
so many people lived by the sea.
Of course, if sea levels rise, people can move farther inland, but what happens when
millions of square miles of productive farmland are flooded, when seaports are drowned and
many livelihoods are lost?
There's a common phrase in environmental advocacy, to save the planet.
The fact is, after 4.567 billion years of almost constant, sometimes violent change
our planet really doesn't need saving.
It's more pertinent to focus our efforts instead on saving the whales.
Or polar bears, for extinction of those charismatic animals would be permanent and undeniably
sad.
But taking the long view, even the extinction of those wonderful creatures, or elephants,
or pandas, or rhinos, or a thousand other species, some of which are charismatic, but
most of which are mundane, is just a temporary loss.
Evolution has always repopulated Earth with amazing new kinds of plants and animals, and
it takes only a geological moment to fill those vacant niches.
Might only take a million years or roughly two hundredths of a percent of Earth history.
Large mammals, possibly even we, ourselves may go extinct, but other vertebrates, perhaps
the birds, will rather quickly fill the gap.
Recent research shows that penguins evolve particularly rapidly, so I can imagine a time
when penguins survive and radiate to fill other niches.
Think of cute little penguins morphing into whale-like penguins and tiger-like penguins
and horse-like penguins.
It's also conceivable that some far future penguin lineage will develop big brains and
grasping fingers and thus become Earth's next technological species.
The point is not that penguins are about to take over the world.
In fact, several penguin species face stresses similar to those faced by large mammals and
may go extinct.
The point is that life adapts in surprising ways and that we shouldn't worry too much
about the overall prospects for life on Earth.
Whatever we do, Earth will continue to be a living world.
No, if we decide to worry about rapid change, then first and foremost we should be concerned
about our own human family, for it is we who are most at risk.
No matter what we do to the air and the water, no matter how many fish we catch or forest
we burn, Earth will survive and thrive and be as rich in evolutionary potential as ever.
Earth's past holds lessons for us today, lessons preserved in the rich record of the
rocks.
For thousands of years, our human family has been wise and curious enough to learn the
story of Earth, to know our home.
And if we continue to observe and understand our planet, then surely we can learn those
lessons in time.
