We're beginning to see that planetary systems evolve.
They change through time.
What's more, each new evolutionary stage depends on the prior sequence of stages.
Changes are often gradual, taking millions or even billions of years to transform a planet's
near-surface environment.
But sudden, violent, and irreversible events can forever alter a world in minutes.
So it was with Earth.
So formation of the moon was one of the most violent and transformative events in the history
of our solar system.
It's taken centuries of accumulated evidence and some pretty wild theories to understand
this remarkable history.
For a time in the mid-20th century, three very different hypotheses vied for support.
But it turns out that all three ideas were simply wrong.
It was only with NASA's successful Apollo missions of the late 1960s and early 1970s
when humans first set foot on the moon and returned hundreds of pounds of precious lunar
rocks that the true story of the moon's birth emerged.
And that story is absolutely amazing.
In the last several lectures, we've seen how scientists have gathered concrete evidence
for the formation of the solar system.
The most important tangible evidence comes in the form of actual ancient samples.
There are the microscopic pre-solar dust grains, and also the rich variety of meteorites,
the primitive chondrites, and the more evolved achondrites.
Recall that solar systems form in vast, irregular space clouds, those immense stellar nurseries.
They have dust, they have gas, they collapsed into rotating disks, and those can stretch
trillions of miles in diameter.
Once in a while, the shockwave of an exploding star is going to disturb such a cloud, triggering
a new star system.
Most of a nebula's mass, much more than 99% of the mass, rapidly falls inward by gravity
to form the central star, while planet-forming leftovers progressively clump into larger
bits.
First, you have sand-sized grains, then pebble-sized collections, and fifth-sized fluffballs of
these primordial dust.
These objects hold a very limited repertoire of a dozen or so air minerals, which are mixed
with frozen water and condensed gases.
The solar system begins to take shape when the young star ignites and bathes the nearby
concentrations of dust and gas with a blast of heat.
In our own solar system, that stellar ignition occurred almost 4.6 billion years ago, with
pulses of heat that melted and remixed elements and produced scores of new mineral species.
Among the mineralogical novelties of this earliest stage of Earth's evolution were
the first iron nickel metals, along with exotic compounds of nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorus,
silicon, oxygen.
Those of the minerals still found in the most primitive chondrite meteorites as the chilled
droplets of molten rocks, the chondrales, and the CAIs.
These planet-forming chondrites quickly clumped into planet-hesimals, some of which grew to
hundreds of miles or more in diameter.
That's large enough to partially melt and then differentiate into an egg-like arrangement
of distinctive mineral zones.
There's a dense, metal-rich core that's like the egg's yolk.
And then the magnesium silicate mantle, that's the egg white.
And finally, the planet-hesimals very thin, cold and brittle crust, which is analogous
to the egg's shell.
The largest planet-hesimals experienced a range of alteration that produced lots of
new minerals.
Some minerals formed from internal heating, others formed from reactions with water, and
a few from the intense shock of frequent collisions in that crowded solar suburbs.
So we now find at least 250 different mineral species in meteorites.
All of those formed as a consequence of these extremely dynamic planet-forming processes.
Those 250 minerals are the raw materials from which every rocky planet, including Earth,
must form.
All those minerals are still found today in the wide variety of meteorites that still
fall to Earth.
Earth formed relatively quickly from all these countless scattered bits and pieces.
Big planetary building blocks kept accumulating into larger and larger planet-hesimals.
It's all the result of gravity.
Every object was attracted to every other by gravitational forces, and the larger the
objects, the greater the force.
So gravitational attractions triggered a succession of increasingly dramatic collisions.
The final stages of this process occurred in episodes of violence almost beyond imagining.
Once every few thousand years, a mini-planet, perhaps hundreds of miles across, smacked
into the proto-Earth, and it was swallowed whole.
It took time for Earth to settle down into something of a routine.
Volcanoes, they must have sprouted up all across the globe, from equator to poles.
The atmosphere thickened with the addition of more and more volcanic gases, and steamy
bodies of water with great geysers may have gained a foothold in cooler crustal areas.
Earth could have entered an extended period of external cooling and internal differentiation.
This story of Earth's origin seems to be neat and tidy, except for one striking detail.
The Moon is way too big to ignore, and for much of the past two centuries, the presence
of the Moon has proven exceedingly difficult to explain.
Now, small moons are pretty easy to understand.
Mars has two small moons called Phobos and Deimos, and these two irregular objects are
just a few miles across.
They're basically city-sized rocks orbiting Mars, and they appear to be nothing more than
captured asteroids.
Some of the dozens of moons that orbit the outer planets are much, much larger.
Some of them are hundreds of miles, even a thousand miles or more in diameter, but they're
relatively tiny compared to their planets.
Even the largest of these moons are much less than a thousandth of the masses of their
giant, gas giant hosts, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune.
It's now thought that the largest moons of those planets formed from the unclaimed remnants
of planet formations.
So they were formed from lots of smaller bits, just like miniature solar systems.
Earth's moon, Earth's moon, by contrast, is relatively huge compared to the planet
it orbits.
Our moon is more than a quarter of Earth's diameter, and it's about one eightieth of
its mass.
That's uniquely large for a moon in our solar system.
So where did the moon come from?
Here we need to step back from the specific problem of the moon's origins and think about
how science is done.
Physics and chemistry, they deal with phenomena where there's a pretty obvious connection
between causes and effects.
You can often design experiments and apply rigorous mathematical theory.
That's quite different from what are sometimes called the historical sciences, especially
Earth and planetary sciences.
Understanding Earth history depends on creative storytelling.
Of course, the stories have to more or less conform to the facts.
And if more than one story seems to fit the observations, then geologists often adopt a
very cautious stance known as multiple working hypotheses.
Now that's a strategy familiar to anyone who enjoys detective novels, who have several
suspects.
You collect facts, and those facts help winnow out possibilities.
This open-minded approach where scientists consider several possible answers at once,
often without even taking sides, appears to be a lot less common in the exacting fields
of physics and chemistry.
In physics and chemistry, you have immutable natural laws and mathematical rigor that would
seem to suggest only one plausible solution to any problem.
And I might say as an aside, I have to confess that many of us in Earth science, scientists,
we wonder if that's one stark contrast between the scientific disciplines that might have
something to do with why there are noble prizes in physics and chemistry, but not in geology.
It's amazing to me, the key people who developed the theory of plate tectonics, perhaps the
single most transformative discovery in the history of the Earth sciences, they weren't
eligible for science's most prestigious prize.
I want to stress that this idea of multiple working hypotheses doesn't mean that the
Earth sciences are somehow less rigorous than physics or chemistry.
And it certainly doesn't mean that there isn't one correct answer to questions like the origin
of the moon.
It's just that historical events can be very complex.
We have to tease out that history often in very clever and indirect ways.
So let's go back a century and a half, long before the historic Apollo moon landings beginning
in 1969, long before the recovery of pristine moon rocks, and long before we had access
to any careful geophysical measurements of the moon's interior.
Before we actually set foot on the moon, all we could do is look at it.
We could use telescopes to study the lunar surface.
We could measure the moon's orbit and its variations over time.
That's not a lot of data.
It's like trying to solve a murder mystery when you can see the crime scene from a distance,
but you can't set foot anywhere near the place.
Or can you actually talk to any of the suspects?
Three prime suspects stood out in this case of the massive moon.
The first widely accepted scientific hypothesis was the fission theory, proposed in 1878 by
George Howard Darwin.
Well, few people have heard of George Darwin, but you've certainly heard of his very famous
father, Charles Darwin, who proposed the theory of evolution by the process of natural selection.
And his mom, Emma Wedgwood Darwin, was also pretty well known as the granddaughter of
Josiah Wedgwood of Wedgwood Pottery fame.
So George Darwin was born in 1845.
He was the fifth child second son of Charles and Emma.
Three of the Darwin's sons took up science related careers, but George was arguably the
most successful of his generation.
Like his father, he rose to a professorship at Cambridge University.
His was in astronomy and philosophy.
And like his father, he won many prizes and medals for his work, most notably on the nature
of the tides, which is related to the moon.
Given George Darwin's interest in tides, it's not surprising that you think about the moon's
origin.
And his scenario imagines how the primordial molten earth must have spun on its axis so
rapidly that it stretched out and became elongated.
Eventually, a big glob of magma was flung off the surface into orbit, perhaps with a little
help from the sun's gravitational pull.
The moon in this model is like an earth bud that's just broken free.
He also went on to calculate how the moon must have been much closer to earth in the
distant past, and he estimated the rate at which they're continuing to move apart.
In one variant of this dramatic tale, the Pacific Ocean basin remains as a telltale
mark, sort of like Mother Earth's birthing scar.
On first hearing, this idea seems plausible.
We've all seen what happens when soft, elongated objects like pizza dough or a water droplet
spin too fast, they split apart in two.
Anyway, the fission theory imagines a pretty violent and dramatic event.
Wouldn't you have loved to see something like that from a nearby spaceship?
So that's George Darwin's vision theory.
A second competing idea is called the capture theory.
In this reasonable model, the moon is thought to have formed separately as one of the numerous
smaller planetesimals and occupied more or less the same distance from the sun and the
emerging solar system.
We know there must have been a lot of big planetesimals out there.
At some point, so this story goes, two orbiting bodies pass close enough to each other that
the larger earth captured the smaller moon.
So you can imagine the moon swinging into some kind of looping orbit that gradually
settles down, that somehow became gradually more circular.
We're now pretty sure that such a gravitational mechanism worked well enough for the smaller
rocky moons of Mars.
So why not for Earth's moon?
Now, unlike George Darwin's fission theory, that doesn't seem to have been any one
inventor of this capture theory.
I suppose it was a pretty obvious idea, so a number of astronomers just accepted it
as a good possibility.
It's fun to think about watching that capture process again from a spaceship.
I think about Earth and the moon in more or less the same orbits coming to close approach
and then the smaller moon curling around Earth.
And then the third, and perhaps the least dramatic hypothesis, is the coaccretion theory.
This model suggests that the moon formed more or less in the present location
and at about the same time as Earth.
And in this view, planets form around the sun from its leftovers, that includes all
the chondrite and achondrite meteorites that we learned about in lectures 12 and 13.
And then moons form around planets in exactly the same way from their leftovers.
And this is really a logical idea.
It's almost certain that the big moons of Jupiter and Saturn formed in this way.
And it's a common theme seen over and over again in the solar system.
Smaller objects accrete from clouds of dust, gas, and rocks around larger objects.
So why not our moon as well?
So we have three competing hypotheses.
There's George Darwin's fission theory.
There's the capture theory.
There's the coaccretion theory.
And which one is correct?
There are times in science when there's just not enough data to decide among
multiple working hypotheses.
One group of scientists will promote one favorite idea and others will promote another.
The debates can be very lively, sometimes even angry and bitter.
But without data, there's no real chance for a resolution that satisfies everyone.
Answers to the mystery of the moon's origins had to await data from the moon rocks.
The sixth Apollo landing is between July of 1969 and December of 1972 featured moon walks
by 12 NASA astronauts starting with Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin.
These missions resulted in a phenomenal collection of more than 840 pounds of moon rocks and soil
samples from six different sites.
There were also many other key lunar measurements such as gravity readings and seismic surveys.
The Apollo missions transformed planetary science in so many ways.
Sure, they were an unrivaled showcase for American technological prowess and our vibrato.
Undoubtedly, they provided a tremendous boost to the military industrial complex.
And the countless Apollo-inspired innovations from mini-computers to polymers to tang, remember
tang, they provided an economic driver that may well have paid for the 20 billion dollar
missions many times over.
It's not surprising that national pride and the race for the high ground,
not just lunar science, were primary drivers for those costly and dangerous early moon missions.
Even so, it would be hard to overstate the impact of the Apollo missions and their treasure trove
of moon rocks on my generation of Earth scientists.
For all of human history, the moon was tantalizingly close, less than a quarter million miles away
on a clear summer's evening as the full moon rises.
You feel like you can just reach out and touch it, but we had no samples.
We had nothing to tell us for sure of what the moon is made, nor when, nor where.
We had no real way of knowing for sure how the moon was formed.
And all that changed were the first batch of returned lunar samples.
For the first time, we had ground truth for our three competing theories.
We could, for the first time in human history, literally touch the moon.
In fact, now everyone can touch a piece of the moon as a visitor to the Smithsonian institution.
Okay, I have to tell you a story about those intense and exciting days.
It was amazing time.
This is the first incredible precious lunar samples that have arrived on Earth.
And my literal first breath of lunar samples came in the winter of 1969 to 1970,
during my senior year at MIT.
That was less than a half a year after Apollo 11's historic mission.
The stage was set a few months earlier.
On July 24, 1969, when the first humans to walk on the moon returned to Earth,
and those early days of lunar exploration concerns of contamination by alien microbes
dictated strict quarantine policies for astronauts and for their samples.
So as soon as their module splashed down in the Pacific near Hawaii,
as soon as they were retrieved by the USS Hornet, Neil Armstrong,
Buzz Aldrin, and Mike Collins, along with those 45 priceless pounds of rocks and soil
they brought home from space, all hermetically sealed in NASA's mobile quarantine facility.
From Hawaii, they were all shipped to Houston to the new lunar receiving laboratory,
where the space explorers and their samples were confined for almost three weeks,
in case something really nasty had accompanied the astronauts back to Earth.
All those precautions for samples from the totally sterile moon may seem a little extreme
to us now, but you have to remember that these were the very first humans to set foot on another
world, and we had no idea what to expect.
Fortunately, there were no lethal bugs, and during the next three years,
there were Apollo missions just about every six months.
The Apollo 12 lunar module, Intrepid, that's with astronauts Charles Conrad Jr.,
and Alan Bean, touched down on November 19, 1969, and a week later,
they returned about 70 pounds of moon rocks and soils, and those were whisked into the
Houston quarantine facilities. Now by good fortune, my master's thesis advisor, David Ones,
was a member of the Select Apollo 12 Lunar Sample Preliminary Examination Team,
and that small band of scientists, they had a glorious adventure of scrutinizing
those first lunar samples with a state-of-the-art arsenal of analytical machines.
Dave's expertise was igneous petrology. That's the study of the origin of rocks that form
from a magma. Now Apollo 11 had included a lot of impact rocks, fragmented rocks called breaches,
but virtually all of the Apollo 12 moon rocks were igneous in origin, so he was in geologist heaven.
In some ways, it must have been a hard duty being locked up for the better part of a month
with a few other intense scientists under the pressure of producing unassailable data on some
of the most costly and significant rock samples ever collected. And it also must have been so much
fun, especially for Dave Ones, who approached science with insatiable enthusiasm and with joy.
He loved the stories of the rocks. He conveyed that experience to every student and colleague he
met. His classroom demeanor was animated, it was engaged with lots of eye contact. He had vivid
anecdotes of rocks and minerals. In fact, I bet you he would have made a great professor in the
great courses series. Well, my first glimpse to the moon came up close on Dave's return from Houston.
I recall it so vividly. The elevator door opening on the 12th floor of the green building, that's
MIT's tallest building since it houses the meteorology department on the top floors. And there
was Dave. He sort of modest in statuary. He's got glasses. He's flanked by these two big uniform
gun-toting federal agents. And you see they were guarding the moon samples, which at that point
would have been worth millions of dollars on the collector's market. Every milligram of lunar
samples had to be accounted for. Okay, so here's Dave Ones. He looks tired. He looks nervous. He'd
been away for a long time. He's under constant scrutiny by the guards, and he still had a job to
do. When the subject of lunar samples comes up, most people immediately think of moon rocks,
perhaps something chunky you can hold in your hand. But a significant fraction of Apollo material
was lunar soil, what's known as regolith. The finest grain fraction of regolith is pulverized
rock and fragments so small, you can't resolve them in a microscope. It's the cumulative consequence
of billions of years of bombardment by a battery of cosmic insults from mighty asteroids to meteorites
to the incessant solar wind. You can get a sense of regolith by thinking about powders you've used.
The material is much, much finer than sand or granular sugar or salt. It's even finer than
flour. It's maybe a bit more like talcum powder or, you know, that black Xerox toner.
This ultrafine lunar powder has really strange properties. Most notably, the dust sticks to
itself and to just about everything else it touches. Dave Ones' task was to transfer some
of this powder from one larger vial into three or four smaller vials for distribution to nearby
Boston area laboratories. Well, I suppose it sounds really easy. All he had to do was dump
the powder from the big vial onto a three by three inch square piece of glassy surface
powder paper and then gently scoop small amounts into smaller vials. David performed similar
operations hundreds of times and it shouldn't have taken more than a minute. You know, but the
stakes were higher here. You got burly guards standing to either side and I know that would
make me nervous. And he also had a small group of his students watching intently. So Dave's hand
it starts to shake a bit as he's tipping the big vial and this self sticky powder clung to the
sides of the glass and it didn't want to come out. You know, like the way Xerox toner behaves
if you ever had to transfer that black stuff. So he taps it with his index finger and nothing
happens. Then he taps it again and then suddenly all of a sudden this moon dust really, I suppose
it was only a little pile the size of a Hershey kiss, but it seemed like a lot in the circumstance
it comes slumping out all at once and goes poof. And literally moon dust flies up at coach stays
fingers. It spills over the edge of the powder paper onto the table. And I think we all must have
breath in a bit of the finest airborne particles. And no one said a word. Okay, this, this wasn't
a real disaster as almost nothing was lost and the powder did eventually get transferred and the
feds did eventually leave to hand off these aliquots, these equal portions to other labs.
In retrospect, we all thought it was pretty funny. And in a couple of days above the lab bench where
the transfer had been completed, we had neatly framed and inconspicuously hung that three inch
square of powder paper with a near perfect imprint of Dave one's left index finger in moon dust.
Four more magnificent Apollo moon landings followed. The last was in December 1972 with
Apollo 17 in the return of 275 pounds of samples from the Taurus litro valley as a region of suspected
lunar volcanoes. That was it. No one has gone back in more than four decades. Nevertheless,
the moon rocks have been meticulously curated in sterile vaults. At the lunar sample building,
that's at Johnson's Space Center in Houston, Texas. And there's also a secure backup of
representative lunar samples in White Sands, New Mexico. These specimens continued to provide an
amazing wealth of opportunities for researchers. A few years after the last Apollo mission,
those samples provided me my first real job. I was hired as a postdoctoral fellow by the
Geophysical Laboratory of the Carnegie Institution in 1976. That was America's bison tenial year
and NASA still had money to study moon rocks. So my task was to examine piles of fines from
Apollo 12, Apollo 17, and Luna 20. Luna 20 was one of three unmanned Soviet missions that returned
a total of about a third of a pound of lunar soil samples. So my job was to look for unusual mineral
bits. Lunar soil contains a lot more than fine dust. There are also lots of larger silt and
sand-sized grains interspersed. And my job was to spend hours in a microscope scanning thousands of
these grains bit by bit of gorgeous little green and red crystals and tiny golden spears of colorful
glass. All of those grains were the remains of violently blasted rocks that had suffered
billions of years of meteorite bombardment. Once I had separated a few dozen promising specs,
I had to subject each unusual grain to three kinds of analysis. First came single crystal x-ray
diffraction, which uses beams of x-rays that bounce off crystals at distinctive angles.
That was an easy way to tell what kind of crystal I was dealing with. Most of my studies focused on
the most common lunar minerals, including olivine, pyroxene, and spinel, the exact same minerals
that we saw formed some of the earliest rocks on Earth. If I found a good crystal, I'd then
carefully orient the grain and measure its optical absorption spectrum. That's the way the crystal
soaked up different wavelengths of light. Green olivine crystals, for example, typically absorb
red wavelengths. That's also why most plants look green. They use the red wavelengths in photosynthesis,
and the green light is left over and scattered back to your eye. Red spinel crystals, by contrast,
absorb more in the green wavelengths, so we see the leftover red light. I also measured spectra
of any unusual-looking glass beads. Now, what I was doing was looking for tell-tale bumps and
wiggles in the absorption spectrum that pointed to rare elements, chromium and titanium, for example,
that tend to modify the crystal's color. I recall finding a small peak at 625 nanometers,
indicating a slight absorption of red-orange wavelengths characteristic of the element chromium.
And it turns out the chromium on the moon is less oxidized than chromium on Earth. It's reduced,
so chromium on the moon has only two valence electrons. While on Earth, it has three,
and that difference was especially fun to find. Finally, after the X-ray and optical work was
done, I used a fancy analytical machine called an electron micro probe to determine the exact
ratios of elements in my samples. Time and time again, I confirmed what others had found.
The moon's minerals, while very similar in major elements to those on Earth, are rather
different in detail from what we find at Earth's surface. They have a lot more titanium. The chromium
is different, too. So the minerals are more or less the same, but as we'll see next time,
important details differ between Earth and the moon. So where did these discoveries leave the
three competing moon-forming hypotheses? Is it the fission theory, or the capture theory,
or perhaps the co-ocretion theory? Remarkably, the results of the Apollo samples cast doubt
on all three. None of the three prevailing theories of moon formation in 1969 fit the data
of the moon rocks. So there has to be another explanation, and that astonishing new theory
called the Big Thwack is the subject of the next lecture.
