The story of Earth is the story of incessant change.
Our planetary home has been an engine of change for more than four and a half billion years.
For the first 100 or 200 million years of Earth's history, the most dramatic of those
changes would have taken place at or near the crusty black and sparkling blue sunlit
surface.
The rain of asteroids and comets, the impact of thea, rising mantle plumes, cooling of
the surface, formation of oceans, were just a few of those changes.
But rather quickly, in a geological sense, certainly within the first 500 million years,
Earth's mantle got into the act and took over the leading, albeit behind the scenes, role.
Earth's mantle is an 1,800-mile-thick zone that holds roughly two-thirds of Earth's mass
and heat energy, so perhaps it's not surprising that dramatic and irreversible transformations
driven by heat ultimately arise from the mantle.
So it was that granite land masses arose literally from the mantle.
Unlike dense black basalt, those first barren granite landscapes floated on the surface,
and they appeared whitish-gray.
That's the color that results from blending colorless quartz and tan or buffed feldspar.
Now, if you could travel back in time to that ancient world of four billion years ago,
you'd spot some topographic features that were more or less familiar.
You could stand on solid land.
On the beginnings of continents, there would be jagged hills and steep walled valleys without
a trace of vegetation.
In fact, it would appear not unlike some rugged coastlines of the high Arctic today.
Like today, you'd probably have to endure periods of violent weather, of wind and rain
punctuated by days of sunny blue or maybe orangish skies and puffy white clouds.
You could rest by the cool blue ocean.
You could lie on the first sandy beaches with their countless grains of resistant pale quartz
grains eroded from the gray granite, with a sprinkling of durable red zircon crystals
thrown in.
Of course, you'd suffocate and die in a few short minutes in that dense atmosphere of nitrogen
and carbon dioxide.
That's an atmosphere without the slightest whiff of life-giving oxygen.
It's important to put these developments in context.
Early formation of protocontinence, which were the first land masses to be constructed
of sturdy granite, was just a sideshow in the sweep of Earth's evolutionary story.
You might think of those first granite terrains as something like growing gray scabs on what
was otherwise a pretty monotonous basalt crust.
True, they were growing blue oceans, but those oceans were floored by a pretty much homogeneous
black skin.
Now, basalt could never rise very far above the ocean waves, but granite, which formed
by deep heating and partial melting of basalt, could form mountains chains of the miles high.
Still, those rafts of granite floated to the surface much the way scum floats to the top
of a pot of boiling soup bones.
It's ironic that what we perceive in our anthropocentric view as the solid Earth is really a kind of
geological afterthought.
So our planet, at its 500 millionth birthday, was really a rather ordinary, rocky world.
True, it was a little larger and a lot wetter than most of its neighbors in our solar system,
but there wasn't much to distinguish it yet.
Earth had big volcanoes, but so did several of the other planets and moons.
Earth had a globe-spanning ocean, but it's likely that Mars did as well, at least in
the first half billion years.
And it now appears that Jupiter's big moons, Europa and Callisto, those are the second
and third of the four so-called Galilean moons that you can see with a small telescope,
they appear to be covered by water ice with an underlying ocean, perhaps 50 or more miles
deep.
They have a bigger percentage of water than Earth.
Mantle plumes and convections had a big role in shaping Earth's surface, but in those
early years certainly Venus and very possibly Mars had their own versions of mantle convection
and tectonics.
And bulk chemistry, it didn't make Earth special either.
All of the rocky planets and moons had basalt crusts.
The same few elements, silicon, magnesium, iron, oxygen, they dominated the composition
of all these worlds.
But Earth had reasonable supplies of the life-giving elements, carbon and nitrogen, sulfur, but
so did the other interterrestrial planets.
In fact, by almost any measure you could devise, our home planet early in its history, 4 billion
years ago, would have appeared to the unbiased observer to be a rather ordinary planet.
In spite of these initial similarities, Earth would soon become utterly unique among all
the known worlds, not just of our solar system, but of any place we've yet observed in the
cosmos.
Now I have to admit that Earth was already unique in a couple of respects.
First, no other solar system planet or moon had experienced such radical change since its
formation, especially in the violent formation of the moon.
But that great transformative event was different only in its epic scale, not in its nature,
for every world suffered big impacts.
Second, every known planet has such a large, no other known planet has such a large moon
relative to its own size, a moon that during Earth's early history was also much closer
than it is today.
But what was to become the most dynamic engine of planetary change?
The one characteristic that sets Earth apart from every other known place in space was
yet to occur.
Of all known worlds, only Earth became alive.
That singular feature, the origin of life, and the subsequent evolution of the biosphere
distinguishes Earth from all of the other known planets and moons.
That's a simple statement, Earth is unique because of life.
But what exactly does it mean to be alive?
How do we define this familiar phenomenon that makes Earth so very different from all
the rest of the known universe?
If you're put in the spot and asked to define life, you might think for a moment and then
start to describe life as a number of distinctive and interconnected traits and behaviors.
Life seems to differ from non-life in a number of ways.
Life always has a complex structure.
Life is somehow linked to the ability to grow, to adapt, and often, but not always to move.
Life makes copies of itself, so reproduction has to be part of the story.
And then we might talk about the ability to evolve through mutation and selection.
We might also point to a variety of distinctive cellular traits, a membrane, for example,
with an inside and an outside.
Or perhaps we'd cite the long strands of the critical genetic molecule DNA.
And we could keep going with more and more specific attributes of life, but no matter
how long that list of traits, there will always be exceptions.
Red spores can lie dormant for thousands of years.
Red blood cells don't have DNA.
Mules don't reproduce.
So perhaps the chemistry of life could provide a better foundation for defining life.
After all, all living things are basically organized molecular systems.
They undergo all sorts of chemical reactions, many of remarkable complexity and coordination.
The most basic unit of every known life form is the cell, an intricate assemblage of molecules
that are separated by a flexible cell membrane from the environment.
Cells are remarkably well-adapted assemblages of chemicals that have evolved two codependent
means of self-preservation, metabolism by which cells take in energy and raw materials to
grow and reproduce, and genetics by which cells store and pass on all the information
required to make more cells.
Together, metabolism and genetics would seem to distinguish living organisms from the
non-living environment.
Okay, let's look at these two critical cellular functions in more detail.
Metabolism includes all the varied chemical reactions used by all different kinds of life
forms to convert chemicals and energy into more cells.
Now by chemicals, I mean essential atoms and molecules, and by energy, I mean chemical
energy from the environment or light coming from the sun.
In this respect, cells are just like tiny chemical factories.
They take in the necessary molecular raw materials and fuel, and they use those resources to
move, to repair, to grow from time to time, to reproduce.
The analogy to a chemical factory is actually rather nuanced.
In cells, the chemical reactions are exquisitely controlled, as opposed, for example, to a
raging fire.
That means the reactions are regulated by a variety of positive and negative feedbacks
that keep metabolism in check.
Of course, metabolism by itself isn't sufficient to define life.
That's because cells, quite unlike the non-living environment, carry information in the form
of molecules of deoxyribose nucleic acid.
That's DNA.
DNA has the remarkable ability to copy and pass molecular information and how to make
and maintain cells from one generation to the next.
What's more, that genetic information is typically copied with a few scattered errors or mutations,
and while mutations are often harmful, they also can confer adaptability to a population
to dividing cells.
By promoting chemical novelty, mutations introduce innovations that, under times of
stress and change, may enable a population of cells to adapt and to compete successfully
against other populations that are less able to change.
This plasticity of populations of cells instills the ability to survive during stressful times
of environmental change, or perhaps to radiate and to otherwise inhospitable new environmental
niches.
As hard as it may be to define life, metabolism and genetics must together play roles in any
successful definition, and still, in spite of centuries of study by literally millions
of life scientists, biologists have simply not been able to come up with one universally
accepted definition of life.
A lot of us in the origins of life field think that a panel sponsored by NASA's Exobiology
Program probably came the closest.
That group was given the charge in 1994 to define what characteristics would allow us
to claim the discovery of life on other worlds.
The panel was chaired by Gerald Joyce of the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, California.
Joyce and his colleagues agreed on a rather streamlined one-sentence definition.
They initially said, life is a self-sustaining chemical system capable of undergoing Darwinian
evolution.
Now to put this effort in context, Gerald Joyce is one of the leaders in attempts to
make life in the laboratory, that's a field known as synthetic biology in the origins
of life community, and synthetic biology recently achieved this benchmark in Joyce's
own lab.
It was really quite a remarkable breakthrough.
In Joyce's test tube-based system, he incorporated thousands of diverse, interacting molecules
that are both self-sustaining and evolving, at least in one sense of the word evolution.
You see, all the evolution in Joyce's closed system is limited to changes in the relative
proportions of a very large, but nevertheless limited, suite of molecules.
Depending on the changing conditions he imposes, different temperature or acidity might be
examples of those changes.
His complicated process only makes exact copies of the same diverse molecules that have been
present from the very start of the experiment.
And here's a really remarkable part of this story.
Joyce could have announced to the world that he had devised the first self-replicating chemical
system that evolves.
That's the first life, according to his own NASA panel's definition.
But instead, he realized that a chemical system that simply churns out more and more exact
copies, even if the proportions of those different molecules change over time, is ultimately
not much more interesting than a kind of molecular Xerox machine that spits out random copies.
This exact copy scenario is quite different from natural living systems, which have the
ability to mutate and thus change over time and potentially do completely new things.
Joyce's lab system lacked the essential ability to explore new environments, to adapt to environmental
change, to perform new tasks.
His collection of molecules was ill-suited to compete with new neighbors for resources.
So rather than claim the historic feat of synthesizing life in the lab, Joyce has revised
his NASA definition to include one more trait, the characteristic of novelty.
So now the definition of life reads, life is a self-sustaining chemical system capable
of incorporating novelty and undergoing Darwinian evolution.
This definition of life provides hints regarding the challenge of understanding life's ancient
origins.
We have to figure out how a non-living planet somehow invented those two intertwined traits
of metabolism and genetics, and as you might expect, there's more than one point of view
among scientists working on this topic.
One thing we tend to agree, most origins of life research should adhere to the idea that
emergence of life was an inevitable geochemical process.
Okay, so what does that mean?
It's clear that Earth had all the essential raw materials.
We had lots of water in the oceans.
We had key chemicals in the atmosphere.
There were vast supplies of rocks and minerals that were rich in all the elements of life
that is carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, sulfur, and phosphorus.
Earth was also rich in sources of energy.
There was the sun's radiation, though that was not the most likely source early on as
we'll see.
More significant, I think, was Earth's inner heat.
The thermal energy provided a ubiquitous, reliable source, though it's certainly possible
that lightning and radioactivity, meteor impacts, and many other forms of energy contributed
as well, and that's one reason why there are at least as many different theories of origins
of life as there are different sources of elements and energy.
Carbon agrees on a few aspects of life's origin.
For one thing, carbon must have played a leading role.
Carbon is by far the most versatile element of the periodic table.
No other element can match carbon in the variety of its molecular designs and functions.
Carbon has the ability to bond to itself and to most other elements, especially the biologically
important hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur.
Carbon typically forms up to four bonds at once, which can be arranged into long chains
of atoms or interlocked rings or complex branching arrangements, or almost any other imaginable
shape.
That's how carbon helps to form the backbones of all sorts of biological molecules, including
proteins, carbohydrates, fats, oils, DNA, RNA.
No other element has the potential to fulfill the twin-defining characteristics of life,
the ability to make copies, and the ability to evolve.
Carbon's unique chemical character explains why it's the central element of life, and
it has become the dominant element of modern chemical technology.
Think about all the carbon-based materials around you, all the food and pharmaceuticals
you consume.
Every structure of your body and the bodies of every other living organism is made from
carbon-based molecules.
So-called organic chemicals, those with carbon, hydrogen, and other molecules of life, are
all around us in paints, glues, dyes, plastics, they're in natural fibers of your clothes
and the rubber soles of your shoes and the pages and ink of every newspaper and book.
All the varieties of fossil fuels, coal, oil, natural gas, gasoline.
As important as carbon was in the story of life's origins, it was by no means the only
factor.
The transition from geochemistry to biochemistry also must have relied on water, on heat energy,
and very likely the chemical energy of rocks.
This was a chemical process that also required lots of time, perhaps many millions of years.
Science isn't yet able to say exactly how or when life emerged, but we are able to point
to some basic principles.
One guiding principle of my own research and other research at dozens of laboratories around
the world is that the origins of life must have occurred as a sequence of steps, each
step added chemical complexity to the evolving biological world.
First, you have to synthesize the small carbon-based molecules from which all organisms are formed.
Those are the most basic building blocks of life, but these small carbon molecules are
much less dense than the minerals we've been discussing so far, with values clustered around
the density of water.
Water floats on top of earth's rocks because it's less dense than the rocks.
The same is true of these small carbon-based molecules.
Indeed, the lightest would have floated on the water's surface like alcohol or even into
the atmosphere like methane, but larger carbon molecules would sink and settle to whatever
rocks and water meet.
Then you must concentrate and organize those small molecules into life's essential structures,
the membranes, the polymers, other functional components of a cell.
Ultimately, at some point, the collection of molecules had to start making copies of
itself, and they also had to devise a means to pass genetic information from one generation
to the next.
Once molecules could self-replicate and mutate, then evolution by Darwinian natural selection
took over.
That's how life must have emerged.
By far the best understood step in the origins of life was the synthesis of life's small
molecular building blocks, including sugars, amino acids, lipids, more.
All of these essential chemicals are based on carbon, and all of them are known to form
just about anywhere that a source of energy interacts with simple gas molecules like carbon
dioxide and water.
Life's raw materials must have formed in all sorts of environments, where lightning pierced
the atmosphere, for example, where volcanic heat boiled the ocean from below, or even
where ultraviolet radiation bathed molecular clouds in deep space.
Scientists likely that Earth's first ocean, more than four billion years ago, became increasingly
concentrated in the molecules of life.
After all, biomolecules must have rained from the skies in the form of carbon-rich meteorites,
and they rose from the depths from deep volcanic zones.
Scientists began to get a handle on these processes in the early 1950s, with what surely
remains to this day as the single most famous experiment in biogenesis.
The two lead characters in this drama, Nobel Prize-winning chemist Harold Urie, a professor
at the University of Chicago, and Stanley Miller, his graduate student.
They designed a rather simple and quite elegant tabletop experiment.
It consisted of a pair of glass bulbs, a few inches in diameter, connected to each other
by a loop of tubing, and one bulb was a small pool of heated water, and the other, a mixture
of gases exposed to little electric sparks.
The idea was to simulate early Earth with the hot water representing oceans, the gas
mixture representing the atmosphere laced by lightning.
It only took a few days for the confined colorless water to become first pink, then brown, with
a complex mix of organic molecules.
As the experiment progressed, the transparent glass around the electrodes became smeared
with sticky black organic sludge.
What Miller found after analyzing the colorful mixture was an abundance of amino acids, lipids,
carbohydrates, and other building blocks of life.
He made headlines around the world with his 1953 paper in the journal Science that announced
the key findings.
Turns out Harold Urie modestly refused to be a co-author on that paper because everyone
would assume the Nobel Prize winner was the brains behind the experiment.
Well, whether or not that was in fact true, Miller's career was made, dozens of other
chemists soon flocked to the study of origin of life chemistry.
Well, some details of the original experiment have been called into question.
The exact combination of gases used in the original Miller Urie experiment may not have
been an exact analog of early Earth's atmosphere, nor were the electric sparks an adequate
simulation of lightning.
Nevertheless, thousands of subsequent experimental variations on the Miller Urie theme have established
beyond any doubt that early Earth must have been an engine of organic synthesis.
Life's essential molecules abounded.
That problem was basically solved, or so many scientists thought.
Indeed, Miller's spark experiment may have been too successful.
For many in the field, mistakenly thought that the origin's mystery was largely solved.
Turns out that the initial enthusiasm for Miller Urie discoveries may have come at a
considerable price.
You see, Miller's experiment was masterful.
It placed origins of life research solidly in the domain of organic chemists.
Miller and Urie established the leading paradigm that life emerged from a prebiotic soup of
organic molecules formed by lightning.
It was all so simple, but few experimentalists during the 1950s had considered the absolute
staggering complexities of geochemical environments.
Think about nature.
You have daily cycles, night, day, hot, cold, wet, dry, and more.
All of these cycles are key to natural environments.
Real geochemical environments also display a range of natural gradients.
There are gradients in temperature, for example, when volcanic, magma, context, cold ocean
water, or gradients in salinity as freshwater streams flow into the salty ocean, and geochemical
environments also have rocks and minerals.
None of Miller's experiments incorporated rocks and minerals, and along with rocks and
minerals comes real chemical complexity with dozens of major and minor and trace elements
that also reactive energetic mineral surfaces.
Miller and coworkers simply assumed that Earth's sunlit surface was all it was needed
for life's origin, and so they spent decades ignoring what early Earth was really like.
As it was, Stanley Miller's influence was immense, and for almost 30 years he and his
growing number of followers had the dominant influence on the origins of life community.
On the one hand, origins of life research became an established field with new journals,
and honors, and rewards.
The Millerites, as they were called, received new sources of government funding.
In fact, it wasn't until 1987, and the discovery of deep sea communities of organisms at the
so-called Black Smoker Ecosystems, that an alternative to the Miller origins paradigm
emerged to challenge the primordial soup model.
The idea was that in those deep zones of total darkness, mineral rich fluids react with hot
volcanic crust.
Ocean floor geysers jets scalding water into the frigid ocean, a constant rain of microscopic
minerals creates a kind of black smoke of reactive particles.
An amazing quantity of life abounds in those remarkable places, and that life is not fueled
by the sun or lightning, but rather by chemical energy at the interface between crust and ocean.
Miller and his followers hated the idea that these deep, dark, volcanic environments might
have fostered life, and they did whatever they could to squelch the hypothesis.
They gave negative reviews to any manuscript or grant proposal that even suggested a deep
volcanic origin of life.
This battle over origins paradigms has a lot to say about the way science is done.
It's easy to understand why the Miller-Yuri process created such a following.
They resulted in a synthetic suite of biomolecules that are stunningly similar to the chemicals
life actually uses.
In many ways, the Miller-Yuri mixture of amino acids and carbohydrates and lipids looks like
a well-balanced diet.
That's why Harold-Yuri is said to have equipped, if God didn't do it this way, then he missed
a good bet.
It's okay to take sides in such a scientific argument, but there's some reason to believe
that some followers of Stanley Miller may have taken things a little bit farther than
typically by systematically suppressing competing ideas.
While I was writing Genesis, which was my previous book on scientists' effort to understand
life's origin, several leading origins of life researchers told me that their grants
were denied, their papers were rejected, their careers suffered because of the pervasive influence
of this point of view.
That situation persisted at least until the mid-1990s.
But a shift in opinion began with that startling 1987 discovery of living black smokers, and
the shift was accelerated because of the powerful influence and the expanding ambitions of NASA.
That's because NASA wants to discover life on other worlds.
So the discovery of black smokers underscored a growing awareness that microbial life thrives
in all sorts of extreme environments.
In many places where previous generations of scientists wouldn't have dreamed of looking,
these amazing organisms, which are collectively known as extremophiles, have radiated into
all sorts of astonishing environments.
Micros have been discovered in extremely acidic streams that flow from old mine waste dumps
and in boiling pools above volcanic zones.
Micros have been found living inside frozen Antarctic ice and rocks in Antarctica.
And they persist on stratospheric dust particles miles above Earth's surface where they're
blasted by ultraviolet radiation.
And then there are really amazing deep microbial ecosystems that extend many miles beneath
Earth's surface.
This deep cellular life lives in narrow cracks and fissures underground.
They subsist on a meager diet of chemical energy associated with minerals.
And all of these microbes integrated over the huge volume of Earth's crust may account
for a significant fraction of Earth's total biomass.
In fact, subsurface life may approach the mass of all the trees, the elephants, ants,
people, combined.
And from NASA's point of view, this is good news, because if life can survive in such
extremes, especially in deep environments that were protected from impacts from asteroids
and comets, then life could have originated in deep, hot zones.
And if life originated in deep environments on Earth, then it could have originated in
the deep environments of other worlds as well.
That's why NASA, whose annual budget depends, at least in part, on the prospect of great
discovery, embraced research into the possibility of deep origins of life.
On the one hand, if life has to arise by a Miller-Yuri scenario, with biomolecules
formed in the lightning-laced atmosphere of an ocean-covered world, then our own home
planet Earth, and very possibly Mars in its first 500 million years, are really the only
plausible places where life could have emerged.
So there are only two living worlds within our reach, and we're living on one of them.
On the other hand, if life can emerge from the deep, black, hot domain of an undersea
volcanic zone, then lots of other solar system bodies suddenly become tempting places for
exploration.
Think about those nearby worlds.
Even today, Mars must have deep hydrothermal zones, so it's possible that microbes live
there even now.
As several of Jupiter's moons are also ripe for biological investigation, Europa and Callisto
are both thought to have deep, ice-covered oceans.
There's also Saturn's Earth-sized moon Titan, which is known to be rich in organic molecules
and must have warm, wet zones in its interior.
It's even possible that some of the larger asteroids, some of which are hundreds of miles
in diameter, might have life-producing zones in their deep interiors.
So the possibility of life arising deep in our planet has led NASA into planning new
missions to many other bodies in our solar system.
That intriguing prospect that life might have come from the deep, hot vents remains one of
the most exciting frontiers in origin's research, and it epitomizes how much we have to learn
about the story of Earth.
But in any case, the progression from the first small carbon-based molecules all the
way to living microbes requires more.
Next time, we'll discuss ways that simple carbon molecules could assemble into the bigger
molecules of biology itself.
