Each of the predominant elements in Earth's rocks is an inevitable consequence of stars.
A preordained byproduct of nucleosynthesis and exploding stars.
These elements, processed and reprocessed in the solar nebula and in planetesimals, are
directly responsible for Earth's most abundant rocks and minerals.
But before the earliest rocks could solidify, Earth had to cool.
I want you to imagine the astonishingly violent years following the moon forming impact perhaps
4.53 billion years ago.
For a short interval after Thea's collision, Earth's molten surface was pelted with an
incandescent rain of liquid silicate droplets at temperatures of thousands of degrees Celsius.
It took a few days or perhaps a few weeks to sort out what mass would fall back to Earth
and what would remain in orbit to become the moon.
In those earliest post-Thea days neither Earth nor the moon had any solid surface.
Magma oceans churning an incandescent red encircled both worlds.
As the space around Earth gradually cleared of Thea's fragmented remains, blast furnace-like
heat radiated into the cold vacuum.
The planet inexorably cooled from the outside to form patches of thin rocky crust.
Even so, several factors conspired to keep Earth's surface hot and liquid for a while
longer.
First, big asteroids kept pounding the planet.
None of these mini-impacts was anything like Thea, but each collision released more gravitational
potential energy and added more heat.
And no crust could form in the vicinity that superheated vicinity of impact sites, immense
gravity-induced tides spawned by the nearby moon also thwarted in any attempt to form
a stable crust.
Every short five-hour Earth Day, a mile-high equatorial bulge of magma must have swept
around the planet.
The supertides fragmented whatever tenuously organized thin veneer might have solidified.
Added to these external influences were Earth's ample stores of heat, the residual heat of
accretion combined with the thermal energy of highly radioactive elements, notably those
short-lived heat-generating isotopes of aluminum, xenon, and more.
Finally, as volcanoes poured more and more gases into the young and growing atmosphere,
heat-trapping vapors rich in carbon dioxide and water may have amplified any heating effects
by inducing a super-greenhouse state.
For some unknown length of time, it might have been a hundred years or it might have
been more like a hundred thousand years, but it's a geological blink in any case, the molten
state-dominated Earth's surface.
But however long it took, cooling and hardening of the surface was inevitable.
It's all part of the second law of thermodynamics.
That's the universal law of nature, that every hot object lacking a significant new input
of energy, it has to cool.
Furthermore, the hotter the object, the faster it has to cool.
Heat transfer from the hotter to the cooler object occurs by three familiar mechanisms
conduction, convection, and radiation.
All of these processes occur all around us, all the time.
Now conduction is the phenomenon you experience whenever you touch an object that's either
hotter or cooler than your skin.
When a hotter object comes in contact with a cooler object, then heat spontaneously flows
from hot to cool.
This is the painfully obvious process when you burn your feet on black asphalt on a hot
summer day, or if you blister your hand on a hot stove.
Conduction arises from the constant wiggling of atoms, what we experience is heat.
In hotter objects, atoms wiggle more violently.
Heat transfers by atomic collisions when those faster moving hot atoms collide with slower
moving cooler atoms.
If you contact an object that is hot enough, those collisions can disrupt molecules in
your skin causing a burn.
But conduction only works on short scales of distance, as atoms in one object contact
atoms in another object.
That means that conduction is an inefficient process for the transfer of heat on a planetary
scale.
It takes much too long to move a lot of heat from a planet's core to its crust by wiggling
atoms.
Now, there's a second way to move heat.
That's convection.
It's a process that occurs when large collections of hot atoms in a mobile state, a liquid or
a gas, move energy wholesale from one place to another.
Convection is a much better planetary choice for cooling our core, and numerous everyday
experiences demonstrate the efficiency of this process of convection.
When you boil water, for example, pour water in a metal pan, place it on a stove, turn up
the heat.
At first, conduction dominates as the hot metal makes direct contact with the cold water.
Faster wiggling metal atoms collide with the slower moving water molecules, and that process
is rather slow.
It would take a very, very long time to boil a pot of water by conduction alone.
But another mechanism quickly takes over as hotter volumes of water near the pan's bottom
begin to expand, and they rise up through cooler and consequently denser, overlying water.
Heats then transferred in bulk from the bottom to the surface.
A convection cell forms as volumes of cooler, denser surface water sink to the hotter bottom.
This exchange of heat goes faster and faster as the convection cell is manifest as a rolling
oil.
We take advantage of convection cells any time we want to heat or cool a large volume,
say a house or a car.
So first we use a heater or an air conditioner to change the temperature of the air, and
then we use a fan to blow that volume of air into its surroundings.
Earth displays convection in many, many familiar processes.
The cooling offshore breezes you enjoy at the beach on a summer day, and those grand ocean
currents like the Gulf Stream that sweeps up from the equator towards the Arctic in the
turbulent weather patterns of lightning-laced thunderstorms.
That's another one, thunderstorm fronts when they come through.
And in boiling hot springs and in towering geysers, in every case and many more, heat
always transfers from hotter to cooler zones.
Earth's deep interior plays the same convection game.
Cooler, denser magma near the surface sinks, replaced by hotter, less dense magma.
When such convection occurs on the scale of the entire mantle, it drives Earth's most
defining geological cycle, plate tectonics.
Throughout Earth history, convection has been the primary driver of planetary cooling.
Finally, radiation is the third mechanism of heat transfer.
Hot objects always radiate heat to their cooler surroundings.
This heat energy travels 186,000 miles per second through a vacuum.
It's a form of electromagnetic waves called infrared radiation.
So when you lie back on a sunny beach to relax and soak up the rays, you're absorbing infrared
radiation from the sun.
That energy left the sun about 8.3 minutes earlier.
Now every warmer object does exactly the same.
A space heater, a roaring fire, a hot water radiator, or the hot engine of your car all
radiate energy that you can sense with your hand.
And you also radiate heat energy.
In fact, a crowded auditorium, if not well ventilated, can get uncomfortably warm.
That's because every adult radiates heat roughly equivalent to an incandescent lightbulb
of 100 watts.
Indeed, you can see this energy being emitted if you use night vision goggles.
People and other animals appear to glow brightly at night.
In all three mechanisms of heat transfer, conduction, convection, or radiation, the
rate of energy transfer is a function of the temperature difference between the hotter
and colder object.
If the temperature differences are large, as with a hot planet or star in cold space,
then convection will be more vigorous and radiation much more intense.
Today Earth is a warm planet.
So it's always radiating heat into space.
But today's heat transfer is nothing like the way the red hot post-stay earth blasted
its excess heat energy into space.
Notice that that early stage literally glowed in the black void of space.
The formation of a rocky crust was inevitable, given Earth's prodigious heat loss by radiation
into space.
Somewhere the molten surface must have first cooled enough for crystals to form and a crust
to appear.
Such an innovation probably occurred near one of Earth's poles, which were less tidally
stressed and experienced less direct sunlight.
Yet that cooling and crystallization were rather more complicated than what we usually
think of as freezing.
Most everyday substances have a well-defined freezing point, the single temperature at which
a cooling liquid becomes solid.
Pure water always freezes at zero degrees Celsius, equivalent to 32 degrees Fahrenheit.
Similarly, the silvery liquid metal mercury freezes at about minus 38 degrees.
And ethanol, the common alcohol in booze, that freezes at minus 179 degrees Fahrenheit.
But magma, or liquid rock, behaves differently.
It's more than a curiosity of magma that it has not one freezing point, but often a range
of freezing temperatures spanning hundreds of degrees.
As an aside, I have to confess that it seems odd talking about freezing points of magma
and more than a thousand degrees Celsius.
That's more than 1500 degrees Fahrenheit, but here we're still speaking about transitions
from a liquid to a solid.
Let's consider the cooling Earth and begin with a time just after the Thea Thwack.
That was a time when Earth and its moon shared a glowing atmosphere of silicate vapor at
temperatures of more than 5000 degrees Celsius for a time as hot as the surface of the sun.
That hellish rock gas must have cooled rapidly because it radiated heat away so fast.
Eventually things cooled enough to condense the silicates into droplets that rained magma
onto those newly reformed worlds.
Cooling was inexorable to below 4000 degrees, then 3000 degrees, then 2000 degrees Celsius
as cooling reached temperatures below about 1900 degrees.
The first crystals started to form.
How do we know?
How can we possibly know what happens to a molten rock at such extreme conditions?
The stories we tell of Earth's first rocks come from more than a century of research
by the experimental patrologists, the women and men who devise novel techniques and build
laboratories to heat and pressurize rocks in an effort to replicate conditions of Earth's
deep interior.
Experimental patrologists face two technical challenges in their quest to discover the
origin of rocks.
First, they need to produce and control the incredibly high temperatures of rock formation,
thousands of degrees in some cases, which is much hotter by far than any oven you've
ever used.
To attain such lofty temperatures, scientists have to craft costly platinum wire into meticulously
spaced coils and then control extremely high electrical currents that are required to achieve
and stabilize such temperature extremes.
Second, what makes this effort far more challenging is that heating has to be done while samples
are subjected to crushing pressures that are tens or hundreds of thousands of times that
of the atmosphere.
Researchers enlist massive hydraulic rams to reach and sustain such immense pressures.
I'm really fortunate to work at the Carnegie Institution's geophysical laboratory, where
for more than a century a succession of scientists has undertaken these experiments.
There's a kind of heroic quality to the quest for Earth's deep truths, and for a short while
before his untimely death by a hospital infection at the age of 82, I had the chance to work
side by side with Hatton S. Yoder Jr.
He was one of the great pioneers of experimental petrology and was probably the world's foremost
expert on the origins of that ubiquitous black igneous rock basalt.
Hatt Yoder was an imposing figure, beefy standing well over six feet.
He was dynamic, he was enthusiastic, attentive, a great teacher, a great colleague, and we
all saw him as a hero.
As a World War II naval officer, he was intimately familiar with the kind of massive metal hardware
that was required for high pressure research.
In 1948, right after the war and the awarding of a PhD from MIT, Yoder joined the geophysical
laboratory and he took naval surplus gun barrels and armor plating.
Some of it still had that battleship gray color, and he constructed a unique high pressure
lab that would run almost nonstop throughout his half century career.
The key part of Yoder's room size device was a bomb.
That's the name he gave to a massive steel cylinder, almost a foot in diameter and 20
inches long with an inch diameter bore down the center.
One under that bomb was linked to a complex series of gas pumps and oil lines, compressors,
intensifiers.
His system could achieve a staggering 12,000 atmospheres of gas pressure.
That's 12,000 times 14 pounds per square inch, or 170 tons per square inch.
And if that gas was suddenly released, if his bomb failed catastrophically as such devices
have done on occasion, it would explode with an energy equivalent to a stick of dynamite.
The bomb's other open end was filled with a foot long sample assembly and sealed by
this giant threaded nut.
If you can imagine this, the nut was six inches in diameter with a massive six sided head.
We had to seal the entire assembly by tightening the nut with a three foot long 20 pound wrench.
Now, it all sounds pretty extreme, but the great advantage of Yoder's apparatus was
that we could prepare powdered rock and mineral samples by loading them into little gold tubes
about the size of a fat grain of rice, and then we packed several tubes into a cylindrical
heating assembly.
We sealed the entire assembly into the bomb's pressure chamber, pumped the pressure up to
thousands of atmospheres, turned on the electric heater to preset temperature, and after that,
the bomb did all the work.
Each of our experiments processed up to six small gold tubes.
Experiments could last anywhere from a few minutes to a few days, and we ran thousands
of such experiments.
Hot Yoder's remarkable invention was capable of sustaining conditions of temperature and
pressure equivalent to those found more than 20 miles deep, so it was ideally suited to
study how rocks evolve in Earth's crust and upper mantle.
What Hot Yoder and other experimental patrologists found was that a melt rich in those big six
elements with element ratios similar to what we find in rocks like basalt will typically
begin to solidify by forming crystals of our old friend, the magnesium silicate olivine
forsterite.
This occurs at temperatures below 1900 degrees Celsius.
In rocks of the type found on Earth, on the moon, and in many achondrite meteorites, we
find that beautiful, tiny green crystals begin to grow in the magma as microscopic seeds.
These small crystals grow larger and larger as the temperature cools, first to the size
of a BB, then a P, then a grade, then a really interesting phenomenon kicks in that
it changes the game.
It's the olivine is typically slightly denser than the liquid in which it crystallizes,
so those first forsterite crystals begin to sink and they settled faster and faster as
the crystals grew larger and larger.
Eventually huge, deep masses of nearly pure olivine crystals accumulated at the bottom
of a magma chamber to form a stunning green rock called dunite.
On Earth today, this rock is relatively uncommon.
It appears in large bodies at the surface only when rocks cooled and settled fairly
near the surface, or when mounting mountain building activities of uplift and erosion
exposed what was once a deeply buried horizon of this distinctive deep olivine cumulant.
Think about what's happening to the melt during the continuous removal of olivine crystals.
The crystals of Mg2 SiO4 have a different composition than the bulk melt.
So their removal depletes the melt in magnesium and silicon, and thus increases the proportions
of calcium, aluminum, and iron.
When the magma ocean began to cool on the moon more than four billion years ago, a different
mineral anorthite began to form, and this in the same way the second mineral, the calcium
aluminate silicate, member of the common feldspar family of framework minerals.
This is anorthite for blocky pale colored crystals.
However, unlike olivine on the moon, anorthite was significantly less dense than its host
liquid, so the anorthite crystals tended to float.
Great volumes of anorthite popped to the surface of the moon's magma ocean to form
a thick crust made almost entirely of floating feldspar crystals.
That's a rock known as anorthosite.
Lunar anorthosite mountain ranges rise as much as four miles above the lunar plains.
In spite of hundreds of millions of years of subsequent basalt volcanism, which formed
the splotchy dark seas on the moon's surface, the prominent whitish gray anorthosite accumulation
still dominate 65% of the moon's reflective silvery face.
These lunar highlands include the oldest known features on the moon.
Some Apollo samples of anorthosite are almost 4.5 billion years old from a time shortly after
the big thwack.
Earth's story was somewhat different.
Earth is wetter in composition.
It is deeper magma oceans and correspondingly greater internal temperatures and pressures.
A small amount of anorthite probably crystallized early in Earth's history in some near-surface
low-pressure environments, but anorthosite was a rather minor rock type on Earth.
Instead, the second silicate mineral to crystallize on Earth was the magnesium-rich pyroxene
enstitite.
That's the commonest of the chain silicate minerals.
Anorthosite co-mingled with olivine in a thick crystal slush that formed magma chambers tens
of kilometers beneath the surface and gradually cooled to the earliest major rock type on
Earth.
It's a hard greenish-black rock called peridotite.
Several varieties of peridotite began to crystallize throughout Earth's outer 80 kilometers.
Different varieties at different depths.
Pridotite production probably commenced more than 4.5 billion years ago and it continued
as a dominant igneous process for many hundreds of millions of years.
In spite of this prominent early in Earth's history, peridotite is relatively rare at
the surface today.
It's likely that rafts of peridotite did harden and cool to form Earth's very early rigid
black surface.
But that crust was unstable and therefore transient.
That instability arises because cooling peridotite is significantly denser than the hot magma
ocean on which it tried to float.
Consequently, the thin peridotite surface layer cracked and buckled and big chunks sank
back into the mantle.
As masses of peridotite plunged downward, they displaced more magma that cooled to form
more olivine pyroxene peridotite.
In this way, a kind of peridotite conveyor belt operated in Earth's outer 80 kilometers
or so, perhaps over a span of hundreds of millions of years.
By this process, the crust and uppermost mantle slowly solidified.
All the while, the ratio of dense solid peridotite to liquid silicate magma increased until the
upper mantle was mostly solid olivine pyroxene rock.
A similar scenario of cooling and crystallization must have played out deeper in the mantle,
albeit more slowly.
Experimental patrologists are still uncertain of all the details.
Conditions at depths below 40 kilometers were beyond the capabilities of Hatt-Yoda's apparatus,
for example.
But more difficult experiments at higher pressures and temperatures reveal that separation of
crystals from melts both by sinking and by floating were probably instrumental in deeper
domains just as they were near-surface environments.
Much of what we know of the composition and structure of the upper mantle comes from detailed
seismological studies.
Exacting measurements of seismic wave velocities are consistent with the peridotite-dominated
upper mantle that extends down to approximately 400 kilometers.
That's the depth at which pressure transforms olivine into the denser wadsliite structure,
due to the dominant mineral in the transition zone.
This transition from olivine to wadsliite, and hence from peridotite to denser rocks,
is relatively sharp.
The exact depth of the transition zone varies by maybe 15 or 20 kilometers from place to
place.
It's generally deeper beneath the continents than the oceans, for example.
While this grand story of Earth's mineral evolution is framed by a preordained succession
of igneous rock types.
Each type followed inexorably from the previous one.
Pridotite was Earth's first crust-forming solid.
That was a critical, but rather brief, juvenile phase that arose directly from the crystallization
of olivine and pyroxene from the well-mixed primordial magma ocean.
That pridotite surface, once cooled and hardened, was much too dense to remain at the surface.
It quickly sank back into Earth's depths.
For crust to survive billions of years, it had to be tough.
But it also had to be a lot less dense than pridotite.
The igneous rock, known as basalt, filled the bill.
The salt dominates the crust of every terrestrial planet.
The barren cratered surface of Mercury is mostly basalt.
So is the hot, rugged exterior Venus.
In the ancient eroded red surface of Mars, and the moon's dark mares literally seized
our frozen flat plains that were once black basaltic lakes.
Earth is no different.
About 70% of the surface, primarily all the crust, underlined all of the oceans.
It's a layer of basalt several kilometers thick.
Basalt comes in several important varieties, but all kinds of basalt are dominated by two
silicate minerals.
The first key mineral is feldspar.
Plagioclase feldspar, or anerocyte, is the calcium N-member of that series.
But the plagioclase feldspar and basalt also often contain significant amounts of sodium.
Because of its importance in basalt and other common rock types, feldspar is by far the
most important aluminum-bearing mineral in terrestrial planets and moons.
And it's Earth's commonest crustal mineral.
The second essential basalt mineral is pyroxene, the same common chain silicate group that's
found in peridotite.
The pyroxene in peridotite was estetite close to the simple N-member composition MGSIO3.
However, the pyroxene structure is extremely adaptable.
It can accommodate many other elements as well.
In fact, pyroxene is one of a handful of common minerals that commonly incorporates all of
the big six elements.
So in basalt, the pyroxene or pyroxenes, because sometimes they're two different kinds,
display much of the complex chemical character of the magma from which it forms.
In order to understand the origin of basalt, that is how plagioclase and pyroxene crystallized
to form this rock, we need to consider the strange way that peridotite melts.
You've seen that as Earth's magma ocean cooled 4.5 billion years ago, forestryte was first
to crystallize, then probably some anorthosite, and finally lots of estetite.
The resulting rock, predominantly magnesium silicate, was peridotite.
Peridotite still forms much of Earth's upper mantle, from a few tens of kilometers to 400
kilometers deep.
Now, when peridotite formed and sank into the upper mantle, it was reheated and therefore
partially re-melted.
This process of partial melting, like what we saw earlier with partial crystallization,
is not at all intuitively obvious.
Our experience with the melting of everyday substances is that there is one specific melting
temperature where solid transforms to liquid.
Water ice melts at zero degrees Celsius, equal to 32 degrees Fahrenheit.
Candle wax melts at about 130 degrees Fahrenheit, depending on the wax recipe, and the dense
metal lead melts at 621 degrees Fahrenheit, one single temperature.
Rock melting doesn't work that way, because most rocks are not a single substance and
therefore melt over a range of temperature.
Peridotite begins to melt at about 1100 degrees Celsius, though the exact temperature is quite
sensitive to the volatile content of water and carbon dioxide.
The chemical composition of the first droplets of melt differs significantly from that of
the bulk peridotite.
That first melt is much richer in calcium and aluminum, for example.
It also has somewhat more iron and silicon, but a lot less magnesium than peridotite.
Another key difference between peridotite and its first melt is that the liquid is much
less dense than peridotite.
Consequently, even a small amount of partial melting, as little as 5%, can produce a melt
that concentrates along mineral grain boundaries that accumulates in fissures and pockets and
rather easily rises toward the surface.
That magma, nothing more than partially melted peridotite, will become basalt.
The production of basalt by partially melting peridotite has occurred continuously for most
of Earth's history, generating hundreds of millions of cubic kilometers of basalt in
the process.
Boyant molten basalt rises through Earth's near-surface layers in two complementary ways.
Volcanic eruptions like those that continue to form Hawaii and Iceland are the more spectacular.
Volcanic basalt breaks through the surface in fiery magma fountains and river-like flows.
The most dramatic explosive eruptions are caused by water and other volatiles.
Water remains locked in silicate liquids at high pressures more than a kilometer deep.
But as water-rich magma approaches the surface, the water can boil and expand explosively
to vapor.
And you get towering columns of ejected ash, car-sized volcanic bombs accompanying the
lava flow of some basalt volcanoes.
Each eruption may add a layer, a few inches to a few feet thick, but thousands of superimposed
layers of lava and ash build mountains several kilometers tall.
The largest basaltic provinces cover thousands of square miles in black rock.
Look closely at basaltic volcanoes and you'll find intriguing varieties of rock.
Many basalt flows are extremely fine-grained and rich in silicate glass because the liquid
cooled rapidly.
Pyroxene and feldspar crystals didn't have time to form, so the rock appears black and
featureless.
By contrast, distinctive olivine basalts incorporate small, gemmy and golden crystals
of force-trade, crystals that had already formed in the melted depth.
Olivine basalt occurs only when peridotite is partially melted at relatively shallow
depths of less than 30 kilometers.
Most basaltic magma never makes it all the way to the surface because it takes huge forces
for magma to break through from the depths.
Consequently, huge volumes of red-hot basalt liquid are trapped, sequestered underground,
below the surface where they cool much, much more slowly than at the surface.
Slow cooling means big crystals, inch-long, blocky feldspar and pyroxene crystals which
grow in rocks called diabase or gabbro.
Some magma is injected into near vertical cracks and the subsurface rocks to form sheet-like
smooth-faced dikes.
If as often happens, the formation is uplifted and the soft surrounding host rock erodes
away, a long straight diabase wall can cross the landscape, a wall that looks uncannily
in some cases like a crumbling archaeological site.
Alternatively, magma is often injected between flat-lying sedimentary layers of sedimentary
rocks so it can form a thick, blanket-like sill.
The palisades cliffs on the Hudson River, which are a prominent feature just upstream
from Manhattan on the western shore of the Hudson River, that's a place where a thick
basaltic sill dips gently to the west.
Other parallel basalt sills create a series of parallel ridges, highlands that become
some of northern New Jersey's most expensive real estate.
As you can imagine, other subsurface lakes of basalt magma just gradually cool to form
irregular masses, kilometers across, but whatever size and shape diabase and gabbro adopt, they
are chemically the same as basalt.
As we look back at the earliest history of Earth, we see how both astrophysical chance
and geological necessity played crucial roles.
Even a slight difference in the orbit of Earth, or Thea, could have changed the character
of the Earth-Moon system, but once the big thwack happened, the history of Earth and
of the Moon were ordained, predetite, inevitably crystallized from Earth's cooling magma oceans.
And just as inevitably dense predetite sank, it was partially remelted to form basalt,
the most abundant rock on Earth.
