The story of Earth's most basic raw materials begins with exploding stars, the nurseries
of the Ur minerals.
For people who seek meaning and purpose in the cosmos, supernovas are a good place to
start.
To be sure, the Big Bang led inevitably to hydrogen atoms, and hydrogen atoms just as
an extirply produced the first stars.
Yet, it's not at all obvious how stars by themselves get you to our modern living world.
A big ball of hydrogen, even if it does have a growing, core-bound collection of heavier
elements from carbon up to iron, doesn't seem to help move things along in a very interesting
way.
But, when the first big star is exploded, cosmic novelty ensued.
These fractured bodies seeded space with all the elements of the periodic table, carbon,
oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur, the elements of life.
They're all quite plentiful, magnesium, silicon, iron, aluminum, and calcium, which dominate
the compositions of many common rocks and form a large fraction of the mass of Earth-like
planets also abounded.
But supernovas also made many more elements, in the incomprehensibly energetic environment
of these exploding stars, elements fused, and they splintered in new and exotic ways
to make all of the periodic table, elements way beyond number 26.
So appeared the first traces of many rare elements, precious silver and gold, utilitarian
copper and zinc, toxic, arsenic, and mercury, radioactive uranium and plutonium.
Once more, all of these elements were hurled out into space, where they could find each
other and clump together in new and interesting ways, through chemical reactions.
And here, chemistry is the key.
Chemistry happens when every day atom is bumped into each other.
Every atom has a tiny but massive central nucleus with positive electric charge, surrounded
by a cloud-like distribution of one or more negatively charged electrons.
Now, isolated atomic nuclei almost never interact, except in the ultimate pressure cooker environments
of stellar interiors, that's where nuclear fusion reactions occur.
But electrons from one atom are constantly bumping into the electrons of adjacent atoms.
And chemical reactions occur when two or more atoms meet and their electrons interact and
rearrange.
Such shuffling and sharing of electrons occurs because certain combinations of electrons,
notably collections of 2 or 10 or 18 electrons, are particularly stable.
If you look at the periodic table of the elements, you see that elements 2, 10, and 18 are found
in the rightmost column, their helium, neon, and argon.
And recall from the last lecture that these elements are found in the hot envelopes of
exploding stars, but they never, ever form minerals.
That's because they have a full complement of electrons.
Their electron shells are complete, so they remain as isolated atoms, and typically remain
in the gas state unless temperatures drop close to absolute zero, when they can ultimately
freeze into crystals.
Now, other elements don't naturally have these magic numbers of electrons, so they go through
all sorts of changes to gain or lose electrons to achieve 2, or 10, or 18.
That need to achieve a magic number is what drives chemical reactions and forges chemical
bonds.
The very first chemical reactions following the Big Bang produce molecules.
Those are small clusters of a few atoms tightly bound into a single unit.
In hydrogen molecules, that's H2, each with two hydrogen atoms locked together came first.
Now each hydrogen atom carries only one electron, which is a pretty unstable situation in the
universe where two electrons is a magic number.
So when two hydrogen atoms meet, they pool their resources to form a molecule with that
magic number of two shared electrons.
This sharing of electrons is called covalent bonding.
Covalent bonding is the most important type in all living things because it's the way
the element carbon typically bonds to other elements.
Now given the abundance of hydrogen following the Big Bang, hydrogen molecules surely predated
the first stars, and they've been a perpetual part of our cosmos since atoms first appeared
about 13.7 billion years ago.
However, lacking any other molecule forming elements, hydrogen must have been it before
the first stars.
Now, there may have been a tiny amount of the lithium hydrogen compound, lithium hydride,
which would have been a gas, however lacking any other molecule forming elements, that's
about it until the first stars.
So following the first supernova, this space was seeded with a variety of other elements,
lots of interesting molecules could form.
Another important water, H2O, with two hydrogen atoms bound to an oxygen atom was one early
example, chances are that nitrogen and two with two nitrogen atoms bonded together, and
then there's ammonia, that's NH3, methane, natural gas or CH4, carbon monoxide, carbon
dioxide molecules, they also enrich the space around supernovas.
All of these molecular species are formed from covalent bonds, and all are going to come
to play key roles in the formation of planets and in the origin of life, but none of them
is a mineral unless it freezes into an ice at temperatures much, much colder than those
found in the vicinity of an exploding star.
Two other types of chemical bonding enrich the cosmos, there's ionic bonding which occurs
when two atoms exchange one or more electrons.
Just a glance at the periodic table shows that sodium element 11 has one too many electrons,
one more than 10, the magic number, while chlorine element 17 has one too few, one fewer
than 18, which is a magic number.
So when those atoms meet, a rapid and very energetic transfer of one electron gives sodium
its preferred 10 electrons, chlorine gets its preferred 18 electrons, and in the process
sodium assumes a positive electrical charge because it now has 11 positive protons in
the nucleus, but only 10 negative electrons.
Sodium becomes a positive ion, and by the same token chlorine becomes a negative ion
because it's gained an extra electron, positive and negative attract, and a crystal of ionically
bonded sodium chloride, what we typically call table salt, is formed, that's ionic bonding.
And then the third type of bonding, metallic bonding occurs when lots of atoms have too
many electrons.
If you put a whole bunch of sodium atoms in a box, they all have one too many electrons.
So each atom gives up an electron to achieve that magic number of 10, while the electrons
form a kind of negatively charged C that holds all the positive charged sodium atoms together.
That's what we call a metal.
So all three common bonding strategies, covalent, ionic and metallic, arise from the need for
atoms to attain their magic numbers of electrons.
We now realize that the first minerals could only have formed where the density of atoms
was high enough, but the temperatures cool enough to form little crystals, the dozen
or so ur minerals.
And so with the explosion of the first stars, the universe began to get more interesting.
But how do we know?
How can we possibly tease out the story of the most ancient microscopic minerals from
the overwhelming background of planet Earth?
That is the scientific domain of the Cosmochemists who study pre-solar grains.
Now the problem of telling a pre-solar grain from everyday dust has been solved by studying
the isotopic compositions of the grains.
Recall from lecture three that most of the chemical elements occur in a variety of different
stable isotopes.
That is isotopes that are not radioactive and last unchanged for many billions of years.
We'll meet many of these stable isotopes many times during the course in this Earth history
of four and a half billion years is a story really of isotopic concentration and change.
The study of isotopes has become one of the most powerful approaches to understanding
ancient chemical events on Earth.
So let's take some time to examine modern research on isotopes.
How do we measure them?
And how can they tell us about chemical processes that occurred long ago, even before the formation
of Earth?
Recall that each chemical element of the periodic table is defined by its fixed number of protons.
But the number of neutrons is not fixed.
So in carbon, for example, with six protons, the number of neutrons in common isotopes
can vary from five to eight.
In nature, carbon-12 with six protons plus six neutrons is by far the most common.
About 99 out of every hundred carbon atoms on Earth is carbon-12.
Less common is carbon-13, which accounts for about one percent of all carbon atoms on Earth.
And it has six protons and seven neutrons.
When you might have heard of a third type of carbon isotope, carbon-14, with six protons
and eight neutrons, that relatively rare radioactive isotope is used in what is known as carbon-14
age dating.
And scientists have also learned how to make small quantities of a carbon isotope with
only five neutrons, that's carbon-11, and that's been used in some specialized experiments,
which we'll learn about in lecture 30.
So, we're going to take a look at some of the experiments that provided the key to discovering
the dozen or so Earth minerals, which are found in pre-solar grains.
Somehow, those grains have to be distinguished from the vastly more common dust particles
that surround us.
Now, the chemical composition of mineral dust, for example, the dust whipped up in desert
sandstorms, or during human activities like farming or construction, those dust grains
of dust are made from the commonest rock-forming elements.
That's oxygen, magnesium, aluminum, silicon, iron, and so forth.
So a simple chemical test for those elements would be hard-pressed to discriminate pre-solar
grains from ordinary dust.
But the isotopic composition of pre-solar dust grains are often radically different
from anything on Earth.
Let's consider the element hydrogen.
On Earth, the average composition of hydrogen is about 150 parts per million deuterium,
roughly one in every 6,000 hydrogen atoms of that heavy variety.
That value represents a kind of average of all the pre-solar materials that made up the
planets in our solar system, all the very dust and gas that made up that original solar
nebula.
By contrast, the individual pre-solar dust grains that made up the solar system had ratios
of hydrogen to deuterium all over the map, from just a few parts per million to thousands
of parts per million.
That's because different pre-solar dust grains come from different kinds of stars, and different
kinds of stars vary widely in how they process and make isotopes.
Turns out the biggest stars burn up their hydrogen quickly, and then proceed to a rapid
sequence of fusion reactions to produce copious amounts of carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, silicon,
and so forth.
Smaller stars may only progress to the red giant stage, and thus emit a lot of carbon
in their violent stellar winds, so each pre-solar dust grain reflects the idiosyncratic isotope
ratios of its parent star, a ratio that's wildly different from the average isotopic
composition of Earth today.
Hydrogen isn't the only element that displays large variations in that isotopic composition.
On Earth, the ratio of carbon-12 to carbon-13 is typically close to 100 to 1, but in different
pre-solar grains, the ratio varies from 1 to 1 to 10,000 to 1.
Similarly, the ratio of nitrogen-14 to nitrogen-15 on Earth is always close to 300, but in pre-solar
grains, the ratio varies from less than 5 to more than 20,000, and the same situation
holds for the isotopes of silicon, and for oxygen, for magnesium, in fact all common
elements in pre-solar grains.
So think about how one might distinguish a precious pre-solar grain from an ordinary
speck of dust.
Pre-solar grains are distinguished by their isotopic anomalies, that is ratios of isotopes
wildly different from those of well-mixed averages we see on Earth today.
And the challenge, the big challenge is to identify and isolate microscopic pre-solar
dust grains from everything else.
If you could find a technique that allowed you to determine the isotope ratio of each
little grain, then you could, in principle, pick out the ones that were anomalous, that
had wildly different isotope ratios.
Such measurements would be a sure sign that the grain had never been processed by planet-forming
events.
Now that task was all been impossible until a new kind of instrument, the ion microprobe,
came into common use in the 1990s.
The ion microprobe is an amazing multi-million dollar piece of scientific hardware that can
measure the isotopic composition of individual dust grains and thus pick out the anomalous
pre-solar bits.
It's an incredibly difficult machine to operate, but the principle behind the ion probe is
pretty straightforward.
Okay, so first thing you need is a beam of ions.
Those are electrically charged atoms, and that beam must be focused into an incredibly
tight beam of atomic bullets, only a millionth of an inch across.
The charged atoms have to be accelerated by a powerful electromagnet, and this whole assembly
is called an ion gun.
It's like a futuristic space ray, and that's only the first step.
So the ion beam has to be focused onto a tiny sample.
The intense beam blasts a crater in the sample, vaporizing the atoms in that part of the sample,
and many of those atoms are ionized in the process, so they become charged atoms, just
like the original ion beam.
These ions are subjected to a second electromagnetic field, which accelerates the sample's ion
towards a target several feet away.
Okay, here's where Newton's laws of motion take over.
Newton's second law states that force equals mass times acceleration.
That second law motion quantifies how objects speed up when they're accelerated, and when
they accelerate, they're subjected to a greater force, or if they're less massive, they don't
accelerate as much.
So that principle applies to isotopes as well.
Under the fixed force of the ion probe's electromagnetic field, the more massive ions
accelerate less than the less massive ions.
That means lighter ions arrive at the target first, while heavier ions arrive later.
So you can use sensitive electronics to measure the time of flight of ions and measure which
one gets first, which one gets there later, and then measure their ratios.
Alternatively, you can guide the ions down a curving path and bend them with an electromagnetic
field.
Here the more massive ions don't bend quite as much, and so they hit a different part
of the target.
And you can use two collectors and measure the isotope ratio that way.
In either case, it's a matter of measuring the ratio of pulses of ions of different mass.
Carbon 12 versus carbon 13, for example.
In the early days of ion probes, it was an incredibly tedious task to focus the ion beam
one by one onto hundreds of individual dust grains that have been collected from high
fine planes or from a meteorite, then adjust the second electromagnetic field to guide
the sample's ions to a target, measure the isotope ratios, and tease out the rare anomalous
ones.
Today it turns out it's a lot easier.
Their new machines have been automated to scan hundreds of grains at a time on a single
mount.
As a result, the inventory of pre-solar dust grains has increased from a few dozen in the
mid-1990s to thousands today.
Once you find a precious pre-solar grain by those isotopic anomalies, it can be studied
by other techniques to tease out what minerals make up the dust.
Turns out that much of every grain is non-crystalline.
The atoms haven't organized themselves into a regular structure with a well-defined composition.
This so-called amorphous state speaks of atoms clustering randomly in a chaotic, hot environment.
But embedded in most pre-solar grains are a region of crystalline order, tiny crystals
of ur minerals.
Let's take a closer look at some of those oldest mineral species.
As we've seen, diamond came first because carbon is abundant and diamond crystallizes
at very high temperature.
Because diamond is so durable, these pre-solar grains are really forever.
But one aspect of this diamond is rather surprising.
We generally think of diamond as a mineral from Earth's deep interior where pressures
are extremely high.
I recall learning this concept as a young boy watching the old black-and-white Superman
TV series, the one with George Reeves as Superman.
The storyline was silly, something about a large diamond eye that had been stolen
from a native idol.
And I remember Lois Lane and Jimmy Olsen were about to be punished for its disappearance.
And to save the day, Superman takes a lump of coal, just was conveniently lying around.
He uses his X-ray vision to heat it and squeezes it until the coal turns into a flawless cut
diamond.
So, if diamond is a high-pressure mineral, how could it possibly form in the vacuum of
space?
The key is in the relative energy of carbon atoms.
Every natural system tries to adopt a configuration of lower energy.
Not necessarily the lowest energy, but lower energy.
So imagine super-hot carbon atoms in the supernova explosion, that's a very energetic configuration,
very high energy, as the environment cooled below about 4,000 degrees, suddenly the atoms
were able to bond together in the arrangement of diamond.
Even though diamond is not the most stable, the lowest energy form, carbon atoms began
to stick together to make little diamond crystals, which had much lower energy than the carbon
gas.
It's a process called vapor deposition, and it's used very successfully today to make
all kinds of crystals, most notably the silicon semiconductor chips that control all our electronics.
But also, a burgeoning industry of growing perfect diamond crystals.
Recall that carbon also played a key role in other air minerals, including graphite,
and the carbide's coenite and moissanite.
Moissanite, that silicon carbide, is especially intriguing, the periodic table shows why.
Silicon is right below carbon, so these two elements have very similar chemical properties.
Recall that in diamond, every carbon atom is surrounded by four others, while in moissanite,
every carbon atom is surrounded by four silicon atoms, and every silicon atom is surrounded
by four carbon atoms.
This similarity of crystal structure means that diamond and moissanite share many properties.
Both are super hard, both are colorless, both make excellent gemstones.
Unfortunately, moissanite doesn't occur naturally in big crystals, but chemists have learned
to grow big crystals that are often marketed as synthetic substitutes for diamond, and
they are virtually impossible to tell apart unless you're an expert.
There are quite a number of other gemstones lurking in that list of air minerals.
The aluminum oxide corundum, that's AL2O3, is a remarkable mineral that takes on deep
coloration when there are trace impurities.
A fraction of a percent iron or titanium, and you get deep blue sapphire, that's the
birthstone of September.
A fraction percent chromium, and you get deep red ruby, which is the birthstone of July.
Of course, those earliest corundum crystals were probably colorless and way, way too small
to make a ring.
Another air mineral, the magnesium aluminum oxide spinel, and that's also widely used
as a colored gemstone, both as a natural and even more commonly synthetic crystals when
it has trace impurities.
Depending on the color, it's sometimes sold as the birthstone of March instead of aquamarine
or instead of blue sapphire for September, and instead of turquoise for December.
And then there's olivine or paredote, as it's usually called in the gem trade, as the brilliant
green birthstone of August.
And given the diamond is the birthstone of April, the air minerals represent half of
the calendar year.
Well, the underlying cause for this close connection between air minerals and gemstones
is that air minerals have to crystallize at very high temperatures, and high temperature
formation often correlates with very strong bonding exactly what you want in a highly
polished gemstone.
In the interest of full disclosure, it could be argued that there are several other air
minerals that I haven't mentioned.
Very careful studies of pre-solder grains show extremely small regions, where other
compounds seem to have consolidated, but these ultra-small specks are less than a millionth
of an inch across.
They're generally poorly crystallized, and they're very difficult to characterize.
Among one of these nano-minerals, as they're called, are presumed specks of the carbides
of titanium and zirconium and molybdenum, as well as iron alloys and maybe even a sulfide
or two.
So whether these regions, some of which are just a few atoms across, should be called
minerals is a wide-open question in mineralogy today.
Traditional mineralologists like myself, who collect hand-sized specimens, tend to object
at classifying anything that small as a mineral.
On the other hand, specialists who operate electron microscopes, and that's the only
instrument that can tease out these nanoscale objects, they argue that anything that they
can image with regular arrangements of atoms, no matter how small, should be called a legitimate
mineral.
I want to close this lecture by considering a rather different reason why mineral evolution
provides a useful way to approach mineralogy.
Mineral evolution represents an alternative approach to systematizing and to teaching
the subject of mineralogy.
The mineral diversity of terrestrial planets evolves, and it evolves as a consequence of
the dynamic histories of planets.
In the coming lectures, we'll see how the roles of epic physical, chemical, and biological
processes, planetary accretion and differentiation, plate tectonics and associated large-scale
reworking of the lithosphere, and the origin and evolution of life, how these processes
create gradients in temperature, pressure, composition.
These gradients selectively process elements.
They lead to new equilibrium mineral species.
This approach, the chronological stage of planetary evolution, and the associated rock-forming
processes that lead to distinctive suites of minerals, rather than the equilibrium structure
or the composition or the properties of the minerals themselves, that's the underlying
organizing principle.
Geological time therefore becomes a central parameter of mineralogy.
This approach is admittedly quite different from the more physics and chemistry orientation
of many traditional mineralogy courses, and it isn't to say that core chemical and physical
processes aren't vital to mineralogy.
Mineralogy professors rightly insist that certain key concepts have to provide the underpinnings
for any mineralogy course.
Let's see how this new approach works by looking at some traditional mineralogy concepts together
with the urminerals, which constitute the logical starting point of any discussion of
mineral evolution.
First in traditional mineralogy comes chemical bonding, which is a core concept in understanding
how minerals form.
And the urminerals incorporate a wide range of bond types, covalent bonds and diamond,
ionic bonds and oxides and silicates, van der Waals interactions between the carbon layers
of graphite, even metallic bonds in the tiny specks of iron mineral alloys.
Geology professors also demand that any serious mineralogy course must introduce the key atomic
structural motifs that appear over and over and over again.
In minerals, in particular, in oxides and silicates, the same patterns recur again and
again.
Calcium almost always surrounded by eight oxygen atoms.
Magnesium surrounded by six oxygen atoms.
Aluminum and silicon surrounded by four oxygen atoms.
These polyhedra, which are common to many rock forming minerals, all occur in the urminerals.
The dozen urmineral species also illustrate such key mineralogical concepts as solid solution,
as exemplified in the olivines.
Remember, that's how two or more different elements can substitute for each other in
the same crystal.
And polymorphism is shown by the two very different crystal forms of carbon, diamond
and graphite.
Traditional mineralogy courses also emphasize phase diagrams, which are graphical representations
of how minerals form in different domains of pressure, temperature and composition.
While the urminerals are ideal for introducing basic phase diagrams, consider carbon.
A pressure-temperature phase diagram of carbon reveals different conditions under which diamond
or graphite or liquid carbon occur.
Diamond is stable at higher pressures.
The carbon-liquid forms at higher temperatures and so forth.
There's a phase diagram that combines two elements, such as silicon and carbon, shows
regions where diamond, as opposed to moisonite, might form.
And one intriguing point revealed by such a phase diagram is that unless you have a near-perfect
50-50 mixture of carbon to silicon, then two mineral phases are likely to form simultaneously.
In an exploding star's atmosphere, where carbon is typically more abundant than silicon, both
diamond and moisonite will form at the same time.
These characteristics of urminerals provide a rich context by which to introduce the chemical
and physical principles that are fundamental to all mineralogy.
However, unlike traditional mineralogy curricula, these principles are introduced as part of
a larger evolutionary story.
Teaching mineralogy based on mineral evolution significantly changes the whole framework of
the field.
I recall learning about the common mineral garnet quite early in my mineralogy course.
You know, garnet, you've probably seen it if you ever had a granite countertop, their
beautiful little red crystals that appear in the granite, and it's also quite commonly
used as a gemstone in their beautiful red garnet necklaces and other jewelry that you
can find in antique stores, for example.
So, garnet epitomizes why teaching mineral evolution is so powerful.
I remember my inspiring MIT professor Dave once, he introduced the garnet group as a
common crystal structure, and all the different kinds of garnets can be represented by a single
chemical formula.
It's X3, Y2, then three silicons and twelve oxygens.
And that X can be calcium or manganese or iron, and Y is an atom commonly magnesium
or iron or aluminum.
So all the garnets are traditionally lumped together in mineralogy textbooks.
And garnets came early in my MIT course for the simple reason that the garnet crystal
structure incorporates isolated groups of one silicon atom surrounded by four oxygen atoms.
That's a structural motif called an ortho-silicate.
In all traditional mineralogy courses ortho-silicates are introduced before other silicates, those
with rings or chains or sheets or frameworks of silicon and oxygen atoms.
But you know, there's really nothing to hang your hat on.
There's no context.
You just have to memorize the garnets or ortho-silicates with a particular crystal structure and
a range of chemical compositions.
Contrast that to mineral evolution.
From the perspective of mineral evolution, different garnet-structured phases are scattered
across several different mineralogical stages.
The earliest garnets probably formed before the planets as shock minerals in giant impacts
between asteroid-sized objects.
Another group of garnets formed in protoplanets as high temperatures and pressures transformed
other minerals and still other garnets formed deep in Earth as molten magma crystallized.
The minerals of the garnet group have crystal chemistries that are similar, but their mineral
evolution stories are vastly different.
Thus, the garnet structure represents the motif of a mineralogical rondo that returns
again and again in different geological settings throughout Earth's history, up to and including
the modern synthesis of yttrium aluminum garnet and other technological garnets used in lasers
and in electronics.
Similar arguments can be made for the diverse evolutionary histories of individual members
of virtually every other group, olivines, pyroxenes, feldspars, clay minerals, sulfides, carbonates,
and most other groups of rock-forming minerals.
Mineral evolution complements more traditional approaches to teaching mineralogy by providing
a historical narrative for each mineral phase.
The four-and-a-half-billion-year story integrates the principal themes of planetary science.
Geodynamics, patrology, geochemistry, thermodynamics, geobiology, as such, mineralogy becomes key
to unlocking our planet's history and thus assumes a central role in the Earth's sciences.
