A giant snowball travels through space.
Earth's surface and atmosphere has cooled,
and ice covers virtually the entire globe.
It's about a billion years before the present,
and Earth is in a period of extreme glaciation.
Most continents are positioned near the equator,
with surface rocks now insulated by ice.
Carbon dioxide from volcanoes begin building
a runaway greenhouse effect in the atmosphere.
Earth is at a tipping point.
For most of the protozoic eon,
Earth's near-surface environment shifted only gradually,
with no obvious periods of extreme global warming or cooling.
Yet for a combination of reasons that are still being revealed
750 million years ago around the middle of the neo-protozoic era,
Earth entered a period of extreme climate instability,
the likes of which had never been seen before.
This unsettled interval began with a brutal ice age.
Geologists deduce the timing and intensity of these changes
because glaciers leave an unambiguous suite of sedimentary features.
First and foremost of these glacial leftovers
are thick, irregular layers of diagnostic rocks called tillites.
Tillites preserve chaotically jumbled piles of sediments
that are carved out in, concentrated by the action of ice flowing over rock.
That includes sand and gravel, as well as angular rock fragments
and fine rock flower.
Glaciers also altered the landscape in very diagnostic ways.
They leave behind characteristic rounded and elongated outcrops of bedrock
that have been shaped by what might be called rivers of ice.
That ice also carries along rocks and boulders
which scratch and polish outcrops of bedrock in very distinctive ways.
Other geological clues to glaciers are thick deposits of finely layered,
varved sediments, paper thin, alternating light and dark layers
representing seasonal runoff deposits into glacial lakes.
Corsair in the spring, finer in the fall.
Added to these sedimentary features are erratic boulders
and mound-like accumulations of gravel called moraines.
It's this diverse combination of features that points to regions of ancient glaciation.
As a geologist, you're trained to spot such evidence when you go into the field.
And indeed, field geologists around the world have discovered
that these glacial features occur abundantly in rocks of ages between 580 and 740 million years old,
just about everywhere they look around the world.
These data have piled up for more than half a century.
Evidence for extensive glaciation is found on every continent
and that latitudes from the equator to the poles at more than 50 localities
and the list keeps growing.
As a result, the geological community has come to realize that an ice age far worse
than anything we had imagined once gripped the entire globe,
beginning roughly 740 million years ago.
This evidence for an abrupt and drastic climate change started about 740 million years ago.
It didn't come all at once.
In fact, it's been accumulating for decades when geologist Paul Hoffman
and three colleagues at Harvard and the University of Maryland
published a short scientific paper entitled,
A Neoproterozoic Snowball Earth.
That was in the August 28, 1998 issue of science.
And let me tell you, that was an electrifying moment for those of us who study early Earth.
Lots of scientists have thought about ice ages
when the polar ice expanded to lower latitudes,
perhaps south into what is now Midwestern United States, for example.
But Hoffman and co-workers made the extraordinary leap
that at least twice during the interval between 740 and 580 million years ago,
Earth had experienced what was not simply an ice age of expanded ice caps,
but that our planet had completely frozen over from the poles to the equator.
They based their extraordinary claims in part on all those field studies,
including their own meticulous field observations of a sequence of rocks
from the skeleton coast of Namibia.
These Namibian deposits were crucial,
because unlike many of the other reports of neoproterozoic glaciation,
the glacial features were made quite close to the neoproterozoic equator.
They documented thick deposits of tillite,
which is the sedimentary rock created by glaciers
and composed of grains of all sizes side by side
with paleomagnetic signals that the glaciers covered the land
at about 12 degrees latitude,
in what today would be tropical conditions.
What's more, these weren't alpine glaciers of the kind
that form in cold, high altitudes of lofty mountains.
These glacial tillites were clearly deposited in the shallow waters
of a coastal setting right at sea level.
That means a climate must have been correspondingly frigid,
cold enough to build up thick accumulations of ice and snow near the equator.
That's a sharp contrast to Earth's most recent ice age 20,000 years ago
when advancing glaciers never got farther south than about 45 degrees latitude,
and when the fossil evidence clearly points to a relatively warm tropical zone
with coral reefs even during the maximum extent of ice.
Most of us quickly bought into the snowball Earth scenario
because the Harvard team had accumulated what seemed to be unassailable evidence
for massive buildups of glacial ice at sea level close to the equator.
Part of the beauty of the Hoffman et al. article
was that they included both obvious geological evidence from the field
and more subtle geochemical data from stable isotopes.
Indeed, for many scientists reading the Snowball Earth article in 1988,
carbon isotopes provided the smoking gun that persuaded us to accept the case
for a sudden and catastrophic change.
Here's the story the isotopes tell.
During the tens of millions of years prior to the first presumed Snowball Earth episode
before about 740 million years ago as the supercontinent of Rodinia,
what continued to fragment and shallow inland seas nurtured primitive life,
the rapid growth of algal biomass concentrated isotopically light carbon.
We've seen how the contemporaneous limestones
that are deposited in the coastal waters around the broken pieces of Rodinia
are correspondingly heavy.
But you can turn this argument on its head.
If microbially produced limestone and so forth slows down or stops completely,
then the carbon isotopes in the limestone must become on average much lighter.
In other words, as life sequesters less and less of the lighter carbon-12 isotope,
then that lighter isotope must enter the limestone.
And that's exactly what Paul Hoffman and his colleagues found in rocks from 740 million years ago.
There was a huge decrease of more than 1% in heavy carbon in limestone
that were formed just before the great Snowball event.
And then there was a break when no limestone or sediments of any kind other than glacial deposits are known.
And then just after the appearance of glacial deposits about 700 million years ago,
more limestone with extremely light carbon suggesting a sharp decline in life.
So that's the evidence for global glaciation.
But it really raises more questions than it answers.
For almost 3 billion years, Earth had existed without any global ice event.
So what happened?
Why was the time 740 million years ago different?
The model that's emerged relies on a sequence of nested feedback loops,
each of which drove Earth to a colder and colder state.
One feedback depended on continental weathering, which was accelerated in hot and humid tropical zones.
Rocks simply weather faster in warm and wet zones, and that pulls more and more carbon dioxide from the air.
Another feedback was triggered by the massive blooms of photosynthetic algae,
which scavenged even more CO2 out of the air.
The drop in carbon dioxide weakened the greenhouse effect,
and as Earth's atmospheric greenhouse weakened, it climate cooled.
That means that ice caps began to form and grow larger at the poles.
Now, this fresh white ice and snow effectively reflected lots more sunlight into space,
so that solar energy was also lost, creating a positive feedback that cooled Earth even more rapidly than before.
So we have an unstable situation.
Ice sheets were spreading to lower and lower latitudes from both poles,
while the still warm equatorial continent and the profligate algal growth
continued to remove more and more carbon dioxide from the skies.
Further weakening the greenhouse effect.
The result was that Earth's climate was at least temporarily skewed out of balance.
So it reached one of those unpredictable tipping points.
Earth cooled quickly.
More and more sunlight was reflected into space, more ice formed,
the global greenhouse weakened, and ultimately white ice converged from both poles toward the equator.
Eventually, in the most extreme hard snowball version of this story,
ice may have completely encircled the globe.
In this scenario, the one promoted by Paul Hoffman and his colleagues,
estimates are that average Earth temperatures plunged to 50 degrees Celsius below zero,
while a mantle of ice up to a mile thick surrounded the entire globe.
Think about the profound implications of the snowball Earth hypothesis.
According to this model, for many millions of years Earth was almost completely encased in ice,
or at least slush.
The white snowball Earth was unable to soak up solar radiation.
It must have seemed forever locked in an icy shroud.
Temperature almost never rose above freezing,
so the water cycle was greatly slowed down to a process of sublimation of ice and snowfall.
And the global ice age would have shut down almost every ecosystem.
Earth's formerly abundant microbial life, including all that green algae, was all but wiped out.
Indeed, we suspect that life survived primarily in those isolated refuges at or near volcanoes
and their associated hot springs.
It's certain that some microbes would have persisted in the perpetual darkness of ocean floor hydrothermal vents,
particularly near mid-ocean rifts where a new basaltic crust was being formed.
So those ecosystems probably have been around for billions of years and aren't much affected by the surface environment.
It's also possible that other sparse surviving populations of photosynthetic algae found their homes
in sunlit zones of cracked thin ice or shallow open water near the warm flanks of volcanoes.
We find such microbial communities even today in the coldest parts of Antarctica.
So it's easy to see how once the snowball Earth events reached the tipping point
that things would settle into a very long time of cold.
What might be harder to understand is how could Earth possibly have recovered
from that seemingly static, icy state?
And here it's pretty easy to find an answer in the inexorable power of plate tectonics.
Indeed, so many aspects of Earth's changeable surface are literally rooted in our planet's much deeper, ceaseless churnings.
Nothing occurring at the surface of our planet and certainly not the white veneer of ice and snow could stop plate tectonics.
The key link between the deep interior and the surface is the global network of volcanoes,
constant volcanism along with constant emission of volcanic gases like water vapor and carbon dioxide
from hundreds of black cones that must have poked through the ice slowly tipped the balance.
Carbon dioxide and water vapor are the dominant volcanic gases, so CO2 once again began to build up in the atmosphere.
And with the land entirely jacketed in ice, there was no way to remove that CO2 by rock weathering.
And with the microbial ecosystem all but shut down and photosynthesis all but ceased,
the carbon dioxide wasn't removed by life either.
That means the carbon dioxide concentrations must have gradually risen
and probably to levels not seen in more than two billion years.
It's likely that CO2 concentrations increased eventually to perhaps several hundreds of times modern levels.
And that rise in greenhouse gases must have triggered a new positive feedback, a runaway greenhouse effect.
Here we have the snowball scenario in reverse.
Sunlight still scattered off the white landscape, but carbon dioxide in the atmosphere bounced that radiant energy
right back to the surface, inexorably warming the planet.
As the atmosphere warmed, small patches of equatorial ice melted, perhaps for the first time in many millions of years,
as the darker land became exposed, more and more sunlight was absorbed by rocks and soils and the warming accelerated.
The oceans too began to clear of their white covering as positive feedbacks between the sun and the surface
caused Earth to become warmer and warmer.
So far, the Snowball Earth story seems like a pretty neat and tidy package, but its central mystery remains.
The Snowball Earth episodes were by no means the first periods of glaciation on Earth, nor would they be the last.
But the neoproterozoic snowball intervals stand out in history to the best of our knowledge
never before and never since have such extreme cold spells occurred on Earth.
Why should that be?
We've seen that almost every aspect of Earth history repeats itself.
Furthermore, the preceding billionaire interval was a time of exceptional global stability.
So how can one relatively brief period of Earth history have been so different from any other?
The contrast is made starker by looking at the two earlier periods of glaciation, which were evidently a lot less severe.
The earliest known ice advance was a relatively brief event revealed by Tillite deposits on ancient South African cratons,
which occurred about 2.9 billion years ago in the middle of the Archean Eon.
That it should have taken so long for Earth's ice caps to expand from poles toward the equator is, in itself, something of a mystery.
Astrophysicists tell us that early in Earth history, the Sun was much fainter than it is today, or that it wasn't the protozoic Eon.
In fact, 4 billion years ago, the Sun had only about 70% of its present radiance,
and it was not more than about 80% of its present energy output during that first mid-Archean glaciation.
Why no snowball Earth episodes back then?
With so much less energy coming from the Sun, there must have been other warming mechanisms at play.
Many scientists suggest that much higher levels of greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide, methane, and perhaps an orange hydrocarbon haze,
were critical at moderating influences that held off cooling, glacial forming events.
It's also certain that early Earth experienced much higher heat flows from the turbulent deep interior,
so greater volcanic outputs must have played a role.
Ironically, Earth's first glacial episode, 2.9 billion years ago, may have been the result of too much greenhouse gas.
If the atmosphere's methane content rose to high enough levels as it may well have done before the rise of oxygen,
then chemical reactions high in the stratosphere would have produced more and more of the big hydrocarbon molecules
that may have given early Earth a hazy, orange sky.
But if that haze became just a little bit too thick, then some of the Sun's energy,
which was formally trapped by the greenhouse effect, would have been blocked in the upper atmosphere
and Earth's surface would have cooled somewhat.
But let me emphasize that whatever the cause of Earth's ice age almost 3 billion years ago,
it was nowhere near the extent nor the severity of the Snowball-Earth interval.
There was a second, somewhat longer and more severe cooling episode
that was marked by extensive glacial deposits between about 2.4 and 2.2 billion years ago,
which followed the breakup of equatorial Kennerland supercontinent.
And here we see some familiar causes in operation.
Atmospheric modeling suggests that increased weathering and sediment deposition along newly formed coastlines
gobbled up much of the carbon dioxide.
At the exact same time, the rise of oxygen in the atmosphere by photosynthesis
caused the destruction of atmospheric methane, which was perhaps the dominant greenhouse gas at the time.
The fainter Sun, which had an energy output perhaps 85% of modern levels,
was simply insufficient to maintain as effective a greenhouse effect
and a protected cold period ensued.
Nevertheless, that ice age wasn't anywhere as severe as the Neoproterozoic Snowball-Earth.
And for the next 1.4 billion years, that's almost a third of Earth's entire history,
there is no trace whatsoever of an ice age that's been found in rocks anywhere on Earth.
For all that time, Earth's climate seems to have remained in a remarkable balance,
never getting too hot, never getting too cold.
Looking at the previous Glacial Episodes at 2.9 and 2.4 billion years,
and knowing of the coming cycles of snowball-hot-house crisis,
it's difficult to explain such a long time when changes were so restrained.
We can evoke a litany of possible negative feedbacks,
all of which may have contributed to stasis,
but it's hard to pinpoint the single cause, especially when there's no obvious effect.
So what was unique about that time 740 million years ago?
Naturally, scientists have ideas, and I'd like to share a mix of these speculations, including my own.
Let me warn you that what I'm about to say is not necessarily the correct explanation,
but this is how the science of ancient Earth progresses.
We look at the limited fragmentary data, we see correlations,
and we come up with possible explanations.
The first factor and the one I find especially compelling has to do with ocean geochemistry
and its effect on life.
All life has certain chemical requirements for survival.
One of those basic requirements is a steady supply of the element nitrogen in a form like ammonia,
that's NH3, with a nitrogen atom bound to three hydrogen atoms
that can be used to make amino acids and many other key biomolecules.
But the only abundant source of nitrogen at Earth's surface is nitrogen gas,
the molecule N2 that makes up 80% of the atmosphere.
The problem is that nitrogen gas is exceptionally unreactive with anything.
That's why it's hung around in the atmosphere for billions of years without reacting with rocks or the ocean.
Life solves the nitrogen problem with that clever enzyme called nitrogenase,
which we met two lectures ago.
Nitrogenase starts with nitrogen gas and water and makes ammonia.
In order to work, this enzyme needs a little energetic boost from a cluster of atoms
that includes either iron or molybdenum atoms.
So all microbes in the protozoic ion needed a reliable source of iron or of molybdenum,
and that's the key.
During the entire period of the Boring Billion after the deposition of those massive banded iron formations,
the ocean had become completely stripped of iron.
They've been that way iron poor ever since.
Today's oceans have a significant quantity of molybdenum, which is soluble in water that's oxidized,
but molybdenum was lacking in the oceans throughout the entire Boring Billion.
Okay, so for a billion years the oceans were poor in both of the essential nitrogenase elements, iron and molybdenum.
Paleontologists concluded that algae could only have flourished right along the coastlines,
where weathering and river runoff supplied both the iron and molybdenum needed for life.
So how does this relate to climate change?
Limited life meant limited consumption of carbon dioxide.
So there was no dramatic drawdown of the greenhouse gas,
only since 850 million years ago was microbial life able to grow unimpeded.
Add to this growth all the new extensive coastlines and shallow inland seas,
and Earth's suddenly experienced an explosion of carbon dioxide consuming life.
Another part of the explanation for the uniquely radical consequences of the Snowball Earth
rests on the distinctive positions of continents and oceans just prior to and during Rodinia's breakup.
The key here is the sharp contrast between oceans and land in their ability to reflect or absorb sunlight.
Darker oceans have a correspondingly low albedo.
That means they soak up most of the sun's energy and warm up in the process.
Dry barren land by contrast is much more reflective and bounces more of the sun's energy back into space.
A dry and desolate supercontinent like Rodinia sitting as it did on the equator
would have bounced much of the incident sunlight back into space.
Such a juxtaposition of polar oceans and equatorial continents would have exaggerated any global cooling event
since the equator receives much more solar energy than the poles.
It's extremely unlikely that our modern world would experience the same kind of cooling
because we now have two major oceans straddling the equator and significant land masses at high polar latitudes.
What's more, unlike 750 million years ago, we now have a terrestrial biosphere with forests, fields,
other vegetation that significantly decreased the land's albedo.
That means much more solar energy is absorbed by today's green landscape than during the barren Neoproterozoic.
That doesn't mean Earth can't undergo new and severe climate changes.
It just won't do so in quite the same way as that topsy-turvy Neoproterozoic world.
So we don't have all the details nailed down, but I think it's possible to come up with a pretty plausible set of explanations
for why the period immediately after the Boring Billion saw such dramatic swings in climate,
and I'm not done with those changes.
When we left the Snowball Earth about 700 million years ago, climate was changing fast.
Carbon dioxide had built up in the atmosphere from continuing volcanism in the absence of algal growth or continental weathering.
Greenhouse warming had started to melt the equatorial ice as dry land and open oceans began to emerge.
More of the sun's radiant energy was added to Earth's total budget.
A sudden release of the potent greenhouse gas methane from shallow deposits of hydrated methane called clathrates may have contributed to the warming as well.
In a geological blink of an eye, perhaps much less than a thousand years, the climate lurched.
The Snowball Earth transformed to the Hot House Earth as temperatures soared to what may have been record levels.
For a long time, perhaps as long as 30 million years, a warm climate prevailed, but the Hot House ensured its own demise.
Some of the greenhouse gas was removed by reactions with rocks.
The new new land was exposed to rainfall laced with corrosive carbonic acid.
That was another consequence of high atmospheric CO2, so it weathered rapidly.
The influx of mineral nutrients coupled with the resurgence of sunshine also led to explosive algal blooms that consumed the greenhouse gas.
And as with the Snowball Earth, all of these events are duly preserved in the carbon isotope record.
For the next 150 million years, Earth cycled between these extremes of climate, not just once, not twice, but at least three times the ice gathered and circled the globe, and then at least three times it retreated.
The global climate swung drunkenly from arctic to tropical and back again.
It's taken geologists quite a while to sort these details out.
It's tricky in part because during the actual Snowball Earth episodes, there aren't many rocks being deposited.
So it's a matter of teasing out part of the story from a lack of evidence.
The first episode, which is well documented now, is called the Sturgeon Glaciation.
It began about 740 million years ago and reached a maximum of about 720 million years ago.
Climate swung to hot-house levels by 700 million years ago, then came the second big Snowball event called the Marinoan Glaciation at 650 million years ago,
which was followed by another hot-house interval and finally came the less severe Gaskier's Glaciation, which occurred at 580 million years.
Now that we've seen this pattern emerging multiple times from the rock record, the picture is becoming ever clearer.
Thick accumulations of rock in a dozen countries reveal more and more details of this dramatic climatic cycle.
As ice retreated, the glaciers left behind huge piles of plucked-up boulders, ground-up rock, lumpy tillites
composed of all grain sizes and polished, rounded bedrock.
Soon after the warming cleared most of Earth's surface of ice, thick crystalline deposits of carbonate minerals covered the tillite layers.
Carbonates on top of tillite is another tell-tale sign of the dramatically warming oceans.
In fact, the carbonates formed so rapidly in the CO2-saturated seas that giant crystals several feet long blanketed the shallow ocean floor.
These distinctive calcium carbonate deposits tells of a time when Earth's near-surface environment had swung wildly from its chemical equilibrium.
For a time, following Paul Hoffman's 1998 publication of the Snowball Earth Model, geologists everywhere embraced the novel scenario.
But I have to say that the mood has shifted significantly.
Try as they might. The climate modelers have found it exceedingly difficult to find any combination of circumstances that could encase all of planet Earth in ice.
Their calculation suggests that even at times of the most significant global cooling at the poles, the equator should remain a rather temperate zone with little ice.
What has changed the consensus viewpoint are new observations by field geologists who now find evidence of moving ice and surface waves,
and ocean currents that persisted during what was thought to be the maximum deep freeze.
Those are clear signs of at least some open water, so Earth couldn't have been completely encased in ice.
That's why for most geologists, this hard snowball model has been replaced by a more benign slush ball scenario.
The slush ball with an only partially ice encased Earth is the new model to beat.
Paul Hoffman is retired now, but he still promotes his original model encounters that it's hard to date those signs of open water and that the slush could represent conditions just before or just after the glacial maximum.
How might we tell the difference?
One of the more intriguing emerging lines of evidence supporting a hard snowball is a striking short-lived pulse of banded iron formations laid down about the same time as the ISIS thought to have covered the globe.
Now, it's hard to explain such iron deposits because the oceans have been stripped of their iron more than a billion years earlier before the start of the boring billion.
So how is it possible that the oceans become recharged by iron and triggered a new pulse of banded iron formations?
Well, one persuasive model suggests that the snowball episode sealed the ocean, cutting off all oxygen to the ocean water column.
Meanwhile, seafloor hydrothermal vents continued to pump fresh iron from the mantle into the deep ocean.
Gradually, iron concentrations arose, only to be rapidly deposited as new banded iron formations when the glacial episodes ended.
Such controversies are nothing new in science, and they tend to focus energy and original ideas on solving interesting problems.
And I must say that the snowball versus slushball debate has made very low-key and a lot friendlier with a lot more goodwill and humor than most.
As Paul Hoffman retired, a new generation has taken up the challenge, where the answers still lie hidden in the rocks.
So keep watching the news. New discoveries will be made, and the last chapter in this story of Earth's global ice ages hasn't been written quite yet.
