As humans, we tend to view Earth in terms of our own current interests and our own narrow
time scales. So let's review our geological address in time. Our eon, era, period, and epoch,
which together remind us where we are in the larger story. So we live in the Phanerozoic eon,
the onset of new life that started 542 million years ago. We live in the Centerozoic era,
the age of mammals that began 65 and a half million years ago, and in the Quartinary period,
which started 2.6 million years ago, and is the framing period for this lecture.
But as we get closer and closer to the present, the division of time gets even smaller. So the
Quartinary period is further divided into epochs, the Pleistocene, and the Holocene, and smallest
and most recent of all, the Anthropocene, also pronounced Anthropocene, which, as the term suggests,
is named for humans. Now on the one hand, we are about one animal species out of uncounted millions
that have inhabited the globe over the past 500 million years, and we have populated Earth for
much less than a 10,000th of life's entire span on Earth. Thus it perhaps could be argued that we
don't warrant a special designation in the history of the planet, much less our own geological epoch.
On the other hand, humans are the first and only species to have harnessed technologies that
significantly alter the near-surface environment of Earth. And since we're the ones who tell the
story of Earth's long and changeable history, it's perhaps not surprising that we place a lot of
weight on human activities in that history. In this lecture, we focus on the place of humans in
geological time, the most recent portion of which has been called the Anthropocene epoch.
This identification of an entire geological time period that focuses primarily on human
activities is, by definition, very anthropocentric. But there's an important point here. Humans
are changing Earth's near-surface environment in many different ways, and at a pace at least
that seems to be unprecedented in more than 4.5 billion years of Earth history. In particular,
the Industrial Revolution of the past 250 years has resulted in global scale changes that may
affect Earth for many tens of thousands of years. This realization of the profound influence of a
human activities on a planetary scale is not particularly recent in terms of the revelations.
In his classic 1830 textbook, The Principles of Geology, the influential 19th century British
geologist and popular science writer, Charles Lyell, spoke of the ways that human colonization
could affect a pristine landscape. He wrote, when a powerful European colony lands on the shores of
Australia, it introduces at once those arts which it has required many centuries to mature
when it imports a multitude of plants and large animals from the opposite extremity of Earth
and begins rapidly to extirpate many of the indigenous species, a mighty revolution is
affected in a brief period. Lyell's theme was expanded later in the 19th century by Italian
geologist Antonio Stepani who coined the term anthropozoic to denote the time when human activities
could alter Earth's surface faster than average geological processes. And a few years later,
in 1878, American geologist Joseph Lacan coined the term psychozoic or the age of the mind
to characterize the most recent period of Earth history. Yet these clever names never caught on.
And the idea that humans can act as a geological force to transform Earth
faded from geological texts as new revelations of the epic scale of Earth and its eons of change
came increasingly into focus. By the last quarter of the 20th century, scientists could no longer
ignore the magnitudes and the rates of change in Earth's environment being caused by industrialization
and the worldwide exploitation of fossil fuels. In the year 2000, as scientific evidence kept
building that humans have imposed significant and increasing impacts on Earth's geosphere and
biosphere for many tens of thousands of years, the Nobel Prize-winning chemist Paul Crutzen brought
attention to the name Anthropocene, the time of humans for the most recent geological era.
Although Crutzen was by no means the first scholar to come up with this kind of name,
in fact, American biologist Eugene Stormer had coined that term Anthropocene in the late 1980s,
Crutzen was perhaps the first to use the geological timeline to focus widespread attention on the
extreme consequences of the Industrial Revolution for global scale processes.
In fact, Crutzen proposed the year 1784 and James Watts' invention of the steam engine as the
beginning date of the Anthropocene epoch. While others have countered with different definitions,
the fact that we are in a very different time from prior geological periods is now widely
accepted. So let's see why. Earth's four and a half billion year story is a saga of innumerable
evolutionary twists and turns, yet until quite recently humans played not the slightest part
in that drama. For more than 99.9% of Earth's existence, there were no members of the human
genus Homo, and for more than 99.99% no Homo sapiens. We are but an eye-blink in our planet's history.
The ascendancy of Homo sapiens may be traced back 65.5 million years to the demise of the dinosaurs,
the victims of the massive decan volcanism and that rogue Manhattan-sized asteroid.
We are descended from those few small rodent-like creatures who hunkered down,
they survived, and opened the door for the explosion of mammals on land, at sea, and in the air.
The last 65 million years have not been easy for life. Within a few million years,
mammals had radiated into vacant ecological niches, to fields and jungles, mountains and oceans,
but many of these strange and wonderful creatures died in other mass extinctions. 56, 37, and 34
million years ago from causes as yet uncertain. Humans ultimately descended from the resilient
survivors to the last of those global catastrophes. Monkeys, the great apes, and humans all point to
a common primate ancestor from about 30 million years ago. As we saw in the last lecture, those
early primates had grasping hands that were ideally suited for life in the forest canopy.
The transition to grassland ecosystems about 15 million years ago saw a corresponding evolution
of the great apes who were well adapted to life on the savannah. The first hominids,
that's the evolutionary family that includes primates who walk erect, arose perhaps 8 million
years ago in central Africa. Those most ancient hominid lineages, including the australopithecines
from northeastern Africa, mark a distinct transition to animals that walked upright and
possessed larger brains. Then came the most recent of the great ice ages to make life really interesting.
Perhaps 8 separate times in the past 3 million years, ice has spread from the poles to cover
great swaths of the high latitudes. Though not as extreme as the earlier snowball earth episodes,
these repeated glaciers were each accompanied by much lower global temperatures and drastic drops
in sea levels by hundreds of feet. Ice bridges linked Asia and western North America and very
likely Europe and eastern North America, thus facilitating migrations of all manner of mammals
including mammoths, mastodons, and eventually humans to the new world. These ice ages may have led
to another surprising change. According to one intriguing theory, cold temperatures favor the
survival of infants who stay close to their mothers for longer periods, as well as infants
with bigger heads because the larger the head, the lower the heat loss. Big heads mean big brains,
while more time with mother means more time to learn and grow in a relatively secure environment.
So perhaps it's not a coincidence that the first known human species,
Homo habilis, appeared shortly after the first of those great glaciers 2.5 million years ago.
Frigid ice advances followed by unusually warm interglacial periods, droughts followed by floods,
great retreats of the seas followed by equally great advances. Such changes were for the most part
mercifully gradual, spanning many generations, and nomadic humans had plenty of time to move
and survive each global change. In the process, our new species grew resilient, clever, and adaptable.
And ultimately, we learned technological tricks to shape the world to our will.
Our own species, Homo sapiens, is thought to have arrived on the scene about 200,000 years ago based
on a sparse fossil record. At first, there was little to suggest that Homo sapiens would be special.
Hominids had long since mastered the technology of stone tools, which date back 2.5 million years
to Homo habilis, man the toolmaker, who was a resident of East Africa and is the oldest known
species of our genus Homo. Shortly thereafter, by about 1.5 million years ago, another human
species, Homo erectus, had mastered the use of fire. Fossils from East Africa and the Middle East
and spanning an interval of almost 2 million years attested the success of man the erect,
who for the first time in history of any species on the planet had the ability to transform purposefully
entire ecosystems. Given these technologies and a significantly larger brain than its ancestor,
Homo sapiens would seem to have been poised to take over the world. Nevertheless, for at least 150,000
years, human populations appeared to have remained relatively small and localized. It's not exactly
clear why that should be. It's possible that competition was one factor. Homo sapiens coexisted
with the anatomically similar Homo neanderthalensis, who, depending on your point of view, was either
a completely different species or a distinct variety of Homo sapiens that lived in separate,
possibly competing tribes. It's not easy to tell from the spotty fossil record why humans remain
a relatively rare, localized, and low-impact species for 150,000 years.
And the relationships and interactions between anatomically modern humans and neanderthals
are especially enigmatic. Are they the same species?
On the one hand, neanderthals do have more phylogical differences. They tended to be somewhat
shorter than the average Homo sapiens, with thick, powerful arms and legs and a skull that's more
elongated and pulled forward. And in spite of the cartoonish portrayals, they weren't necessarily
stupid. In fact, that characterization arose from studies of an early discovered neanderthal
skeleton that happened to be of a stooped, elderly male with arthritis. Neanderthals had
large brains on the average 10% larger than those of modern humans. And they had a complex
social structure. They cared for elderly and infirm members of their tribe, and they performed
burials with ritual, which points to both a religion and a language.
In these respects, neanderthal was not too different from anatomically modern humans.
Recent genetic analysis of DNA from fossil neanderthal bones provides a similar story.
Even though there appear to be important genetic differences, it turns out that
neanderthals were closely enough related to interbreed with Homo sapiens. This is why
they no longer seem like a completely different species. It's estimated that modern humans of
European or Asian descent received anywhere from 1% to 4% of their genes from the neanderthal.
One of the great mysteries about the neanderthals is how they died off.
In Europe, where the fossil record is most complete, it appears that neanderthals flourished
up until about 35,000 years ago, and then disappeared rather suddenly.
And their disappearance seems to coincide with the entry into Europe of modern Homo sapiens.
Now, as you can imagine, more than one theory has been proposed to explain neanderthals'
disappearance. Some suggest neanderthals were wiped out by the invading members of our own
species. Perhaps an early incident of the numerous extinctions of big vertebrates in which human
hunters have been implicated. Others have suggested that neanderthal couldn't compete
with the more technologically advanced newcomers and simply died out. In that case,
neanderthals weren't wiped out by war, but were slowly displaced from the most desirable settlement
locations and eventually disappeared from environmental stresses. This emergence of
modern human beings raises an important point that's easy to forget. In the past several million
years, many different beings could be classed as human-like, and several different genera and many
species of the hominid family have walked on earth. Today, for perhaps a variety of reasons,
we only have one surviving hominid, perhaps with a little genetic help from those that didn't
survive. The process of natural selection and extinction have extensively pruned the branch
to the family tree leading to human beings, just as they have for virtually all other life forms.
In any case, the true flowering of Homo sapiens didn't occur until the last few tens of thousands
of years, the time when our species achieved a kind of dominion over ecosystems across the globe.
And that is perhaps the best definition of the Anthropocene epoch, the time when Homo sapiens
could significantly alter the environment through the application of technology.
Let's examine more closely the evidence for the kinds of new changes that have occurred during
the last 50,000 years, specifically the kinds of change that have been described to human activities.
The first hints of human-induced changes in earth's near-surface environment come from the
vertebrate fossil record during the past 50,000 years. During that interval, a significant fraction
of large vertebrates have become extinct. Now, this is not to say that we're in a mass extinction.
Plants, insects, small mammals, ocean life, show no obvious global declines over this timescale,
but numerous big vertebrates, including mammoths, mastodons, woolly rhinoceros,
and a host of grazing animals, not to mention many types of birds, reptiles, and amphibians,
have disappeared. In some cases, the link to humans may be only coincidental. More than 90%
of large mammals on the Australian continent became extinct at about the same time that human
colonization began, roughly 50,000 years ago. Debates still rage regarding whether these
extinctions are attributable directly to human hunting, indirectly to human causes such as wild
fires, which could also be used for hunting, introduction of new diseases brought over by
humans, or to environmental changes unrelated to human habitation. Similar debates surround the
rise of human populations and the concurrent loss of large mammalian species in North America
shortly after the last ice advance, roughly 13,000 years ago. On the one hand, some of the most recent
mastodon and mammoth fossil remains on the continent are associated with projectile points that indicate
organized human hunting parties. On the other hand, those now extinct animals may represent the last
individuals from stressed populations that would have died out. Anyway,
of particular interest in this regard is a thousand-year interval that began approximately
12,900 years ago, known as the younger dryus. That odd name refers to a diagnostic tundra
plant of the genus dryus. This is an interval of rapid global cooling that occurred at a time
when glaciers from the most recent ice advance were receding in the northern hemisphere, but
suddenly expanded again. The cause or causes for this rapid cooling are unclear. Perhaps shifts
in water or air currents resulted in a tipping point, or a large comet may have struck North
America at that time, which is marked by widely distributed sediment horizons with both diagnostic
impact debris and clearly defined soot layers. That's a possible indicator of widespread wildfires.
Anyway, this period closely correlates with the loss of numerous species of large mammals,
including elephants, a giant species of beaver, and the saber-toothed cat, and there's no evidence
of human involvement. In fact, the younger dryus also seems to match the time when the so-called
Clovis prehistoric culture, which is characterized by elegant fluted projectile points, disappeared
from North America. So that's a case where environmental factors clearly contributed to both
animal and human extinction. However, in a few cases, the role of humans in large vertebrate loss
is unambiguous. On the remote islands of New Zealand, for example, large mammals never
established a foothold, and a host of large flightless birds, including the giant moas such as
the 12-foot-tall 500-pound dinornus gigantius, evolved to fill vacant niches. A clear correlation
exists between the arrival of human populations to New Zealand and the extinction of these
impressive avian species. Similarly, three species of dodo, a flightless bird from the islands in
the Indian Ocean, became extinct by the early 19th century as human hunting and competition
from newly introduced species overwhelmed the once abundant birds. And in North America, the loss of
the passenger pigeon serves as a stark reminder of the potential role of humans in extinction.
Early in the 19th century, John James Auderman described immense flocks of these graceful birds,
exceeding a billion individuals. And it's now thought that they were the single most abundant
bird species in North America. During migration season, such a flock would take hours to pass
by overhead, and they would literally darken the sky. And it became a national sport in some areas
to fire shotguns vertically so that birds would literally rain from the sky. Some were used for
food, but many were simply killed for fun. In any case, the passenger pigeon's decline was swift,
with the last wild bird shot in about 1900, or the last known individual died at the Cincinnati Zoo
in 1914. Several other early human technologies, including agriculture and irrigation, mining
and urbanization, had the potential to alter the near surface environments, at least locally.
But whatever the collective impacts of these early human technologies, they pale in comparison
to the potential effects of industrialization. Today, human agriculture occupies 40% of the
planet's land surface, and that's because of industrial technologies.
Throughout this course, we've seen how global climate and sea level, not to mention the diversity
and distributions of animals and plant species, are intimately tied to a host of factors. Some of
those factors are surely beyond our technological control. The relative positions of continents,
including their latitudes near the poles or the equators, and the degree to which
they're clumped together into supercontinents would seem to be utterly beyond any conceivable
human technology to alter. Similarly, the variable intensity of volcanic activity at
mid-ocean ridge systems and the periodic disruptions of the surface environment by large-scale
volcanic eruptions reflect the ongoing process of convection in Earth's deep interior.
There's nothing we can do to alter those factors in Earth's climate.
On the other hand, human contributions to Earth's greenhouse gases now dwarf by perhaps a factor
of 100 or more the amount contributed by volcanoes. This is the sort of change that leads scientists
to say we're living in a new geological epoch. We may not be able to change the volcanoes,
but we now affect the atmosphere more than they do.
And consider the vast oceans. It was once thought they were much too big to be altered in any
fundamental way by humans, but the increased CO2 in the atmosphere has already been absorbed by
the ocean, which increased in acidity by a tenth of a percent on the pH scale from 1750 to 2010.
That may not sound like much, but pH is in powers of 10, so acidity has actually increased by 30%.
Large-scale regional weather patterns are also controlled in significant measure by the position
of mountain ranges and the location of major ocean currents. Across the globe, from the Hawaiian
Islands to central China to the Atlas Mountains of Morocco, the windward side of tall mountains
feature wet climates as water-related air rises, cools, and forms rain clouds. At the same time,
the leeward side of those mountains are often arid as cool, dry air flows down into the desiccated
lowlands. Many of Earth's most forbidding deserts from the Sahara to the Gobi form downwind. In the
lee of mountain ranges, it's hard to imagine humans ever changing such a mountain-control
weather pattern, though I've been told that the Chinese government did contemplate a century-long
epic construction project to remove one segment of the mountain ranges that bound the Gobi desert.
Idea was to allow moist air into the desert and thus turn thousands of square miles of
desert into fertile land. Another major factor in the local climate of many coastal regions is the
distribution of surface ocean currents. The Gulf Stream, which takes warm equatorial waters from
the Caribbean north and east toward the British Isles in northern Europe, has become the poster
child of such climate-altering currents. In spite of their high northern latitudes, these regions
are temperate, at least compared to portions of Canada and Siberia at the same latitudes.
By the same token, the California coast is much cooler than might otherwise be because of the
so-called California current that carries colder water from high latitudes to the south.
And across the globe, many other examples can be cited. One of the potential paradoxes from
global warming is the potential triggering of local cooling. If polar waters warm much faster
than the equator, then the Gulf Stream could stall, and it's not just that the temperature
contrast between the poles and the equator decreases. An additional important factor could be that
melting fresh water from the large icebergs breaking off Greenland could reduce the density
of surface water and thus halt the sinking of cool surface waters at high latitudes,
which is essential to driving the Gulf Stream convection cycle.
Here, as with mountain ranges, it's hard to imagine human geoengineering altering immense
ocean currents. But for interesting speculation, I can refer you to Kim Stanley Robinson's
trilogy of science fiction novels about climate change. In the second volume of that trilogy,
50 degrees below, there's a pretty elaborate description of a cooperative international
effort to restart the stalled Gulf Stream using immense quantities of salt that are released
from hundreds of supertankers. Although the idea of us imposing any kind of geoengineering change
at a global scale might seem like pure science fiction, we humans have been engaged in just
such a massive project for the last two centuries. We have taken reduced carbon that was locked away
in the crust for hundreds of millions of years and converted hundreds of billions of tons of that
carbon into carbon dioxide, much of which has been added to the atmosphere. This is a significant
global change in atmospheric chemistry. As we have seen over and over again in the story of
Earth, climate is strongly affected by atmospheric composition and especially by the concentration
of greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide. Records preserved as air bubbles in ancient ice cores
from the past 650,000 years revealed by direct measurements that levels of atmospheric carbon
dioxide have been relatively stable between values of 180 parts per million during maximum
glaciation and maybe 300 parts per million when as today the glaciers have retreated.
Furthermore, indirect measurements based on carbon isotopes and other methods suggest that the
atmospheric concentration of CO2 has not exceeded 300 parts per million at any time over at least
the last 20 million years. Yet atmospheric carbon dioxide reached 400 parts per million
by 2012 and the rate of increase was accelerating. Now CO2 is not the only greenhouse gas. Methane,
chlorofluorocarbons, nitrogen oxides and even water vapor also contribute but the larger point
is this rapid change in atmospheric composition is humanity's global experiment in geoengineering.
The last time carbon dioxide reached anything like these levels was tens of millions of years ago
in the paleogene interval, an extended period of dramatic global warming ensued with a corresponding
rise in sea level and significant shifts in global ecosystems and we can expect the same kind of
change today. While the extent of warming is a matter of considerable debate, average global
temperature is already increasing suggesting that more severe weather systems will occur
and that sea levels will rise. Computer models provide hints as to the consequences of this
carbon dioxide buildup and some degree of warming seems inevitable. But what we cannot yet model
are the possible tipping points. For example those associated with the accelerated release of methane
from thawing permafrost and methane ices. For a time it was thought that the geological record
with its prior episodes of carbon dioxide increase might provide useful analogies for today's change.
In particular climate scientists focused on a time known as the paleocene
eocene thermal maximum or PETM which occurred 55 million years ago. At that time a rapid release
of carbon dioxide caused a relatively sudden rise in average global temperatures of perhaps six
degrees celsius. The relatively slight effect of the PETM on global ecosystems and the lack of
a mass extinction at that time was caused for some initial optimism. A further study has dampened
that optimism for at least three reasons. First the PETM occurred at a time when there wasn't
already substantial ice cover so global warming then didn't cause a corresponding rise in sea
level. Today by contrast melting of polar ice could lead to an eventual sea level rise of more
than 200 feet. Second ecosystems survived because they could gradually shift away from the equator
as the climate warmed. Today by contrast extensive agriculture and urbanization has
fragmented the landscape making natural shifts in ecosystems much more difficult.
But by far the biggest and most sobering difference between the PETM and now is the rate of change.
It now appears that the rise in carbon dioxide 55 million years ago took thousands of years
while we are seeing a similar change in just a few hundred years. Earth's oceans and land
gradually absorb excess atmospheric carbon dioxide but we know of no time in earth history
with the possible exception of a mega volcano eruption when so much carbon dioxide was released
so quickly we are quite literally entering terra incognito.
As the scientific community comes to accept the reality of climate change and the inevitability
of global warming melting ice caps sea level rise and shifting ecosystems is interesting to see a
gradual change in the rhetoric at science conferences and in publications. There are of
course ongoing expressions of concern please for moderation and conservation and frequent dire
predictions of coming mass extinction and societal collapse even extending to the extinction of our
own species and these concerns are not to be taken lightly but we've seen similar dramatic changes
over and over again in the history of our planet but there are also intelligent and constructive
discussions of global scale mitigation strategies humans have now demonstrated that they have the
capacity to alter environments on a planetary scale and we could potentially use that knowledge to
engineer the planet. We might for example place large reflecting shields in orbit around earth
to decrease solar inputs concurrently thousands of earth scientists are working on strategies to
sequester carbon dioxide deep underground perhaps pumping CO2 back into old oil wells for example
and chemists are feverishly developing industrial processes of artificial photosynthesis.
They are attempting to mimic plants by using the sun's energy to turn carbon dioxide into a host
of useful materials including food and fuel thus even as human populations grow and impose more
stress on the global environment our expanding understanding of earth's story may play a key
role in our continued survival and that enhanced understanding as well as how humans adapt may
become the true legacy of the Anthropocene epoch.
