How much water is there?
In particular, how much water is on Mars?
In the Moon?
Where is that water?
And how accessible is it to future colonists?
For Mars, answers to those questions are now coming from a succession of amazing Mars orbiters
and landers, most courtesy of NASA.
One of the most important discoveries about Mars, a finding that has only come into focus
in the early 21st century is that Mars has a lot of water, most of which occurs as subsurface
permafrost and maybe some groundwater in deeper zones where it's warm.
These hidden repositories are potentially huge, and they're for the most part isolated
from the dry outermost layer.
The first substance of hints, the true extent of subsurface water came from the Mars Odyssey
that's a spacecraft in 2002.
Mars Odyssey carried a sophisticated neutron spectrometer, which measures neutrons that
are dislodged when cosmic rays encounter hydrogen near the Martian surface.
In this case, hydrogen means either water or else hydrous minerals like clays, which require
water to form.
The Mars Odyssey instrument package detected such neutrons from a wide swath of the Martian
surface from high latitudes near the poles to the equator.
However, the form of water, liquid, or ice, or hydrous mineral couldn't be resolved.
Then in 2007, NASA's Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter offered a much higher resolution picture
of the buried water by employing ground penetrating radar.
That technique records reflected pulses of microwave radiation, which can be used to
distinguish layers of rock from water or ice in the outer thousand feet of the Martian
surface.
Rock is much more reflective of microwaves than water or ice.
If microwaves penetrate more deeply, as measured by increasing times until the reflection is
recorded by the orbiter, then more ice is present.
These pioneering measurements pointed to a vast glacier scale, underground accumulations
of water ice in the mid-southern latitudes, and more recent, similar measurements by the
European Space Agency's Mars Express Orbiter point to deep ice across much of the planet.
There are places near the South Polar Ice Cap, for example, with ice-rich zones more
than 1,500 feet thick.
It now appears that Mars has enough near-sub-surface frozen water to form a globe-spanning ocean
hundreds of feet deep.
Feast of rocks and minerals on Mars also point to the presence of abundant water on the red
planet.
NASA's Phoenix Lander and its amazing two rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, fed scientists
the most wonderful data for years beyond their projected lifetimes, and they detected a variety
of such mineral evidence.
And then NASA's amazing Curiosity rover began doing the same.
Water-rich clay minerals, which suggest rock weathering in the presence of water, turn out
to be rather common in the near-surface environment of Mars.
Much of the near-surface hydrogen-rich material observed by Mars Odyssey's neutron experiments
were probably clay minerals.
Equally compelling are so-called evaporite minerals, which are characteristic of dried-up
lakes or oceans.
A variety of these minerals, notably flat deposits of distinctive sulfates, point to
dried-up bodies of water.
And an opal.
Opal is a poorly-crystallized variety of quartz that typically forms in wet sediments, common
in the ocean floor.
It's also found on Mars, and there's much more evidence for water at the local and
planetary scales.
Evidence that water once flowed freely across the sculpted Martian surface.
The highest resolution photographs on the Martian surface, for example those obtained by telescopic
cameras on NASA's Mars Global Surveyor and Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter.
They're amazing.
They reveal clear signs of rivers, ancient, boulder-strewn branching valleys and systems
of gullies, teardrop-shaped islands and ancient riverbeds, water-induced slumping features
on steep hillsides, and even complex braided stream channels.
All of these landforms are diagnostic of flowing water.
That's more, many of those features cut through layers of sediment reminiscent of earth deposits
laid down in shallow lakes or seas.
There's even a suggestion of a global high watermark where such a body of water may have
left ancient beach-like terraces.
These characteristic landforms girdle the northern hemisphere of Mars, which happens
to be topographically quite a bit lower than the southern hemisphere.
Some planetary scientists conclude that one continuous ocean covered most of the northern
latitudes, more than a third of the Martian surface to an average depth of 1,800 feet.
If that's true, it's quite possible that Mars may have been a blue ocean-covered life-giving
planet many millions of years before Earth.
By the way, whatever water Mars has left, it's a lot less than the way it started.
Gravity, or I should say rather the lack of gravity, is the culprit.
Mars is too small to hold onto its hydrogen.
Water molecules evaporate, but they're a bit too massive to just fly off into space.
The trouble is that cosmic rays split the water into two, into one OH molecule and one hydrogen
atom, and that isolated hydrogen atom can fly off into space.
Over a span of billions of years, Mars has lost a lot of hydrogen, and that translates
directly into losing a lot of water.
Only the water locked deep beneath the surface is immune from this kind of loss.
Let's shift our focus to Earth's moon.
Mars may have a lot of water, and it may have once had a lot more, but the moon appears
to have always been a dry place.
By conventional wisdom it's bone dry, in fact it's a lot drier because bone retains
a significant amount of water even when it's bleached white in the desert sun.
Several lines of evidence support this contention of a dry moon.
For one thing, Earth-based telescopes find no characteristic infrared absorption.
Even more convincing, the Apollo moon rocks had no traces of water, at least according
to the analytical capabilities of the 1970s.
The fact that iron metal persists on the lunar surface for four billion years is yet another
indication that there's not even a trace of corrosive water.
But you know, conventional wisdom is a funny thing.
Sometimes someone will come along and challenge what most other people think is true, and
every so often we learn something quite new in the process.
That's what happened with the story of lunar water.
Not one, but two new findings provide convincing evidence that the moon is not as dry as we
once thought.
Spacecraft observations of the moon's surface provide one line of evidence that's not too
surprising.
We know that comets must slam in the moon from time to time, and when they do, some water
must be added to the surface.
A lot of that water must gradually escape back into space, but if a comet strikes near one
of the moon's poles, then some ice could concentrate in a perpetually dark crater floor.
The coldest places on the moon's surface.
Temperatures never get close to the melting point of water, so ice could persist.
The first hints of such crater floor ice came from a single flyby of the Clementine mission
in 1994.
Radar measurements were consistent with deposits of water ice, though a lot of planetary scientists
were unconvinced.
The lunar prospector spacecraft, employing neutron spectroscopy four years later, detected
significant concentrations of hydrogen atoms, a sign of either water ice or hydrous minerals
near the poles.
That result also raised objections.
After all, there must be a significant accumulation of hydrogen ions implanted in the lunar soil
by billions of years of the sun's solar wind.
That could be a more likely source of this signal.
Now, fast forward a decade.
Some NASA scientists had the neat idea of smashing the big upper stage of an atlas rocket
that's a 30-foot-long, two-ton chunk of metal into one of those craters near the pole, and
then looking at the impact debris for signs of water.
The consequent mission.
The lunar crater observation and sensing satellite, NASA called it the cross because NASA loves
acronyms.
Anyway, they targeted a shadowed, south polar crater called Cabeus.
The impact took place on October 9, 2009, and it produced a fair-sized plume of dust
and debris visible in Earth-based telescopes.
The bottom line.
There was a small, but significant amount of water.
All of this renewed interest in lunar water led to yet another discovery, this time in
old data.
Roger Clark of the United States Geological Survey reexamined decade-old data collected
during a lunar flyby on August 19, 1999 by the Cassini-Huygens mission, which was on a
five-year journey to study Saturn.
It turns out the Cassini's infrared camera had picked up clear evidence of lunar water.
That fingerprint-like absorption feature in the infrared spectrum.
At the time, he didn't follow up because everyone knew the plume was dry, and those discoveries
by La Crosse and Cassini were further reinforced by another mission, this one, the Indian Chandra
Yayan number one spacecraft, which conducted its own infrared observations of the lunar
surface.
Three different studies of the complementary data from La Crosse, from Cassini, from the
Indian mission appeared together in the October 23, 2009 issue of science, and then there
were findings, which I'll get to in a minute, that the Apollo moon rocks contained previously
undetected water, and that suggested the moon's total water might be even greater.
Based on this flood of data, there can be no question that there's water on the moon.
That's true.
This water may be only a minor constituent of the otherwise volatile poor moon, but even
a small quantity of water might be a tremendous asset for future moon colonists, who might
employ sunlight to split ice into life-sustaining oxygen and energy-rich hydrogen fuel.
Lunar orbiter and flyby missions proved that there's water on the moon.
One of those apparently dry Apollo moon rocks and soils.
In the 1970s, the most sensitive analytical methods then available detected no trace of
water, but analytical methods have improved by leaps and bounds.
Three decades after the Apollo missions, my colleague Eric Howrie and his coworkers at
the Carnegie Institution employed one of these new techniques.
Green glass beads.
Most no larger than a pinhead are among the commonest constituents of lunar soils.
These tiny revealing objects are a consequence of violent surface volcanism that must have
atomized magma and explosive eruptions billions of years ago.
That kind of explosive volcanism implies there must have been a significant component of
expanding volatiles, and water is certainly the most likely choice.
The idea that the glass beads might contain water wasn't new.
Decades earlier, several other scientists had analyzed lunar glass beads looking for
water, but it's not easy to see traces of hydrogen.
The detection limit in the 1970s was perhaps 100 parts per million water, and that value
required analysis of many glass spheres at the same time.
At that level of precision, the glass appeared to be dry.
Eric Howrie has access to much more sensitive instruments.
An ion microprobe, this technique not available to the first generation of scientists who
study moon rocks, is ideally suited for detecting trace amounts of hydrogen.
The ion probe employs a narrow high-energy beam of atoms that focuses onto a sample and
measures the atoms that are blasted off.
With this amazing machine, Howrie measures water concentrations as low as one part per
million.
And he can make these measurements on sample areas as small as a millionth of an inch.
Here is what Howrie and his coworkers did that was so clever.
They mounted and polished a variety of spherical glass beads so that their circular cross sections
were revealed in the ion probe.
That sample preparation meant that they could scan across the beads and measure the water
content from rim to core.
They found the outer rims to be extremely dry, with only a few parts per million water,
just as you might expect from the results of earlier bulk analyses.
What was really new and exciting about Howrie's analysis was that the centers of the largest
beads hold as much as 100 parts per million water.
Now that amount may not sound like much, but what's preserved in the glass beads must
be only a tiny fraction of the water that was originally there.
For one thing, a great deal of water certainly boiled off during the original volcanic eruption.
And a lot more water has gradually evaporated to space over billions of subsequent years
of lunar history.
That's why the rims of the lunar glass beads are so much drier than their cores.
Most of the original water has been lost.
But based on what remains, Howrie and colleagues calculate that the magma's original water
content may have been as high as 750 parts per million.
That's a lot of water.
In fact, it's comparable to the water content of many volcanic rocks on Earth.
And it's more than enough water to drive explosive volcanism.
What's more, if that much water drove explosive volcanism on the moon billions of years ago,
then a lot of water must still be stored somewhere deep inside the moon today.
The discovery of significant water on both Mars and the moon is exciting and points to
an abundance of water throughout our solar system.
Nevertheless, Earth remains the one and only ocean-bound world in our vicinity.
So how much water does Earth hold?
What forms does it assume?
Where does it reside?
How does it move?
This story is complicated, and it's constantly being updated.
As recently as the 1990s, most scientists thought the oceans were by far the largest
repository of water on Earth, storing about 96% of all the accessible inventory.
Ice caps and glaciers are a distant second accounting for about 3% today, though that
figure may have risen to 5% or 6% at the peak events of glaciers during the ice ages.
Groundwater, including all of the near-sub-surface water that fills aquifers as well as the more
widely dispersed deep water, represents 1%, and all the lakes, the rivers, the streams,
the pond, the atmosphere combined count for no more than about a hundredth of a percent
of Earth's available water.
This near-surface water is constantly moving from one reservoir to another on scales of
days to millions of years.
Water molecules evaporate from the oceans.
They fall as rain into lakes and rivers.
They penetrate the ground into aquifers and become locked in ice at the poles.
Great ocean currents, rivers of warmer and cooler water, transport huge volumes of water
from equator to the poles and back, while prevailing winds sweep rain clouds from oceans
to continents.
Human actions alter nature's water cycle by pumping immense quantities of deep water
to the surface to sustain agriculture, for example, in the semi-arid southwest, in this
way ancient aquifers are being drained, mind of their water, at unsustainable rates.
Earth's water cycles without end.
Some molecules temporarily break apart into hydronium and hydroxyl ions, but they quickly
recombine into new water molecules with new atomic companions.
Other water molecules undergo chemical reactions in deep ocean zones of serpentinization when
basalt turns into clays, or in soils to become part of Earth's storehouse of crustal clay
minerals.
Earth has also evolved to become an essential part of Earth's near-surface water cycle.
Plants absorb carbon dioxide, water molecules, and sunlight.
In the process of photosynthesis to manufacture their roots, stems, leaves, fruit, then when
animals eat those nutrient-rich plant tissues, respiration converts them back to carbon dioxide
and water.
Such near-surface processes are in plain view and relatively easy to study.
But what of Earth's deep interior?
Is there any water in the mantle or in the core?
And does that water play any role at all in the more familiar water cycle at the surface?
These questions came into sharp focus in the mid-1980s when mineralogists and patrologists
began to consider the global-scale water cycle.
Surface water can't be the whole story.
Some water-rich magmas that reach the surface in explosive eruptions come from tins or even
hundreds of kilometers down.
Some minerals that crystallize deep inside our planet hold tiny, water-rich fluid inclusions.
Scientists concluded that we were missing a deep and largely hidden part of the water
cycle.
This deep water that affects volcanism must be locked primarily into one of two reservoirs.
On the one hand, there must be some kind of widely distributed fluid phase, which is
sampled in those fluid inclusions.
The volumes can't be huge because any big volumes of fluid would appear in detailed
seismic surveys of shallow zones.
Alternatively, many scientists have focused on the possibility that common mantle minerals
– olivine, pyroxene, garnet, as well as their denser, deep Earth variants – might
incorporate small amounts of water under mantle conditions.
Consequently, in the 1990s, the investigation of water contained in nominally anhydrous
minerals became a major focus of high-pressure mineralogy.
And I think it's safe to say that everyone was surprised by the astonishing results.
What experimentalists found was that it's relatively easy for many common magnesium-silicate
minerals to incorporate hydrogen atoms.
It's the mineralogical equivalent of water because hydrogen atoms bound to oxygen offered
by the silicates of these minerals.
We were all surprised to learn that minerals that are invariably dry in the shallow crust
can become wet in the mantle.
Let's look at the example of olivine, the first silicate to crystallize as the magma
ocean cooled.
Olivine is a key ingredient of peridotite in many other igneous rocks, so a little bit
of water in olivine could represent a lot of water in Earth.
The experiments are conceptually simple.
Start with a sample of powdered olivine in a gold tube, add water, heat while squeezing.
Experimental patrologists pressurized samples to hundreds of thousands of times atmospheric
pressure and simultaneously heat to temperatures approaching 2,000 degrees Celsius.
To accomplish such extreme conditions, far, far beyond what hat-yoters bomb could attain,
scientists have designed and built a new generation of massive metal presses to concentrate
tons of force on tiny samples.
The experimental assembly is rather intricate and exploits three nested stages.
Each state is made of several hard angles that surround and squeeze the next, so it
focuses immense pressures on smaller and smaller volumes.
The first stage is a pair of giant parallel metal plates like a vice, with one plate above
and the other below the sample.
Those plates are set in a big press that can push down with a force of thousands of tons.
The second stage, inserted between the plates, consists of six interlocking hardened steel
angles, three above and three below.
This second stage is engineered in such a way that as the big press pushes down, the
six angles press uniformly against the six square sides of a cube about three inches
across.
This cube holds the third stage.
That third stage is a cube broken into eight smaller cubes, each a kind of anvil in its
own right.
These eight anvils are machined from tough tungsten carbide.
Each one is a cube about one and a half inches across, with one tiny corner cut and polished
to form a triangular facet.
Those eight faceted corners, the anvils of the third stage, all face inward in this way
to define an inner sample holder that has an eight-faced octahedral shape about half
an inch across.
That sample holder itself is a complex assembly.
There's a central metal capsule that seals in powdered mineral plus water.
That capsule has to be surrounded by an electrical heater and wires to measure temperature and
a deformable octahedron-shaped liner so all the reactants don't squirt out the sides.
Hating hundreds of thousands of atmospheres is only half the battle.
The sample also has to be cooked to carefully control temperatures much higher than any
oven.
There's no way to use coils of platinum wire like Hat Yoder did.
In fact, heating samples requires a fascinating two-stage heater.
First, there's a little cylinder of pure carbon in the form of graphite.
That cylinder surrounds the sample.
It turns out that graphite makes a pretty good electrical resistance heater.
You put a modest current through the cylinder and it heats up to 1,000 degrees Celsius.
Ironically, above 1,000 degrees and at high pressure, the graphite transforms to diamond.
So there needs to be a second cylinder inside the graphite made of chromite.
That little heater kicks in above 1,000 degrees and can sustain temperatures of about 2,000
degrees Celsius.
Okay, that's a really complicated assembly.
But if everything goes well, if the desired pressure is reached and the high target temperature
is sustained, if the temperature sensor doesn't break, if the sample doesn't leak out, then
it's possible to duplicate conditions of Earth's mantle.
It's possible to see if water can be stored in deep minerals.
Even if the experiments are successful, how do you measure a few parts per million water
in an otherwise dry sample?
Eric Howery's Ion Probe is certainly one option.
This high sensitivity has terrific spatial resolution.
If you could find trace amounts of water in lunar volcanic glass, then the high pressure
experimental samples should be no problem.
Another option is infrared spectroscopy, the kind that astronomers and lunar orbiters
use to reveal characteristic bonds between oxygen and hydrogen.
The trouble with these techniques is that a single minute fluid inclusion, a pocket
of water too small to see with a microscope, can yield a false hydrogen signal in such
sensitive measurements.
And there's always the possibility that water trapped at very high pressure might somehow
leak out as the pressure is released.
That uncertainty leads us to a second alternative experimental approach for generating extreme
conditions in the laboratory, a device called the diamond anvil cell.
The diamond cell generates high pressures by squeezing two gem diamonds together.
Take two half carat brilliant cut diamonds, the kind of most engagement rings.
Polish down the sharp points on what you might call the bottom of the diamonds.
That gives you two flat circular surfaces, maybe a twentieth of an inch across as the
anvil faces.
It's important to mount the diamonds as precisely parallel as possible in a metal vise.
The sample chamber is nothing more than a thin piece of metal with a tiny hole, but
the hole is centered over the opposing diamond anvils.
It's relatively easy to load sample chambers with mineral powders and water and then close
up the cell and squeeze it.
Even a modest force in the diamonds generates tremendous pressure because the pressure is
simply the force divided by the area, and the area of the anvils is very small.
This kind of diamond anvil cell has reached the world record highest sustained pressure
equal to more than three million times atmospheric pressure, that's just shy of the 3.5 million
atmosphere pressure at the center of earth.
Perhaps the most appealing aspect of the diamond anvil cell, even more important than
the extreme pressure range is that you can look through your diamonds and see your pressurized
samples, so many different analytical techniques can be used to probe the sample at pressure.
It's also relatively easy to heat the sample to deep earth conditions, for example with
a high power laser that shines through the transparent diamond anvils.
In this case, scientists can change temperature and pressure and look for the characteristic
changes in the infrared absorption spectrum to point to newly formed bonds between hydrogen
and oxygen.
Those bonds alter the way that the mineral absorbs light so they can watch water entering
the mineral structure at high pressure.
These diamond anvil cell experiments took a while to catch on, but when they did, scientists
quickly found a whole lineup of minerals that can store deep water, and many of these minerals
are surprises.
Olivene pyroxene are typically dry, they hold no more than 100 parts per million water
in the lower crust, but if pressures and temperatures are increased to mantle conditions of 100,000
atmospheres, 1500 degrees Celsius, olivene transforms to the different denser wadziite
structure, which we now know can incorporate in astonishing 3% water, that's 30,000 parts
per million.
It turns out there's an ideal small hole in the wadziite crystal structure where a little
hydrogen atom can attach to an oxygen atom.
Wadziite is thought to be the most abundant mineral in earth's transition zone from about
400 to 600 kilometers deep, so the transition zone, that relatively narrow layer between
the upper mantle and lower mantle, may be the wettest place in the planet, or at least
rather than the most hydrogen rich place.
It may hold the equivalent of 9 times all the water in the ocean.
Similar experiments on minerals of the lower mantle find that the most abundant minerals
are much less waterlogged with much lower hydrogen contents, but what those minerals
lack in hydrogen concentration they make up for in huge volumes, half of earth's total
volume, is lower mantle silicates.
So best estimates are that they may hold another 16 times the hydrogen in all of earth's oceans.
There could be a lot more hydrogen locked in the core, as hydrogen easily bonds to iron
at very high pressure and temperature.
Consequently, by one recent estimate, earth's deep interior may store as much as 80 oceans
worth of water.
At first blush, it would seem unlikely that earth's deep water cycle has anything at all
to do with the surface.
Certainly the hydrogen atoms in the mantle and core would seem to be permanently locked
away, but that's not quite true.
Earth is a dynamic planet with long-term cycles of convection, plate tectonics that can really
mix things up, will explore plate tectonics and its influence on mineral evolution in
more detail in lectures 24 and 25, but for now it's sufficient to note that two ongoing
processes, subduction by which old crust is swallowed up by the mantle, and volcanism
by which mantle material generates new crust, have tremendous effects on the water cycle.
Every year, huge volumes of wet rock descend into the mantle in so-called subduction zones,
mostly at the margins of the oceans.
And every year, new wet magma ascends from the mantle, both at places where new crust
is formed, at places like the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, and above subduction zones in the kind
of volatile rich explosive volcano exemplified by Mount St. Helens in Washington State, which
literally blew its top on May 18th, 1980, and killed 57 people in the process.
Such explosive volcanism, which occurs around the world especially along the Ring of Fire
around the Pacific Ocean, points to an active exchange of water from the mantle to the surface.
It's tricky to be sure of the total volume of this exchange between the surface and
the deep interior, but by one thoughtful estimate, all the water in Earth's oceans is completely
recycled through the mantle about once every 300 million years.
That means over the four and a half billion year history of Earth, the average hydrogen
atom in the oceans today could have made the journey to the deep interior and back a dozen times.
Earth scientists have been pretty successful at cataloging the volatiles on Earth today.
We certainly have a good handle on the gaseous elements, the inert gases, helium, neon and
argon, and the equally inert dinitrogen molecules that make up most of the atmosphere.
These elements are rarely locked in mineral hosts, so the atmosphere represents a dominant
repository for them.
We now have a much better idea of the total hydrogen budget as well.
Carbon is a different story.
Much less is known, but there's a new effort called the Deep Carbon Observatory that I'll
tell you about in lecture 39 that's trying to correct that situation.
So all in all, it's not difficult to account for sources of Earth's modern oceans and atmosphere.
Earth accumulated plenty of volatiles during its accretion from the solar nebula, indeed
conservative estimates place Earth's original volatile budget at perhaps 100 times greater
than modern levels.
So the principal challenge in modeling Earth's volatile history may be figuring out how so
much was lost.
In the next lecture, we'll see how minerals, particularly the difference in near-surface
mineralogy of Earth and the Moon, provide important clues about what happened to all
the water.
