After the dramatic changes of Earth's first 2.5 billion years, what came next appears
to be an extended time of stasis.
For a billion years, very little seems to have happened.
No major changes in climate, no glaciations, no major changes in mirror surface mineralogy,
no major changes in atmosphere or ocean chemistry.
Earth appears to slow down and take a nap.
It's hard for us to imagine a span of time that's as long as a billion years.
That's roughly equal to 30 million human generations, an incomprehensible number.
It's even harder to imagine a period of a billion years on Earth when nothing much happened.
Yet that's exactly what some scientists have said about the billion year time in Earth history
from roughly 1.85 billion to 850 million years ago.
This was the middle of the protozoic eon, and by most accounts, our planet seems to
have changed very slowly during that time, and in ways that are both subtle and as yet
not fully understood.
This vast interval has been dubbed the Intermediate Ocean by more conservative writers, but a lot
of us prefer the more whimsical title, The Boring Billion.
It's a period that's often skipped over, but there are important changes in mineralogy.
In the oceans, the continents, perhaps the structure of life, changes that together make
this a very pivotal stretch of time.
For a flavor of how this period is usually seen, I love the comment made by the Australian
field geologist Roger Buick, who specializes in the earliest rocks on Earth.
He summed up a lot of this time period in the opening sentence of an unabashed 1995 article.
The dullest time in Earth's history seems to have been the Mesoprotorozoic.
Now the Mesoprotorozoic era spans the interval from 1.6 to 1 billion years ago, so it encompasses
only the middle 600 million years of the much longer Boring Billion, before and after things
already look more interesting.
The immediately preceding period, from 1.85 to 1.6 billion years, constitutes the tail end
of the Paleo-Protorozoic era.
We already discussed in the last couple lectures how that era includes much of the more dynamic
time of gradual global oxidation from 2.5 to 1.85 billion years ago.
In fact, I argued that oxidation most likely continued underground until about 1.5 billion
years ago.
And after the Meso, or middle, protozoic is the earliest bit of the Neo-Protorozoic era,
the interval from 1 billion to 850 million years ago.
Starting two lectures from now, we'll see how the end of the Neo-Protorozoic era, which
lasted until 542 million years ago, saw some of Earth's most dramatic changes, including
at least two episodes of global glaciation and other dramatic changes in the near-surface
environment, along with corresponding changes in biological evolution.
You can see how the eras of the protozoic eon can cause some confusion, because the
timings of the three big subdivisions, the Paleo-Protorozoic, the Meso-Protorozoic,
and the Neo-Protorozoic eras were defined before some key events in Earth history were
discovered.
So the timings don't quite match our present understanding of Earth history.
In any case, with the boring billion, we have a vast chunk of Earth's history, almost
a quarter of the story, and there are essentially no headlines, no big thwack, no formation
of first continents, no inception of plate tectonics, no origin of life.
You might ask, why would we be surprised to have what appears to have been a time of
relative biological and geological stasis?
Why would we expect dramatic transformative events to take place throughout Earth history?
And I suppose the answer is simply that Earth has so often been a planet of profound change.
There have always been earthquakes and volcanoes, shifts in continents and oceans, and, following
the origins of life four billion years ago, continuous major transitions in life as well.
Nevertheless, at first blush, the rock record of this interval reveals no epic game-changing
impacts or sudden climate changes.
There are no obvious signs of glaciations, no mass extinctions.
About the only thing going on was that the important interface between the ocean's more
oxidized near-surface layer and the anoxic ocean depths may have gradually gotten deeper
and deeper.
On average, maybe a meter deeper every 100,000 years or so, this dropping fully 10,000 meters
over the billion-year period.
But no fundamentally new life forms are known to have emerged from that ocean, nor is it
generally thought that many new rock types or mineral species arose, at least that's
the conventional wisdom.
But I have to say from personal experience that boring is a risky term.
I once made the terrible mistake in a public lecture of making a passing reference to the
group of biomolecules called lipids, which include all the fats and oils.
I said they were rather boring, as all the molecules had the same simple backbone of
carbon and hydrogen atoms.
Well, this remark was a mistake.
Lipids are in fact amazingly diverse when you get into their nuances, as I learned from
a chemist who had spent her entire career studying them and rightly took me to task.
Lipids play all sorts of interesting roles in regulating life's chemical reactions and
crafting its intricate nanoscale structures.
Lipids define the insides and the outsides of most living things without lipids.
Life would not be possible.
My point is that what we call boring may speak as much to our state of ignorance, our lack
of sophistication in the nuances of a subject than any intrinsic dullness, and so it is
with Earth's boring billion.
Earth scientists may underestimate biological changes.
Biologists may be unaware of mineral evolution, and both may overlook the combined evolution
of rocks in life.
That long interval may in fact be somewhat analogous to human civilization's so-called
dark ages.
Now it turns out the dark ages were a dynamic interval of great innovation and experimentation,
as with every age in human history there were inexorable and irreversible changes.
The dark ages may be thought of as the gateway to the modern technological world, and yet
it's a time span once largely ignored by scholars.
As for Earth, I think all of us in the field would bet that some hints of dramatic transformations
must lie hidden in rocks of the boring billion, and those stories are so far largely unread.
Everyone in the business knows about some of those hints, some of Earth's most valuable
ore reserves, immense deposits of lead and zinc, and silver from Zambia and Botswana
and Africa, from Nevada and British Columbia and North America, and from the Czech Republic
and Southern Australia, they're found in rocks of ages smack in the middle of that billion-year
interval.
Many other important rock and mineral localities that form at that time are rich in exotic
minerals of beryllium, boron, and uranium, and the tectonic stories equally interesting
and perhaps related to the valuable ores and exotic minerals from this time.
Growing evidence suggests that Earth's continents clumped together into one gigantic supercontinent
during the boring billion, and then broke apart and then clumped together again in that
most majestic of Earth's surface cycles.
And biologically, this long period may not be boring at all.
Throughout that billion-year interval are abundant, beautifully preserved fossils of micro-organisms
that reveal how life, though perhaps under great stress, still crowded coastal shallows
and offshore environments.
The lacking confirmation from other lines of evidence, research using so-called molecular
clocks, has suggested that this period marks the first genetic divergence of precursor
cells for fungi, modern plants, and animals.
All of these organisms depend on eukaryotic cells, that is, their cells have a nucleus
and specialized organelles.
But the earliest differentiation in the distinct types may have occurred at this time, along
with the development of sexual reproduction and the first steps towards multicellularity.
I think it's safe to conclude that we have much to learn about Earth's dark ages.
Up to this point in the story of Earth's evolution, as we reach and pass the planet's
two and a half billionth birthday, the one continent theme has been changed, with the
first transformations occurring rapidly.
There was the outrageously destructive impact of Thea, then an ocean of incandescent magma
that encircled the globe and the subsequent formation of our big moon.
Within a hundred million years, black earth turned blue as hot, shallow seas covered almost
all the solid surface.
It's entirely possible that only one percent of Earth's surface was dry land, with only
the tops of the tallest volcanic cones sticking above the waves.
The nearby looming moon would have spawned wild weather, immense tides, the water world
subjected to constant bombardment from above, volcanic blasts from below made this earliest
Hedianian totally inhospitable, but the very intensity of those early conditions allowed
for a stupendous amount of chemical experimentation, with microscopic life itself emerging very
soon thereafter.
While life stayed in the water, Earth's evolving surface was largely a saga of expanding the
total extent of land.
The first step was partial melting of mantle peridotite, which produced black basalt-covered
land.
The total extent of Earth's exposed surface in the first half billion years was probably
no more than about five percent, compared to almost thirty percent today.
And then partial melting of black basalt produced great mounds of gray, buoyant granite, which
became the foundation stones of what were to become the continents.
Even after a billion years of geological activity, those proto-continents of granite, maybe fifty
to a hundred miles in diameter accounted for no more than about ten percent of the ocean-dominated
surface.
It took even longer, perhaps another billion years, for plate tectonics of the kind we
see today to impose some order on the continent-forming process.
It took that long for the chaotic swirling of the mantle to settle into more orderly,
deep convection cells, which could then drive the stately, plate tectonic conveyor belt.
And amidst all of these geological changes, life emerged and evolved and ultimately became
another major agent of change, particularly when cells learned to make oxygen.
And I think we're getting the point that constant change was Earth's hallmark, something
that set Earth apart from all of its planetary neighbors.
Two and a half billion years ago, Mercury, Venus, the Moon, and even Mars were already
more or less the way we see them today.
But while those worlds were trapped in stasis, our planet kept reinventing itself over and
over and over again at every stage trying something new.
And so I return to that central mystery of how could we have a boring billion?
How could our dynamic planet have found itself mired in its own eon of apparent stasis?
One possible answer is simply that Earth was not static.
Perhaps change on Earth was still incessant, maybe just not as dramatic as a moon-forming
impact or the great oxidation of it.
After all, in biology, new generations of more complex cells, cells containing a nucleus,
mitochondria, other organelles, they had to deal with new stresses while they developed
new capabilities.
Take sexual reproduction, which was not a feature of life's earliest microbes.
Very incomplete evidence suggests that sexual reproduction and the cellular process of combining
genetic material from two organisms by meiosis either began or stabilized during this period.
Fossils of multicellular red algae found in Arctic Canada on Somerset Island have been
dated between 1.2 billion and 1 billion years ago, with spore and gamete differences characteristic
of sexual reproduction.
Of course, such evidence is scarce and it's difficult to interpret, and the actual onset
was probably somewhat earlier.
But biologically speaking, this understudied stretch of time might someday be seen as the
very opposite of boring.
At the cellular level, almost a roaring billion.
Anyway, perhaps a critical stretch of biological evolution that we do not yet understand.
We do know that mineral evolution during this time led to new types of rocks and valuable
ore deposits.
Recent research reveals that this interval saw the first appearance of numerous new mineral
species that had never before appeared anywhere in our solar system.
And perhaps the most significant change was associated with plate tectonics, which just
keeps churning.
Geological evidence from every continent on Earth reveals that the mesoproterozoic era
was a time of inexorable shifts in the positions of continents.
Probably the single most important geological discovery of the last half century is that
Earth's familiar geography of oceans and continents is ephemeral.
The globe that we all grew up studying and the locations we memorized are all temporary.
All of the most recognizable features, including the Americas, Europe, and Africa, framing
the mighty Atlantic Ocean, the great eastward sweep of the Asian continent, the expansive
Pacific Ocean with its plethora of southern islands, and the continent of Australia, and
the polar world of Antarctica, all are but a momentary geographic state, and the continents
didn't merely drift the single time and eventually lock into place.
Go back 50 million years, or time travel 50 million years into the future, and either
way you'll find a different distorted globe that looks only vaguely familiar, 50 million
years into the future.
The Atlantic Ocean will be some 700 miles wider, while Africa will have finished colliding
with Europe.
Go back 50 million years before the present, and India was colliding with islands off the
coast of Asia.
Go back further to the Cretaceous period around 100 million years ago, and sea levels were
100 to 200 meters higher than today, with inland seas spread across North and South America,
Europe, Russia, Africa, and Australia.
Go backwards or forward 200 million years, and our modern borders would be unrecognizable.
And that's just a tiny fraction, less than 5% of Earth history.
The lesson is clear, our globe's land and water have transformed in position and relative
extent over and over again.
Plate tectonics not only acts to assemble all the continents, but it also rearranges them
by shuttling them across the globe, causing them to collide to split apart.
Plate tectonics is the engine of Earth's constant extreme makeovers.
But how can we possibly know Earth's ancient geography?
Isn't that knowledge lost to time and change?
The job of reassembling early Earth falls to a mix of geoscience disciplines, which collectively
produce remarkable, though admittedly approximate, maps of past and future Earth.
Fortunately, Earth has preserved numerous clues to help in the reconstructions.
A key starting point is knowledge of how the continents are moving today, how fast they're
traveling and in what directions.
Hereby, year scientists have employed satellites to measure the distance across the Atlantic
Ocean.
Thus, we have direct measurements of an increase of roughly 2 inches every year.
We also see that Africa is splitting in two, and we can document how India smashes into
China, which crumples the impact zone into the jagged Himalayan mountains, which are
rising an inch or two every year.
It's all happening in super slow motion, of course, but with changes occurring at a
steady rate of an inch or two a year for 100 or 200 million years, these small increments
add up to literally monumental changes.
If we can play an imaginary videotape of those changes backwards and forwards, we might be
able to guess the details of Earth's geography.
If we try to look back much farther than 100 or 200 million years, then we need to invoke
other kinds of geological clues.
Longitude ceases to be something we can extrapolate backward with any precision.
But important data about latitude come from fossil magnetism that's been locked into those
volcanic rocks.
Those paleomagnetic data have the potential to reveal the orientation of Earth's magnetic
field long ago.
Moreover, the dip of the field can also reveal the latitude of the continents at the time
when those rocks solidified.
Such subtle evidence frozen into solid rocks shows that rocks now at the equator were once
at the poles and vice versa, and that information is complemented by evidence from fossils and
sediments that point to former tropical lagoons in what is now Antarctica, or frozen tundra
in what is now equatorial Africa.
The sedimentary rock record adds vital data because different kinds of sediments accumulate
in different environments.
Sand accumulates in shallow seas, while black mud forms continental shells.
The steady laying down and compression of layers in a swamp differs from the windswept
sediments of a rocky alpine tundra, and both differ from the daily cycles of tidal lagoons,
the annual and multi-year cycles of glacial lakes, and the very long-term sediment patterns
caused by the advance and retreat of glaciers, or the cycles of sea-level rise and fall.
The complex picture of shifting continents is clarified over the past half billion years
by the rich fossil record of animals and plants.
Certain species are indicators of climatic zones, while the distribution of distinctive
flora and fauna can point to widely separated continents that followed divergent evolutionary
pathways.
Familiar examples are the varied marsupials of Australia, and the large flightless birds
in New Zealand which provide a convincing story of long zoological isolation.
It's hard to use fossils much farther back because all we have before about 540 million
years are a few jellyfish and sponges, and single cells in the fossil record.
Inevitably farther back in time, the picture of Earth's geography fades from view, and
any extrapolation from the modern world becomes much more ambiguous.
Nevertheless, the experts in paleogeography have managed to bring many lines of evidence
together to produce a coherent view of Earth back to at least 1.6 billion years ago, which
is well into the boring billion, and there are now well-informed speculations about continental
positions that have been pushed back much farther, all the way to 3 billion years ago.
I find the results of these studies nothing short of amazing.
It's easy to be biased by today's globe, on which the continents are widely dispersed
across the globe.
They're spread out east to west, and from pole to equator.
The Americas are separate from Eurasia, which is just touching Africa and Australia, and
Antarctica are giant islands.
But it hasn't always been so.
According to the most accepted models, Earth has repeatedly experienced times when all
of the continents were clumped together into one or two supercontinents, and these supercontinents
have repeatedly broken apart and dispersed.
If we start from the beginning, my view, and one that's supported by many, though not all
geologists who study early Earth, is that it took a long time to make the first continent.
State tectonics was the prime driver, both promoting the production of granite crust
and assembling bits of granite crust into larger and larger landmasses.
The focal point of these continent-forming activities is the subduction zone, at the
point where a subduction slab plunges down into the metal depths.
All of the unsinkable granite bits and pieces pile up, one after the next after the next
to make larger and larger stable, long-lasting landmasses.
At the same time, the subducting slab partially melts to make even more granite above the
subduction zone.
That's how the most ancient protocontinents form.
Those earliest pieces of continents are the cratons, which we met earlier.
Because cratons are made of tough, igneous, and metamorphic rocks, once a craton forms,
it lasts a very long time and preserves a record of its history.
Cratons have identified perhaps three dozen more or less intact cratons on six continents.
Some are as old as 3.8 billion years, and they range in size from 100 to more than 1,000
miles across.
I love their evocative names.
There's the slave and superior cratons in North America.
The capval is Zimbabwe cratons in Africa, and the Pelbera and Yelgarn cratons in Australia.
Each of these cratons has experienced billions of years of motion across the globe.
They've been jumbled together, ripped apart over and over again, along with lots of smaller
ancient fragments.
And if we're ever to gain a picture of early Earth, it's the cratons that will provide
the evidence, because cratons survive as the foundation stones of the continents.
Let's take a closer look at the distribution of cratons, which will ultimately give us
a sense of the supercontinent cycle.
Three cratons form most of Greenland.
Half a dozen cratons make up a large region in North America, sometimes called the Canadian
Shield, that includes not only Central Canada, but also the Adirondacks of New York, as well
as northern parts of Michigan and Minnesota.
Moving to South America, large portions of Brazil and Argentina are underlain by several
cratons.
We also see three cratons forming big chunks of Northwest and South Australia, and other
ancient pieces of continental plates called terrains that make up parts of Siberia, Scandinavia,
and a large piece of Antarctica.
Separate regions of East and South China, most of India, and also several swaths of
West, South, and Central Africa.
All of these cratons were begun more than three billion years ago, which is a time when
a lot less of Earth's surface was dry land compared to now.
Every one of these cratons holds information about Earth's early stages, but those records
are warped, they're scrambled in ways that can make them almost impossible to read.
Cratons provide the rosetta stones of Earth's earliest history.
After all, today's oceans are too new to help in deciphering early Earth, and the atmosphere
is even more ephemeral, and because the incessant conveyor belt of plate tectonics keeps swallowing
up the salt at convergent boundaries, ocean floors can't help either.
In fact, the oldest ocean crust is not much more than 200 million years.
That means that anything old enough to tell us about early Earth must be preserved on
the continents, or not at all.
The histories of the cratons are impossibly complex.
Every craton has been pushed here and there across the surface, propelled by motions of
the tectonic plates.
Every craton experienced collisions with others to form larger landmasses called provinces
or super cratons, which in turn occasionally clumped into single giant landmasses, those
were the continents, or even the super continents.
Every time two cratons collided, they produced a new mountain range, along with a suture
zone which left behind telltale geological signatures.
Each of these ancient mountain ranges provides compelling evidence for the ancient assembly
of larger and larger landmasses.
And what came together also had to rip apart.
Each supercontinent enjoyed a period of 100 million years or so when it was more or less
stable, but a supercontinent is like a heat trapping lid.
As heat builds up, new upwelling magma forces new divergent plate boundaries to form and
the land's fragment.
So each supercontinent eventually rifted apart and fragmented into separate ocean-bound
island continents.
And each time a continent split apart, a widening ocean formed between the diverging pieces.
And when a new ocean opened up, thick piles of distinctive sediment were deposited.
There were sandstones and tidal zones, then limestones representing offshore reefs.
And in deeper water, you get thick layers of mud and black shale.
Each time we find a thick sedimentary sequence of this kind, it points to an episode of continental
fragmentation.
And the evidence, once again, is clear.
Over and over for more than three billion years of Earth history, supercontinents have
been assembled.
Then after a few hundred million years, they've split apart.
So imagining Earth history becomes something like an immense jigsaw puzzle where you don't
know what the picture looks like and where the pieces constantly change their position
and change their shapes.
Given those complexities, how can we possibly reconstruct Earth's early past?
What sort of evidence do we have to show that the three dozen cratons have indeed moved
relative to each other, much less to resolve the details of the succeedingly complex multi-building
year wandering across the globe?
As always, we must look to the rocks.
Geologists must trek to the most remote places on Earth, map the rocks, collect samples,
subject them to a battery of revealing laboratory tests.
The number one target of opportunity is the cratonic core, where you find really old rocks,
typically three billion years old or more.
These are fragments of Earth's most ancient crust, and they represent a total of at most
a few percent of Earth's total continental mass.
Such old rocks are invariably baked by heat, by pressure, they're altered by the dissolving
powers of subsurface waters, and they're often contorted by crustal stresses.
Nevertheless, it's often possible to deduce the nature of the original rocks, whether
granite-like intrusions or sedimentary layerings.
Even so, if all that survive were the most ancient cratonic roots, then our task of
deciphering Earth's early geography would be hopeless.
Fortunately, the cratons are part of a dynamic crustal history.
The story of each craton is punctuated by pulses of new magma, which penetrates the
older rocks to form igneous rock bodies and veins and pods.
New sedimentary deposits accumulate inland in lakes and rivers, as well as along the
shallow sandy coastlines.
And whenever two cratons collide or rip apart, distinctive right rock types and characteristic
structures occur that can reveal the relative motions of two land masses.
So by carefully studying all the rocks and structures associated with a craton, it is
possible to document pretty much the entire history of that craton.
All of these younger rocks must be studied together to get a good picture of how a craton
moved through time.
The igneous rocks are important because they hold tiny magnetic minerals that, when they
solidify, lock in the orientation of Earth's earlier magnetic field, and thus reveal the
approximate latitude when the rocks cooled.
Those data don't provide GPS coordinates, but they do record relative positions of cratons
through time.
And the sedimentary rocks are important because they often hold clues about the climate and
ecology.
For example, sediments deposited in rapidly weathering tropical zones are quite different
from those deposited in temperate lakes or the glacial deposits of higher latitudes.
And some sedimentary rocks also incorporate tiny grains of magnetic minerals that can
be used to complement magnetic data from igneous rocks.
All this takes an enormous amount of work to achieve, even a vague understanding of
Earth's changing globe.
Every one of the three dozen cratons has to be scrutinized by armies of geologists.
It takes decades of meticulous fieldwork and lab studies and data from every part of the
globe must be integrated, that all those cratons have to be juxtaposed like bumper cars on
a globe.
And then we gradually play the imaginary movie of their wanderings backwards in time, starting
from the known geography of the modern world.
As you might expect, that movie becomes more and more speculative.
The farther back we go, nevertheless an astonishing picture is slowly emerging according to the
latest compelling interpretations for at least the last three billion years.
Earth has experienced a repeated cycle of at least five supercontinent assemblies, periods
of instability, and then fragmentation.
And so it appears that if we are to understand Earth, that great supercontinent cycle lies
at the heart of this story, our familiar world map will never look the same again.
