The stage has been set for the formation of Earth.
The solar nebula had been processed first by heat and radiation from the T-Tauri sun
that initial solar wind formed the chondrules and CAIs and separated most of the volatile
atmosphere-loving components from the inner, rocky regions of the solar system.
Isotope data from the most primitive meteorites date those initial events at 4.5672 billion
years ago.
This first stage of mineral evolution saw the production of perhaps 60 different minerals,
many which occurred only in microscopic crystals.
Electrostatic forces caused the chondrules and dust to stick together to form lumps the
size of basketballs, and then automobiles and maybe even houses.
As the clumps got larger over an extended period of perhaps 10 or 20 million years, gravity
increasingly took over, eventually forming billions of irregular objects up to a kilometer
across.
This process of accretion accelerated as the planetesimals grew and their gravitational
attraction increased.
Isaac Newton's Universal Law of Gravity explains why.
The force of gravity is described by a famous equation.
Force is equal to a constant G times mass of the first object times mass of the second
object divided by the distance between them squared.
That is, a gravitational force is experienced by any two objects that are separated by a
distance.
This equation reveals that the force of gravity between those two objects is dependent on only
three parameters, the mass of the first object, the mass of the second object, and the distance
between them.
The universal gravitational constant G in the equation indicates the magnitude of the
universal gravitational force, and it's very, very small.
The implication of this equation is that size, or at least mass, really does matter.
In a swirling nebula, objects are constantly moving and brushing by each other, so the
distance term is pretty much the same for smaller or larger objects, at least while
there are lots of objects in orbit around the sun.
However, if masses are small, just a few ounces or a few pounds, gravity is extremely weak
and can't have much influence.
That situation changed as planetesmos grew larger and larger to masses of thousands or
millions of tons.
That's the point when gravity really took over.
The same scenario was being played out at all distances from the sun, between what is
now inside the orbit and Mercury, to be on the asteroid belt.
That is from perhaps 10 million to 700 million kilometers from the sun.
This region had been largely stripped of its hydrogen, helium, other volatiles.
What remained 4.55 billion years ago were innumerable big rocks that would eventually
become the four terrestrial planets.
The final stages of Earth's formation must have been typical of all the inner rocky planets.
Indeed, computer models show that for a time, all of their fates were linked by random violent
events.
This ultimate stage of planet formation is called runaway accretion, an interval lasting
perhaps 100,000 years when gravity was fully in control.
We begin that stage with billions of objects in a variety of sizes, but with a significant
population of objects a kilometer across or even more.
When two such objects get close, the force of gravity pulls them together and they merge.
The larger and more massive the bodies, the more violent is that impact.
The computer models reveal the inevitable progression of such a scenario.
Statistics show that a few objects inevitably get larger, much faster, which means they
have much stronger gravitational pull, and they grow faster still.
Perhaps thousands of planetesimals grew to sizes of 50 to 100 kilometers or more.
They sweep up the smaller bits like efficient vacuum cleaners, and some of those planetesimals
grow even faster than others, leading to perhaps dozens of protoplanets reaching 500 kilometers
in diameter.
This is a solar system of perhaps 50 to 100 good-sized protoplanets.
At this point, each impact releases huge amounts of energy.
Some planetesimals are blasted to bits, that's where many of the asteroids and meteorites
come from.
More typically, a smaller planetesimal will smash into a larger one and be completely
swallowed up.
Computer models show that the orbits of these larger protoplanets are easily altered by
the late-stage collisions, so if you have a dozen really large objects in order in the
range of 10 to 700 million kilometers from the sun, any one of them could ultimately
wind up in almost any orbit.
A large protoplanet near the orbit of Venus, for example, could, if the subsequent impact
history is just right, wind up near the orbit of Mars, and vice versa.
What's not entirely random is the final orbital distribution of the stable planets.
No two planets can persist for long at the same orbital distance.
The bigger planet always consumes the smaller.
All planetary systems, whether derived from computer models or observed by the Kepler
mission, involve planets neatly spaced from their star.
In fact, it was a time when astronomers thought planetary distances obey a strict single set
of mathematical proportions, called the Titius-Bodilaw, after the 18th century German astronomers
Johann Daniel Titius and Johann Elerit Bodi.
The exact sequence of the distances is rather complex.
If the Earth-Sun distance is 10 units, then Mercury occurs at a distance of 4, Venus at
4 plus 3, Earth at 4 plus 6, Mars at 4 plus 12.
Then the asteroid belt is roughly at 4 plus 24, while Jupiter and Saturn are more or less
at 4 plus 48 and 4 plus 96.
So you see that doubling progression 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 96.
Though the relationship breaks down after Uranus, whose name, incidentally, was first
proposed by Johann Bodi.
It isn't all that exact, though, even for the inner planets.
After all, the asteroid belt doesn't occur at just one radial distance, and most of the
planets are in elliptical orbits.
And the discovery of planetary systems by NASA's Kepler mission reveals that other solar
systems have very different arrangements.
What does seem clear is that planetary systems, if they're going to be stable, they require
suitable spacing between the planets.
In any event, the protoplanet that would become Earth was the largest object to survive
in our section of the solar system, roughly 150 kilometers from the sun.
At the time of its final stages of formation, Earth was a lonely, moonless world, which
had almost achieved its present size of 12,740 kilometers diameter and its mass of 6 billion
billion kilograms.
Its orbit then, as it is now, was near circular, and the length of the year was close to the
modern value of 365 current days.
Though as we'll see in Lecture 16, the length of Earth's day was much, much shorter than
the 24-hour cycle we experienced today.
Astronomers conclude that the newly accreted Earth bore some similarities to our modern
planet, but its appearance was radically different from the marbled, blue planet we know.
There were no oceans.
There were no continents.
There wasn't even an atmosphere at first.
During Earth's turbulent earliest days, it was a hot, blackened sphere of dense, igneous
rock.
Huge, glowing, red cracks, towering volcanic magma fountains, incessant meteorite impacts
punctuated the rough surface.
Giant impactors, asteroids, comets continued to smash into Earth.
Each collision was marked by a pulse of vaporized rock blasted into orbit.
Again and again, the entire surface was disrupted into a molten, red hot, hot rocky slush, yet
Earth was locked in cold, airless space, following each great impact Earth's surface cooled quickly
and blackened again.
Earth couldn't remain airless for long.
The rocky planets are volatile, poor relative to the more distant gas giants, but they're
not volatile-free.
The magma beneath the thickening black crust contained enough water, nitrogen, and carbon
to lower the melting points of rock significantly and decrease its viscosity from that of a
thick paste to that of running water.
This magma, less dense than its surrounding, exploited cracks and fissures to force its
way to the surface.
And then like a shaken soda can suddenly opened, the magma exploded with tremendous force as
it breached the surface and it released vast amounts of steam and other gases.
What would eventually become the oceans and the atmosphere?
Earth then was as alien and hostile as any world we can imagine.
We've now seen how Earth was assembled.
But when did it happen?
The timing of the final accretionary events that formed Earth is still a matter of scientific
debate, but there are a couple of lines of evidence.
Most important are the radiometric ages of the most processed meteorites, the irons,
the stony irons, and the stony achondrites.
These ages are relatively consistent and point to the existence of fully differentiated protoplanets
by about 4.55 billion years.
That's roughly 15 to 20 million years after the first space droplets formed, those calcium,
aluminum-rich inclusions that are found in chondrites.
The numbers also get a sense for timing from the number of young stars that still have
protoplanetary disks of gas and dust.
We can't watch as those disks turn into planets.
The process just takes much too long.
But the mere fact that so many young stars are surrounded by disks of small objects indicate
that planet formation requires extended time scales.
So that's the best guess for the duration of the entire process, from the first solar
flare up to a solar system with a dozen or so planets and protoplanets, certainly no
less than 10 million years, but probably no more than 20 or 30 million.
Astronomers have provided us with a compelling story of how Earth formed by accretion in
the solar nebula about 4.55 billion years ago.
And we can speculate on what Earth looked like from space at that early time, but what
of the interior?
We know from the variety of meteorites that a lot was going on deep inside protoplanets
and by extension inside Earth as well.
In our planet, as in all other big rocky objects, gravity had clumped the primitive chondrites
together as heat altered the mix, crushing pressures, searing temperatures, chemically
reactive water, violent impacts reworked the growing planetesimals, and the process more
and more new minerals emerged, together more than 250 different minerals collectively
founded all the varieties of meteorites.
That's a four-fold increase over stage one, and it's a 20-fold increase over the dozen
pre-solar ur minerals.
These richly varied mineral species, the building blocks of Earth and other rocky planets, reveal
the deeply buried flip side of accretion, the process of differentiation.
In the last lecture, we saw the differentiation, which is a process that ultimately led to
the separation of elements in iron meteorites versus stony iron meteorites, versus the very
varied achondridic stony meteorites, was driven by heat from two sources, radioactive isotopes,
particularly those short-lived radionucleotides, such as aluminum-26, xenon-129, that's one
major source, and that represents maybe more than half of the total heat energy in the
earliest planetesimals.
Added to this radiogenic heat was the transformation of gravitational potential energy to heat,
as planetesimals added mass, and as denser material accumulated in the deep cores of these
objects.
These exact same processes occurred in Earth, but in an even grander scale, as is appropriate
for a 12,740-kilometer diameter of planet.
Every differentiation of the kind experienced by Earth arises principally from two complementary
mechanisms called chemical differentiation and physical differentiation.
According to current thinking, both chemical and physical processes contribute to the kind
of concentric layering seen in all the terrestrial planets, as well as all of the larger rocky
moons and protoplanets.
Chemical differentiation involves the separation of elements in the different volumes based
on their bonding preferences, their chemical affinities, as formalized in the Goldschmidt
classification of elements.
Most dramatically, iron, nickel, and other citrophile elements concentrate in a metal
alloy phase with metallic bonds, whereas the lithophile elements, including oxygen, silicon,
magnesium concentrate in silicate and oxide minerals, and magmas, primarily with ionic
bonds.
Citrophile and lithophile elements, when melted together, tend to form separate liquids
like oil and water, a phenomenon known as emissibility.
Now, chocophile elements, notably sulfur and metallic elements like copper or zinc, that
readily bond to sulfur to form sulfide minerals, are less abundant than either citrophile or
lithophile elements in earth.
However, in those regions where sulfides concentrate, including some of earth's richest
metal ore deposits, chocophile elements can form a liquid usually with covalent bonds
that's also emissible with silicates.
And on sulfur-rich worlds like Jupiter's innermost large moon Io, and possibly Mercury,
the emissibility of lithophile and chocophile elements must have played a major role in
their differentiation.
As for atom-filed, they bond covalently and they bond with van der Waals forces, so they're
also chemically distinct from the lithophiles.
Chemical differentiation is by no means restricted to the liquid state.
Every time a new mineral crystallizes, we're seeing the effects of a chemical differentiation,
the separation of a select group of elements from the others.
So the formation of ur minerals, diamond, or spinel, or olivine from the cooling envelopes
of supernovas was a form of chemical differentiation, as was the subsequent crystallization of
the first quartz, or belzbar, or mica.
Indeed, mineral evolution is ultimately the story of successive stages of element selection
and concentration to form the nearly 4,700 minerals known today.
That ongoing process of chemical differentiation is the central theme of this course.
The separation of elements in metallic and silicate fractions played a major role in
the flip side of planetary layering, physical differentiation.
The principal driver of large-scale differentiation in a body with a strong gravitational field,
is density.
Denser materials tend to move closer to the center of gravity, and two factors contribute
to whether and how quickly a body will separate into layers by density.
The first is the density contrast.
The greater the density contrast, the more readily a separation occurs.
Iron metal, for example, has a density of more than 7 grams per cubic centimeter.
That's 7 times the density of water.
By contrast, the typical silicate rock has a density closer to 3 times that of water,
so there's a large density contrast between silicate and metal.
The second equally important factor is the strength of those materials.
A large chunk of iron will sit at Earth's hard, rocky surface just about forever.
Cold, hard surface rocks are simply too strong to give way for denser iron.
But at the much hotter temperatures of Earth mantle, silicate rocks are much softer.
They're more like taffy than the rocks with which we are familiar.
So even if everything is in the solid state, large volumes of iron metal will sink.
And if the iron and silicate are molten, then separation and sinking occurs rapidly.
Perhaps not as rapidly as a stone sinking in water, but just as inexorably.
By the way, over very long periods of time, tens or hundreds of millions of years,
density differences can lead to physical differentiation of the crust even in the solid state.
Perhaps the most dramatic examples are salt domes, which supply much of the world's table salt.
Bast quantities of salt have been sequestered in layers of rock
when salty seas were cut off in the oceans and then they dried up.
Think of the Great Salt Lake, for example.
These salt deposits can become buried,
but salt at about twice the density of water is much, much less dense than the surrounding sediments.
The salt is also very, very soft and over long periods of time it can flow.
The result is that salt pushes up, which forms a bulge in the salt later,
and that pushes up more and more, and salt continues to join this bubble-like dome.
Even though it all happens in slow motion, gradually you get a salt dome that's huge
and can rise all the way to the surface that can punch through the surrounding rocks.
And it can be mined for salt.
Physical differentiation resulted in the layering of earth.
The dense core concentrated a metal fraction.
Magnesium silicates dominated the mantle, which holds most of earth's volume,
and a thin layer of much less dense element, the so-called incompatible elements
that don't easily enter the mantle or core, wound up forming a low density crust.
And then even less dense water floated on the crust,
while the gases formed an outermost layer of gaseous elements, especially nitrogen.
So density played an important role in all of earth's layers, even the oceans and the atmosphere.
It's important to recognize the role of atomic number in the process.
Iron metal is denser than silicates, primarily because iron is element 26,
while oxygen, magnesium, and silicon are elements 8, 12, and 14 respectively.
That difference alone is enough to explain why iron metal is more than twice as dense as the average silicate.
But that doesn't mean that every citrophile element is denser than every lithophile element.
Tungsten, a lithophile with atomic number 74, is denser than the citrophile gold, which is atomic number 79.
And in fact, the heaviest natural element uranium with atomic number 92 is an incompatible lithophile element that concentrates in earth's crust.
The diversity of meteorites provides strong evidence for a layered earth, with an iron core and a silicate mantle.
But how deep are those layers?
Are they sub-layered?
And is earth radially symmetric, or are there hidden hills and valleys?
To answer these questions, we must turn to solid earth geophysics, the study of earth's interior through remote observations.
The deepest mines penetrate less than four kilometers into earth's crust.
The deepest drill hole is only about 10 kilometers, given the known strengths of materials
and the forbidding heat and pressure of earth's deeper interior, its doubtful will ever sample far deeper than that.
So we need another kind of probe.
Two primary geophysical techniques reveal the distribution of mass inside earth.
The first, and older techniques, involves measuring earth's moment of inertia.
The moment of inertia of an object is defined as its resistance to any change in rotation.
And think about how this might apply to three different kinds of balls.
Each exactly four inches in diameter, each weighing exactly one pound.
Now, one of the balls is made of polished wood, so its density is uniform.
A second ball has a central lead weight surrounded by styrofoam.
And imagine the third ball is a hollow steel sphere.
If you spin these three balls on a table at the same speed, let's say 10 revolutions per second,
it will take different amounts of force to stop the balls from spinning.
Perhaps you have an intuitive feel for this.
It's easiest to stop the ball with the lead weight at the center.
That ball has the lowest moment of inertia.
The solid wooden ball is next, and the hollow steel sphere with most of its mass near the outside surface
has the highest moment of inertia, and it's the hardest to stop.
State it a different way. If you had a four-inch diameter ball that weighed a pound
and was spinning at 10 revolutions per second, and you measured the force it took to stop the spin,
then you could say something about how the mass was distributed inside the ball,
even without cutting that ball open.
Okay, so Earth's a ball. It's 12,740 kilometers in diameter on average.
It has a mass of six billion, billion kilograms.
It's spinning on its axis once every 24 hours.
If you can measure the force needed to slow Earth's rotation,
then you have direct evidence for the distribution of mass inside.
That's Earth's moment of inertia has been measured in various ways,
including modern satellite measurements, studies the effect of tides,
and gradually slowing Earth's rotation, and increasing the Earth-Moon distance
provide one important classical method as well.
The bottom line is that Earth's moment of inertia is significantly less
than that of a uniform sphere of the same size and mass.
That means significantly more mass is concentrated in a dense core
compared to a uniform sphere.
So if you assume that Earth has two dominant regions, the core
and the mantle, then it's possible to predict with good accuracy
the 2,900 kilometer depth of that core mantle boundary.
There's another way. Our most detailed picture of Earth's interior comes from
the branch of geophysics called seismology,
which is the study of how sound waves travel through Earth.
Size with waves, the kind of waves generated by earthquakes.
The key to seismology is that sound waves travel through different kinds of
materials at different speeds, typically several kilometers per second.
These speeds, or seismic velocities, are generally faster for
denser materials and slower for hotter materials,
especially if they're partially melted.
A diagram of seismic waves traveling through Earth's interior
reveals several very distinctive patterns.
Seismic waves bend as they go deeper in Earth.
Also, some waves produce echo-like reflections when they meet boundary layers.
The bigger the density difference at the boundary, the louder that echo.
One of the earliest geophysical discoveries using seismology
was the strong echo off the core mantle boundary.
They're two kinds of seismic waves. They provide complementary information.
Primary or P seismic waves are compressional waves,
in which the direction of the wave is the same as the motion of the rocks.
P waves occur anytime you hit something, and they can travel through solid or liquid.
Now, secondary or S seismic waves are shear waves,
with the motion of the medium at right angles to the direction of the wave.
That's just like the wave at a football stadium.
S seismic waves don't travel very far through magma
because liquids can't support shear.
This phenomenon explains one of the most important results of seismology.
Some S waves just stop at the core mantle boundary.
That observation reveals that the outer core is actually liquid, mostly iron plus nickel.
Seismic studies also reveal that Earth has a solid metallic iron inner core,
with a radius of about 1200 kilometers.
One of the great mysteries associated with seismic studies of the core
is that the liquid outer core is too light for pure iron, nickel, metal.
There must be a small amount of one or more lighter elements,
because the density isn't high enough.
It's not high enough for pure iron, nickel, metal, that is.
Contenders include hydrogen or oxygen, silicon, carbon.
Some people say sulfur, any or all of which might bond
to iron, metal at high enough temperatures and pressures.
Now moving outward from the center, the core mantle boundary appears to be one of
the most complex and fascinating zones of the deep Earth.
There's always a strong echo, but seismologists often see a strong
scattering of seismic waves at this boundary,
as if the boundary is irregular and not at one distinct depth.
Some geophysicists suggest that giant mountains of dense minerals,
some more than 300 kilometers tall, may float on the surface of the metal liquid outer core.
As we move closer to Earth's surface, the picture of a layered planet becomes ever clearer.
The mantle is divided into three distinct layers, each of which has a different density
and its own seismic discontinuity.
The lower mantle, which extends from 670 to 2900 kilometers deep,
contains more than half of Earth's volume.
Dense, high pressure forms of magnesium silicates and oxides dominate this layer's mineralogy.
Between about 400 and 670 kilometers deep is the mantle's transition zone,
a region that's bounded by two relatively sharp seismic discontinuities.
Most geologists assume that this change in physical properties is associated with
phase transformations of lower pressure minerals into denser, higher pressure forms.
We know, for example, that the mineral olivine, which is abundant in the upper mantle,
transforms to a denser form of magnesium silicate called wadsliite at about the pressure
corresponding to the transition zone, objects.
And then the upper mantle, it extends from the base of the crust to about 400 kilometers deep,
and it features the same relatively simple composition of the entire mantle,
dominated by oxygen, silicon, and magnesium.
Some of the most abundant mantle minerals, based on chunks of rock brought to the surface
by deep volcanoes, are garnet, pyroxene, and olivine, all of which are common constituents
of some crustal rocks as well.
Finally, seismology, coupled with centuries of geological field studies, mining, deep drilling,
and so forth, reveals that Earth's crust is an extremely heterogeneous place.
Under the ocean, the crust is commonly a layer of black igneous rock, the salt,
often no more than a few kilometers thick.
Under the continents, by contrast, the crust can be more than 50 kilometers thick,
with a mixture of layered sedimentary rocks, once molten igneous rocks and metamorphic rocks
that have been extensively altered by heat, pressure, and the action of hot fluids.
The crust also has wonderfully complex structures, faults, folds, high mountains,
deep trenches that point to an ongoing dynamic history.
Today's crust is compositionally quite varied as well. In many places, the crust is made almost
entirely of black volcanic rock, like the basalt that pours from Hawaii's Great Volcanoes.
In other places, we find many miles thickness of sediments deposited by erosion as particles in
layer upon layer. Those sedimentary rocks are also often rich in fossils, which they provide
our most vivid picture of a living, evolving planet. And we'll come back to the fossil record
again and again in the coming lectures. Finally, I have to tell you about one futuristic
technology that might surpass even seismology in our ability to probe Earth's interior.
For some years now, there's been a wild proposal to use neutrinos as a probe of the entire planet.
Neutrinos are subatomic particles that are produced in vast quantities by the sun.
Neutrinos have almost no mass. They have no electrical charge, so they can pass right through
most matter. Every second, countless solar neutrinos pass through Earth, and they pass
through your body as well. Theorists tell us that there should be a slight absorption of
neutrinos, and that absorption is probably different for different chemical elements.
For example, iron or silicon might absorb neutrinos of certain energies more efficiently
than other energies, and each element should have its own distinctive
neutrino absorption spectrum. So here's the idea. If scientists could develop a sensitive neutrino
detector, and if we could place that detector on the far side of Earth from the sun,
then we get direct measurements of Earth's neutrino absorption spectrum. And by extensive
looking at the distribution of elements inside the Earth, we need a giant neutrino observatory.
Maybe it's going to be land-based, maybe it's space-based, and it could take measurements
on Earth's dark side as solar neutrinos pass through the planet.
With such an observatory, we might be able to detect the light elements in the outer core.
Maybe we could see the compositional shadow of those presumed giant mountains
at the core mantle boundary. Admittedly, this is a futuristic idea. We won't see it in our lifetimes,
but it's great to think of the untapped scientific opportunities that are going to thrill
coming generations of scientists and science watchers.
Earth's birth 4.55 billion years ago was a drama whose beginning has been repeated countless
trillions of time throughout the history of the universe. And it's still being repeated to this
day. Every star, every planet arises in space from gas and dust particles too small to see with the
unaided eye. It includes so vast in total extent that we can observe immense star-forming regions
halfway across the Milky Way. Billions of years ago, gravity served as the midwife
for our solar system's birth, the sun emerging as the solitary giant, and what you might think of
as a litter of planetary runts. As the sun ignited, our home took its first halting steps to become
a living world. As alien and as distant as such epic events might seem, we all experience
the same cosmic phenomenon that led to Earth's formation every day of our lives.
The very same elements that atoms that forged Earth also make our bodies and our dwellings.
The same universal force of gravity that assembled the stars and planets from dust and gas
that forged the elements and stars also holds us fast to our planetary home.
When it comes to the universal laws of physics and chemistry,
there is nothing new under the sun. However, geology is more than physics or chemistry,
and the story of Earth differs markedly in many ways, not least because of our moon.
