About 2.5 billion years ago, algae capable of photosynthesis began to pump oxygen into
the atmosphere. Within 300 million years, this extremely corrosive gas would have far-reaching
effects on Earth's surface, the variety of minerals, and the atmosphere available for
all future life forms.
How and when did photosynthesis get started? Of the several ways that Earth has learned
to make atmospheric oxygen, photosynthesis is without question the champion. Green plants
and algae pump huge quantities of oxygen into the atmosphere, so that today almost 20% of
the air we breathe is that reactive gas.
So how did photosynthesis begin? That question is in large part the domain of paleontologists
who study what turn out to be extremely fragmentary remains of the ancient microbial world. These
scientists use every technique they can imagine to tease out connections between past and present
life. In this lecture, I want to tell you stories of Archean paleontology, the search
for signs of life in rocks older than 2.5 billion years. This is where we find the
earliest evidence for any kind of photosynthesis, and we see hints of the initial transition
to an oxygen-bearing atmosphere. Naturally, in their search for earliest traces of photosynthesis,
fossil hunters concentrate on Earth's oldest rocks.
As you can imagine, there are precious few fossil remains of the first photosynthetic
single cells. Microbes have no hard parts like bones or teeth or shells, so they don't
generally remain intact after they die. After billions of years of burial, heating, squeezing,
and chemical alteration, almost nothing in the way of microbial fossils has been preserved,
much less documented. What little has survived is typically baked and smushed. Colonies that
presume fossil microbes at best look like a smear of small black smudges. It takes a
creative imagination and more to make any sort of biological interpretation, at least
one that will convince other scientists. So it's not too surprising that every new announcement
of microbial fossils more than 2 billion years old is met with a lot of skepticism.
Let me give this skepticism an individual face. In every scientific discipline, it seems
that there are individuals who have taken on the task of quality control inspectors.
These researchers act as protectors of rigor to police what gets published and to point
out questionable claims. And for the better part of half a century, paleontologist Professor
J. William or Bill Schoff at the University of California's Los Angeles campus has played
that role for Archean fossils. After studying some of Earth's most ancient microbial fossils
for decades, Schoff developed a checklist of traits that are both necessary and sufficient
to confirm that purported fossils represent actual remains of life. He developed his criteria
by first focusing on more recent, well-preserved specimens, which are unambiguous. Schoff was
then able to push the fossil record farther and farther back into the past, more than
3 billion years old in some cases. Schoff's criteria for old fossils are logical. They're
convincing. He demands, for example, that fossil microbes must be preserved in properly
dated sedimentary layers that were deposited in environments where microbes could have
once lived. Fine-grained marine sediments are promising, but metamorphic or igneous
rocks are not likely homes for these remains. If they're purported fossil microbes, they
must show uniformity of size and shape. Microbes tend to come in large collections of nearly
identical spheres or rods or chains, which are quite different from the nebulous black
streaks and carbon-rich blobs that are found in many other old rocks. Schoff's students
quantify these observations by employing statistical tools to analyze size and shape distributions.
Those procedures, which included a checklist of perhaps a dozen characteristics, helped
to remove some of the inherent subjectivity found in describing Earth's oldest sedimentary
rocks.
The field really needed this kind of rigor, and Schoff's quantitative catalog of essential
traits for any purported suite of microbial fossils served him very well. Time and again,
he published what seemed to others to be unassailable descriptions of new fossil finds. He also cast
out on some of the more questionable claims of ancient life that were submitted by competing
researchers.
His most public and newsworthy challenge occurred in August of 1996, shortly after NASA scientists
announced that they had found microbial remains in a Martian meteorite. At a high-profile
NASA-hosted press conference, Schoff played the role of the lone, dissenting voice, the
only scientist to speak who rejected the claims of extraterrestrial life. And he had a litany
of good reasons to suppose Martian fossil microbes are much too small, they're not even
large enough to hold a single strand of DNA. The reports lacked the proper supporting chemical
and mineralogical evidence regarding how the fossils were mineralized, and the microbes
were in the wrong kind of rock type as well. It was a pyroxene-rich igneous rock, not sedimentary.
Of course, most reporters went with the big story and seemed to ignore Schoff's persuasive
arguments.
Given all that, it's more than a little ironic that Bill Schoff himself was eventually subjected
to the same kind of devastating criticism over a claim he had made a few years earlier
to have discovered Earth's oldest microbial fossils from an Australian rock formation
called the Apex Chared.
These narrow layers of black rocks, rich in carbon and silicon, occur in a terrain that's
almost three and a half billion years old in a desolate part of northwestern Australia.
Schoff obtained many pieces of the chariot and then sliced them into thin, flat plates
called thin sections that are transparent to light. His graduate students and postdocs
were given the task of scrutinizing hundreds of sections in a microscope looking for anything
that was suggestive of ancient life. They took lots of photographs of suggestive, elongated
black structures which could be interpreted as cell-like segmentation. Schoff first published
these results in 1993 in a high-profile science paper. The smudgy photographs were placed side
by side with artistic line drawings to, quote, aid the eye, as well as photographs of similar-looking
modern photosynthetic microbes that were cyanobacteria. Schoff even went so far as to claim that the
Apex Chared fossils produced oxygen, even though this was a full billion years before the Great
Oxidation event. Well, this was a discovery that really caught on. Within a matter of
a few years, the most convincing Apex photos had achieved iconic status and were amongst
the most reproduced paleontological images of all time. They appeared in many textbooks,
each of which repeated the earliest fossil claim, often with an uncritical statement
that the microbes were photosynthetic. Now, it's an old rule in science, often quoted
by the great science communicator Carl Sagan that extraordinary claims require extraordinary
evidence. And it's equally true that extraordinary claims are likely to attract extraordinary
scrutiny. All of Schoff's Apex Chared fossil specimens reside at the British Museum in London,
where they're carefully catalogued and preserved as thin, glass-mounted, transparent sections
of rock. Seven years after the Schoff paper in 2000, Oxford paleontologist Martin Brazer
commenced a detailed re-examination of the Apex Chared fossils. Brazer employed new imaging
techniques, and he came to a rather different conclusion than Schoff. As it turns out, Schoff's
thin sections aren't so thin after all, at least not compared to the size of microbes.
That means that under a microscope, you can raise and lower the focal plane and see different
slices of each section. That means that the job of relocating every one of the Schoff's
original images is rather difficult. If you can imagine, Brazer and his colleagues were
eventually able to find most of the tiny objects, but they had to look through many, many thin
sections to do this. So they found what Schoff had photographed and published. And the big
surprise was that many of the photographs were misleading, because they showed a two-dimensional
slice through a three-dimensional black object. Brazer's newer photographic technique produced
three-dimensional montages, and thus revealed a much more complex picture. If Brazer and
colleagues set the microscope focused to the same depth of Schoff's original photographs,
then they could reproduce the classic textbook images of Apex fossils. But if they raised
or lowered the focus slightly, then what they had appeared to be legitimate elongated strings
of microbial cells morphed into something altogether different, wavy sheets, irregular
blobs, sometimes with branching or folds that had nothing to do with biology. So Brazer
and colleagues published a major challenge titled, Questioning the Evidence for Earth's
Oldest Fossils. That was in the March 7, 2002 issue of the Prominent Periodical Nature.
They described Schoff's fossils as nothing more than selectively chosen cross-sections.
The real three-dimensional structures bear little resemblance to anything biological.
Well, that wasn't the end of the controversy. As Schoff fought back with his own article,
Laser-Ramen Imagery of Earth's Earliest Fossils. It was published back-to-back with
Brazer's piece in the same issue of nature. And Brazer was furious. He claimed that his
paper had been delayed a year to give Schoff a chance to rebut that challenge. So Schoff's
new contribution presented new micro-analysis of the Apex chart. Black cells he showed that
the isotopic composition, the atomic structures are consistent with biology. And he repeated
that oldest fossil claim without any apology. Although he didn't push the idea that the
microbes were photosynthetic. Even though Schoff fought back as best he could, for many of
us the seeds of doubt had been sown. And the bar for claiming Earth's oldest fossils has
clearly been raised. It's not surprising that three-and-a-half-billion-year-old fossil
microbes are rare, if they exist at all. Try to imagine what would happen to a colony of
microbes when they die. Almost invariably, the microscopic collection of chemicals that
was a living cell is going to fall apart. Larger biomolecules like proteins and cell
membranes will break down into smaller and smaller molecular pieces, ultimately into
water and carbon dioxide. Many microbes will be eaten or scavenged, and almost nothing
will remain after a few months or years. Much less millions or billions of years. Time is
not kind to dead cells. There may be rare exceptions, but it takes extraordinary circumstances.
Cells must be buried quickly in fine-grain sediments with absolutely no corrosive oxygen
in the atmosphere. The host rock can't get too hot, nor can the rock be too deformed
by pressure. Even so, only the hardiest carbon-based molecules can survive any length of time, and
those molecules survive in an altered form. What's most likely to persist is the sturdy
carbon backbone of molecules, perhaps up to about 20 carbon atoms total. Sometimes the
backbone is a simple long chain with a few carbon atoms branching off to the sides, and
sometimes it will be a hope-annoy group of interlocking rings. You might think of these
diagnostic molecular fragments as ultra-small skeletons. They're all that's left of much
larger collections of functioning biomolecules that have been depolymerized, degraded, otherwise
altered down to a resilient core. This is a new and different game in paleontology. We're
talking about searching for the actual molecular pieces of once-living cells. These are the
atoms, the molecules that were once alive. It's really challenging, but if you can find
such a molecular skeleton in old sedimentary rocks, and if you can convince yourself and
others that it's not simply contamination from younger rock formations or from all the
living microbes in our environment, then you might be able to claim discovery of a chemical
fossil, the original atoms of a once-living microbe.
I'm fascinated by the contrasting lifestyles of this new breed of molecular paleontologists.
On the one hand, the women and men who enter this field have to endure the rigors of field
geology in some of Earth's most forbidding places. Remote locations in Africa, Australia,
northern Canada, it requires hiking miles across arduous terrain, excavating hard rocks by hand,
carrying hundreds of pounds of promising specimens back to base camp.
Other geologists work for months at drilling rigs because fresh drill cores are less likely
to be weathered and contaminated by surface microbes and vegetation. These scientists face
months of hardship, danger, deprivation, and then it's back to the laboratory for more months
of clean room tedium. Once you have the rock in hand, a single thumbprint, even the slightest
breath, can contaminate a precious 3 billion year old rock sample and lead to false results.
It not only takes time and patience and exquisite care and handling specimens,
but you also need an arsenal of specialized micro analytical apparatus to extract individual
molecules from a rock. One of the pioneers in this kind of 21st century paleontology is
Professor Roger Summons, an Australian who has set up a state-of-the-art lab at MIT's
Department of Earth Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences. The Summons lab looks for molecular
fossils in some of Earth's oldest rocks. Summons most famous and controversial discovery was
made in the late 1990s while he was working at the Australian National University. He focused
on 2.7 billion year old sedimentary rocks from the ancient and unusually well-preserved
Pilbara Cretan in Western Australia. Summons and his colleagues were able to obtain relatively
unweathered samples from a unique drill core that reveals a sequence almost half a mile long.
There was an especially tantalizing section of black, carbon-rich shale, which is the kind
of sedimentary rock that's most likely to hold original molecular fossils. And these particular
Pilbara rocks are especially interesting because they look like they haven't been very altered by
high temperatures or ground waters. So if there was any old rock where ancient biomolecules might
survive, this drill core is a pretty good bet. Summons and his colleagues concentrated on finding
those particularly distinctive and resilient class of molecules called hopenoids. Recall from two
lectures ago they have a multi-ring carbon backbone that's known in nature only from living cells.
Each hopenoid molecule has its characteristic backbone of five interlocking rings, four of which
are hexagons, each with six carbon atoms, and a fifth ring is a pentagon with five carbon
atoms, and each ring shares two carbons with its neighboring rings. That's a total of 21
backbone carbon atoms at all. If you find hopenoids in a rock, then you have clear signs of life.
In modern cells, these molecules play key roles in stabilizing cell membranes that protect cells,
and because they only come from cells, they make very convincing molecular biomarkers.
Two extremely high-profile papers appeared almost simultaneously in August 1999 from Summons
Australian lab. The first one was in science with Jochen Brock, a PhD student as first author.
That paper described the oldest reported molecular fossils, hopenoids in those 2.7 billion-year-old
pill barerochs, and that discovery would break the previous molecular fossil record by a billion years.
And it was more than just a report of a finding a molecule, because hopenoids come in varieties that
can reveal a lot about ancient ecosystems. Different kinds of hopenoids have extra carbon atoms stuck
off at various places around the rings. In this case, Brock's and colleagues found a kind of
hopenoid only known for more advanced cells called eukaryotes. These cells contain a nucleus that
houses DNA, and they're the building blocks of all major types of multicellular life, including
fungi, plants, and animals. At the time of their publication, the oldest known eukaryote fossils
were only about 1 billion years old. All the more primitive microbes existing before 2 billion years
ago were assumed not to have a nucleus. And you can imagine the surprise and the skepticism
that met this interpretation. If the summons group discovery is true, then one of two conclusions
is possible. Either eukaryotic cells evolved 1.7 billion years earlier than anyone had thought,
and that would mean that life's early evolution was correspondingly accelerated much faster than
anyone thought, or this kind of hopenoid molecule evolved very much earlier than eukaryotes.
Either case would require a rethinking of life's history.
For many scientists, it was a lot easier to reject both conclusions and believe that
Brock's and colleagues were simply detecting contamination from much younger cells.
The second article, this one published in Nature with Robert Roger Summons, this first author,
made what was an equally surprising and somewhat controversial claim that a nearby rock formation
contained another variety of hopenoid. The rock is the 2.5 billion-year-old Mount McRae black shale
taken from a modest 3,300-foot hill in Western Australia. Mount McRae shale contains a kind
of hopenoid with an extra carbon sticking off one side of one ring. Today, these two methyl
hopenoid molecules are only found in cyanobacteria cells that produce oxygen by photosynthesis.
So, Summons concluded that photosynthesis is well established by 2.5 billion years ago,
which was slightly before the Great Oxidation Event. For many paleontologists who read the
paper, I suspect the prospect of probing the origin of photosynthesis with preserved molecular
fragments was in part exciting, but also something to treat with caution. After all,
there's no compelling evidence in the rock record that oxygen production began that early.
And naturally, there were some pretty severe skeptics, just as there have been for every
claim of the earliest fossil. Most troubling, even confusing to those of us on the outside,
were grave doubts raised by Joachim Brockes a few years after the publication of his own
PhD work. Evidently, Brockes had always harbored doubts about whether he was measuring something
old, because young hopenoids are everywhere. Even the deep subsurface is swarming with microbes,
living in rocks, so contamination is inevitable, even if the hopenoids and other molecular fragments
are there. There's apparently no way to be sure how they got there. So I recently asked
Roger Summons his current thoughts about what's the oldest no molecular fossil. He paused and said,
well, I suppose it's 2.7 billion years, but a lot of people don't agree.
And even more recent experiments at Summons lab point to recent contamination in those very old
rocks, so the jury is still out. But skepticism is probably warranted. It will probably take many
years, more samples, refine separation methods, and new analytical techniques before the challenges
facing this kind of research are fully resolved. The fossil record holds lots of clues related to
the history of photosynthesis. We've discussed fossils of primitive cells, an algae, mound-shaped
stromatolites, even possible molecular fossils. And then there are microbial maps,
which may be at once the most obvious and the most overlooked fossils of ancient photosynthetic
life. Today you can find microbial maps just about anywhere around the world. Wherever shallow
coastal waters or banks and slopes of slow-moving rivers and streams provide a foothold for algae.
Given the chance, algae will form thick, tangled, carpet-like layers of intertwined filaments.
These resilient coatings provide a kind of anchoring to loose, sandy sediments and ensure
that the algae are stabilized in a wet, sunlit environment, a protection from the erosion of
floods and waves. You might think that such fossils would be seen everywhere, but the paleontological
community all but overlooked these fossil microbial maps before the discoveries of Noronovki.
Noronovki is a professor of geobiology at Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Virginia,
where she has amassed a research portfolio that establishes her as the world's leading authority
on ancient microbial maps. I've had the good fortune to work with her on some of her findings
since the early 2000s, and it's been obvious that her path to scientific prominence has been anything
but easy. And this is a story that's been repeated over and over and over again for women in science.
She enrolled as the only female undergraduate in geology at the Eberhardt-Karls University
in Tübingen, Germany. There, and at her graduate department at the Karl von Asetzky University
in Oldenburg, there was not a single woman on the earth science faculty. And as you might expect,
lab facilities and field trips were not geared towards coeducation.
On top of those challenges, Nora has chosen some extremely forbidding areas in the world
to conduct her fieldwork, including remote and hostile rock formations in South Africa,
in Western Australia, in Namibia, in the scorching Middle East and frigid Greenland.
But she brings to the field a steely determination and a remarkably keen eye for features that
others have simply overlooked. Again and again, Nora has spotted the trace
evidence that microbial mats have flourished on many of Earth's ancient sandy shores.
Microbial mat fossils are important because they have to be associated with some kind of photosynthesis.
That's not necessarily true of microbes that left fragmentary remains in black shirts or black
shales. Those fossils could have come from deep dark zones, far from the surface, far from sunlight.
A strong case can be made that shallow water stromatolites that were formed by microbes
that were photosynthetic, as the microbes are held in place right at the surface.
Though it's also possible that this kind of mineralizing mound could simply represent
a protective home in an otherwise harsh wave swept environment. But it seems logical that
microbial mats must have been made by photosynthetic organisms. After all, why would a colony of
microbes use all that energy to stabilize itself in a rough shallow tidal zone if it wasn't trying
to collect the sunlight? Let me step back and place these contributions in some perspective.
Scientists have been looking ancient microbial fossils for about half a century. For much of
that time, paleontologists focused on only three kinds of rock formation. First, you have the black
shirts, which are silica-rich rocks like the controversial three-and-a-half-billion-year-old
apex shirts that Bill Shaff studied. In fact, old fossiliferous black shirts first made the news
long time ago, early in the 1960s, when Harvard's paleobotanist Elsa Barghorn recognized ancient
microbial fossils in the 1.9-billion-year-old gunflint chart from northern Minnesota and western
Ontario. When Barghorn examined these thin transparent sections of the gunflint, he realized
that he was seeing ancient single cells preserved in exquisite detail. He did this work with geologist
Stanley Tyler, who had actually been the first to observe these tiny sphere-like objects a decade
earlier, but he wasn't sure what he was seeing. Barghorn was able to describe amazing suites of
cell-shaped like spheres and rods and filaments. Some of these were even fossilized in the process
of dividing. It turns out that these fossils are still the oldest absolutely unambiguous fossils
of photosynthetic cells on earth. There are, of course, older claims, but none that everyone
accepts. So that's black shirts. Then there are carbon-rich black shales,
which is the rock type studied by Roger Summons and colleagues. Black shales are very fine-grained
and often come from deeply buried sediments, so they're perhaps the best source of ancient molecular
fossils. Black shale typically represents a deep water accumulation of mud and carbon-rich
debris that must have entombed ancient microbes. That's why thick sequences of ancient black shale
from Australia, South Africa, lots of other localities are so carefully examined, a layer
by microscopic layer, and we keep inventing more sensitive analytical tools so black shale
will continue to be studied intensively. A third intensively group of my studied microbial fossils
are the dome-like structures called stromatolites. It might have been difficult to interpret these
distinctive mound or sometimes cone-shaped structures, which are commonly preserved in limestone,
but modern living stromatolites still form reefs in a few shallow coastal areas,
most famously at Shark Bay in Western Australia. These odd layered structures form when a thin
surface coating of photosynthetic microbes causes layer upon layer of minerals to precipitate.
There are countless fossil stromatolite localities and older rocks all around the world,
some in rocks about three and a half billion years old. So by about 1990, black shale and
limestone stromatolites were all well-established rock types in which defined evidence of ancient
micro. To this very limited list of Earth's oldest fossil up for its formations,
Norinovsky has now convincingly added a fourth rock type, sandstone. Now it's easy to understand
why sandstone wasn't embraced earlier. Microbial fossils are most easily preserved in very fine
grain rocks like chaired or shale or in limestone reefs, where the grain size is smaller than
the microbes. That's why the focus on black chaired, black shale, stromatolites.
Sand by contrast is relatively coarse and the mineral grains are very much larger than most
microbes that make that makes it very hard to preserve small fossils. In addition, sand accumulates
in the turbulent tidal zones of beaches where sand patterns and most signs of life are quickly
erased by waves. Fossils in sand are likely eroded away and dispersed. Nevertheless, Norinovsky has
spent more than two decades studying modern tidal flats and their rich ecosystems of tough,
fibrous microbial mats. And one of the neatest things about these microbial mat structures is
you don't need a microscope to see them. Norinovsky found that microbial mats impose all sorts of
distinctive structures along shallow, sandy shorelines. For one thing, they imprint a crinkly
texture to the sand surface, sort of like a wrinkled tablecloth. Mats also bind and trap
sediment grains in a thick, resilient, massive algal strands, and they alter the patterned ripple
marks in the sand. Mats rip apart and fragment in storms by tearing in a distinctive geometric
chunks and rolling up like little Persian carpets. All of those features can be seen in the field
if you know what to look for. Most sandstone outcroppings have none of these attributes
suggestive of photosynthesizing life. They appear monotonously smooth or perhaps gently
rippled, but they lack anything that's obviously biological. But Norinovsky has an amazingly sharp
eye, and she learned to spot the distinctive wrinkled and cracked surfaces characteristic
of fossilized microbial mats in ancient rocks. This is classic field discovery at its best,
and so in the next lecture, I'll begin by describing some of her most important discoveries
with some of Earth's oldest microbial fossils. Research that's pushing the date for primitive
photosynthesis back to more than three billion years.
