It was a violent and hellish time for our solar system.
At 4.5 to 3.8 billion years ago, our Earth fell under constant attack.
Earth's surface was pelted by a constant rain of meteorite bombardment from above,
enroiled by incessant volcanic eruptions from below.
The surface, a flowing blanket of red-hot lava.
Earth has experienced many transformative events during its long history.
The big thwack was by far the most disruptive, and because that impact led to the formation of the moon,
it probably resulted in the most far-reaching effects.
But the formation of a large and solitary moon orbiting close to a living planet
is not an inevitable outcome of the natural laws of chemistry and physics.
Impacts on the scale of the Earth-Thea collision are not preordained.
One can imagine differing scenarios for that ancient thwack between Earth and Thea,
variations that could have produced a very different result.
It's possible that the impact could have been better aimed with the collision head-on and dead-center.
In that case, a lot more of Thea's mass would probably have wound up merging with Earth.
In that case, it's likely we would not have had a moon at all,
because Thea and Earth would have coalesced into one big, moonless world.
It's even more likely that Thea could have just missed Earth,
in which case its orbit might have been radically different,
altered perhaps to be flung inward in the direction of Venus or outward in the direction of Mars.
In such a scenario, Thea could have left Earth's neighborhood forever.
And there are other possibilities as well.
If the impact had been more glancing,
then the scattering of debris might have resulted in several much smaller moons,
giving us a rather different night sky to enjoy.
My point is that chance plays an important role in the formation of planets and moons.
Our dynamic cosmic neighborhood, like those of innumerable solar systems across the universe,
holds myriad possibilities.
But although chance plays a role at many junctures,
many aspects of the cosmos seem hardwired into the laws of physics and chemistry.
For example, Earth, after the impact of Thea,
must have settled into an inevitable, largely predetermined time of gradual cooling of self-organization,
and of mineral evolution.
What was that earliest Earth like?
Well, for one thing, it was incredibly hot.
Geologists who study Earth's earliest time, called the first half billion years,
the Hadianian, in reference to the assumed hellish conditions that must have prevailed at the disrupted surface.
We can invoke informed speculation to paint a picture of that ancient time,
two simultaneous sources of violence would have contributed to this special effects.
On the one hand, incessant gas-spewing volcanoes produced steam-powered magma fountains hundreds of feet tall,
raging rivers of glowing lava across the globe.
At the same time, the surface suffered a steady bombardment of sizable asteroids
and comets that scattered leftovers that came from planetary processes
would have just pelted the Earth.
There was no stable or safe place on Earth's disrupted surface.
In spite of the certainty of these rather generic ongoing events,
we're at a loss to know Earth's first few hundred million years in any detail.
There simply is no surviving, tangible evidence.
That's not the case for every stage of early Earth history.
We do have a rich record of the earliest solar system.
The Sun is exhibit A, as are the numerous objects in orbit around it.
More than 50,000 meteorite samples give us an intimate view of the earliest stages of nebular accretion,
as well as the interiors of planetesimals.
We've collected a similarly detailed view of the Moon's origin from ancient lunar soils and rocks.
But nothing has survived from the time of Earth's earliest period.
From just after the period of accretion, there's not a known fragment of rock,
not even a single mineral grain from 4.5 billion years ago.
As we saw when we discussed the achondrites in Lecture 13,
it is possible that such tangible evidence of Earth's first surface might have survived
in the form of rocks that were blasted from Earth's earliest surface
by a giant impact four and a half billion years ago,
and then landed on the Moon as an Earth meteorite.
Some scientists have suggested that lots of these objects must be preserved on the Moon,
and they add to that long list of reasons why we should send more human missions to the lunar surface.
It might take systematic geological surveys of the Moon's surface, as well as a lot of luck,
but we've gained tremendous insights about Earth's earliest and most inaccessible past.
It really would be spectacular to hold in your hand a 4.5 billion-year-old piece of our own planet,
the very first hardened surface.
To me, that ancient rock would be even more impressive and more meaningful than a piece of Mars or the Moon.
Yet we don't have that object in hand to know the Hedean Earth.
You see, Earth may have changed over and over again throughout its long history,
but the laws of physics and chemistry haven't changed at all.
Four and a half billion years ago, the exact same natural laws prevailed,
and once the Moon had formed, there were no more really big thwacks or other planet-scale events to worry about.
Earth had entered into a long, long interval of settling down.
In the scale of cosmic events, even the epic Moon-forming collision couldn't have altered Earth's cooling stage for very long.
Space is cold.
Even with the Sun to provide a steady source of surface heat, Earth's battered and volcano-strewn surface,
along with its equally battered and volcano-strewn Moon, quickly cooled and formed a hardened black surface.
That veneer of black basalt provided an ever-thickening lid on what was a vast subsurface ocean of turbulent molten rock.
This magma ocean lacked the rigidity to support any significant surface topology.
There were no large mountain ranges, nor were there any deep valleys.
Indeed, for a time, Earth was probably a more perfect sphere than any object in our present solar system,
with the possible exception of ice and ocean-girdled Europa.
The principal surficial scars on primordial cooling Earth were impact craters and volcanic cones,
which might have generated a total relief of a kilometer or two.
The fast rotating Earth also sported a rotation-indulged bulge at the equator,
and a corresponding flattening at the poles.
And that bulge is much larger than that of present-day Earth.
So Earth's inevitable chemical differentiation was a direct consequence of two complementary chemical processes.
First was making elements, the cosmochemical process of nucleosynthesis.
As we saw in Lecture 3, big stars make all the elements of the periodic table,
everything heavier than hydrogen and helium.
The second chemical process is making the rocks, or petrology.
It may be hardwired into our universe that a half dozen or so of the more than 100 known chemical elements
were destined to become dominant in rocky planets.
We still have a lot to learn about rocky planets, but if we focus on Earth, there are six dominant elements,
and their atomic numbers are 8, that's oxygen, 12, magnesium, number 13, aluminum, 14, silicon,
20 is calcium, and 26 is iron.
What about our solar system?
If we ignore hydrogen, helium, and neon, the six dominant elements on Earth account for about three of every four atoms in the solar system.
Moreover, much of the rest is, in proportions even greater than for Earth itself,
carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur, each of which are critical for life.
And if we focus on just the inner terrestrial planets, where most of the volatiles have been stripped off,
the big six elements have an even more important role.
They make up a whopping 97% of Earth's mass, just as they do for the mass of Mercury, for Venus, for Mars, and Earth's big moon as well.
For Earth, the big six ranked by their contribution to the mass of the planet are iron and oxygen, each 30%,
silicon and magnesium, 15% each, and a little less than 2% each for aluminum, calcium,
and also nickel, though almost all the nickel is in Earth's core, so we can ignore that for now.
We can also count by the number of atoms each element contributes.
Looked at in terms of numbers of atoms, oxygen is really the king accounting for almost half the atoms of Earth.
Magnesium, silicon, and iron follow with roughly 15% each.
Then aluminum is only about one-tenth this common at 1.5%, and calcium is even less, roughly 1% or so.
So although I call these elements the big six, you could also think of them as the big four plus two.
At this point, we've met each of Earth's six dominant elements in various contexts, from nucleosynthesis,
from the ER minerals, from the goldsmith classification of elements, from Earth's differentiation into core, mantle, and crust.
Each of these elements has played key roles throughout Earth's history, and each has an important chemical story.
Chemical bonding lies at the heart of these stories, so I want to take a step back and look at the chemical character
and bonding strategies of each of these six elements.
We've seen that the key to understanding chemical bonding is the arrangement of electrons about an atom.
Two atoms will form a chemical bond when they're diffuse clouds of electrons contact and interact by shuffling electrons to form a more stable arrangement.
And as we've seen, the most stable electron arrangements have magic numbers of electrons.
Two, ten, eighteen, thirty-six electrons.
These are inert gases, the elements in the last column of the periodic table.
And those gases are inert or noble for precisely the reason that they already have magic numbers of electrons that correspond to completely filled electron shells.
There's simply no need for those elements to take electrons or give away electrons, or to share electrons with any other atoms.
And that's the key to chemical bonding.
An exchange of electrons must occur as some atoms give away electrons and other atoms accept electrons.
So let's start with oxygen, which is far and away the most abundant element in Earth's crust and mantle.
On the periodic table, oxygen lies in the eighth position, just two places to the left of the inert gas neon.
Oxygen wants two more electrons. In fact, it plays the role of Earth's most voracious electron acceptor.
That's because every oxygen atom holds eight protons in its nucleus. That's the definition of oxygen.
Those eight protons have eight positive charges, which are usually balanced by eight negative electrons.
But ten is the nearest magic number, and that means oxygen is constantly on the lookout for two extra electrons.
Given our dependence on oxygen, it's odd to realize that element eight is one of the most chemically reactive and corrosive gases in nature.
Oxygen reacts violently with many carbon-rich chemicals, and we call that reaction fire.
Oxygen also turns shiny iron metal into a pile of rust, and then quickly breaks down many minerals in a purely chemical context.
Oxygen is just this nasty stuff.
There's another common misperception about oxygen.
Most of us naturally think of oxygen's primary role as an essential life-giving part of the atmosphere.
In fact, oxygen is only about a fifth of the atmosphere. Almost 80% is nitrogen.
But oxygen in the atmosphere is a relatively recent development.
For more than half of Earth's history, the atmosphere had virtually no persistent oxygen whatsoever.
And even today, with a lot of oxygen now in the atmosphere, 99.9999% of Earth's oxygen is locked into the minerals and rocks of the crust and mantle.
It's mind-boggling to think that when you hike up the trail of a tall mountain or walk across an outcrop of hard rock,
most of what you're walking on is atoms of oxygen.
And when you lie on a sandy beach, two out of every three atoms that support your weight are oxygen atoms.
Oxygen could not play such a critical chemical role as an electron acceptor in Earth's outer layers,
were not for several kinds of atoms that are equally eager to give away or share their electrons.
In fact, the five other elements of the Big Six are all electron donors.
The most enthusiastic of these electron donors is silicon, which accounts for about one in every four atoms in Earth's crust and mantle.
On the periodic table, silicon is in the 14th spot just below carbon.
That means silicon has 14 protons in its nucleus, a charge of plus 14, which can be balanced by 14 negative electrons.
14 is not a magic number.
10 or 18, equally distant from 14, are magic numbers.
As a result, silicon has to form chemical bonds.
As we saw in lecture 13, silicon adopts a hybrid strategy.
You can imagine silicon giving up the outer four of its electrons to become a plus four silicon ion.
In Earth's crust and mantle, it's common for two oxygen atoms to accept those four extra electrons.
So it's not unreasonable to think of silicon oxygen bonds as having a significant ionic character,
with silicon a plus four ion bounded to two oxygen minus two ions.
However, detailed experimental and theoretical studies of how electrons are distributed in such silicon oxygen bonds
reveal a significant amount of electron sharing.
That's what happens in carbon bonding, where carbon typically shares four electrons with four neighboring atoms.
As a consequence, the silicon oxygen bond always has a component of covalency as well as ionicity.
In any event, resilient silicon oxygen bonds are found in almost every crustal and mantle rock and in the majority of minerals.
The classic example is tough, long-lasting quartz.
That's SiO2, with a two to one mixture of oxygen atoms to silicon.
Translucent quartz grains weather out of many kinds of rocks, and they accumulate in uncountable numbers to form the tan beaches of the world.
And I'm sure you've seen those beautiful, faceted, six-sided crystals of quartz that are often sold in stores as power crystals.
The next time you see such a crystal, remember the two out of every three atoms you're holding is oxygen.
One of the reasons that silicon oxygen bond is so important is that materials with silicon oxygen bonds are Earth's most common materials,
both in total volume and in the sheer number of different species, more than 1,300 and counting since Moore discovered almost every month.
These minerals collectively are called silicates.
They're richly varied in their atomic architectures and in their physical and chemical properties.
That's because the silicon oxygen bond is so versatile in the way it can connect to other atoms.
The silicates include red garnets, green olivines, blue topaz, all important enough gemstones to rise to the status of birthstones for January, August, and December.
In many common silicates, we find a small cluster of one central silicon atom and four oxygen atoms in a tiny little pyramid arrangement called a tetrahedron.
In these minerals, the silicate tetrahedron is surrounded by other electron-donating elements from other big six members, aluminum, magnesium, calcium, iron.
Minerals with this kind of individual silica tetrahedra are called ortho-silicates, and they occur in most of the major rock types that form Earth's mantle and crust.
Now, it's also possible for silica tetrahedra to link corner to corner in a long chain-like arrangement.
The commonest examples of chain silicates are two important groups, pyroxenes, which we've met in the guise of enstitite, one of those ur minerals, and amphiboles, which are important hydrous or water-bearing minerals.
Chain silicates tend to form elongated crystals, sometime in the extreme needle-like or fibrous habit of some notorious forms of asbestos, which are also silicates.
In chain silicates, the strong, straight chains of silica tetrahedra dictate the crystal shapes.
A fun variant of this chain-like structure are the ring silicates, which as the name implies have little rings of corner-linked tetrahedra.
The commonest ring silicates are the gemstones tourmaline and beryl. Beryl in its blue or green form are called aquamarine and emerald respectively, so they're pretty valuable.
Silica tetrahedra can also link by their corners in two dimensions to create thin, flat, and very strong layers of silicon and oxygen atoms.
The resulting minerals called sheet or layer silicates are epitomized by the mica group of minerals, including the aluminum-rich mica called muscovite.
After big deposits near Moscow and Russia, big transparent mica sheets, some more than a foot across, were used as windows at a time when glass was very expensive.
The flat, reflective surfaces of mica often add a reflective sparkle to common rocks.
For example, the metamorphic rock called mica schist.
Look for that effect the next time you're driving by road cuts in New England, where mica schist is particularly common.
Other important layer silicates include all the clay minerals.
Now, the reason clay feels so slick when it's wet is all the little silicate layers line up and slide over each other.
And then we come to the extremely important and abundant framework silicates, with three-dimensional frameworks of silica tetrahedra in which every corner of each tetrahedron is linked to another.
The most common framework silicates include quartz, which we just met as SiO2, and the ubiquitous feldspar mineral group.
The feldspar's are a diverse group of aluminum silicates that collectively are by far the most abundant minerals in Earth's crust.
By the way, most clear glass including everyday window glass is also a framework silicate, but without a regular crystal structure.
All of these minerals and glass with a rigid three-dimensional network of silicon and oxygen atoms form relatively hard and resistant grains.
That's why most beach sand is an accumulation of grains of framework silicates.
Okay, let's move on in our survey of Earth's big six elements to aluminum, which is found to silicon's immediate left in the periodic table.
That's element 13, aluminum, and its bonding strategy should be clear to you by now.
At position 13, aluminum has three more electrons than ideal, which is 10.
So it serves the role as another important electron donor in Earth's crust and mantle.
Aluminum is a lot less abundant than oxygen or silicon, only about one in 20 atoms of the average mantle in crust or aluminum.
In spite of that relative scarcity, aluminum plays unique structural roles in many of the most common minerals.
In the pyroxene chain siligrate group, in mica and clay layer silicate groups, and in feldspar and other framework silicates.
By the way, that word feldspar originally meant something like field rock without ore.
So the name tells you to expect a lot of feldspar, the most abundant aluminum bearing minerals on the surface of Earth.
Now for aluminum to give away three electrons, it requires one atom of oxygen to take up two electrons, and there's still one electron left over.
That means the common aluminum oxide mineral corundum, one of the air minerals, has a two to three atom ratio, yielding the chemical formula Al2O3.
And most rocks and minerals aluminum occurs with silicon and other electron donors.
However, in those special and rare rocks where aluminum and oxygen still bond strictly to each other to form corundum.
And when you have trace amounts of much rare elements, titanium or chromium, and they enter that corundum crystal structure, the results are the precious gemstones, sapphire and ruby.
If we move to the left of aluminum, one space we come to magnesium, element 12, which accounts for approximately one in every six atoms of the crust and mantle.
As we've seen, every magnesium atom wants to get rid of two electrons.
So it easily bonds in a one to one ratio with oxygen.
However, it turns out that the pure magnesium oxide, MGO, or the mineral pericles, is quite rare in nature.
That's because magnesium tends to join with silicon and other elements to form many of the common, silicate minerals in both the crust and the mantle.
Indeed, magnesium silicates are estimated to form about half of Earth's volume, mostly in the most abundant mantle minerals.
The olivine forsterite, the pyroxene, ends to tight.
The garnet pyrope, that's a magnesium aluminum silicate and very dense high pressure equivalents when the Earth are also very, very important.
The fifth of the big six elements is calcium, which represents about 6% of atoms in the crust and mantle.
Calcium appears at position 20 in the periodic table, so it lies immediately below magnesium.
That means that calcium is somewhat larger than magnesium, but in other respect, it's magnesium's chemical twin.
Recall that guiding principle of the periodic table.
Elements that lie in the same vertical column usually have similar chemical properties.
So calcium, like magnesium, is two electrons away from a magic number, in this case, 18.
Calcium wants to get rid of two electrons, and so, like magnesium, it bonds to oxygen in a one-to-one ratio to make calcium oxide CaO, the mineral lime.
You may have purchased lime to spread in your lawn, it's a source of calcium in the soil.
Also, like magnesium, it's rare to find pure calcium oxide in nature.
Calcium almost always combines with silicon and other elements, often as a substitute for magnesium in minerals like olivine, pyroxene, mica, or garnet.
And finally, finally we come to the sixth iron, which is by far and away the most versatile of the big six elements.
That's because each of the other five elements, oxygen, silicon, aluminum, magnesium, calcium, plays one and only one dominant role in the chemistry of rocks and minerals.
They are all quintessential lithophile elements that adopt ionic bonds and concentrate in the crust and mantle.
Oxygen almost always plays the role of an electron acceptor, while the others are almost always electron donors.
Iron, by contrast, embraces three very different chemical responsibilities.
The varied roles of iron are manifest in earth's layered structure.
In the crust and mantle, iron accounts for about one in ten of the atoms.
But in the metallic core, more than nine out of ten atoms is iron.
This remarkable difference arises from the fact that iron is element 26 in the periodic table.
So it's rather distant from any magic number. The closest are 18 and 36.
There's no way that iron can give away eight electrons, much less add ten electrons, so it has to compromise.
Often, iron prefers to remain a metal and form metallic bonds with itself or other ciderophile elements.
But iron sometimes winds up donating a few electrons to form ionic bonds, like a lithophile element.
For example, in many minerals like olivine or pyroxy, iron acts just like magnesium.
It yields two electrons at a time to become a two plus ion.
Iron in this divalent state is very similar in size and properties to magnesium, just a bit larger.
Divalent iron lends a distinctive greenish or bluish color to many chemical compounds, including many of the commonest minerals.
That characteristic bright green color of the iron-bearing olivine forsterite, a gemstone.
It arises from a small amount of divalent iron in solid solution.
That's also the cause of the bluish green color of your veins, which carry oxygen-starved blood.
That's blood with divalent iron, which chemistry books also refer to sometimes as ferrous iron.
Divalent iron bonds to oxygen in the same one-to-one ratio as magnesium and calcium.
And because the bonding behavior of divalent iron is similar to magnesium, we see again and again
that these elements substitute freely for each other in Earth's commonest crust and mantle minerals.
Our old friends olivine, garnet, pyroxene, mica, for example, the current variants that show the entire range of magnesium to iron ratio.
These minerals display telltale colors too, from colorless n-members with 100% magnesium to dark-hued n-members with 100% iron.
And iron is by no means restricted to its divalent state.
In the presence of an excess of electronic scepter elements, and especially if there's excess oxygen as provided by our oxygen-rich atmosphere,
then iron commonly donates a third electron to become an ion with a plus-3 charge, a trivalent ion.
Now, trivalent iron often adds a characteristic brick-red color to its mineral host.
Red rust, red soils, red bricks, not to mention oxygen-rich red blood.
They owe their distinctive colors to trivalent iron, another word for which is ferric iron.
In many ways, trivalent iron atoms mimic aluminum atoms, which are only slightly smaller and also occur in that trivalent state.
Like aluminum, trivalent iron combines with oxygen in a 2-3 ratio to form Fe2O3.
That's the common mineral hematite, and that name hematite comes from Hema, which is the Greek root for blood.
Many of Earth's most abundant minerals, including garnets, amphibals, pyroxenes, mycas, they have variants in which aluminum and trivalent iron occur in solid solution,
and you can find almost any aluminum to iron ratio from colorless n-members with 100% aluminum to reddish n-members with 100% iron.
In many ways, iron in both its divalent and trivalent forms behaves just like a lithophile element, just like the other members of the Big Six.
Iron differs, however, in the exceptionally useful ability to switch back and forth from plus 2 to the plus 3 state.
This characteristic is especially important for life's origins and evolution, as we'll see when we discuss biomolecules in lecture 27.
But iron has one more critical role to play in Earth. Iron can rather easily form a metal.
All the chemical bonds we've examined so far in this lecture involve exchanges of electrons, silicon, aluminum, magnesium, calcium, iron.
All donate electrons while oxygen accepts them. This exchange of electrons is mutually beneficial.
It causes each atom to become electrically charged, and ion.
The consequence, ionic bonds dominate in Earth's crust and mantle.
Metal adopts a rather different bonding strategy.
Every atom gives up one or more electrons, what are known as delocalized electrons to become positively charged.
Those rejected electrons hang around to form a sea of negative charge that holds all the positive atoms together.
A metal crystal is thus something like a regimented array of little BBs, those are the atoms, in molasses, which is analogous to that sea of electrons.
Iron metal can be pictured at the atomic scale as a collection of iron atoms that share all the delocalized electrons.
The consequences of this BB in molasses arrangement are profound.
First, the delocalized electrons are free to wander through the metal, consequently metals are excellent electrical conductors.
So electricity is simply the flow of electrons, typically in a metal wire.
Materials with ionic bonds, by contrast, have every electron locked into place so electricity can't flow.
A second consequence of metallic bonding is that metals are usually able to bend instead of shatter.
That's because the atoms in the electron sea can be moved around without disrupting the overall collective strength.
That behavior is different from the brittle fracture of most rocks and minerals.
You may be thinking iron is not the only big six element that comes in the metallic state.
After all, aluminum cans are commonplace and magnesium and silicon metal both have critical technological roles.
But metallic aluminum, magnesium and silicon are all marvels of the modern age.
It takes a lot of energy to separate those elements from oxygen, so they almost never form metals.
But iron is different.
Unlike silicon, aluminum, magnesium or calcium, iron commonly bonds to other electron acceptors, especially sulfur.
Fools gold is just one example.
Iron also readily forms the dense metal that sinks to the center of planets and forms their massive cores.
In short, iron is one of the few elements that commonly acts as a lithophile, a sitterophile, and a calcophile element.
So with that introduction to the big six elements, you know much more about our planet.
In the next lecture, we'll see how those elements combined to form peridotite and basalt, the two most common rocks on the young earth.
