It has been said that the past is prologue to the future, and in many aspects of nature
and society, that's certainly true. But does this aphorism really apply to Earth?
On the one hand, certain kinds of change have happened over and over again,
earthquakes and volcanoes, mountain building and erosion,
and the majestic plate tectonic cycles that form and fragment supercontinents have occurred
for billions of years. And they'll continue for billions of years into the future.
Slow changes will continue. For example, the moon will continue to move very slowly away from Earth.
Some mountains, like the Himalayas, will continue to grow taller, while others gradually erode away.
But other key events in Earth history are unique and irreversible.
The big thwack that formed the moon, the origin of life about 4 billion years ago,
and the initial rise of atmospheric oxygen about 2.4 billion years ago.
So it's reasonable to ask what's in store for Earth in the future.
In the next two lectures, I want to explore some of the fascinating
transformational events that we can predict will probably affect our planet in the next several billion years.
In some respects, it's easy to guess what's coming,
as in the past, Earth will always be a planet of incessant change.
For a time, the global average climate will become warmer,
and then it will become cooler, and a cycle that repeats over and over again.
It's certain that ice ages will return once more, as will times when the ice retreats,
and mid-latitudes experience tropical extremes.
Without doubt, plate tectonics will continue to shuffle continents, while oceans open and close again.
Now, the rate of plate tectonic processes might gradually slow down a bit,
as our planet cools, but the plates will still move.
And just as we've had giant asteroid impacts and mega-volcanoes in the past,
these intermittent catastrophes will once again disrupt life.
Nevertheless, some changes will be new, and many of them will be irreversible.
In particular, there are inevitable transformations involving our sun.
As we'll see, those changes will ultimately affect Earth's fate.
Many details of Earth's future are probably unknowable.
Nevertheless, we can make predictions based on our planet's rich history, coupled with natural laws.
I'll begin with the long view into distant times, and then focus closer and closer to our modern era.
Let's begin by peering five billion years into the future, at a time when the sun has entered its
old age, and Earth will be a very different place.
Astrophysicists tell us with confidence that the sun is almost halfway through its roughly
10 billion year lifetime.
For four and a half billion years, our solar system's central star is shown steadily,
while getting slightly brighter through time as it consumes its vast store of hydrogen fuel.
This stable state results from the steady process of hydrogen burning,
by which hydrogen atoms subjected to tremendous temperature and pressure fuse to make helium
plus energy.
For perhaps another four or five billion years, a doubling of the age of the solar system,
the sun will continue to generate nuclear energy by this stable process.
That's exactly what most stars do most of the time.
Hydrogen burning can't go on forever.
Eventually, the hydrogen fuel has to run out.
Some stars smaller than the sun just sort of peter out when they reach this stage and never do anything very dramatic.
They eventually cool and shrink in size, while emitting much less energy than before.
Had the sun been such a relatively cool red dwarf star, Earth's ultimate fate would probably be to
slowly get colder, eventually freezing solid.
Life on such a world could survive most likely for a long time, maybe tens of billions of years.
But it would be limited to a few hardy microbes deep underground where liquid water could persist.
That's not the fate in store for Earth, because the sun won't die in that gradual way.
It turns out that the sun is large enough to have a nuclear backup plan.
One way to think about stars is that they must balance two opposing forces.
On the one hand, gravity pulls the star's great mass inward to make as small a sphere as possible.
At the same time, nuclear reactions, something analogous to a continuous explosion of hydrogen bombs,
push outwards and try to make the star bigger.
The sun is now in the midst of its reliable hydrogen burning phase, so it has about a stable diameter 870,000 miles or so.
That size has persisted, and will continue to persist for a total span close to 10 billion years.
But here's the catch.
The sun is large enough so that when the hydrogen burning phase ends,
a new much more rapid and energetic helium burning phase will begin.
Helium, which was formed as the byproduct of hydrogen fusion reactions, can itself be a nuclear fuel.
Helium fuses to make other helium atoms to make the element carbon.
These reactions will keep the sun going for another few hundreds of millions of years,
but with rather startling consequences for the inner planets.
As it enters the helium burning phase, the sun will swell larger and larger like a crazy super heated balloon.
This solar expansion results from the outward push of nuclear reactions,
overcoming the gravitational inward pull.
The resulting red giant star will literally pulsate, getting larger, then smaller, then larger again.
The sun will swell by tens of millions of miles, expanding past the orbit of little mercury,
and thus engulfing the innermost planet.
Then the sun will swell some more past what is the orbit of our neighbor Venus,
probably swallowing that sister world as well.
In fact, by the best estimates of astrophysicists,
and these are estimates that are buttressed by many astronomical observations of other red giant stars,
the sun will swell to 200 times its present diameter.
That's even past the orbit of Earth.
These events will be hard on planet Earth.
Those exact details of what will happen are somewhat murky,
and they depend on the details of the sun's end game.
According to some scenarios, the red giant sun will simply expand to overwhelm and swallow Earth,
which will then vaporize in the solar atmosphere and be no more.
Other astrophysical models have the sun shedding more than a third of its present mass
in solar winds of unimaginable ferocity.
And if that happens, then, as the sun becomes less massive and its gravitational pull gets weaker,
Earth's orbit will get correspondingly larger.
Earth will then become the innermost planet.
Of course, if Earth isn't swallowed by the expanding sun, then its surface will be scorched,
and most near-surface water will escape into space.
It's very likely that a sparse subsurface microbial ecosystem could persevere for another billion years.
But being the planet closest to the sun, Earth would be very different.
But please don't worry.
We're talking four or five billion years from now.
And if our descendants are still around,
they will have long since moved outward to colonize other Earth-like planets.
And what about closer to today?
What will Earth be like in two billion years?
And here, once again, we have to turn to astrophysicists
to calculate the gradual changes that the sun will undergo.
Ever so slowly, even in its present, calm, hydrogen-burning state, the sun is getting hotter.
It's estimated that in the beginning, four and a half billion years ago,
the sun shone with only 70% of its present light.
Fast forward, more than two billion years,
and the Great Oxidation Event 2.4 billion years ago found the sun shiny
with perhaps 85% of today's intensity.
Today, the sun is significantly brighter than that,
and a billion years from now, the sun will be brighter still.
And there's nothing to worry about here.
For a time, perhaps for many hundreds of millions of years,
Earth's negative feedbacks will likely moderate the changing solar output.
For example, more heat means more evaporation,
and evaporation produces more clouds,
and clouds reflect more sunlight back into space.
More heat also results in faster weathering of rocks,
which consumes more carbon dioxide, which lowers the amount of greenhouse gases.
And so these and other negative feedback loops may keep Earth habitable for a long time to come.
Of course, if the sun gets too hot for Earth's gravity,
then there will come a tipping point.
Our smaller planetary neighbor Mars, with its much weaker gravity,
appears to have experienced this scenario billions of years ago.
But almost all of its near-surface water was lost to space,
even though Mars is farther from the sun, and the sun was dimmer at the time.
A billion years from now, the increased heat from the sun may cause
Earth's oceans to evaporate at an increasing rate,
perhaps turning the atmosphere into a perpetual sauna.
If that happens, then ice caps and glaciers will melt,
as even the poles will become tropical zones.
I suspect that life will thrive at least for a time.
In such a hot-house environment.
More life may live below the surface.
And if human descendants learn a few geoengineering tricks,
it's very possible that a warming sun will act as an ever more bountiful energy source.
Nevertheless, as the sun continues to emit more and more radiation,
and more water vapor enters the atmosphere,
it's likely that the greenhouse effect will intensify.
Hydrogen may be lost to space at ever-increasing rates,
and that could gradually dry out the planet.
By some pessimistic estimates,
all of Earth's oceans will have dried up in about two billion years.
Like Mars, Earth's surface will be utterly barren.
Surface life will be on the edge of total extinction.
Still, we're looking two billion years into the future.
There's literally eons of time to adapt.
Let's now think about the globe 250 million years from now.
Projections into the less remote future paint a benign picture
of a dynamic yet relatively safe planet.
Looking forward a few hundred million years,
the past is indeed the key to understanding the future.
At the global scale, plate tectonics will continue to play the central role
in changing Earth's geography.
Today we live in a time when the continents are pretty much scattered across the globe,
from poles to equator, and in both hemispheres.
But all that's temporary.
These land masses are constantly in motion
at rates of roughly an inch or two per year,
and that adds up to a thousand miles of motion every 60 million years.
Looking at the details of ocean floor basalts,
their positions, and their ages,
we can establish rather precise vectors for every land mass.
Basalt near the mid-ocean ridges is quite young,
just a few million years at most.
While basalt at continental margins,
the subduction zones may be more than 200 million years old.
So it's a fairly simple matter to take all those ocean floor ages
and play the plate tectonic tape backwards in time.
And from that information,
it's also possible to project current plate motions
many million years into the future.
When geologists undertake this exercise,
they find that all the continents are heading for another collision.
In roughly a quarter billion years from now,
most of Earth's land mass may once again form one giant supercontinent.
This imagined land mass already has a name,
Novopangia.
Nevertheless, the exact arrangement of that future supercontinent
is still a matter of much debate.
Assembling Novopangia turns out to be a tricky game.
It's relatively easy to take today's continental movements
and project them 10 or 20 million years down the road.
In that interval, the Atlantic will have widened by several hundred miles
and the Pacific will have shrunk by an equal amount.
Australia will have continued moving north toward South Asia
and Antarctica will have continued shifting slightly away from the South Pole,
also in the direction of South Asia.
Africa is also on the move with two big changes.
On the one hand, it's inching northward to close off the Mediterranean Sea.
In a few tens of millions of years, Africa will have collided with Southern Europe
in the process of pushing up a Himalayan-sized mountain range that will dwarf the Alps.
Africa is also splitting in two, as a rift occurs in the northeast part of the continent.
It's likely that the map of the world 20 million years from now will look familiar,
but skewed.
And extending this approach as far as 100 million years into the future is fairly safe.
Most experts come up with more or less the same geographies of a future world
where the Atlantic Ocean has overtaken the Pacific as Earth's largest ocean.
But from 100 million years on, the models diverge.
One school of thought called extraversion assumes that the Atlantic
will continue opening and the Americas will eventually collide with Asia,
as well as Australia and Antarctica, which will have previously collided with Southeast Asia.
According to this extrovert model of supercontinent assembly,
North America sweeps in from the east to close the Pacific and impact Japan,
while South America wraps around clockwise to the southeast to snuggle against equatorial
Antarctica.
And it's pretty amazing how all those continental pieces could fit together to form
nobopengia.
It's one immense land mass stretching from east to west along the equator.
The key assumption of this extraversion model of supercontinent formation is that the deep
mantle convection cells that underlight plate motions will continue more or less as they do today.
But there's an alternative view called introversion that takes the opposite point of view
by noting past cycles of opening and closing the Atlantic Ocean.
Persuasive global reconstructions for the past billion years revealed that the Atlantic
or equivalent ancient oceans positioned between Americas and Europe plus Africa
has opened and closed three times on a cycle of a few hundred million years.
That result suggests variable and episodic mantle convection.
Paleo-magnetic studies reveal that the movements of Laurentia and other continents about 600
million years ago formed the Atlantic's predecessor.
That ocean closed about 400 million years ago at the assembly of the great supercontinent
of Pangea, and about 250 million years when Pangea began to split apart,
the Atlantic Ocean was born.
According to advocates of this introversion hypothesis, the now widening Atlantic
will eventually follow the same pattern.
It will slow, stop, and reverse in about 100 million years.
Then, some 200 million years later, the Americas will once again collide with Europe
and Africa to form a new mountain belt.
At the same time, Australia and Antarctica will have collided with Southeast Asia to
complete the future supercontinent of Amasia.
This great landmass is predicted to be shaped something like a sideways L.
Note that Amasia uses the exact same puzzle pieces as Noah Pangea,
but this time with the Americas forming the western side.
The time being, both of these clever supercontinent models,
extroversion and introversion, have their proponents, and both are still in play.
Whatever the outcome of this friendly debate, everyone agrees that Earth's map,
250 million years from now, will feature a new supercontinent.
Now, let's set our sights closer and peer a mere 50 million years into the future,
and talk about probabilities.
A recent scientific survey that estimated how people are most likely to die,
rated asteroid impacts pretty low.
It's something like one chance in 100,000 that you'll be killed by an object zooming in from space.
Statistically, that's about the same probability as death by
lightning or by a tsunami, but there's an obvious flaw in this kind of risk comparison.
In the United States alone, lightning kills one person at a time
about 60 times per year, year in and year out,
and with roughly the same number every day killed worldwide.
And killer tsunamis occur every few years.
Truly, big asteroid impacts by contrast probably haven't killed anyone in thousands of years,
even though smaller chunks are falling to Earth all the time.
But the chance is always there that on one really bad day, one little thwack
could kill almost everyone on Earth all at once.
In spite of all the movies that exploit this slim possibility,
you shouldn't lose sleep over this. Chances are that we're safe,
as will be the next 100 generations. Nevertheless, we can be absolutely
certain that another big asteroid impact of the dinosaur-killing variety is coming
someday, somewhere. Given the best estimates of what's happened in the past,
we can be almost certain that in the next 50 million years,
Earth will suffer at least one really big hit. It's simply a matter of time,
and of probabilities. Most likely culprits are the so-called
Earth-crossing asteroids, or potentially hazardous asteroids,
which have elliptical orbits that cross the plane of Earth's more circular path around the sun.
Astronomers have documented at least 300 of these potential killers,
and it's known that some of them will pass uncomfortably close to Earth in the next few decades.
You may have seen the occasional news stories. On February 22, 1995, a just-discovered asteroid
with the benign name of 1995 CR whizzed by within a few Earth-moon distances,
which in the context of space is a near-miss. On September 29, 2004, the three-mile diameter
asteroid Tutautus passed even closer, and in 2029, asteroid Apophis, a 900-foot diameter rock,
is predicted to cross much closer still, well inside the Moon's orbit, and that close encounter
will irrevocably alter the Apophis orbit and possibly bring it even closer to a direct hit
in the future. And those are just the ones we spotted. For every known Earth-crossing asteroid,
there are probably a dozen or more yet to be spotted, and when an asteroid is seen on a collision
course, the chances are it will be much too close to do much about it. Indeed, if Earth is the target,
we may only have a few days' warning to settle our affairs. It's just a matter of probabilities.
Almost every year, Earth is struck by a 20-foot diameter rock, though most objects that size
explode and fragment into little pieces before hitting the ground. Bigger objects are less
frequent. A rock 100 feet or more arrives about once every thousand years, and when it does,
it causes significant local damage. In June of 1908, a rock almost that large leveled a swath of
forest near the Tunguska River in Russia. When we get to asteroids a half-mile in diameter,
we're talking major destructive potential. Such an object hits Earth on average about once every
half-million years, and devastating asteroids as large as three miles in diameter may arrive about
once every 10 million years. The consequences of the next big event will depend on the size
and location of the impact. A 10-mile diameter boulder will devastate the globe just about
anywhere it hits. By contrast, the dinosaur-killing asteroid 65 million years ago is estimated to
have been about six miles across. If a 10-mile object hits an ocean, which is a 70 percent
probability given the distribution of land and sea, that all but Earth's highest mountain peaks
will be swept clean by immense globe-destroying waves, it's likely that nothing on land will survive
up to a few thousand feet above sea level. Every coastal city will utterly disappear.
It will be a big mess, though life in the oceans will carry on.
If, on the other hand, a 10-mile diameter asteroid hits land, the immediate devastation may be
somewhat more localized. Everything within a thousand miles will be obliterated. Massifiers
will likely sweep across whatever continent is the unlucky target. For a short time of days or weeks,
more distant lands may be spared that violence.
The problem is that such an impact will vaporize immense quantities of rock and soil,
sending sun-obscuring dust clouds into the high atmosphere, or perhaps a year or more.
Photosynthesis will all but shut down. Plant life will be devastated and the food chain will
collapse. A few humans might survive the horror, but civilization as we know it would probably be
irrevocably altered. Smaller impacts will naturally cause less death and destruction,
but any asteroid over a few hundred feet, whether it hits the land or the sea,
will cause a natural disaster greater than anything humans have ever experienced.
And that raises the question, what should we do? On the one hand, we could ignore the
threat is too remote, too insignificant in a world that has so many more immediately pressing
problems. In any case, what could we do to divert a big rock?
I'm sure that many of you remember the late Carl Sagan, who was a professor at Cornell University
and arguably the most recognized, charismatic, and influential spokesperson for science in
the second half of the 20th century. Sagan was the star of the epic TV science series
Cosmos, and he thought a lot about space and his exploration. In particular, he thought a lot about
asteroids and he advocated focused international action.
In the Cosmos series, he told the tale of the monks of Canterbury Cathedral, who reported
observing a violent explosion on the moon in the summer of 1178. That explosion, if it happened,
would have been an asteroid impact. And the fact that it could occur so close to us
less than a thousand years ago is telling. Countless millions of people would die if such
an impact occurred on Earth. So what can we do? The obvious first step is to look as hard as we
can for Earth crossing asteroids. We have to know the enemy. That requires dedicated telescopes
that are automated with digital processors to locate the big rocks, to plot their orbits,
to predict their future trajectories. And that's a relatively cheap thing to do,
and it's already underway at a small scale. The more could certainly be done.
A more difficult question is what we should do if we find a large rock that will smash into us in a
few years. Asteroid deflection is the most obvious strategy. Even a small nudge by a rocket engine
or well-placed nuclear explosion, if it's initiated early enough, can shift an asteroid's orbit
sufficiently to change a collision course to a near miss. Carl Sagan argued such a possibility,
even if remote, is reason enough for a robust program of space exploration. In his view,
the survival of our human species is our highest ethical responsibility. And if there's an obvious
threat, we have to confront it. There is another option as well, and that's colonization of other
worlds. To Sagan, it boiled down to a choice between space flight or extinction. For humans to survive
in the long run, we have to journey outward to colonize neighboring worlds. First will come
bases on the Moon, though the Moon will probably always be a hostile place to live and work.
Mars is the next obvious colony. The red planet has lots of water. You can grow crops and produce
oxygen and hydrogen fuel. A Mars colony won't be easy or cheap, and no one expects Mars to
become a thriving colony anytime soon, but establishing a permanent Mars base and perhaps
eventually terraforming the planet may well be an essential step in our species' evolution.
It's no secret that two obstacles will delay and maybe even prevent the establishment of a Mars base.
Money is the first obstacle. It will cost many tens of billions of dollars minimum
to design and implement a Mars landing, and that's beyond even the most optimistic NASA budget.
It's possible it could be done with a cooperative global effort,
but no international program at that scale has ever been attempted.
The survival of Martian astronauts is an equally daunting challenge. You simply cannot ensure a
safe round trip to Mars. It's not just the danger of meteorite bullets and unpredictable solar bursts
of lethal, penetrating radiation. No rocket technology on the books would allow a spaceship
to carry enough fuel to get to Mars and make it back along with the crew and supplies. The fuel
itself requires a huge amount of fuel to take off and land. Some inventors have proposed
processing Martian water to synthesize fuel for the return trip, but that technology is only a dream
and probably a long way off. Okay, a lot of us in astrobiology think the more logical option is a
one-way trip, even though that idea flies in the face of NASA traditions. Nevertheless,
a one-way expedition with years of supplies instead of fuel, with much sturdier shelters,
with a big greenhouse and fast-growing plants, with oxygen and water, and with tools to extract
more life-giving resources from the red planet, it might just survive. Of course, it would be
dangerous. Cumulative radiation is a concern, for example, though the Curiosity rover reports
that radiation levels on Mars are comparable to those on the International Space Station,
which is significantly less than the radiation during the deep space journey just to get to Mars.
But think back to the pioneering human voyages of discovery, the circumnavigation of Magellan
in 1519 to 1521, the westward explorations of Lewis and Clark in 1804 to 1806, and the hazardous
polar expeditions of Perry and Amundsen early in the 20th century. Those exploits were incredibly
dangerous, too, and lots of explorers died in the process. But have we as humans lost our desire
to take such risks? I think if NASA sent out a call for volunteers for a one-way trip to Mars,
thousands of scientists would sign up in a heartbeat. Commercial ventures know how to sell
this kind of idea, so it's even conceivable that has happened with the race to sequence
the human genome that private investors may provide backing for the first people to land on Mars.
So peering into the future, we can be pretty confident that 50 million years from now,
Earth will still be a vibrant living world. Our planet will still have blue oceans and green
continents. Continents and oceans will have shifted, of course, but still will be recognizable.
The fate of our human species is a lot less certain. 50 million years is 20 times longer
than the time from the first Homo species to now, so it's certainly possible that in 50 million years
all descendants of Homo sapiens will be extinct. If we don't evolve into another species,
then 50 million years is more than sufficient time to erase almost every trace of our resonance
on the planet. Every city will have eroded away. Every highway and every monument will have been
buried or weathered to nothing millions of years earlier. An alien archaeologist or paleontologist
would have to search for a long time to find the fossilized traces of our vanished species.
Of course, it's also possible that humans will survive and will evolve if we move outward to
colonize neighboring planets and perhaps eventually planets orbiting neighboring stars.
Then new species of Homo will appear, and if our descendants make it into space,
and if they preserve a record of the deep past of human origins,
then Earth most surely will be treasured as never before.
Earth might become a natural preserve, a global museum, and a shrine and a place of pilgrimage.
Perhaps by moving far beyond, out into space to other worlds, even in the imagined journey
of a thought experiment, humans will learn to cherish our beautiful, fascinating home as never before.
