We've arrived at the seventh lecture in our examination of Earth's epic history.
We've seen the birth of the universe in the Big Bang.
We've examined the birth of atoms in the first million years after the Big Bang, and
the formation of all the elements in stars.
Then we explored the origins of chemistry, the first chemical bonds that resulted in
the formation of the first gaseous molecules like dihydrogen, H, and water, H2O.
And we've watched as the very first minerals, diamond, graphite, and a few other Ur minerals
crystallized in the expanding cooling envelopes of the first energetic stars.
In the process, we've surveyed billions of years of cosmic history, but we still haven't
met planet Earth, our home.
So let's fast forward several billion years and begin surveying our surrounding real estate.
At the largest scale, we're one small part of what is known as the local supercluster,
or Virgo supercluster of galaxies.
Now a galaxy is an immense collection of tens to hundreds of billions of stars.
Galaxies can appear as fuzzy elliptical shapes, or they can have big spiral arms.
That's probably the most familiar kind, or they can adopt a more chaotic shape.
The key is that all the stars are gravitationally bound to the galaxy.
Well, the vast region of space called the local supercluster is more than 100 million
light years across, and it contains many thousands of galaxies.
And our local supercluster is just one of the thousands of known superclusters.
Now within the local supercluster, we're in the local group, which includes more than
50 galaxies spanning a diameter of about 10 million light years.
All the local group galaxies are bound by gravity to a common center, which lies somewhere
between our own big Milky Way spiral galaxy and our twin, the somewhat larger Andromeda
galaxy, which is about 2 million light years distant.
Andromeda was one of the galaxies that Edwin Hubble observed to conclude the galaxies are
in fact immense collections of stars.
Our local group is just one of perhaps 100 groups in the local supercluster, so you may
be getting a sense of the scale of the universe, thousands of superclusters, each with hundreds
to thousands of groups, each with many individual galaxies.
Our galactic home is the Milky Way galaxy.
It's a large spiral galaxy with perhaps 400 billion stars.
The age of the Milky Way based on the age of its oldest stars is about 13.2 billion years.
It's almost as old as the universe and suggests that stars and galaxies formed rather quickly
after the Big Bang.
Now galaxies don't just form from stars, they are the engines of new star formation.
As one generation of stars explodes or sheds its outer layers, it seeds space with the
dust and gas that will become the next generation of stars.
You see, nothing happens only once in our universe.
Well, nothing except perhaps for the Big Bang.
So scattered debris of old exploded stars are constantly subjected to the organizing
force of gravity, thus remnants of former stellar generations inexorably seed new populations
of stars by forming new nebulas.
Each is a vast interstellar cloud of gas and dust and it represents the wreckage of many
prior stars.
Each new nebula is more iron rich than the last and each is a little poorer in hydrogen
than the previous population.
So for billions of years this cycle has continued as old stars produced new stars and slowly
altered the composition of the cosmos.
Countless billions of stars emerged in countless billions of galaxies.
Nebulas abounded in our neighborhood of the Milky Way galaxy and became the breeding grounds
for still more stars.
And that brings us to the dawn of our own star, the sun.
The story I'm about to tell you, the nebular hypothesis, was first outlined by the French
mathematician and physicist Pierre Simon Laplace, who was born in Normandy, France in 1749.
And on a plus he was a prodigy, he was appointed university professor at the age of 19.
He described his nebular theory in the bestselling book Exposition of the System of the World,
which was first published in French in 1796.
So once upon a time, five billion years ago, our future real estate in the galactic suburbs
lay about halfway out from the Milky Way center at the uninhabited edge of a star-studded
spiral arm.
And little was to be found in that unassuming neighborhood, but there was a great space-bound
cloud, a nebula of tenuous gas and icy dust it stretched light years across in that dark
void.
Nine parts and ten of that cloud were hydrogen atoms.
And nine parts and ten of what remained were helium atoms, and then ice and dust rich in
small life-giving molecules and microscopic mineral grains that accounted for that almost
negligible remaining mass.
So nebular clouds in space can last many millions of years before a trigger, for example, the
shockwave from a nearby exploding star initiates a collapse into a new star system.
That's 4.6 billion years ago such a trigger initiated our solar system.
So Laplace's hypothesis provided the first coherent explanation of how such an event
might produce the solar system.
To understand Laplace's idea and his reasoning, we need to take a closer look at the solar
system and its idiosyncrasies.
The solar system includes all the objects that are gravitationally bound to the sun,
which remember is just an ordinary star.
In trying to deduce the history of the solar system, we first have to collect observations
about its physical and its chemical characteristics.
A graphical representation of the solar system reveals the sizes and the relative positions
of the sun and the planets.
With the unaided eye, we can see five planets in addition to Earth.
And with telescopes, astronomers have discovered two more for a total of eight major planets.
These eight planets logically fall into two distinctive groups of four.
So the four innermost planets are relatively small.
They're rocky worlds.
They include Mercury, which is a blasted hot and dry world closest to the sun.
Then comes Venus, which is shrouded in a thick, cloudy atmosphere of nitrogen and carbon dioxide.
Earth is the third planet out from the sun, so far it's the only known living world.
And the fourth is the red planet, Mars.
These four inner planets, all of which are dominated by silicate rocks and minerals,
are called the terrestrial planets.
Now these inner planets contrast with the four outer planets called the gas giants,
or Jovian planets.
Gas giant planets, as the name implies, are large.
They're accumulations primarily of the gaseous elements, hydrogen and helium.
And they're basically miniature versions of stars that never quite got large enough
for nuclear fusion reactions to begin.
These four planets include Jupiter, fifth from the sun, and by far the largest planet.
Then the next is Saturn, which boasts a magnificent system of rings.
And beyond Saturn are the smaller gas giants, Uranus and Neptune, both of which were discovered
with telescopes, by the way.
So our solar system has countless smaller objects as a well, all of which are gravitationally
bound to the sun.
First, there's a group of so-called minor planets, or plutoids, of which Pluto is the
most famous, though not the largest one.
And Pluto was once listed as the ninth planet, but Pluto's anomalous icy composition, and
its small size and the subsequent discoveries of several similar plutoids, prompted astronomers
to revise their classification and define this whole new group of objects.
Most of the planets have one or more moons, which are defined as objects that are gravitationally
bound and in orbit around a planet.
Of course, the most obvious moon is our own large moon, and with a good pair of binoculars
you can also see four big moons in orbit around Jupiter, but all the Jovian planets
have numerous moons, ranging in size from irregular rocks a few kilometers in diameter
to objects bigger than planet Mercury.
Now, there's other matter in orbit around planets as well.
For example, all the gas giant planets have rings, composed of relatively small particles.
These rings are especially obvious for Saturn.
You can see the rings with a good pair of binoculars.
These rings are composed of countless ice particles ranging in size from sand grains
to some kilometers across, so it's sometimes hard to know where rings end and moons begin.
In addition to planets, countless other smaller objects orbit the Sun.
There are thousands of big rocks called asteroids.
They're typically irregular in shape, and they come in sizes from small boulders to
some hundreds of kilometers across.
And then there are the beautiful comets, which are often described as dirty snowballs in space.
The comets we see occasionally in the night sky have very elliptical orbits that bring
them close to the Sun.
Now, they're rich in water and methane and other volatile materials that form ices when
they're very far from the Sun in cold, dark reaches of space, but they boil off into a
long tail when the Sun's heat melts and vaporizes the ices.
That contrast between rocky asteroids and icy comets is not unlike that between the four
rocky terrestrial planets and the four gas giant planets.
Some objects in our solar system have most of the mass in rocks and minerals, while others
have most of their mass in gaseous or molecular components.
Comets are thought to originate in what's known as the Oort cloud, which is a distant
band of relatively small icy objects that lies far beyond the outermost planet Neptune.
The comets we see are probably Oort cloud objects that are somehow knocked out of their
more distant orbits.
And also beyond Neptune lies the Kuiper Belt, which has a large number of enigmatic objects
in orbit.
What little we can tell about these distant masses comes from studies of light reflected
off their surfaces.
These data suggest that Kuiper Belt objects may be a combination of comet-like ices and
asteroid-like rocks, perhaps smaller versions of the plutoids.
Okay, so that's an inventory of the objects that make up our solar system.
And any theory the origins of the solar system had to take into account this distinctive distribution
of planets, the plutoids, asteroids, comets, and so forth.
Most notably, the inner planets are small, rocky, and poor in hydrogen and helium, while
the outer planets are big, gaseous, and rich in hydrogen and helium.
Now, there's a second key observation that provides a critical hint to the origin of
the solar system.
It's a striking feature of the solar system that all of its planets, all of its moons,
orbit the sun in virtually the same plane and in the same direction.
What's more, the sun and most of the planets rotate on their axes in more or less that
same plane and in the same direction.
Now, there's absolutely nothing, nothing in the law, so motion in Newton's laws that
requires this commonality of spin.
Planets and moons co-orbiter rotate any which way, north to south or east to west or top
to bottom, bottom to top, and still, these orbiting bodies would obey the law of gravity.
So for example, if the varied planets and moons of our solar system were captured from
distant random sources, then one might expect such a hodgepodge of orbital directions and
rotations.
The observed orbital near-uniformity in our solar system, by contrast, suggests that planets
and moons all coalesced from the same flat rotating disc of dust and gas, and probably
at more or less the same time.
You see, all of these grand objects share the same sense of turning, the same angular
momentum.
That's a concept we'll explore in more detail in subsequent lectures.
That angular momentum was conserved from the time of the original swirling cloud of dust
and gas, that original nebula.
So let's summarize the key observations about the solar system, the key characteristics
that inform the nebular hypothesis.
First, the distribution of mass, 99.9% of the mass is concentrated in the sun, with
only about a tenth of a percent in everything else, the planets, the moons, asteroids,
comets, and so forth.
Second is the distribution of elements.
The inner solar system is dominated by rocky planets with silicate minerals, while the
outer solar system is dominated by hydrogen, helium, and other volatile elements and compounds.
And third is the distribution of angular momentum.
Virtually all of the solar system's angular momentum is in the orbiting planets, and mostly
in one planet, Jupiter.
And fourth is the orientation of planetary orbits and rotations.
All the orbits are in a plane with the same direction of orbiting, and the sun and most
planets rotate on their axes close to that same plane and in the same direction.
Okay, so how did the solar system form?
Any viable model has to take into account all four of those observations.
According to Laplace's nebular hypothesis, a solar system begins as a nebula, a giant
cloud of dust and gas, as a consequence of the competing phenomena of gravity, which
pulls mass inward, and angular momentum, which keeps matter in orbit around a central mass.
In the case of our nebula, the cloud was likely gigantic, perhaps a light year across.
The composition of our nebula was unremarkable, roughly 90% hydrogen with various other elements,
and recall that later generations of stars have more of the heavier elements.
Our solar system may have been preceded by a half dozen or more cycles of exploding stars.
So gravity gradually attracted the nebular dust and gas into an ever denser and more
compact cloud.
This process of compaction once started accelerated as the mass became more and more concentrated,
and the centralized force of gravity increased.
So slowly the immense swirling mass of pre-solar gas and dust was drawn inward like a twirling
ice skater the big cloud rotated faster and faster as gravity pulled its wispy arms to
the center.
As it collapsed and spun faster, the cloud became denser and flattened into a disk with
a growing central bulge, and that's what was to become the sun.
You can imagine the scenario.
Gravity ruled the show.
Larger and larger grew that greedy, hydrogen-rich central ball.
And as it grew larger, its gravitational pull increased, so it became even more efficient
at gobbling up the mass of the nebula.
Ultimately, the sun swallowed 99.9% of the giant cloud's mass, but most of the angular
momentum remained in the outer reaches of the nebula.
As the sun grew, internal pressures and temperatures rose to the fusion point, triggering hydrogen
fusion to make new helium nuclei, igniting the sun.
Recall, every star is a balancing act between those two competing forces.
Gravity pulling inward, which causes temperature and pressure to rise higher and higher, then
fusion reactions began adding more pressure and pushing outward.
When you see a relatively stable star like the sun, it's hard to imagine the epic battle
that's being waged deep inside between gravity and nuclear reactions.
So the ignition of the sun marked the beginning of the solar system, and that's an event
that's now confidently dated at 4.567 billion years ago.
The sun defines the solar system, which is simply the region of space containing everything
– planets, moons, asteroids, comets, dust, gas, any other debris that's gravitationally
bound to the sun.
It took tens of thousands of years for that nuclear energy to work its way outward to
the sun's surface.
But when it did, a strong solar wind began to push outward from the sun through the rest
of the solar system.
Here we glimpse the origins of the large-scale structure of the planets.
The heat and wind from the sun stripped the inner planets of most of their hydrogen, helium,
and other volatiles.
That process left behind the four rocky, terrestrial planets.
Much farther out, it was cool enough for hydrogen and helium to condense into the four Jovian
planets.
What's more, the shared orbital direction and plane, as well as the similar axial rotations
of the sun in most planets, is a relic of that original swirling nebula.
Angular momentum is conserved, so the net rotation of the nebula is preserved to this
day as the orbits and rotations of the planets.
The nebular hypothesis of Pierre Simon Laplace was embraced because it's simple, it's elegant,
and it explains the major features that we observe today in our own solar system.
But is such an arrangement of stars and planets inevitable?
Many astronomers have wondered how likely it is to form a solar system like ours elsewhere
in our Milky Way galaxy.
Is the nebular model true for most or all stars?
Or is our solar system somehow a very special case?
So two approaches have been taken in peril to address this question.
On the one hand, one can use computer models that keep track of the evolution of a dust
cloud under gravity.
One surprises that under most conditions, you don't get one star.
In most computer simulations, two stars wind up forming a binary star system.
This surprising result is a consequence of the amount of initial angular momentum.
Faster rotating clouds tend to spread out the mass into two lumps.
And this theory is borne out by observations as well.
More than two-thirds of all nearby stars turn out to be part of binary systems.
It's intriguing to think about the solar system in that context.
If Jupiter had been about 50 to 100 times larger, we would be in a binary star system
too.
Jupiter is just too small to be a star.
When only one star dominates a system, some calculations suggest that a pattern of planets
like our own is quite probable.
Astronomer George Weather and his colleagues at the Carnegie Institution of Washington
pioneered calculations like this one.
Their calculations involved starting with tens to thousands of ten to hundred kilometer
sized planetesimals in orbit around a sun-like star.
Then they let gravity take over and see how the smaller objects clump together.
In almost every simulation, about half a dozen more or less regularly spaced planets emerge
from the chaos.
The computer models also suggest the process is relatively fast.
Just a few thousands of years.
Now one really fascinating aspect of these calculations is the importance of very late
stage collisions when two big, planet-sized objects compete for the same orbital space.
Such a situation is inherently unstable and always results in an epic collision in space.
These collisions can dramatically alter the details of planetary orbits and will learn
more about one such collision in lecture 16.
Another set of calculations tries to model what happens with the colder, gas-rich regions
of a nebula.
And here again the computer models mimic what we see in our own solar system.
Gas giant planets are the norm and they readily form in the colder, outer regions around a
sun-like star.
And like the rocky planets, only one planet can occupy each orbital distance.
Stable planets have to be separated from each other.
Computations, of course, have to be tested by real-world observations.
And we're fortunate to be living in a time of unprecedented planetary discovery, thanks
to the ongoing research for extrasolar planets or exoplanets.
From the first critical data came from the Hubble Space Telescope, which has produced
dramatic images of what are believed to be dynamic star-forming regions in nearby space.
Some Hubble photographs show immense dust concentrations with dramatic fingers of matter
as seen, for example, in the now-famous views of the Eagle Nebula.
So that's the first stage of solar system formation.
The Hubble Space Telescope has also captured photographs of what appear to be stars surrounded
by flattened disks of dust.
These objects may be solar systems in their first million years of formation when the
star is ignited, when planetesimals are forming and colliding to make protoplanets.
But that's just the beginning of our search for other planets.
Before turning to Earth, let's examine one other hot area of planetary research.
And that's the search for extrasolar planets.
Powerful telescopes, both on land and in orbit, are providing amazing opportunities
to detect the presence of planets, orbiting relatively nearby stars in the Milky Way.
It's not yet possible to see most exoplanets directly in a telescope, but there are two
very powerful techniques that reveal their presence.
The first technique, the one that was used first to identify hundreds of planets beyond
our Sun, involves looking for a slight periodic wobble that's caused when a star in one of
its larger planets orbit around a common center.
The Sun, for example, wobbles ever so slightly as Jupiter orbits.
What this means is that as the Sun moves back and forth relative to Earth by a few meters
per second, and that depends on where Jupiter is in its 12-year orbit, we can see that
wobble.
The effect is extremely small.
It's tiny, but astronomers have learned how to measure it using the Doppler shift.
I've had a first-hand opportunity to watch this development because one of the pioneers
of the technique, Paul Butler, works at my Carnegie Institution Laboratory in northwest
Washington, D.C.
And here's how it works.
Every star emits copious amounts of radiation, light.
Some of that light arrives as spikes of very well-defined wavelengths.
These are wavelengths that correspond to electronic transitions in atoms like hydrogen
atoms.
Electrons in atoms can occur in lower-energy ground states or in higher-energy excited
states.
And when electrons change from a higher-energy state to one of lower energy, the atom emits
a characteristic wavelength of light.
That's like what happens in a laser.
One intense color stands out.
We know what these colors should be, and every star has them.
What astronomers find is that these characteristic wavelengths shift ever so slightly because
of a star's wobble, the wobble induced by the orbiting planet.
Those shift, called red shifts or blue shifts, depending on whether the star is wobbling
away from us or towards us, correspond to a relative star motion of just a few feet
per second.
So the trick is to measure how those wavelengths change over days or months or even years
with incredible precision, and then look for those telltale wobbles.
Plots of the relative red shift versus time can show regularly repeating, wave-like pattern.
If there's one big planet in a near-circular orbit, the pattern approximates a perfect
sine curve.
On the other hand, if the planet is in a highly elliptical orbit, then the sine curve is kind
of skewed.
If there's more than one planet, as is often the case, the plot of wavelength versus time
shows extra bumps caused by multiple planets in a distant solar system.
At this point, Paul Butler and his co-workers, as well as several other groups around the
world who have adopted this approach, have discovered many hundreds of planets and more
are being found every month.
They have great websites, for example, at www.exoplanet.com, which is a rather technical
presentation of all the validated orbital data, and of course, websites of NASA and
various astronomical observatories.
You can easily get updates on some of the latest planet discoveries, and there's news
almost every day.
Now, there's a proviso.
This effort has only been in full swing for a little more than a decade or so.
And it takes at least that long to determine the orbit of planets like Jupiter or Saturn
with orbital periods that are a decade or longer.
As a result, lots of new planets and planetary systems are being added all the time.
But our present view of the nature and distribution of extrasolar planets is somewhat skewed towards
planets with shorter orbits.
Of course, all that's going to change as more time passes.
So this really is the golden age of discovery about planets beyond our solar system.
In that context, among the most intriguing findings of this kind of exoplanet research
is that many planetary systems are quite different from our own solar system.
The first rather startling discovery was of supermassive planets, some several times the
massive Jupiter that have orbits very close to their stars, in some places so close that
the orbital period is just a few days.
Now these planets are admittedly the easiest to find.
The orbital period is very short and the large masses in close distances lead to huge red
shifts of the star.
But no one expected to find these hot giant planets.
They are completely different from anything in our solar system and they defy logic of
gas giant planets forming in the cold regions very far from their star.
And there are other bizarre discoveries.
Planetary systems with extremely elliptical orbits or systems in which two or three large
planets are all in orbits closer than Mercury is to the sun.
These planets defy conventional wisdom and they pose new challenges for the theorists.
I think you can see why the search for extrasolar planets and planetary systems far beyond
our sun is an incredibly exciting area of research, one that is fundamentally important
to understanding the origins and evolution of our own planet Earth.
It's now obvious that planets are relatively common out there.
But these discoveries are just the tip of the iceberg.
In the next lecture, before we meet the varied planets of our own solar system in more detail,
I'll introduce the greatest planet-finding adventure yet, NASA's glorious Kepler mission.
