The leading surface mineral on Earth roughly three-quarters of a billion years ago was ice.
This is also the start of a second Great Oxidation Event, and in this lecture we'll
see how ice and much higher levels of oxygen transform the planet once again.
To be more precise, the Neo-Proterozoic Era featured a time of snowball episodes, followed
by hot-house episodes, not once, not twice, but at least three times between 740 and 580
million years ago.
And together, these episodes raised the level of oxygen close to modern levels.
The living world had to be dramatically affected by such extreme global changes.
Think about all the consequences.
During the global winter is lasting millions of years, the lands were covered by thick ice,
so that very little erosion could occur.
Without erosion, essential mineral nutrients couldn't flow into lakes and oceans, so microbial
life was greatly limited in extent.
It was very likely that life was restricted to those few places where mineral-rich hot
waters spewed out of volcanic zones.
By contrast, after each glaciation, the melting ice in exposed continental shores must have
contributed pulses of essential mineral nutrients to every coastal ecosystem.
The element manganese, which is required for photosynthesis, was one such vital mineral
supplement.
And molybdenum, which was used by many cells for processing nitrogen, was also available
in much greater quantities.
There were also new pulses of iron, nickel, copper, and vanadium, all of which are employed
in various metabolic roles.
Like iron, these are metals that form not only metallic bonds, but also covalent bonds
or ionic bonds capable of joining organic molecules.
Out of all of the many chemical elements that were available in only limited supplies
during global glaciation events, phosphorus may have been the most important in those
freshly exposed neoproterozoxies.
Just to remind you, the element phosphorus is the 11th most abundant element at Earth's
crust, where it's concentrated by pigmentites.
It's also the sixth most abundant element in the human body, and absolutely essential
for all life.
Phosphate, the five-atom group of one phosphorus surrounded by four oxygens that gave rise
to hundreds of new minerals inside pigmentites, also helps to form the backbone of those familiar
genetic molecules, DNA, the double helix, and RNA.
In addition, phosphorus helps to stabilize many kinds of cell membranes as part of phospholipids.
And phosphorus-bound oxygen atoms plays a key role in storing and transferring chemical
energy in small molecules called ATP or adenosine triphosphate.
Those small, energy-rich molecules are found in every cell in your body.
The ancient story of phosphorus and its effects on life has been a long-time fascination for
Dominic Papineau, who comes from Quebec, and was for a time my colleague at the Geophysical
Laboratory.
What Dominic Papineau has discovered is that some neoproterozoic ecosystems, including
the coastal ecosystems of the fragmented Rodinian supercontinent, phosphorus might have been
the most crucial limiting nutrient, that is, the total biological productivity.
The mass of all the cells may have been directly tied to the amount of phosphorus that eroded
off rock, sun, land, and was carried into the sea by runoff.
Dominic imagines times between each global glaciation when there was an unprecedented
amount of phosphorus flowing into the shallow coastal seas of the neoproterozoic era.
That's because the exposed land could be rapidly eroded by the big buildup of carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere, causing carbonic acid to rain down on the land.
And that was at the same time that all the ground-up rock flour produced by the glaciers
was rather suddenly released, providing even more phosphorus for life.
So life thrived at this time as cells gobbled up every bit of phosphorus, and then those
phosphorus-rich cells died and settled to the bottom.
The mineral they formed is called phosphorite, which can refer to any mineral with a substantial
percentage of phosphates.
Well, it turns out that some of the world's largest deposits of phosphorite are composed
of thick layers of sediments laid down as phosphorus-rich cells when they died and they
settled to the bottom.
And they're concentrated in the same time intervals as those snowball-hot house cycles.
Stagnation of the oceans during snowball events was followed by periods of vigorous circulation,
conducive to production of phosphorite.
Some of the largest examples are in China, along what used to be a continental margin.
Dominic has traveled the globe in search of these ancient phosphorite deposits in Northern
Canada, in Finland, in Africa, and in India.
In each locality, he studied their distinctive geological settings, their associated fossils,
and their fascinating chemistries.
Major deposits dated to this period are known on every continent except Antarctica, and
in each case, they're found on top of glacial, remilated sedimentary rocks.
One key consequence of this phosphorus increase was the production of massive phosphorus-driven
algal blooms along the coast.
You can imagine the shallow seas around all the continents choked with green algae, spreading
miles in every direction in smelly, thick mats that pumped atmospheric oxygen up to
new levels.
By some estimates, the atmosphere rather quickly jumped from only about one percent of today's
oxygen to more breathable concentrations close to modern levels.
So algal blooms produced unprecedented amounts of oxygen.
Under such conditions, surface rocks quickly weathered.
They oxidized and hydrated to all sorts of minerals that formed much more easily than
before.
Microbes quickly learned to exploit these chemical reactions for their own energy source.
More oxygen meant it was easier to gain energy from oxidation reactions.
What's more, life could creep onto land for the first time because the increased oxygen
budget meant that more ozone was produced high in the atmosphere.
Remember, ozone is the molecule with three oxygen atoms that acts as a natural sunblock
against harmful ultraviolet radiation.
So the rise in atmospheric oxygen that was caused by the blooming of algae along the
shores triggered positive feedbacks that increasingly protected life on land from radiation and
allowed new ecological niches.
Yet, paradoxically, riding clumps of dead algae that settled to the ocean floor consumed
every bit of oxygen in the deep waters.
So algae in the Neoproterozoic acted much like runaway algal blooms in many areas today
where excess fertilizer runs off into coastal waters.
Photosynthetic oxygen-producing cells cause deep waters to return to a deadly anoxic state.
As a result, the great resurgence of microbial life following the Snowball Earth episodes
may well have led to a newly stratified ocean.
With the living oxygen rich layer near the surface and dead anoxic waters below.
The strong parallels between the algal bloom 600 million years ago and those of today triggered
by large fluxes of phosphate from fertilizer runoff provide an important incentive to study
the kinds of dramatic changes that affected ancient ecosystems.
And this story of the intimate connections among global climate and atmospheric chemistry
and near-surface mineralogy and microbial life underscores a critical point about our
planetary home.
Everything is interconnected, often in surprising and even paradoxical ways.
This realization is relatively new and it's changing the way many earth scientists approach
their work, not to mention science education in departments of geology.
Indeed, even the names of those departments have changed.
In the 1960s, almost all universities had departments of geology.
But now you're more likely to find departments of earth and environment, or earth and planetary
science or even earth systems science.
When I began my graduate studies in mineralogy and crystallography in the 1970s, the predominant
viewpoint was that studies in biology were all but irrelevant to geology.
Geologists study rocks and the grand cycles of igneous sedimentary and metamorphic rocks
where widely viewed as absolutely separate from the cycles of life.
Even as plate tectonics came to be accepted doctrine, the roles of moving plates in the
distribution of life were only dimly seen.
And that was primarily life on land or shallow coastal regions where fragmenting continents
could effectively isolate different populations.
There certainly was no obvious connection between life and plate motions themselves,
or that anyone talked about life having a big influence on the formation of minerals.
So it's not surprising that when I asked my thesis advisor whether to take a biology course
as my final elective, he persuaded me to take quantum mechanics instead.
You'll never use biology, he assured me, and his advice, I suppose, made a lot of sense
in the context of the 1970s.
That view has almost completely changed.
Now, Earth scientists realize that all and every aspect of Earth's evolution from geochemical
origins of life four billion years ago to the present day, life's influenced geology.
Geology's influenced life.
I want to give you a sense of this new mindset by describing three relatively recent ideas
that have been proposed about how life has changed Earth's nearsurface geology and mineralogy.
The first of these intriguing ideas was described in 2006 by geochemist Martin Kennedy, who
teaches at the University of California's Riverside campus.
Kennedy and four co-authors devised a particularly novel, albeit speculative, scenario for the
co-dependence of rocks and life.
The title of their article included the phrase, the clay mineral factory, and it appeared
in the March 10th issue of Science.
The hypothesis is that life greatly accelerated the production of clay minerals, hence the
clay mineral factory, and the clay minerals in turn had important feedbacks to life.
Specifically, the rise of atmospheric oxygen from a few percent to its present level was
accelerated by positive feedbacks between microbes and clay minerals.
I think this is a pretty clever idea.
Here's how it works.
First, we called it clay as a generic term for a large group of dozens of different minerals
that consist primarily of ultrafine-grain microscopic particles that soak up water and
form sticky, gooey masses.
We met clays in their uniquely sticky properties during Stage 4 of Earth's mineral evolution
at a time when the first granite protocontinents were just beginning to appear.
The principal mode of clay mineral formation on land is weathering, especially weathering
by chemical alteration under the wet, acidic conditions of the kind that predominated during
the late Neoproterozoic era.
Carbon dioxide was still abundant, so a rain of carbonic acid would have been too.
That's why Kennedy and co-workers suggest that the rapid, post-glacial weathering of
the continents between about 700 and 580 million years that produced an order of magnitude more
clay minerals than before.
Added to chemical weathering or biological processes, there's a lot of growing evidence
from the fossil record that microbial colonies began to colonize the coastal landscape at
about this time.
It turns out that microbes can be especially efficient at turning hard rock into soft clay.
It's not entirely clear how they do this trick, but scientists in Japan and France and the
United States have shown that all sorts of common rock-forming minerals, especially feldspars
and mycas, break down as much as 10 times faster when they're attacked by microbes.
The minerals that are most commonly produced are clay minerals.
So 600 million years ago, huge quantities of clays were being generated both by chemical
weathering and by microbes.
Among the most important characteristics of many clay minerals is their ability to form
strong chemical bonds to organic biomolecules.
Clay minerals often develop a slight electrostatic charge on their surfaces, which complements
the polarity of many organic molecules.
Both molecules, like water, have positive and negative ends, so the molecules stick
to the clays.
The greatly increased production of clay minerals, coupled with the extensive blooming of algae,
were to sequester huge amounts of carbon-rich biomass.
As large volumes of clay minerals washed into the oceans, they would have sequestered
those biomolecules in thick piles of fine-grained carbon-rich sediments.
Now, recall that burial of organic carbon is equivalent to releasing oxygen into the
atmosphere.
It's just like photosynthesis, which takes carbon dioxide and turns it into biomass
while releasing oxygen.
So according to the Kennedy Clay Mineral Factory Scenario, burial of carbon-tied clay minerals
led to the rise of oxygen, which further accelerated weathering and the chemical production of
clay minerals on land, which led to even more carbon burial.
That's how complex feedbacks among weathering, microbes, clay minerals, and the atmosphere
may have contributed directly to the rise of atmospheric oxygen and the evolution of
the modern living world.
The second of our three examples of feedbacks between biology and rocks relates to the rare
and toxic element, mercury.
The mineralogy of mercury is a fascinating story in itself, but here I want to focus
on one biochemical process that may have profoundly influenced Earth's mercury cycle.
Living cells, whether in algae or in people, simply cannot tolerate much mercury.
The mercury binds strongly to key biomolecules and disrupts their functions.
So sometime in the history of Earth, probably after the initial Great Oxidation Event, microbes
developed a very clever and sophisticated method of eliminating mercury by binding it
to a methyl or a carbon plus 3 hydrogen group.
The resulting chemical compound called methylmercury is very soluble in water and is easily
passed through the microbial cell membrane and thus voided from the cell.
Today, numerous kinds of primitive microbes are able to tolerate mercury-rich environments
by producing and excreting methylmercury.
So what does the microbial production of methylmercury have to do with geology?
Well, this is just speculation on my part, but we recently discovered that Earth's mercury
cycle appears to have completely changed about 1.8 billion years ago, right about the beginning
of the boring billion.
Prior to that time, there were quite a few mercury mineral deposits around the world.
But rather suddenly, at 1.8 billion years ago, mercury mineralization just seems to
stop.
In fact, for another 1.2 billion years, there are simply no known mercury mineral deposits
right up until the last of the snowball events we've been discussing.
That's a really strange thing, because mercury should have been continuously recycled by
plate tectonics and concentrated in hydrothermal fluids and released in mercury ore deposits
when those hydrothermal solutions cooled near the surface.
As I say, this is speculation, but it may be that the microbial invention of mercury
methylation suddenly changed the mercury cycle.
If microbes started pumping lots of methylmercury into the oceans, then very slowly, the ocean's
mercury concentration would have risen, while this new reservoir essentially took up any
excess mercury that previously went into mercury mineralization.
It's just one more possible example of feedbacks between life and rocks.
A few decades ago, such thinking would have been radical, implausible, but today it's
almost mainstream, and it's really fun thinking across disciplines in this way.
Topics that used to be studied in isolation, oceans, microbes, ore deposits, plate tectonics,
atmosphere composition, weathering, so much more, are now essential parts of a well-rounded
earth science education.
Never again will a mineralogist be advised to ignore biology.
And now to a third example of the remarkable feedbacks that can occur between life and
rocks.
And in many ways, this example is the least obvious and the sort that's most hidden from
view.
I want to explain some of the evidence for the conclusion that oxidation below earth's
surface probably lagged perhaps for hundreds of millions of years later than the appearance
of increased oxygen in the atmosphere.
This example involves studying the kind of subtle change in a mineral record that would
probably never have been recognized before the rise of this new geobiological paradigm.
Two rather scarce metal elements that are very sensitive to the oxidation state of their
surroundings were key, molybdenum and rhenium.
Element 42 of the periodic table is a member of the column that includes the somewhat more
familiar elements, chromium and tungsten.
Like chromium and tungsten, molybdenum finds important uses in the steel industry for making
special alloys of great strength and hardness.
We've already discussed molybdenum as an important element for creating the enzyme that allows
plants to take nitrogen from the earth.
Let's review molybdenum's two common valent states in nature.
Under more reducing conditions, such as those of the mantle and prior to the great oxidation
event, it adopts a plus 4 charge.
This positively charged state is very insoluble in water, so molybdenum 4 plus is not easily
mobilized or transported.
This is why molybdenum wasn't available during the boring billion.
By contrast, the more oxidized plus 6 form of molybdenum is highly soluble, unless it
concentrates in hydrothermal fluids, which can dissolve and mobilize molybdenum 6 plus.
When fluids rich in molybdenum 6 plus encounter more reducing conditions deep underground,
for example conditions caused by buried carbon rich organic matter, the molybdenum will revert
to its insoluble plus 4 state and precipitate out as molybdenum minerals.
That's how most of the major molybdenum ore deposits are formed.
Okay, the other element in this story is rhenium, element 75 of the periodic table.
This extremely scarce metal element is present at only about a part per billion in earth's
crust.
Its principal uses are in high temperature alloys such as those employs for thermocouples
for measuring extreme temperatures where other metals melt.
Rhenium's geochemical behavior is remarkably similar to that of molybdenum.
Like molybdenum, rhenium has two common valence states in rocks.
Like molybdenum, the more reduced plus 4 valence state is very insoluble in water, so it stays
locked in rocks and minerals.
And like molybdenum, the more oxidized form of rhenium, in this case it's rhenium 7 plus,
is easily dissolved in water.
So rhenium 7 plus, like molybdenum 6 plus, is concentrated and transported by hydrothermal
solutions.
Now by far, the commonest mineral of the molybdenum is the sulfide mineral we've seen
called molybdenite, that's MOS2.
Most molybdenum mines exploit molybdenite, so it's a very well studied mineral.
And in addition to a few dozen major mining districts, there are thousands of known molybdenite
localities that don't rise to the level of economic deposits.
So there's a lot of data on molybdenite in the mineralogical literature.
Rhenium is never so concentrated that it forms its own mineral species, but chemically,
rhenium 4 plus is very similar to molybdenum 4 plus.
That means that virtually all specimens of molybdenite contain trace amounts of rhenium.
And that's handy because rhenium has a radioactive isotope, rhenium 187, and it decays to osmium
187 with a half-life of about 42 billion years.
Rhenium osmium dating is perfect for determining the ages of any molybdenite sample.
Okay, so that's a pretty long preamble to a research project that my group recently
completed because rhenium is mobilized and concentrated in more oxidizing fluids.
I made a simple prediction that more recent molybdenite samples would display higher levels
on average of rhenium than those before the Great Oxidation event.
My colleagues Joshua Golden and Melissa McMillan, who at the time were both graduate students
at the University of Arizona, then dove into that vast orgeology and mineralogy literature
to find reports of the analysis of molybdenite specimens that happened to include both the
age of the mineral and the rhenium content.
And let me tell you, that was a huge undertaking.
They found more than 350 sample descriptions and hundreds of scientific papers in a dozen
different languages.
Melissa also analyzed another 80 samples in our lab, so we wound up with more than 400
data points from 154 localities spanning the last 3 billion years of Earth history.
So we plotted up all the data on a graph of age on the horizontal axis and rhenium content
in parts per million on the vertical axis.
And the rise in rhenium over time was immediately obvious and quite striking.
The first thing you see is that every specimen from before about one and a half billion years
ago has relatively low rhenium content.
The average value for samples of archaea in age, those molybdenites that are greater
than 2.5 billion years old in our study, is about 130 parts per million.
And no archaea specimen has a rhenium concentration greater than about a part in a thousand.
By contrast, during the Mesoproterozoic and Neoproterozoic eras from about 1.6 billion
years to roughly 550 million years ago, the mean rhenium concentration is more than 350
parts per million, with a maximum value of several parts per thousand.
So we see a distinct rise between the archaean and the proterozoic.
And rhenium content keeps rising after that.
The mean rhenium concentration for paleozoic eras samples, those deposits between 542 and
251 million years ago, it's almost 400 parts per million.
And in Mesozoic eras specimens, with ages between 251 and 65 million years old, they
have a mean rhenium content of 444 parts per million.
And then the concentrations really soar over the last 65 million years, with a mean of more
than 600 parts per million.
And the highest individual rhenium content of any recorded sample comes from Mexico.
It's over 10,000 parts per million.
So there's a significant and systematic increase in the average rhenium content in molybdenite
from the Archaean time before 2.5 billion years ago, all the way to the modern era.
And we would argue that this striking increase reflects a gradual oxidation of deep water
circulating in the crust, as a consequence of mobilizing rhenium through enhanced deep
weathering processes.
That is, there was a gradual oxidation of the subsurface environment following the Great
Oxidation Event.
What really took us by surprise, though, is the timing of the subsurface oxidation.
Remember, that the first Great Oxidation Event occurred roughly 2.4 to 2.2 billion
years ago.
And the second oxidation occurred about 800 to 600 million years ago, yet our data suggests
that the subsurface environment didn't become more oxidized until many hundreds of millions
of years after those atmospheric changes.
So why did it take so long?
Almost a billion years for subsurface oxidation to reflect the changes in atmospheric composition.
Recall that the oxygen content of Earth's atmosphere following the Great Oxidation
Event has been estimated to be about 1 or 2% of present levels, so maybe just 1 tenth
of a percent of the total atmosphere.
And that's roughly similar to the amount of argon in today's atmosphere.
If you do the math, it turns out that equals a planet-wide total of about 10 to the 19th
grams of oxygen.
And that might sound like a lot, but it's roughly equivalent to the oxygen contained
in a layer of rocket Earth's surface that's only about half an inch thick.
That's only the tiniest fraction of the quantity of oxygen that would be required to oxygenate
the upper mile or so of Earth's subsurface waters.
And so it's also only a tiniest fraction of what would be required to trigger significant
mineralogical changes.
For Mars, it's a similar calculation.
The atmosphere in Mars has a tiny oxygen content of about a tenth of a percent, equal to four
times 10 to the 13th grams of oxygen.
That's the amount equivalent to the oxygen contained in about a hundredth of a cubic
mile of rock or a layer of the Martian surface that's perhaps a millionth of an inch thick.
The bottom line is that it took a very long time, at least hundreds of millions of years
for low levels of atmospheric oxygen to penetrate down into the subsurface zone where molybdenum
and other ores form.
By the way, it might be possible to gain even more information on the rates of subsurface
oxidation because the molybdenite ores are commonly hosted by granite.
And it turns out that the grain size of granite can be a very sensitive indicator of the depth
of formation.
Granites that form near the surface in the upper half mile or so tend to cool quickly,
so they're relatively fine-grained with quartz and feldspar crystals generally no more than
an eighth of an inch across.
The deeper the granite, the slower it cools, and so the bigger the average grain size.
Our data don't yet incorporate information on the depth of the molybdenite formation,
but we're working on that.
It's plausible that deeper crustal zones on average took longer to experience that influence
of atmospheric oxidation, and that's because of the circulation of oxygenated groundwater.
So a systematic trace element survey that also incorporates depth information might point
to a gradual increase in the depth of subsurface oxidation that increased rhenium contents
in molybdenite, which in turn might hold a key to the timing of Earth's mineralogical
diversification from the first great oxidation event to the second.
As we peer into Earth's past to a time 800 million years ago, we find Earth nearing the
end of a comfortable and seemingly stable middle age.
For a billion years, the planet had been remarkably stable in its climate and life.
But then, as Rodinia fragmented, Earth reached that climatic tipping point.
Under normal times, steady sunlight and heat-trapping carbon dioxide keep our planet temperate,
but as carbon dioxide was rapidly consumed by the weathering of equatorial continents
and as reflective ice spread from both poles to the equator, Earth's temperatures plunged
into the first snowball episode.
Then, after millions of years, steady carbon dioxide buildup, perhaps amplified by the
rapid release of methane from the ocean floors, triggered an equally rapid runaway greenhouse
effect.
Cumulatively, the snowball hot-house cycles amounted to a second great oxidation event
in the history of Earth, which raised the level of oxygen close to modern levels for
the first time.
But climate is another matter.
Perhaps more than any other events in Earth's history, Earth's wildly erratic snowball-to-hot-house
cycles reveal a planet knocked out of kilter.
Climates shifted in a matter of decades, while almost every living thing died.
Although life at this time consisted of microscopic organisms leaving no detailed fossil record,
we can probably assume that major extinction events occurred during this time.
But major change on Earth has often led to new opportunities.
The flip-flopping neoproterozoic climate led directly to an unprecedented rise in atmospheric
oxygen.
That transition paved the way for the first animals and plants and the colonization of
the seas and continents.
Having considered oxygen, we turn next time to carbon, the most useful and chemically
flexible of all the elements, and to recent efforts to understand the full carbon cycle
for methane and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, to the abundance of life and other types of
carbon found not only on the surface, but deep inside the planet.
