The sun ignited for the first time, bathing the surrounding nebula with pulses of intense
heat and radiation.
Frozen droplets of rock, the chondrols, formed a first stage of mineral evolution.
When examined, new mineral species in chondrol meteorites bear witness, telling the story
of dozens of new raw materials, the initial building blocks for the creation of our planet.
We've come to the beginning of the solar system at 4.567 billion years ago.
The sun has formed, at least it's entered its energetic initial T-tor-i phase.
Once radiation and solar winds are blasting the protoplanetary disk of gas and dust, an
epic process of distillation is occurring as much of the gas in the disk, primarily hydrogen
and helium, is swept outward to colder regions, while the hotter districts inside what is
now the orbit of Jupiter become concentrated in the mineral-rich dust fraction.
Meanwhile, as the wind transfers angular momentum from the rotating young star to the more distant
regions, the stage is being set for planet formation.
Our primary tangible evidence for those turbulent times are the meteorites, which are rocks
that fall from space.
Meteorites record many of the processes that took place as the solar system assumed its
present state.
As we've seen, meteorites are not the oldest objects we can study.
Recall those pre-solar grains of dust that formed a small fraction of the giant molecular
cloud that predates our solar system.
Those dust grains represent materials processed in a previous generation of star systems,
both from the strong winds that are emitted from some very energetic big stars like red
giants and from even bigger stars that explode, the supernovas.
We've seen that pre-solar grains hold a dozen ur minerals that formed when concentrations
of carbon and heavier elements were sufficiently high, and temperatures sufficiently cool
to condense into the first crystalline materials in the cosmos.
Those tough refractory ur minerals, those phases formed when the commonest rock-forming
chemical elements, those elements beyond gaseous hydrogen and helium in the periodic
table, they bond together into tiny crystals of cosmic dust.
Those crystals include two forms of pure carbon, diamond and graphite, as well as rugged
oxides of calcium, magnesium, aluminum and titanium.
Their gemmy magnesium silicates, unusual nitride and carbide minerals and more.
These dust grains are the raw materials of planets and of moons, they are the building
blocks of worlds.
One of the central questions of mineral evolution is how those original dozen minerals were
processed and reworked over almost 5 billion years ultimately to form the more than 4,700
different minerals we find on Earth today.
All the chemical richness of Earth was locked into those primordial dust grains.
More than 80 chemical elements of the periodic table had to be contained in that dust, but
most elements were impossibly dilute, a few atoms in a billion or less.
Barring some remarkably efficient concentration mechanisms, the chances of most chemical elements
clumping together to form separate distinct minerals is vanishingly small.
The mineral evolution story therefore is a 4.5 billion year narrative of successive
stages of element selection and concentration through diverse physical, chemical and biological
processes.
We've already met one of these processes and the distillation effects of the hot solar
wind.
The more volatile elements, molecules like hydrogen and helium, methane, water, those
are efficiently concentrated in the outlying regions of the circumstellar disk, while the
inner regions were effectively enriched in the mineral forming elements, notably oxygen,
silicon, magnesium and iron.
Before we discuss mineral evolution, it's essential to look in more detail at the classification
of meteorites.
That's a topic that has generated a lot of discussion and there's a lot of controversy
and no single universally accepted system.
For most of the last two centuries, meteorite classification was rather ad hoc and was based
on three broad groups, stony meteorites that look more or less like ordinary rocks, iron
meteorites that are made primarily of iron metal, usually with some nickel thrown into
the mix, and stony iron meteorites with obvious mixtures of iron metal and silicate minerals.
Those categories still prove useful as a first cut grouping is what we use when hunting for
meteorites in Morocco, for example.
But the terms stony meteorite or iron meteorite aren't very helpful in a generic sense.
They don't indicate where or when or how a meteorite formed.
So a rather complicated subgroup classification of meteorites focuses on more subtle details
of bulk chemical composition and the mineralogy and the texture.
So stony meteorites are commonly divided into two big subgroups.
First come the chondrites, which are distinguished by their numerous droplet-like chondrules.
Detailed studies of these distinctive space rocks reveal that many chondrules were heated
more than once.
Some were even melted multiple times as repeated pulses of radiation transformed the regions
closest to the sun.
These chondrules clumped together, cemented by finer-grained pre-cellar dust and mineral
fragments.
Taken together, these ancient chondrite meteorites provide our best view of the brief window,
the window in time when the sun had just been born, but planets had yet to form.
Now, a second-buried class of stony meteorites, collectively dubbed achondrites, lacks those
droplet-like chondrules of the oldest meteorites, and they represent a time when the early
earliest materials of the solar system had been extensively reworked.
They've been melted, they've been smashed, altered by hot water, otherwise transformed.
The diversity of the achondritic meteorites, some with nuggets of shiny metals, some like
chunks of blackened rock, some as fine-grained as glass, and others with lustrous big crystals
an inch across, it's astonishing, and important discoveries of new varieties are still being
made in some of Earth's most remote regions.
We'll focus on the many kinds of chondrites in this lecture, and we'll learn a lot more
about the diverse achondrites and other kinds of meteorites in the next lecture.
As for the two other main groups, the iron meteorites have long been divided into subgroups
based on the structure and composition of the metal, for example, the amount of nickel.
Hexahedrites, octahedrites, and ataxites are three important types of iron meteorites
in order of increasing nickel content.
And then stony iron meteorites, the rarest of the three main groups, are further subdivided
into palisites and mesocytorites, which differ in texture of the metal-silicate mixture.
And I know that there's a lot of different words here and names, but that's just the
nature of the meteorite business, in fact, geology in general.
So we have irons, stony irons, and achondrites, all remnants of small bodies called planetesimals.
These are like mini-planets, if you will, and they formed early in the history of the
solar system.
They grew large enough to have a metal core, and then they were blasted apart in subsequent
collisions.
So, let's focus our attention here on the chondrites, which are both the most primitive
and by far the most common of all meteorites.
The classification of chondrites alone can become overwhelming as there are about twenty
main types and then many subtypes, each of which is distinguished by its bulk composition,
its mineralogy, and its texture.
Here I want to focus primarily on the two biggest groups, the abundant ordinary chondrites,
which account for about eighty-seven percent of all meteorites, and then the intriguing
carbon-rich carbonaceous chondrites, which represent slightly less than five percent
of meteorites.
We're also going to meet the uncommon but highly significant insta-tight chondrites,
they account for less than two percent of all meteorites, as well as a couple of even
rarer types of chondrites.
Now, before examining these different meteorite types in detail, let's look at the anatomy
of chondrites.
These diverse objects incorporate four principal components.
First and foremost are the tiny frozen droplets called chondrules.
Depending on the meteorite type, these objects can range from a couple of hundredths of millimeters
in diameter to about ten millimeters in diameter.
By the way, that word chondrule comes from the ancient Greek word for grain, and many
chondrules are round in about the size of a grain of barley.
There's also a huge range in abundance.
Many ordinary chondrites approach eighty-volume percent chondrules, whereas one important
type of carbon-rich chondrite, the C.I. chondrites, have been so altered by water that they don't
have any chondrules at all.
The mineralogy of chondrules is very revealing.
Recall that the first step in reworking the pre-solar dust occurred when the sun's T-torai
phase began.
An intense heat, with temperatures approaching two thousand degrees, melted those grains
of dust, which became sticky and began to collect into larger and larger droplets.
Not unlike the way that raindrops form from lots of water molecules?
These droplets of molten minerals are what are preserved today as the chondrules.
Several of the dominant chemical elements in pre-solar dust grains, oxygen, magnesium,
silicon, calcium, and aluminum, are also predominant in chondrules.
But these elements have been refined, they've been concentrated, they've been reworked at
somewhat lower temperatures to give a somewhat different assemblage of minerals.
The commonest chondrule phases are two magnesium silicates, forasterite, that's an olivine
group mineral, and enstitite, which is one of the pyroxene group.
Both of those silicates were among the original dozen ER minerals, but there are new lower
temperature minerals as well.
We see the calcium-aluminum silicate called anorthite for the first time.
Its chemical formula includes calcium, aluminum, silicon, and oxygen.
And then anorthite is a member of the Feldspar group, which collectively are the most abundant
minerals on Earth's crust.
So this is an important innovation.
Okay, we also find the iron sulfide troylite, that's FES, which is the earliest mineral
to form with sulfur.
And we see the first phosphorus, and the first chromium minerals, also those incur in chondrules.
These elements are present in pre-solar grains, but their concentrations were much too low,
and the temperatures were too high to crystallize separate sulfur or phosphorus or chromium
minerals in those envelopes of exploding stars.
In fact, about two dozen different minerals have been identified in chondrules, most of
which occur as extremely tiny crystals, only a hundredth or a thousandth of a millimeter
across.
The mineralogy and textures of chondrules point to episodes of very rapid heating, perhaps
within a minute or less, to temperatures between 1500 and 1900 degrees Celsius, then
cooling of the droplets occurred in no more than a few hours.
These time and temperature relationships follow from the size and the complex integrates
of crystals, primarily olivine and or pyroxene crystals in those chondrules.
There's also abundant evidence that some chondrules have been reheated some several times, so the
thermal history of these objects can be very, very complex.
Now, chondrules are old, but they aren't the oldest components of chondrites.
The calcium aluminum-rich inclusions, or CAIs, are rounded objects ranging in size from less
than a millimeter to about a centimeter, and they look like little white specks, sort of
irregular shapes in some case, sometimes very rounded.
Now, CAIs, it's easy to see.
In some specimens I have show little white flecks that, like chondrules, the CAIs also
represent these cooled droplets of silicate minerals, but these form very early and at
temperatures even greater than the chondrules.
Radiometric dating places their age at 4.567 billion years.
The oldest object you can hold in your hand is the very first new minerals processed and
refined by the solar system.
The CAIs, these CAIs, define the date of the solar system's birth.
By the way, this age value is incredibly well constrained by radiometric dating techniques.
The latest official number is 4.5672, plus or minus 0.6 million years, so the uncertainty
is just 600,000 years out of almost 5 billion years.
These inclusions from the birth of our solar system contain several of the ur minerals,
the calcium, aluminum, oxide, hibbenite, for example.
Also the magnesium, aluminum, oxide, spinel, and the magnesium silicates, forstrite, and
enstitite, remember which are both part of those chondrules as well, and then anorthite
is also a comic constituent, and here as in the chondrules, but there's also another calcium
aluminum silicate called mellolite, and there's a calcium titanium mineral too called perovskite,
and then there are also 20 or more minor phases that form micro crystals, some too small to
see in the light microscope.
These are all relatively high temperature minerals, with the freezing points above 1500 degrees
Celsius.
You can see how the mineralogy of the solar system was beginning to diversify beyond the
initial dozen kinds of crystals.
In addition to chondrules and CAIs, chondrite meteorites also typically have a host of mineral
phases that are opaque to visible light.
These opaque minerals are significant and considered separately because one of the
standard ways to study meteorites is to cut and polish a very thin section, no more than
a few hundredths of an inch thick, and look at it with transmitted light.
Most of the minerals, almost all the oxides and silicates, for example, are partially
transparent to light, so you can see grain sizes, and you can look at textures, the rounded
chondrules and CAIs really stand out, but you can't see through the opaque phases.
You have to identify those phases using reflected light techniques, so various natural alloys
of iron nickel metal are most abundant, along with a variety of metal sulfide minerals,
their iron oxides, some exotic phases as well, about 20 opaque minerals altogether.
And finally, chondrites typically have a very fine grain matrix made of interlocking crystals
that are barely visible, even a powerful light microscope.
Many of the same minerals found in the chondrules are also found in this fine grain matrix,
oxides, silicates, sulfides, metal particles, all those are common.
So all told, meteorite experts have tallied about 60 different mineral species and all
the different kinds of chondrite meteorites.
These 60 minerals, which include all the dozen ur minerals, define the first stage of ur
mineral evolution.
Ordinary chondrites are by far the most common kind of meteorites.
They're really easy to spot because they're packed with these little spheres, those are
the chondrules, and you can see those chondrules without a microscope or a hand lens.
It's now thought that the ordinary chondrites come from several different larger objects,
asteroid-sized bodies that represent the gravitational accumulation of lots of small
bits, chondrules, CAIs, bits of metal, and so forth.
Those parent bodies must have experienced some kind of major impact, and then fragmentation,
and the meteorites we see today are those fragments.
One large group of ordinary chondrites, by some estimates 40% of all the meteorites
to hit Earth are called H chondrites.
These meteorites are unusually high in iron for a stony meteorite.
That's the reason they're called H chondrites.
We also share other similarities that suggest a common source.
One hypothesis is that they all come from a big asteroid in the asteroid belt, an asteroid
named Six Hebe.
Telescopic observations suggest that Six Hebe is unusually dense for an asteroid which matches
those principal characteristics of H chondrites.
And then we have another distinctive group, which includes the relatively low iron or
L meteorites, and the even lower iron, the low metal L L chondrites, both of which do
have relatively iron-rich olivine, but not much other iron.
Current thinking is that almost all of the ordinary chondrites came from just a handful
of asteroids, and those happen to be impacted in such a way that lots of debris were thrown
into an Earth-crossing orbit.
However, it's not yet known what parent asteroids might have produced those relatively
common types.
Now we come to the much rare, but tremendously important carbonaceous chondrites, which are
distinguished by their unusually high carbon contents.
These meteorites are subdivided into six main groups, as well as a number of oddballs
that don't yet fit into an obvious type.
The most primitive of all meteorites, the ones that seem to be least processed by the
solar nebula, and thus the most primordial in terms of the relative abundances of their
elements are the CI chondrites.
The CI chondrites are named for the Ivuna meteorite, a two-pound rock that was observed
to fall near Ivuna Tanzania on December 16, 1938.
By the way, meteorite experts make a distinction between falls, which are observed to streak
through the atmosphere and then collected, and fines, which are recognized by the unique
non-Earth-like physical and chemical properties, but are not seen to fall.
By convention, most meteorite groups are usually named for the oldest known fall.
Anyway, the CI chondrite meteorites are loaded with volatiles as much as 22% water and up
to 5% carbon, much of it in the form of organic molecules.
These revealing objects are thought to have never experienced temperatures above about
50 degrees Celsius.
After all, the water never boiled off, so they provide our best estimates of the original
composition of the average pre-solar dust.
That characteristic, the preservation of the presumed primordial composition, has proven
tremendously important to geochemistry and to the study of Earth's origins and its evolution.
The ratio of elements in CI chondrites is a benchmark against which all kinds of samples
are compared.
So when scientists want to know the nature of Mars, or how life processes isotopes,
or what happened to the early atmosphere, or where the moon came from, the CI chondrites
are invoked.
By comparing the relative compositions, scientists get a sense of what kind of elemental processing
might have occurred.
We call that one theme of this course is the transformation of Earth's near-surface environment,
including its mineralogical diversity, through the selection, separation, concentration of
chemical elements.
The formation of ore deposits, of sandy beaches, and of life are all examples of this kind
of element selection and concentration.
The CI carbonaceous chondrites provide a standard of comparison for all of these systems.
Even with this unmatched preserved record of the solar system's initial chemistry,
CI chondrites don't preserve all of their original features.
Water in particular is a powerful agent of change.
After more than four and a half billion years, some of the original silicate minerals and
CI chondrites have weathered to clays, and those are perhaps the first occurrence of
those important minerals in history.
It's also common to find chondrite meteorites that have been reheated or altered by violent
impacts, so the detailed classification of carbonaceous and ordinary chondrites, it gets
a lot more complicated.
The CM carbonaceous chondrites, that's the second kind of carbon-rich meteorite, and
they're named for a meteorite that fell in the town of Meghe in Ukraine on June 18, 1889.
These meteorites are also extremely rich in organic molecules.
Like the CI chondrites, the CMs are black, they're fine-grained, they're pretty much
lacking in obvious chondrules.
The most intensively studied CM chondrite fell onto a sheep farmer's ranch in Murchison,
in the Victoria province of Australia in 1969.
More than 200 pounds of fragments were collected, and many of those ended up in public research
collections.
Dozens of scientific papers have focused on the amazing organic chemistry of the Murchison
carbonaceous chondrite.
For example, more than 230 different amino acids are known from the Murchison, including
many that are biologically important, glycine, alanine, and aspartic acid, for example.
There are also exotic kinds of amino acids not found in biology, whereas the amino acid
serine, a very common contaminant in rocks exposed to Earth's near-surface environment,
is significantly absent.
And that suggests that the Murchison chemistry is largely unaltered from its time and space.
So Cosmochemists have put the meteorite through a battery of analytical tests.
One recent paper reported more than 14,000 different kinds of organic molecules.
And most were in extremely small quantities, but with up to 60 parts per million amino
acids.
Those are the building blocks of proteins.
And there are over 300 parts per million carboxylic acids, which are important in metabolism,
and they're lipid molecules of the kind that may have formed the very first cell membranes,
and they're a host of other biologically interesting molecules as well.
And of special importance to the apparent handedness of some of those molecules, their
chirality, as it's called in biology.
One of life's most distinctive traits is the chirality of some of its molecules.
Many organic molecules come in mirror pairs, like left and right hands.
Such pairs of molecules have very similar physical properties.
They have the same melting points, the same boiling points, they have the same color, the
same electrical conductivity, and so forth.
These molecules have different shapes, like left and right-handed gloves.
In the presence of other chiral objects, and only then they react differently, just like
each of your hands reacts differently to a left or right-handed glove.
So remarkably, it turns out that some of the merches in amino acids are biased, with left-handed
molecules more abundant than right-handed.
The same bias that we find in living cells.
Well, we'll come back to this point when we discuss the assembly of biomolecules in
lecture 27, but suffice it to say that other than meteorites, life is the only system we
know that has this kind of chiral bias.
So some origin of life researchers suggest that meteorites like Murchison seeded ancient
earth with the first building blocks of life.
And since similar meteorites must have impacted everybody in the solar system, that means
that every planet and every moon has the raw materials for life.
There are many, many other types of carbonaceous chondrites.
In addition to the CIs and the CMs, there's the CA chondrites that feature abundant calcium
aluminum rich inclusions, which are not typically found in other types.
There's CB and CH chondrites that are distinguished by being both very carbon rich and having
very high metal contents, 50% iron nickel metal in the case of the CBs.
And then the CO group has extremely tiny chondrules, only a tenth of a millimeter or so in diameter.
So each of these meteorite types is suspected to have come from a different, big parent
body, probably different asteroids in the asteroid belt.
The study of meteorites is also enriched by the discovery of totally new kinds.
As just one example, on January 18, 2000, a meteorite was observed to fall on the ice
of Tagish Lake in the Yukon of Northern Canada.
About 500 meteorite fragments were subsequently collected, and they reveal a very carbon rich
meteorite.
These bits of space rock look like pieces of charcoal briquette, and they're loaded
with unaltered pre-solar dust grains, so the Tagish Lake carbonaceous chondrate is perhaps
the most primitive, least altered meteorite ever found.
And it's in pristine shape as it was collected quickly on frozen ice.
That's great news for understanding the early solar system.
Even better, the fireball that was caused by the meteorite's atmospheric entry was well
documented so we know that its orbit originated in the asteroid belt.
Some astronomers have even suggested that the parent body for this unusual fall is the
asteroid 773 Airman Trout, which appears to match closely the compositional characteristic
of the black meteorite.
Because of the observed fall and its excellent state of preservation and its unique chemical
characteristics, the Tagish Lake meteorite is likely to become one of the best documented
finds in meteorite history.
And finally, we come to the rare and the strange Enstitite chondrites, or E-type chondrites.
Enstitite is one of the ur minerals.
But Enstitite chondrites represent about one in every 50 meteorites and have a very distinctive
mineralogy that reflects an extremely oxygen-poor and iron-rich composition.
The most obvious features in hand specimens are chondrules with Enstitite itself, which
is magnesium silicate, recalls one of the pyroxene group minerals.
Two main subtypes of Enstitite chondrites are distinguished by the average sizes of
those chondrules and the ratio of Enstitite to metal.
EH chondrites have smaller chondrules and higher percentages of Enstitite than the
EL chondrites.
So it looks like these meteorites may have come from two different parent bodies or perhaps
two different regions of the same parent asteroid.
One very promising candidate based on telescopic observations of its average composition is
16 Psyche.
That's a big asteroid in the asteroid belt.
Alternatively, some astronomers propose that at least some of the Enstitite chondrites
might have come from the planet Mercury.
But that's not a widely held view, but it's out there and it's really interesting to think
about.
So, the real mineralogical surprise of Enstitite chondrites is the presence of some exceptionally
odd minerals that are found almost nowhere else.
For example, magnesium and calcium almost always bond to oxygen in minerals.
But in the Enstitite chondrites, you find magnesium and calcium sulfides, the rare minerals
niningerite and old hemite.
There are also sulfides of sodium and potassium and the titanium nitrite, a weird mineral
Osbornite.
That's one of the urminerals and a really weird mineral periite that's got iron bonded
to silicon, but no oxygen.
That's really strange.
These exotic sulfides and silicides and nitrides almost never occur in crustal rocks.
The chemical term for this kind of mineral assemblage with lots of metals and sulfides
instead of oxides is reduced and it points to a surprising diversity of environments
in the young solar system.
Most chondrites are much more oxidized with a complement of the oxides of iron and magnesium,
aluminum and calcium.
The absence of these minerals in Enstitite chondrites suggests that a substantial volume
of the early solar system had different ratios of chemical elements than the average represented
by the CI carbonaceous chondrites.
Some cosmochemists suggest that these objects were produced quite close to the sun.
Inside the orbit of Mercury, maybe that explains that difference in composition, but the exact
process that caused this chemical separation, this distillation of oxygen from the more
metallic elements, if you will, that's not well understood and it points to a dynamic
chemical environment during the time just before the planets started to form.
Chondrites frame the first 10 stages of Earth's mineral evolution.
The story that's going to play out over the next three dozen lectures.
One is immediately struck by the mineralogical parsimony of this earliest stage of planet
formation.
Only about 60 different mineral species occur in the chondrite meteorites, with only about
a dozen elements playing important roles.
It's true that the story of Earth's mineralogical richness began many billions of years before
that, long before the origin of our solar system, where the formation of the first dozen
are minerals.
But 4.5 billion years ago, that number had not increased by very much.
The central question of mineral evolution is how those original dozen minerals were
processed, how they were reworked to begin yielding the many thousands of minerals found
on Earth today.
The answer lies in processes that selected and concentrated different chemical elements
and situated those elements in different regimes of temperature and pressure.
In the next lecture, we'll take a significant step in that path of mineral evolution.
The second stage of mineral evolution is revealed in the amazingly diverse meteorites
known as the achondrites.
It's in the transition from chondrites to achondrites that mineral diversity begins
to take off.
