The nebular hypothesis of Pierre Simone Laplace provides a simple and elegant description
of how our solar system came to be from the gravitational collapse of a swirling,
space-bound cloud of gas and dust. But understanding the origins of our planetary system doesn't
mean that every star works the same way. Are there other types of solar systems? And by extension,
are planets like Earth common or rare? In the last lecture we saw that the search for extra
solar planets or exoplanets in the complementary efforts to model the origins of planetary systems
has come a long, long way. Measurements of subtle wobbles and distant stars point to hundreds of
extra solar planets, including some that are quite unlike anything in our system. Hot gas giants
orbiting perilously close to their stars or planets in extremely elliptical orbits, for example.
These discoveries are being quickly eclipsed by the most ambitious and successful planet
finding effort in history, NASA's Kepler space telescope mission. Kepler is an unusual space
telescope, decades in design and construction. The 1.4 meter, that's about four and a half feet
diameter telescope, was launched in March of 2009, and the first data were collected from a stable
orbit around the Sun on May 12, 2009. The heart and soul of the Kepler mission is an array of 42
state-of-the-art electronic detectors, each of which has over 2.2 million pixels with amazing
sensitivity. They're not unlike the kind of detector you might find in the best digital cameras today.
And that's one reason why space exploration is still a great deal. All sorts of advanced technologies
are developed by NASA in the aerospace industry. So Kepler's mission is conceptually beautiful,
and it's simple. The telescope always points in exactly the same direction at a significant area
of the night sky in the constellation Cygnus. It's about 11 by 11 degrees square in the sky,
and the telescope has been accumulating data on this same region by taking exposures for 30
minutes at a time, 48 images every day, day after day, week after week, year after year,
and in the process astronomers have collected extremely accurate data on the brightness of
more than 100,000 different stars. Those data are an absolute goldmine for understanding how
stars operate and behave. They're variability over time, for example, and the statistical
distribution of different kinds of stars, big and small, young and old. There's never been anything
like the Kepler mission's star database. But how does that help us find planets?
The answer lies in eclipses. If a star has planets, and if those planets orbit in a plane
that's close to edge on from our vantage point, then planets will periodically eclipse its star.
Such an event is called a transit. Now a planet is a tiny thing compared to a star,
but Kepler's electronics are so sensitive that even a drop of one part in a million in a star's
light intensity can be detected. So Kepler's trying to scan all those 100,000 stars for tiny dips
in light intensity, dips lasting a few hours or a few days as a planet transits in front of the star.
Now they don't get too excited by a single dip. That could be an artifact or some other
object that happens to get in the way. A second dip some weeks or months or years later is more
exciting, but the clincher is if you see a third eclipse spaced the same time from the second
as the second was from the first. Then you have incontrovertible evidence for periodic
orbiting object, a planet circling a distant star. What's more, the exact nature of that brief
dimming provides lots of additional information. For one thing, the amount of dimming tells you
how big the planet is. We know the sizes of stars from astrophysical calculations. So if a star dims
by a part in 10,000 versus a part in 100,000, then that's the ratio of the planet's cross-sectional
area to the stars and the diameter of the planet follows from simple geometry. And then the time
it takes the planet to transit reveals how big the orbit around the star is. It's distance from the
star. It's amazing to think that we can get such a vivid picture of a planet when we aren't anywhere
close to being able to actually see the planet. And there's even more data to be had. If you couple
Kepler data with the kind of Doppler measurements that Paul Butler and others are collecting from
ground-based telescopes, then you can determine exactly how much the star is wobbling because of
that orbiting planet. And that reveals the mass of the planet. And from the mass of the planet
and its diameter, you can calculate the planet's density as the planet's mass divided by its volume.
So this calculation tells you whether it's a rocky terrestrial type or a gas giant
or maybe something in between. This is an absolutely stunning development in the history
of astronomy. We are learning details about planets many light years away that we didn't
even know about planets in our own solar system until relatively recently. And here's the real
kicker. Kepler is discovering thousands and thousands of planets. There are so many planets
that we can do statistical analyses and get a sense of the entire sweep of what's out there.
Jupiter-like planets, Earth-like planets, all sorts of exotic things we've never seen before.
For example, by plotting the sizes of all the recently discovered planets, it's obvious that
most planets are relatively small, perhaps more like Earth than Jupiter. And there are hundreds
of planetary systems emerging from Kepler data. Many systems with two or three or more planets.
The record went pretty quickly from five planets to six to seven, and lots more data are coming in
every month. Remember, it takes three full eclipses before a planet is confirmed,
and Kepler has only been operating since May of 2009. Now that's enough time to see planets
in orbits with periods up to a year or two like Earth or Mars, but it will take many years,
in fact decades, to detect and confirm planets with orbital periods like Jupiter or Saturn.
So what are some of the key Kepler discoveries? I have to confess there are so many it's hard
to choose. I suppose the first and foremost discovery is many planets in Earth-like orbits
with more or less Earth-like sizes that lie in what's called the Goldilocks zone. That's the
habitable zone where temperatures are in the range of liquid water. Those are the planets most likely
to have evolved in parallel to Earth and most likely to be alive. Another fascinating discovery
is Kepler 16b, a planet that orbits two stars in a binary system. That number 16 is the 16th
confirmed planetary system found by Kepler. We're already way past Kepler 100 with thousands
of unconfirmed candidate planets. Well, Kepler 16b features two stars relatively close together
doing this kind of circling dance, and the planet orbits farther away around both stars.
And then there are planetary systems like Kepler 18, where the planets are locked in phase with
one another, a phenomenon called orbital resonance, so that one planet orbits exactly twice as fast
as another planet in the same system. So much, so much has been discovered. Of course, Kepler
sees the hot supergiant planets orbiting close to their stars, but these oddities turn out to be
fairly rare. They were really easy to spot using Doppler techniques because they cause a big wobble
every few days. But they are by no means common in the context of all the thousands of stars.
Far more common indeed, what seem to be the most common planets in the cosmos are objects the size
of Earth or larger and orbits closer to their star than Earth is to the Sun. The preliminary
statistics from the thousands of planets already discovered suggest that perhaps one in 10 stars
will host a planet of that type. Now this extrapolation has to take into account the fact
that most planetary systems appear to be planar, like our solar system, and that most of those
planes will have orientations that are not edge onto us, so Kepler will only detect a small
fraction of all the planetary systems in its field of view. The implication of Kepler's historic
mission of discovery is that planets are pervasive characteristic of the cosmos. As many as half
of all sun-like stars may have planets, in our Milky Way galaxy alone may well hold more than 100
billion planets. A significant portion of those planets may be in the habitable zones,
like Earth, with liquid water, with the elements of life, and with a rich storehouse of rocks and
minerals. The story of Earth, our home, is unique to us, but it may be a story that has been repeated
many times elsewhere in the cosmos. Now Kepler is by no means the final word in the search for
extra-stolar planets, ultimately we'd like to be able to take pictures of those distant worlds
to see if they have oceans and continents or clouds or possible signs of life like an atmosphere rich
in oxygen. A new generation of space-based and ground-based telescopes now in the planning
stage is being designed specifically to achieve that dream, to image individual planets orbiting
nearby stars. Two complementary strategies are attempting to get underway, and I suppose some
would say they're competing as telescopes are very very expensive and funds for new big science
projects are really limited these days. So first are space-based instruments called
interferometric telescopes. An interferometric telescope synchronizes the light gathered by two
or more telescopes with mirrors that are separated by a significant distance, say 100 meters.
That separation effectively increases the resolving power of the telescope to the point
that an earth-sized planet orbiting a nearby star and by nearby I mean up to a few tens of light
years it might be resolved. Up until recently a leading candidate for such a telescope was the
terrestrial planet finder or TPF which had tentative approval in last decade but was repeatedly
postponed and finally the expensive project was canceled by NASA. The TPF had been on the NASA
drawing board for several years so a lot of us are sad to see that dropped. Now there's another
telescope system called the Space Interferometry Mission or SIM. It also got pretty far along in
the planning stages but there's no set launch date and by some accounts it's also been canceled by
NASA. I suspect that now the Kepler has found numerous nearby candidate earth-like planets
and we know exactly where to look that some sort of space-based interferometric telescope will happen
someday. Meanwhile at least a couple of groups have been trying for years to design and raise a
lot of money for billion dollar ground-based giant telescopes. There's a Caltech instrument,
an instrument called the owl for overwhelmingly large telescope and there's another big project
in my own Carnegie institution called the giant Magellan telescope. Anyway these are projected
to be really big light-collecting machines with arrays of mirrors approaching 100 feet in diameter.
Recall that a century ago the radical new game-changing Mount Wilson telescope that
Edwin Hubble used to discover galactic red shifts that was an unprecedented 100 inch telescope
and here we're talking 100 feet. In any case the design involves taking a bunch of smaller
mirrors and arranging them to form a much larger reflecting surface. Calculations suggest that a
100-foot ground-based telescope coupled with the latest light-collecting technologies will be large
enough to see earth-like planets orbiting nearby stars. That would be amazing. Equally important
such a telescope to take a spectrum of the planet and might be able to resolve the element oxygen
in the atmosphere. Many scientists think that the presence of a lot of oxygen in a planet's
atmosphere would be a clear sign of life so this next generation of giant telescopes is a really
exciting prospect. Okay let's let's change gears and move a lot closer to home. We're fortunate
there are eight planets that we can study in much greater detail. The planets that make our solar
system. I want to do a quick survey of these neighboring worlds and we'll find that each
planet is different with its own distinctive characteristics and its own mysteries but there
are also important common themes that reveal critical aspects of earth's history. The four
planets closest to the Sun that's Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars are all relatively small rocky
worlds. The elements silicon, oxygen, magnesium, and iron with significant amounts of calcium and
aluminum characterize their compositions. Those elements you'll recall all appear in the
air minerals and they are among the most abundant elements produced by fusion in big stars.
So the prevailing idea is that when the Sun ignited with nuclear fusion reactions it began to
blast a solar wind out past the planets. The regions closer to the Sun were naturally a lot
hotter and most of the hydrogen and other gases were stripped off and blown out to cold
regions of space. What was left behind were four rocky terrestrial planets. Now if you think about
it the process that separated the rocky inner planets and the gaseous outer ones is like a
distillation column. Recall we met distillation in lecture one. You can separate chemicals by
putting them in a heated column. Different compounds melt or boil at different temperatures
so you can use distillation to separate materials with different melting and boiling
points and that's exactly what happened in our solar system and it's a theme. The separation
and concentration of chemical elements that we'll revisit again and again throughout this course.
The innermost planet Mercury is the smallest of the eight major planets and the one that is most
desolate and most forbidding. Its small size and its proximity to the Sun have made Mercury
extremely difficult to observe with Earth-based telescopes but we're now getting an amazing
close-up view with NASA's spacecraft messenger which is in orbit around the planet. That's just
an amazing feat to place a satellite in orbit around Mercury because the gravitational pull of
the Sun is so much greater near Mercury and the solar radiation is so intense but NASA did it.
And now messenger is returning a treasure trove of data about that first innermost planet.
Mercury turns out to be distinctive in a couple of ways. For one thing its orbit of 88 days is
quite elliptical. It gets as close as 46 million miles excuse me 46 million kilometers to the
Sun and as far away as 70 million kilometers. In spite of that very very short year less than
three Earth months the Mercuryian day is very long 176 days or exactly twice the year on Mercury.
Think about what that means if you stood on Mercury as equator it would take almost six
Earth months for the Sun to rise and set and then rise again. You'd experience three months of
blasting heat from the Sun and then a short transition to utter darkness and then cold for
another three months. Here Mercury has a lesson for our understanding Earth history as as do all
the planets. One aspect of Earth that makes it habitable the way it is is the length of the day.
It's neither too long is in the case of Mercury or too short and we'll see some of the consequences
of that when we get to Jupiter. Dramatic photographs from messenger reveal the surface that is heavily
cratered but also with possible regions of recent volcanic activity. There's virtually no atmosphere
in Mercury so no erosion to speak of. Old landforms persist for a long long time. The most important
thing to remember about Mercury is that it's very hot it's very dry perhaps the most inhospitable
world in the solar system for a living being. Yep there is one caveat to that the polar regions.
Mercury's rotation is tidally locked to the Sun so the rotation axis is absolutely perpendicular
to the orbit around the Sun. That means that in some regions close to the North Pole and the South
Pole in the bottoms of certain craters for example the ground never sees direct sunlight or else it
only receives the most glancing solar rays. The temperature in these craters never gets very hot
and it now turns out that there are significant accumulations of water ice and possibly other
volatiles that are formed in these less extreme environments. It's even possible that there are
subsurface warm zones where liquid water might persist so suffice it to say we still have a
lot to learn about Mercury which is the closest planet to the Sun. Next comes Venus. Venus is
Earth's closest planetary neighbor both in its distance and in its size. The nearly circular
orbit of Venus has an average distance of about 108 million kilometers from the Sun. It orbits the
Sun every 225 Earth days so a year on Venus is about two-thirds of Earth's year. Venus is curious
and then it has a very slow retrograde rotation about its axis that is it rotates the wrong way
compared to the Sun in most other planets. On Venus the Sun rises in the West and it sets in the
East and it rises again once every 243 days so the situation is even more extreme than Mercury.
Venusian day lasts almost eight Earth months and we're going to come back to that curious
anomaly in lecture 16. The most important aspect of Venus in the context of comparisons with Earth
is its thick atmosphere composed primarily of clouds of carbon dioxide and of nitrogen.
The surface pressure of Venus is about 95 times that of Earth. What's more all the carbon dioxide
has produced what might be called a runaway greenhouse effect. Carbon dioxide efficiently
traps the Sun's radiant energy so temperatures build up unmercifully and daytime temperatures
in Venus reach about 490 degrees. Earth's atmosphere by comparison is it's much more
benign and its greenhouse effect much more restrained but Venus proves that runaway effects
are possible and the things can heat up a lot. We're going to come back to this aspect of Earth
when we consider past episodes of global warming for example in lecture 37 and that's when we
consider Earth's possible future in lectures 46 and 47. The surface of Venus is effectively
hidden from view by the thick cloud cover but the pioneer Venus spacecraft was able to map
the surface in detail using radar. Scientists discovered a surface with big mountain ranges,
cratered plains, volcanoes so Venus must still be a very active planet and that's another point
that reflects on Earth and its evolution. Bigger planets hold more internal heat and internal
heat can drive a lot of interesting geology. Now Mars. Mars is by far the most intensively
studied planetary neighbor for one simple reason. Of all the planets Mars boasts the strong possibility
that it once had abundant surface water and if it had water that it might possibly have had or
might still have life. Mars is half the diameter of Earth and it is just over a tenth of Earth's
mass. It has an elliptical orbit that averages about one and a half times the Earth's sun distance.
Depending on the relative positions in their orbits Earth and Mars can be as close as 60
million kilometers and as far away as 400 million kilometers. A year on Mars lasts almost two Earth
years because it's farther from the Sun but the day on Mars is quite coincidentally close to the
length of an Earth Day about 25 hours and that coincidence actually wreaks havoc on scientists
who supervise Mars lander missions because all those missions operate on a Mars clock.
You operate Mars rovers and landers during the Martian Daylight when you can see what's going
on. So mission scientists start the work in phase with Earth but every day they get about an hour
farther behind Earth time and after a dozen days or so they're completely out of phase with Daylight.
Their families, their school schedules, TV, life in general is just completely crazy. I'm told it's
pretty debilitating experience after a few weeks though the similar length of day could ultimately
represent a distinct advantage to future Mars colonists. Mars has an intriguing similarity to
Earth and that its axis is tilted about 25 degrees the plane of orbit around the Sun. That's comparable
to Earth's 23.5 degree tilt. So Mars has seasons just like Earth and unlike Mercury and Venus,
Mars has two small irregularly shaped moons just tens of kilometers across. These moons called
Phobos and Deimos look a lot like they could be captured asteroids and here's an intriguing point.
Unlike Earth with its one big moon Mars has nothing to keep the planet from wobbling on its axis.
That means that over many hundreds of thousands of years Mars goes from rotating almost perpendicular
to its orbit just like Mercury to being tilted more than 40 degrees. That extreme variation
coupled with Mars's relatively elliptical orbit results in much greater climate fluctuations than
on Earth. Some astronomers have even suggested that the presence of a big moon is critical to Earth's
relative climate stability. Mars's prominent surface features that are clearly visible from Earth
most obvious are the polar ice caps which wax and wane with the 686 day Martian year.
The planet also shows brighter and darker reddish areas with what appeared to some 19th century
astronomers as linear features. We're going to come back to those suggestive canals and their role
in the early search for life on other planets in lecture 19. Thanks to a host of orbiting spacecraft
from Mariner in the 1960s to orbiters that are operating today we have detailed photos of almost
the entire Martian surface and the landscape is just utterly amazing with water card valleys and
ravines has cratered plains it has huge volcanoes in fact the largest known volcanoes anywhere in
the solar system. These observations suggest that Mars once had lots of water perhaps even a large
ocean and perhaps a thicker atmosphere as well. We'll get an even closer look at Mars thanks to
the fleet of landers and rovers sent by NASA. The Mars Pathfinder mission which touched down on
July 4th 1997 featured both a lander and a six-wheeled 23 pound rover named Sojourner.
Then those great spirit and opportunity rovers of the last decade and now the amazing nuclear powered
Curiosity rover that's an automobile-sized science platform that's it's returning even more
detailed information on landforms and rocks and minerals atmosphere lots more.
The most anticipated Mars mission for many of us is a possible sample return effort
but that's a long way off and it will be exceedingly difficult to pull off. Now it's not that hard to
get to Mars it's not that hard to land and to collect a sample our landers and rovers have
done that several times. The real challenge is how you would get the sample back off the planet
and return it to Earth. It takes a huge amount of rocket fuel and the technology to land a
rocket on the Martian surface and then take off again is daunting even if the sample was just
the size of a coke can and that's what's now envisioned. Still, still we can hope. NASA has
kept a Mars sample return on its books even with pretty hefty budget cuts. One proposal for a joint
mission between NASA and the European Space Agency is slated very tentatively to launch in 2018
with the sample return in the 2020 to 2022 time frame. Though I don't know anyone who would put
money on that happening on schedule. And then there's that ultimate possibility the possibility of a
human expedition. Certainly Mars is the first planet we try to visit because Venus is much too
hot and hostile. Mars has water it has sunlight as the prospect of setting up a sustainable base camp
but there's a big impediment and that's our seemingly unquestionable policy of returning
astronauts to Earth. That's a requirement that vastly increases the expense and the danger of a
Mars mission. If on the other hand we could design a one-way mission where the extra weight was not
fuel for a return trip but rather for supplies to set up a more permanent and sustainable base
then we might be able to pull it off. There'll be more about that possibility
late in the course. Suffice it to say that Mars remains a very tempting place to visit.
So that's a quick tour of the rocky terrestrial planets. On beyond Mars before we come to the next
planet that's the big gas ball we call Jupiter we have to make a quick stop at the asteroid belt.
That's a broad band of rocky debris halfway between Mars and Jupiter that looks for all
the world like the remains of a planet. In fact the asteroid belt is just about where you might
expect to find another a fifth terrestrial planet. What we find instead are perhaps 50,000 objects
a kilometer in diameter or larger in the asteroid belt. Now that's not enough mass to make a very
big planet but given enough time those asteroids could have formed a good size protoplanet
some maybe several hundred kilometers in diameter yet gravity has not been able to clump all those
rocks together. According to one theory the strong gravitational force of Jupiter
disrupts the asteroid belt and prevents them from coming together and here's another lesson for Earth.
Our planet might never have formed if there were much bigger planets in our vicinity
like the hot super giants discovered in our search for exoplanets. Near the end of the
course we'll also learn about other rogue asteroids that aren't confined to the asteroid belt.
Some of those asteroids adopt Earth crossing orbits and they could pose a major threat if one
actually hit Earth so the asteroids are a bit more than curiosities in our quest to tell the story of
Earth. Out farther far beyond the asteroid belt a billion miles from the Sun the character of the
solar system changes and it changes quite radically and the next lecture we enter the colder darker
the main of the gas giant or Jovian planets those four big spheres of hydrogen and helium
Jupiter Saturn Uranus and Neptune
