For the past 540 million years, fossils of organisms with hard shells, teeth, and bones
have accumulated in thick layerings of sediment on land and at the bottom of the seas.
This vast fossil record speaks of extraordinary biological invention, hundreds of thousands
of known fossil species of corals and crinoids, brachypods and bryozoa, clams and snails,
not to mention the immense number of different microscopic and soft bodies animals that we
rarely see preserved as fossils.
Specialists estimate the diversity in excess of 20,000 known species of trilobites with
dozens more described every year, and perhaps five times that number yet to be discovered
and described.
Given that trilobites only inhabited Earth for about 280 million years, between about
530 and 250 million years ago, that is an average of a new trilobite species every one
or two thousand years.
If we take all of the rich diversity of fossil life into account, then it is likely that
several new species of plants and animals must have appeared on average every century
for more than 500 million years.
It's not so obvious from the fossil record, at least not at first glance, or a few sobering
episodes of mass death.
Mass extinctions when rather suddenly vast numbers of species disappeared forever in
a relatively short time span.
I suppose it's human nature to spot something new more easily than the absence of something
familiar.
After all, it's relatively easy to recognize when a plant or animal is novel, and paleontologists
are not immune to the temptation of describing the first or the earliest appearance of any
significant taxa or trait.
I've been doing exactly that in the last couple of lectures.
The first plant, the first tetrapod, the first reptile, the first cockroach, they all made
news.
Headlines have also announced the first flower, the first snake, albeit with tiny vestigial
hind legs, and the first human.
One recent scientific paper even claimed the discovery of the oldest known fossil penis
from a 400 million year old spider.
That was yet another remarkable find from the reigning chair in Scotland.
Of course, in each case, the word first actually means oldest known, and in many cases new
headlines will be made when even older examples turn up.
Loss of a species is much, much harder to recognize and to confirm in the fossil record.
Extinctions require meticulous teasing out of fossil diversity, sediment layer by sediment
layer, time interval by time interval across the globe.
It's not enough just to collect all the fossils from one prime locality.
You have to assemble coexisting suites of fossil organisms, one layer at a time, and
then compare each layer's life forms from many different localities around the world.
Many decades of effort have paid off in the documentation of five great mass extinctions,
five times over the past 540 million years when Earth appears to have suffered the loss
of more than half of all its species of marine animals in a relatively short time interval.
It has more data accumulate from more sediment sections.
It seems there may have been as many as 15 other less severe mass extinction episodes
spread out over the Phanerozoic Eon as well.
It's difficult to tease out a sudden loss of a species from the fossil record.
Remember, geological change is constant.
The oceans advance and retreat, advance again, shallow seas open and close, sedimentation
slows during cool periods and rocks are constantly being lost through erosion.
The rock record is spotty.
It's incomplete, like a many-volume encyclopedia with lots of its pages randomly ripped out
and even some missing volumes.
What's more, it's not always possible to obtain accurate ages of sedimentary layers,
so it may not be possible to match up strata from different parts of a continent, much
less continents on opposite sides of the globe.
So it's always possible that the apparent disappearance of any group of animals or plants
might simply reflect a change in sea level or a gap in the fossil record.
Nevertheless, as fossil databases have grown to include millions of specimens from hundreds
of thousands of localities and as paleontologists around the world compare notes, the largest
extinction events are becoming obvious against the more normal background of life and death.
In the last lecture, I touched on some of the many extinction events within the Paleozoic
era, including three in the Cambrian period, a big one at the end of the Ordovician period,
and six more during the Devonian and Carboniferous periods.
Each of these intervals of increased species loss appears to be associated with a positive
shift in carbon and oxygen isotopes and thus ice ages.
But of all the many periods of biological stress, one event stands out.
The end of the Paleozoic era itself, 251 million years ago, saw the extinction of an estimated
70% of land species and a whopping 96% of marine species, an unprecedented global event
called the Permotriassic extinction, or the Great Dying.
Never before or since in Earth history have so many land or sea creatures, including all
the trilobites, disappeared forever.
The Great Dying was one of the most dramatic and enigmatic events in Earth history and
scientists aren't yet agreed on what caused it.
Unlike some of the earlier, smaller extinction, it doesn't appear to have been caused by
just one factor like an ice age, and growing evidence suggests that this was not a quick
episode either.
In fact, it may have been spread out over several million years, or as several groups
are now claiming, there may have been too closely spaced and in some ways related extinction
events.
Let's look more closely at this late Permian period, roughly 260 to 250 million years ago,
and see what might have happened.
We recall that the Permian period was ushered in as a time of environmental stress.
A great ice age, almost 50 million years in duration, lasted until about 275 million years
ago.
And then the single Pangean supercontinent was dominated by desert conditions.
Those climates led to a decline in plant life and a corresponding precipitous reduction in
atmospheric oxygen to less than half of the carboniferous maximum.
About relatively low 15% oxygen content in the atmosphere was a source of stress for
animals which began to show a sharp uptick in extinction rates as early as 265 million
years ago.
That's about 15 million years before the Great Dying.
Then at about 260 million years ago, a clear extinction event caused the loss of entire
groups of marine animals, including small shelled creatures called fusillinids and ancient
relatives of the chambered nautilus called aminoids.
But the biggest extinction interval appears to have been between about 252 and 251 million
years ago, when fully 96% of all marine life forms went extinct, along with perhaps 70%
of land animals and plants.
So one can point to that last time as the height of a much more protracted period of
species lost.
The whole Permotriassic extinction represents an interval of both gradual and relatively
sudden declines in diversity.
What could have caused this unique crisis in the history of Earth's biosphere?
Without a doubt, there were multiple reinforcing stress factors that may have come into play.
We've already seen that a protracted ice age, decline in atmospheric oxygen, and desertification
set the stage for a stressful environment that greatly reduced the extent of conifer
forests and killed off the jungles of fern trees.
By the way, that loss of fern trees is probably one reason why we don't find extensive coal
measures after the late Paleozoic Era.
And scientists have not been in a loss to suggest a host of additional factors in the
Great Dying, all of which seem to pile on one after another.
For one thing, the decline of oxygen may have reduced the extent of the protective ozone
layer, so that harmful ultraviolet radiation may have increased.
Mutant fossil spores from the end of Paleozoic rocks around the world from Antarctica to
Greenland provide intriguing evidence, if not a smoking gun, for this ozone crisis.
There's also evidence that the deep ocean in some places became anoxic, and thus limited
its ability to support animals.
And at a sort of double whammy, reduced oxygen led to chemical changes that increased the
ocean's acidity and made it much more difficult to organisms to form their carbonate shells.
We thus observed very high rates of extinction among those creatures, including most kinds
of brachypods and crinoids, and as I mentioned before, all the trilobites.
And there were other environmental stresses.
The end of the Paleozoic era saw modest ice age, with thick ice covering the south polar
portions of Pangea.
That return to cold climates from 260 to perhaps 252 million years is another possible factor
in extinction, because severe cold always places stresses on ecosystems.
And a consequent large drop in ocean levels, which were already low because of the single
supercontinent and correspondingly vast deep ocean basins, would have provided additional
stresses by exposing most of the world's continental shelves to air.
The continental shelves are the ocean's most productive biosphere where all the reef-type
ecosystems develop, so the loss of a large fraction of those productive shallow water
zones would have restricted the growth of coral reefs, lagoons, shoals, and other diverse
shallow water ecosystems.
In a cascading effect, those lost habitats would have constricted the entire ocean food
web.
So there are many possible contributing factors to the Permotoracic extinction, all of which
had played a role in the changing biosphere in earlier stages of the Paleozoic era.
Earth has always experienced changes in atmospheric and ocean chemistry, in global temperatures
and ice distribution, in rainfall patterns and in sea level, and life has always adapted
to these changes.
Sometimes species were lost, but other species evolved to fill any vacant niches.
So what was different about the Great Dying?
How was it possible that only 4% of marine species survived?
Two additional factors, both of which came right at the end of the Permian period seemed
to have combined to make this time very different.
The first, and arguably the most important of all, was large-scale volcanism that commenced
near the end of the Paleozoic era, and almost exactly coincides with the mass extinction
251 million years ago.
The term mega-volcano, meaning an eruption that releases huge amounts of volcanic ash
and gasses into the atmosphere, has been much in the news lately.
Geologists keep finding evidence of volcanic eruptions that dwarf anything known from human
history.
At a time when small eruptions of an Icelandic or Alaskan volcano can disrupt European air
travel for weeks, the concept of an eruption a thousand times or more larger gives one
pause.
That would be a global catastrophe.
But now, imagine something a million times bigger than anything we humans have ever
experienced.
The protracted end of Permian eruption produced as much as a million cubic miles of basalt
in Siberia, covering an area of 770,000 square miles.
That's much bigger than the entire state of Alaska.
This prolonged event was by far the largest known volcanic eruption in Earth history.
And yet, because of its remote location, it's only just now coming into focus.
New international geological surveys are taking place each summer in the remote central Siberian
region where these thick deposits called the Siberian Traps are located.
For a long time, it was thought these epic eruptions, which poured out of a group of
volcanoes over half a million year interval, were fairly benign basalts with only modest
amounts of explosive power.
However, recent findings of thick volcanic ash point to a much more violent sequence
of events accompanied by the release of huge amounts of toxic sulfur compounds along with
lots of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide.
What's more, much of the volcanic rock erupted through thick coal deposits, and the burning
of that coal caused vastly more CO2 to be pumped into the atmosphere along with a possible
release of toxic coal ash.
Recent estimates put the total increase in carbon dioxide at about 2,000 parts per million,
which is more than 10 times the amount correlated with all human use of fossil fuels since
the 18th century.
Such a vast release of potentially harmful gases must have severely compromised Earth's
environment.
First, pulses of volcanic ash and dust probably reduced the sun's input and exacerbated the
existing ice age, while the nasty sulfur compounds would have led to acid rain, accelerated ozone
loss in the upper atmosphere, and caused further environmental deterioration.
And then, another sudden change.
Volcanic CO2 is implicated in a swift and devastating shift in climate that almost exactly
correlates with the end of the Permian and maximum extinction rate.
A sudden rise in average global temperatures by as much as 15 degrees Fahrenheit led to
a global drought and widespread loss of terrestrial plants and animals.
This rapid climate change may have been worsened by the global scale melting of methane hydrates
and release of immense quantities of that potent greenhouse gas into the atmosphere,
a positive feedback loop that worries some scientists today.
By the way, this idea that megalocanism was a central factor in the extent of the Great
Dying has now been extended to all five of the largest mass extinction events in Earth
history.
Every one of these episodes is known to coincide with one of five massive releases of volcanic
lava and ash.
The idea that's emerging is that every so often, a hot pulse of buoyant soft rock,
known as a mantle plume, forms near the core mantle boundary deep inside Earth and slowly
rises to generate one of these prolonged volcanic events.
These now rare occurrences harken back to the early Archean and Hadian eons before three
billion years ago when vertical tectonics was the dominant type of mountain building.
We know this process continues today with another plume thought to be rising below Yellowstone
Park right now.
Our best estimates are that it will be a long time, perhaps a million years before that plume
creates another megalvolcano in North America, but it will happen again.
As if climate change in acidic oceans and worldwide droughts and megalvolcanoes weren't
enough, there's also some evidence to support one more global catastrophe near the end of
the Permian period.
There may have been a giant impact of an asteroid or comet as well.
The evidence comes from reports of shocked mineral grains and layers of meteorite fragments
and ancient layers of Antarctic ice of the correct age, roughly 250 million years old.
No large impact site has been found of that age, but given the rapid turnover of ocean
crust, 70% of Earth's surface every 200 million years or so, that's not too surprising.
It's even possible that a big impact could have triggered the outpouring of the Siberian
traps, and surprisingly, such an impact might do the trick either by hitting a Siberia or
impacting the opposite point on the globe.
Whatever the cause is, the Great Dying left a staggering gap in Earth's biodiversity,
and it was unusually slow to recover.
It was several million years before reef ecosystems again appear in the fossil record.
It took 30 million years for anything approaching full recovery.
But recover it did, and in a theme repeated after every extinction event, loss led to
opportunity.
It was a new era, the Mesozoic era, and it saw new fauna and flora evolve to fill the
vacant niches.
We have entered the age of dinosaurs, and this is indeed the timespan from 251 to 65
and a half million years ago, during which dinosaurs were the dominant vertebrates.
It's also the interval when the Pangean supercontinent began to split apart, and what we recognize
as today's continents and oceans began to take form.
The Mesozoic era is conveniently divided into three periods, each of which saw the appearance
of distinctive new life forms, and each of which is bounded by a mass extinction event.
The Triassic period came first, that's the 50 million year interval from about 250 to
200 million years ago.
As I've indicated, life got off to a slow start, but soon new organisms had evolved
to fill the oceans and populate the lands.
Here we find the first of the amazing ammonites, cephalopods that are related to squids and
that lived in beautiful coiled shells.
Some of these predators would grow to be more than eight feet in diameter and dominate
many marine ecosystems.
And of course, there were the dinosaurs.
During the Triassic period, two large groups of reptiles competed on land, the Theraspids
including ancestors of mammals, and the Archosaurs, which were ancestral to the dinosaurs and
birds.
Branching evolution was rapid amongst these terrestrial vertebrates.
The first true dinosaurs appeared in the late Triassic about 225 million years ago, and
they quickly split into the two familiar dinosaur groups, which are distinguished by their very
different pelvic anatomy.
The Syrishian or lizard-hipped dinosaurs display more reptilian characteristics.
The Ornithoshians, or the bird-hipped dinosaurs, have a distinctive avian-helvic girdle.
We tend to think of dinosaurs as great lumbering beasts, and it's true that by the end of
the Mesozoic Era, dinosaurs had become the largest land animals in Earth history.
For those first dinosaurs, the Triassic period were rather modest creatures, short in stature,
and looking rather like generic two-legged dinosaurs.
Of course, it wasn't smooth sailing throughout the Mesozoic Era.
The Triassic period ended about 200 million years ago, quite abruptly, with a major mass
extinction, perhaps the fifth or sixth largest in the Phanerozoic Eon.
This event was so obvious in the fossil record that it's used to mark the boundary between
the Triassic and Jurassic periods.
Approximately half of all species on Earth became extinct in a very short time interval,
no more than 10,000 years, and possibly much more rapidly than that.
As with the Permotriassic extinction, an episode of Megavalconism correlates with the
loss of species.
In this case, it's the 200 million-year-old central Atlantic magmatic province that's
to blame.
That volcanism, which is recorded as ash layers that cover a wide swath of North America,
caused a large release of nasty sulfur gases and carbon dioxide, so a variety of environmental
consequences must have followed.
It's also possible that the volcanic activity was coupled with an asteroid impact, though
no specific impact site has yet been identified.
Among the many organisms to die at the Triassic-Jurassic mass extinction were many non-dinosaur
reptiles, as well as about 20 percent of all families of marine organisms.
A special note was the extinction of the entire class of conodons, which are important tooth-like
microfossils from the Cambrian through the Triassic periods that are widely used to identify
both the age and the maximum temperature of sediments that host petroleum.
The color of the phosphatic conodons is very sensitive to temperature, so the oil industry
relies on that data to estimate the maturity of their oil fields.
And amusing confusion arises because for more than a century the name conodont was applied
to the microfossils.
But in 1980, fossils of the complete, soft-bodied, eel-like creatures were found.
So conodons, the animal, possesses a ring of up to 19 microscopic tooth-like fossils,
which are also called conodons.
This end Triassic mass extinction is a case where loss of old species opened the door
for new species, most notably the rapid radiation of large reptiles into the seas, the ichthyosaurs
and plesiosaurs, and into the air, most notably the pterosaurs, but also the first known
diminutive ancestral birds, which were related to dinosaurs.
This diversification was amplified by the rifting of Pangea into two very big landmasses.
To the north was Laurasia, which as the name suggests, stretched from Laurentia's the
North American cratons all the way across to Eurasia.
To the south was Gondwana, which had the cratons of Africa and South America at its center.
That meant that dinosaurs began two divergent evolutionary tracks on two great continents.
Pteranosaurs, for example, developed throughout Laurasia, but apparently not on Gondwana.
The Jurassic period also saw a remarkable diversification of ammonites.
Now I find ammonite evolution particularly intriguing, because it's largely based on
the geometry of the many chambers that form the protective shells and buoyancy control
system of these cephalopods.
Ammonites are commonly coiled structures.
You find them in all ranges of sizes, from an inch or less to many feet across.
They also can be found in cut and polished versions, where those chambers are beautifully
exposed, sometimes even used for jewelry because of that beauty.
Like a chambered nautilus, each ammonite had many nested compartments, which not only
provided significant strength to the shell, but also could be flooded sequentially to
alter the buoyancy.
Each chamber was separated from the next by a folded wall, which creates distinctive
markings on the outside of the shell where adjacent chambers connect.
The identification of different ammonite species relies on these so-called sutures.
As a general rule, the sutures become much more elaborate through time.
Similar to the Mesozoic Era, aminoids have simple curved or wavy lines of sutures.
In many Jurassic ammonites, those sutures are much more convoluted curves, and by the
Cretaceous Period, ammonites sported squiggly sutures of remarkable complexity and beauty.
The end of the Jurassic Period, dated to 145.5 million years ago, merges seamlessly into
the Cretaceous, the final period of the Mesozoic Era.
There was no great extinction of it, nor were there radical changes in life forms at that
boundary.
Instead, the Jurassic Cretaceous divide simply reflects the age of certain distinctive rock
formations in Europe where geologists first established the geological timeline.
Cretaceous is a word derived from the Latin term for chalk, and the most famous of the
Cretaceous Period's rock formations are, in fact, the great chalk beds of the Paris
Basin, in Germany, Denmark, and South Coastal England, including the famed White Cliffs
of Dover.
The Cretaceous Period lasted for 80 million years.
That's the longest period of the Phanerozoic Era, and yet conditions seem to have been
much more stable than in most previous times.
The climate was warm throughout most of that interval, so ice caps and glaciers were minimal.
Sea levels were high, temperate coastal environments along the newly created margins of the fragmenting
masses of Lurasian, Gondwana fostered a global blooming of life.
Ammonites diversified as never before, with giant species more than six feet in diameter
and dinosaurs, they experienced an astonishing radiation.
When you think of the classic giant dinosaurs like Stegosaurus, triceratops, Apatosaurus,
which was once known as Brontosaurus, and of course Tyrannosaurus rex, you're thinking
of the evolutionary exuberance of the Cretaceous Period.
This is the time when all the really big land vertebrates, the 80 and 90 foot monsters,
reached their zenith.
Big marine reptiles like Mosasaur shared the waters with a growing variety of fish, including
sharks and rays.
Big flying pterosaurs were also abundant in the earlier Cretaceous, but they were gradually
displaced by a growing diversity of birds.
At the same time, a variety of mammals, initially all marsupials, had evolved.
But they were generally small, rodent-like creatures, and many of the modern lineages
of insects, including ants, termites, and ancestors of butterflies, arose at that time.
Plants also saw a major evolutionary spurt with the rise of the angiosperms, the flowering
plants, along with a host of new pollinating insects, such as bees.
Large, leafy trees also flourished and formed forests of a distinctly modern caste.
Great tectonics played a major role in shaping the Cretaceous world.
Gondwana was unified at the start, but it soon was breaking apart with Africa and India
rifting from South America, and Arctica, and Australia.
Laurasia, with what is now Europe and North America, began to split to form the North Atlantic
Ocean.
The new deep ocean volcanic chains like the Mid-Atlantic Ridge raised global ocean levels,
so that as much as a third of modern continents were submerged by shallow inland seas.
Only about 20% of Earth's surface was dry, while the inland seas were rich in ammonites,
marine reptiles, and other life forms that are preserved abundantly in Cretaceous rocks
around the world.
One of my favorite formations is the pier shale, which is a carbon-rich black shale that outcrops
in many places in the Great Plains, notably in Colorado and South Dakota.
The pier shale speaks of a vast inland sea that covered half the North American continent
about 100 million years ago.
As the Atlantic Ocean opened wider, the western coast of Europe and the eastern coast of North
America were tectonically quiet, but are known to geologists as passive margins.
At the same time, however, important new mountain ranges were beginning to form on several continents,
notably along North America's western coast.
The Rocky Mountains started to grow as a convergent margin along Northwest America's coast repeatedly
brought island and strips of land colliding into the continent.
The basin and range province of the American West is one manifestation of these repeated
collisions.
The initial formation of the Alps, by the northward motion of the African plate into
Europe, also began in the late Mesozoic Era.
All in all, the Mesozoic Era is exceptionally well documented.
We have a rich inventory of rocks that are loaded with fossils.
We have clear paleomagnetic evidence for the positions and relative motions of the continents,
and we can deduce outlines of major changes in climate and environment.
Yet big mysteries remain.
For example, what were the oxygen levels during this 185 million-year span, and why?
Was the climate during the Cretaceous period really stable and warm for 80 million years?
And so, why was that interval so stable, compared to what came before or after?
What were the unique geochemical, physical, and biological characteristics of the ocean
that led to massive precipitation or chalk then, unlike any other time in Earth history?
Obviously, there is still much to be learned about the age of the dinosaurs.
The Great Dying, caused by climate change, acidic oceans, drought, mega-volcanoes, and
perhaps a meteor impact, brought 280 million years of trilobite evolution to an end, and
marked the beginning of 185 million years for the dinosaurs.
But as we all know, the dinosaurs themselves perished in the most famous, though not the
most wide-ranging of the Great Extinction events.
Biology and Earth have been intimately related not only in life, but also in death.
