Life emerged on Earth over 3.5 billion years ago, at a time when oceans still covered most
of the world, where basalt volcanoes and proto continents of granite represented the only land.
A simple, single-cell form of life now inhabited our world, and it radiated and diversified in that
form for the next billion years.
Life has irrevocably transformed every facet of Earth's near-surface environment.
The most obvious changes have occurred in the oceans and atmosphere,
but life has radically altered the rocks and minerals as well.
Those big changes took a lot of time for a billion years or more after the innovation
of that first living microbe.
Earth's surface hadn't changed in any significant way.
It is true that new varieties of microbes probably formed brownish or purplish scums along some coastlines.
It's even possible that there were patches of greenish slime that populated shallow ponds
and bays as a few pioneering cells began to experiment with ways to capture the sun's energy.
But three and a half billion years ago, the continents were still totally barren.
No plants decorated the rocky landscape, and there certainly weren't any animals of any source.
If you were suddenly transported to that alien, anoxic world, you would still die quickly.
Earth, at age one billion years or roughly three and a half billion years ago,
was at a major transition point in our planet's history.
A lot has happened to set Earth on its path to the modern world.
We know the oceans and atmosphere had formed,
though they were very different from the oceans and atmosphere today.
Plate tectonics was just getting started, and the first continents were being assembled,
though they were much smaller in total landmass compared to our time.
And the first life had emerged, though it consisted entirely of microscopic cells.
In many senses then, Earth was well on its way to becoming what it would become.
But there's something special that sets Earth at three and a half billion years apart from earlier
times, at least for those of us in the Earth sciences. That's because at about three and a
half billion years, we begin to see a significant rock record. For the first time in Earth's long
history, large-scale deposits of rock survive. These revealing fragments of the early crust are
called cratons, which are very old, very stable, buoyant pieces of continents that represent
ancient large islands and many continents. Cratons are generally more than two billion years old,
and some may be closer to four billion years old. A handful of cratons in North America,
Africa, and Australia form the very hearts of continents, and they preserve the oldest rocks
on Earth. I can't overstate how important these cratons and their amazing rocks are to our growing
understanding of Earth history. Evidence for what happened during Earth's first few hundred
million years is incredibly sparse. A few isolated zircon grains, no larger than a piece of sand,
date from those early years. Those are the oldest known fragments of our planet.
We also have meteorites and moon rocks, which provide some clues about the early stages of our
solar system. Indeed, the moon rocks document quite a bit about what was happening in our
neck of the woods during the first billion years or so, and someday when we revisit the moon,
we might be lucky enough to find fragments of Earth's earliest crust that were blasted into
space and landed on the moon as Earth meteorites. But there's nothing like actual rocks in outcrops
that you can walk on, that you can hammer, and drill, and take chunky specimens back to the
lab for analysis. I want to take a look at some of those earliest available rocks to give you a
sense of what they tell us about Earth in those early days of the living world. But let's start
beginning comfortable with the timescale that geologists use to pinpoint different episodes
in Earth's history. The geologic timescale is, of course, a work constantly in progress. It divides
Earth history into major transitions as that imperfect history is known at a given time,
but we keep learning more. And it turns out that many of Earth's most transformative events
probably don't correspond exactly to any boundary in the current timeline. So it wouldn't surprise
me at all if the names and dates will be changed sometime in the future. Of course, that'll cause
all sorts of confusion in the geological literature, so maybe we're just stuck with the current version.
In any case, Earth history is first divided into four major eons. The earliest and consequently
the least understood is the Hadean Eon, literally the hellish time extending from Earth's formation
through about 4.03 billion years ago. By convention, the Hadean Eon is defined as the time from which
no rock formations are known. A couple of years ago, that number was 3.85 billion years, but as of
today, the Hadean Eon ends at 4.03 billion years because that's now the oldest known rock formation
on Earth. So the Hadean is a shifting definition, and it's probably just a matter of time before
some even older rock is found. For example, there are now claims, much disputed claims I should add,
that a little outcrop along Hudson Bay in Canada is as much as 4.2 billion years old. And there are
those zircon crystals that date back to 4.4 billion years, so the demarcation of the Hadean Eon
is really pretty arbitrary. It's possible that life emerged at about 3.85 billion years,
but could have been hundreds of millions of years earlier, or later we simply don't know.
What is true is that the rock record is extremely sparse prior to 3.85 billion,
perhaps no more than a few acres of total exposure on Earth. That means we have essentially no direct
information regarding Earth's Hadean surface. Virtually everything we do know comes from inference
and analogy. So that's the mysterious Hadean Eon. Next comes the Archean Eon, which spans the period
from 4.03 to 2.5 billion years. That's almost a third of Earth's history. The Archean Eon is
further divided into four eras, and I have to confess that these four subdivisions seem really
arbitrary to me. There's the Eo Archean era. Eo means dawn from 4.03 to 3.6 billion years.
There are only a very few small outcrops from that interval, notably 4.03 billion year rocks from
Canada and outcrops as old as 3.85 billion years along the southwestern coast of Greenland at Isua
and Achillea Island. And there are also some rocks about 3.6 billion years old in central
Canada. In any case, those oldest Eo Archean rocks are all pretty altered by heat and pressure.
They've been metamorphosed in such a way as to mask what the original rocks might have been.
It's not even clear in most cases whether the rocks were sediments or from volcanoes.
One exception and an incredibly important discovery are the oldest of the so-called
banded iron formations or biffs. These iron-rich rocks must have formed on the ocean floor,
where iron-rich minerals were deposited in layers. The rocks are quite distinctive and beautiful
with alternating bands of red hematite and black magnetite, which are both iron oxide minerals.
These banded iron formations tell the story of a time when there were shallow oceans,
margins, and iron-rich seas. It's also possible that microbes played an important role in the
formation of the biffs by pulling the iron out of solution and forming those uniform layers.
So it's entirely possible that these rocks represent some of the earliest signs of life
as old as 3.85 billion years. The Paleo Archean era comes next. It rather arbitrarily spans 400
million years from 3.6 to 3.2 billion years. Now, neither of those endpoints is associated with
any obvious major events in Earth history. However, this is the time span when the first
major pieces of crust, the first real surviving cratons, date from. Pieces of the Paleo Archean
crust hundreds of miles across are found in Central Canada, in North America, in South Africa,
and in Western Australia. The oldest unambiguous fossil structures, stromatolites at about 3.5
billion years from South Africa and Australia, come from this time as well. By the way, the
scientific community doesn't always use the official timeline. It's amusing to me that many
experts on Earth's first billion years now call the time before 3.5 billion years as simply early
Earth. So they define 3.5 billion as the real dividing line between Earth's adolescence and young
adulthood. Then comes the Meso Archean era, another 400 million year chunk from 3.2 to 2.8 billion.
In this interval, we find increasing volumes of preserved rocks and more cratons,
so it's clear that continents were being assembled. This is also the interval for which
there's growing evidence that modern plate tectonics probably took over in a global scale
organized way from the vertical plume-driven tectonics of before, forming the first large
continent by around 3.1 billion years ago. And later, with global scale plate tectonics,
came what may have been the first instance of all the continents coming together to form a single
supercontinent. If so, then 2.8 billion years may not be such an arbitrary date after all.
The idea is that plate tectonics causes land masses to shuffle this way and that across the
globe. And from time to time, two continents collide and suture together. You can get hints
of these collisions from a couple of sources. For one thing, every time two continents collide,
they form a mountain chain, just like the Himalayas today. Also, any molten rock will freeze in the
orientation of Earth's magnetic field when it cools, so you can sometimes tease out the orientation,
and even the latitude of ancient rocks when they formed. That's the field called paleomagnetism
we touched on when we were discussing plate tectonics. The bottom line is that it appears about
2.8 billion years ago, all the continents clumped together to form one gigantic supercontinent
called Ketterland, which was surrounded by an even more gigantic super ocean. We're going to come
back to examine this supercontinent cycle several lectures from now in lecture 35. Suffice it to
say that Earth, at 2.8 billion years, was acting very differently than it did a billion years earlier
at the start of the Archean era. And the fourth and final segment of the Archean era is the Neo
Archean era, the 300 million year interval between 2.8 and 2.5 billion years ago. Here again, the rock
record becomes more complete, more nuanced. Ketterland continued to assemble perhaps for 200
million years, leading to more mountain building. When mountain building came the formation of lots
of new rocks through melting and reworking of what came before. So we actually have a fair amount
of interesting Neo Archean mineralization, including some huge ore deposits in Australia,
Africa, Canada, Europe associated with rocks of this age. Unlike the previous eras, the founding
ages of the Neo Archean era may have some significance to Earth history. We've seen the 2.8
billion years may correspond to the beginning of the first supercontinent assembly, when new
mountain ranges started to form and the geography of the globe took on an entirely new character.
And as we'll see in the coming lectures, 2.5 billion is about the time when the most important
atmospheric change in history took place. That was the rise of oxygen through the invention of
oxygen producing photosynthesis. Okay, let me run briefly through the rest of the geologic
timescale and we'll come back to this each time we enter a new time interval. The third of Earth's
four grand eons is the protozoic eon, which embraces more than 40% of history from 2.5
billion to 542 million years. So 2.5 billion years is roughly when oxygenic photosynthesis
got going. And you can probably guess that 542 million years is not an arbitrary cutoff date.
It does represent a significant innovation in life when the first big pulse of mineralized
shells occurs in the fossil record. And we'll come back to that point.
The protozoic eon is divided into three eras and here the division really does seem arbitrary,
even unfortunate as there are big transitions that are simply not represented by this time
scale at all. Anyway, there's the paleoproterozoic era from 2.5 to 1.6 billion years, that's a
whopping 900 million year interval during which a lot happened. There's atmospheric oxidation,
there's the oldest unambiguous fossils of microbes, there are two huge pulses of banded
iron formations, and the beginning of a long period during which much of Earth, at least the
oceans and microbial life, really didn't seem to do much of anything new. This somewhat later
interval is sometimes called the boring billion from about 1.85 billion years to 850 million years
ago, but those dates have only recently come into focus and they just don't match the protozoic
boundary. Then the mesoproterozoic era is the 600 million year period from 1.6 to 1 billion years.
During this time there was at least one new supercontinent formed and broken up and there were
huge pulses of new minerals and major ore deposits as well, but other than being a nice round number
there's just nothing special about 1 billion years ago. We're getting closer to our own time with the
neo protozoic era, the period from 1 billion to 542 million years ago. Though a much better starting
point might be 850 million years ago as we'll see when we discuss feedback loops in lecture 36.
Anyway a huge amount happened during that roughly 450 million year interval. Now perhaps that's
because it's more recent, so rocks are better preserved, but I think there really were unusually
big changes. There were astonishing changes in climate including periods when earth was almost
completely locked in ice from the poles to the equator and then sudden shifts to a tropical glow.
There were equally dramatic biological innovations including the first multicellular animals
and there was another supercontinent formed and dispersed, so the neo protozoic was quite an
alien time but it was getting us much closer to the modern world. And finally the last of the four
grand eons we have the Phanerozoic, the time that saw the emergence of the modern living world over
the last 542 million years. Naturally being closer to modern times and with the profusion of animal
and plant fossils we have much more detailed picture of this last half billion years or so.
That's why the relatively short Phanerozoic is divided into three eras which are further divided
into a dozen or so periods which are further subdivided into smaller and smaller time
intervals based primarily on important innovations in life as well as a series of mass extinction
events will focus on those important events in the history of life in some of the later lectures.
Suffice it to say that the closer we get to the present the more richly woven is the tapestry
of earth's story. Let's journey backward in time and think for one last time about that transition
from the early earth before three and a half billion years to the living planet of the paleo
Archean era. Whenever that first life emerged whether it was before four billion or after
3.8 billion years ago those meager cells had little effect on earth's ancient surface.
The very first populations of microbes didn't have the chemical tools to alter the surface
environment they simply exploited the exact same chemical reactions that were already taking
place at or near earth's surface. From earth's earliest days lots of different chemical reactions
were taking place because rocks and gases from volcanoes were more chemically reduced
than those at the surface. The reason comes down to the distribution of electrons.
Earth's mantle rocks have on average more electrons per atom involved in chemical bonding
than rocks in the crust that means the mantle is more reduced the surface is more oxidized.
It's a simple equation when reduced and oxidized chemicals meet for example when reduced magma
and gases from the mantle spill out onto the more oxidized surface in a volcanic eruption
that will inevitably lead to an energy liberating oxidation reduction chemical reaction.
In the process electrons transfer from the more reduced to the more oxidized compound
and a little bit of energy is released to the environment. A familiar example is rusting
in which iron metal reacts with oxygen. Iron metal is loaded with electrons in fact iron has so
many bonding electrons that some of them are free to move through the metal and thus conduct
electricity so iron acts as a donor of electrons. Meanwhile oxygen gas is so lacking in electrons
that two oxygen atoms have to combine they have to share their electrons to make an O2 molecule
the meager supply of bonding electrons is shared by both atoms like rations on a desert island
so oxygen is the ideal electron acceptor and iron is the ideal electron donor.
When iron metal meets molecules of oxygen an exchange of electrons occurs each iron atom
gives up two or maybe three electrons each oxygen atom accepts two electrons the consequence of this
electron exchange is a new mineral iron oxide plus a small amount of energy for example four
atoms of iron plus three molecules of oxygen can give you an red iron oxide called hematite plus
a little bit of energy. The earliest microbes evolved to exploit all the abundant energy that
was readily available in the form of reduced iron atoms and other food that was dissolved in the
oceans of early earth microbes learned to oxidize iron to form the black mineral magnetite the rusty
red mineral hematite to form those layers in the earliest banded iron formations 3.85 billion years
ago. Those mineral forming chemical transformations released enough energy to support entire ecosystems
on the ancient ocean floor this pattern continued all over earth for almost two billion years as
massive banded iron formations formed in what are now cratons in Australia in north and south
America and Africa and China and India other ancient terrains so all over the globe we find
the leavings of what was in effect an epic microbial buffet that lasted hundreds of millions of years.
Dozens of other oxidation reduction chemical reactions also would have occurred spontaneously
at or near early earth surface in addition to iron there were several other common electron
donating metal elements including nickel manganese and copper all those metals were subject to
oxidation and then there were all sorts of simple carbon-based molecules that had been synthesized
in those prebiotic processes that resulted in the primordial soup so there was methane or natural
gas propane butane various other chemicals that will burn what we use today as carbon-based fuels
molecules of oxygen gas were pretty much absent in earth's earliest atmosphere but there were
plenty of other electron hungry molecules with oxygen on board including sulfate nitrate carbonate
phosphate all them were available to accept electrons and here's the key to understanding
the role of early microbial life before the origin of life oxidation reduction reactions
occurred everywhere in earth's near surface environment but they proceeded at a relatively
leisurely pace the first microbes learned how to shuffle electrons at a much faster pace
in many environments including shallow ponds and along coastlines in lagoons the deep ocean floor
the microbes began to control the pace of these chemical reactions you see each oxidation reduction
reaction provided a little bit of energy communities of microbes survived by accelerating
oxidation reactions to produce minerals that would have formed anyway they used the resultant
energy to live to grow to reproduce so planet earth made iron oxides but the first microbes
made them faster and in a controlled way that laid down those beautiful banded iron formations
those first microbes in effect helped earth achieve its electron balance and in that way
life began ever so slowly to alter both earth's surface environment and its deeper interior
these events those subtle at first began what i described as the astonishing co-evolution of
the geosphere and the biosphere it didn't take long for life to learn other mineral forming
tricks those earliest oceans were saturated in a variety of dissolved minerals including the
important carbonates of calcium and magnesium the minerals calcite aragonite and dolomite
these minerals were from time to time deposited on the ocean floor by
abiotic processes in great layers of giant crystals rather early in history of life microbes
took advantage of the carbonate forming chemical reaction and in the process found another source
of chemical energy carbonate layers also provided a safe and sturdy haven on which
the microbes could anchor themselves the early fossil structures called stromatolites are good
examples of this innovation stromatolites are the result of microbes arrayed in mats living on the
energy and structure provided by carbonate and microbes also used other minerals where conditions
were favorable they sometimes drew energy by forming phosphate and sulfate minerals
from the mineral saturated oceans it was evolution by the process of natural selection
that continued to drive all these mineral forming strategies any microbial species that
learned to use iron or carbonate as a food source or conduct oxidation reduction reactions more
efficiently or tolerate more extreme temperatures or pressures or to exploit some novel energy
producing chemical reaction they would have had an distinct advantage and thus ensured their own
survival inevitably populations of mutating microbes discovered new enzymes that catalyzed
these energy producing reactions more efficiently than the non-living environment and so the results
are preserved in the most ancient cratons as little stromatolite mounds of limestone modest
layered deposits of iron oxides the rock record also holds subtle clues in its isotopes pointing
to a gradual increase in the processing of near-surface elements critical to biology including
carbon sulfur nitrogen and phosphorus but it's important to keep in mind that these earliest
life forms on earth did little more than mimic the chemistry that would have occurred on a non-living
geochemical world the era of this first life microbes that mimicked non-living geochemistry
persisted for a long time these cells dominated earth's biosphere for perhaps one and a half
billion years until about two and a half billion years ago that's when what was arguably the most
significant biological innovation other than the transformative origin of life itself occurred
that's when cells learn to harvest sunlight the innovation of photosynthesis most of us in the
origins field suspect that the earliest life forms relied exclusively on the chemical energy of rocks
that was an abundant source of energy especially in early earth but it greatly and increasingly
restricted where life could make us home microbes either had to be anchored to a reactive mineral
surface or else live in a place where water was not in equilibrium with its surroundings
all that changed when microbes learned to collect solar energy rather than relying primarily on
oxidation reduction reactions in the environment these microbes could drive their own bioreactions
with the energy of light after all solar energy is an abundant cheap energy source available
to any surface dweller anywhere on the planet and its simplest guys photosynthesis begins with sunlight
in small molecules like water nitrogen carbon dioxide to make the carbon rich biomolecules
it takes a fairly complex chemical apparatus but given the right set of light gathering molecules
and enzymes it's possible to manufacture all of life's essential building blocks amino acids
sugars lipids the components of dna and rna all that from nothing more than atmospheric gases
and the sun's radiation the first photosynthesizers were not like today's green algae and plants
they generated no oxygen but we do have lots of modern descendants of these primitive organisms
in the form of microbes that form a brownish or purplish scum on stagnant ponds it's not such a
stretch to imagine immense floating rafts of photosynthetic microbes maybe unsightly brownish
purplish splotches floating along the shorelines of the blue archaean oceans you might wonder how
we could possibly know microbes have no hard parts that can easily be preserved as fossils and it's
not obvious how floating algal mats would alter the rock record in any obvious way but it turns
out there may be a way to tease out evidence for some of the most ancient photosynthetic microbes
like gathering cells rely in part on distinctive molecules called hopanoids which possess tough
backbones of carbon atoms that form five interlocking rings they sort of look like the olympic logo
by the way that term hopanoid came from a genus of resinous trees named for botanist
john hope well long after microbes die and decay the telltale hopanoid molecules can survive
and they can be preserved as a molecular residue in ocean floor sediments some of these molecular
fragments called geo-hopanes when they've gone through a lot of processing have been reported
rocks more than two and a half billion years old now any interpretation has to rest on some
very tricky assumptions about more recent sources of contamination and the paleontological community
responds to every report of molecules that have survived for several billions of years with skepticism
still the geo-hopanes are there and they may provide our best picture of the photosynthetic
ancient biosphere there can be no question that by our planet's one billionth birthday
three and a half billion years ago life had established a firm foothold on earth's surface
for perhaps another billion years this primitive microbial life had only modest effects on near
surface environments the first microbes sped along oxidation reduction reactions that would have
occurred anyway while a subsequent lineage of more sophisticated cells engaged in a primitive
version of photosynthesis so far we found no evidence that life during those first two billion
years resulted in any new minerals at or near earth's surface cellular life simply made more
iron oxides more carbonates more sulfates and phosphates that might have formed on a non-living
world microbes constructed banded iron deposits of iron rich minerals in the deeper ocean they
built protective stromatolite mounds in shallow coastal waters but in the larger chemical sense
the living earth of two and a half billion years ago was not much different in character
from the world a billion years earlier but that was about to change for earth's primitive
microbial population two and a half billion years ago was poised to undergo a dramatic
transformation microbes were about to learn the complicated new chemical trick called oxygenic
photosynthesis for the first time cells gained energy from the sun while exhaling the highly
reactive dangerously corrosive gas called oxygen
