Hi, I'm Arth 11, and I'm going to be giving a presentation on some various data we've
collected about people's perception of novel agents.
So what we're trying to do, just in general, our mission going into this, is we want to
probe the general population's feelings on novel agents, you know, AI biological creatures
that are being developed by people in the lab and etc., anything that sort of falls
out of what we would typically assume as like natural agents in the world.
And we're also trying to determine the level to which people are aware of and prepared
for these agents, because pretty soon we're going to be dealing with them in all sorts
of different ways, and in like the setting of a jury room, we're going to pretty soon
people are going to be having to think about, well, okay, how do I feel about these new
creatures?
Can we try them?
That sort of thing.
We want to see to what level people were prepared for these sorts of hard decisions
that are going to be coming up.
We also just in general want to look at the correlations between various opinions on a
lot of difficult topics and see if there's any interesting relationships we could notice.
So for the project itself, we read a book called Picturing the Mind, which is very helpful
and gives a lot of ideas about the whole thing.
And I did in-person lessons with Dr. Michael Levin at Tufts University.
So to make the survey, we planned what topics we wanted to talk about, and we polished the
text to make sure we were, you know, clearly stating everything we wanted to do.
We created the survey in a special program that I'm going to get to a little bit, designed
for surveys, and we tested them on just a few subjects to see what their general opinions
were, and they had some feedback and we implemented that.
And then we deployed it via M-Turk, which we'll get to the specifics of what that is
and how it works pretty soon coming up in the slides, but that's where we deployed it.
And then we noticed there were a few areas that we had left in that, well, not super
problematic, could be improved upon that were exposed once we gave it, you know, to the
general public.
So we worked on those.
And then we were able to analyze the data and see what we were looking for, really,
and we created this presentation so that we could share what we learned from that.
So the tool we used to build a survey is called Qualtrics, and it's just a handy tool for
making surveys.
It's pretty quick, and anything really that you want to do in terms of making a survey,
it just handles that pretty simply compared to anything else we found that we were able
to access.
Then once the survey was created, we obviously needed to get it out to people, and we wanted
to have as large of a possible roof of people as possible.
So we used Amazon's M-Turk, which is basically a tool for distributing surveys to large numbers
of people and paying them to take it.
In the end, we got 365 responders, and according to Qualtrics criteria, the data quality was
98%.
That's pretty good.
That's almost 100%.
So just for some examples of the kinds of questions we were asking on the survey, because
we obviously can't include everyone, we're going to talk about the most interesting ones,
but here's the sort of things we were looking for.
Demographic data that we could compare to people's opinions, so stuff like their age,
what level of education they have, that sort of thing.
Other general opinions, so like preconceived notions on stuff that people probably have
thought about at least somewhat and have some sort of idea of where they land, and answers
to very specific situations.
So if we present you with a very specific, pretty nuanced problem, how well these people
will be able to come up with a new idea that they hadn't really thought about before to
something that they were approaching for the first time was sort of a difficult subject.
And now we can get into what we found, we're going to be looking at some of the different
relationships and how this question, that question related to each other.
Relationship one that we thought was interesting was between people's age and whether or not
they thought that we should be developing novel life forms.
And as you can see from the data, what we found, and according to the Chi-squared test,
this data is significant in this relationship.
Most people age 20 to 60 are undecided, whereas people between 60 and 70 largely said yes,
with no one being undecided.
So in general, people are pretty mixed, they're not really sure where they land one way or
the other, generally as you go through most of the ages, but actually people on the older
side are very, is much more decisive, and they're generally in favor of yes, which I think would
go a lot against what a lot of people might assume.
Relationship two, we're looking at age again, but this is about the concept of self.
So the question was, think of yourself, the collection of your thoughts, emotions, perceptions.
What kind of thing, if it's a thing at all, is yourself?
And then we gave them three options to pick from, from what they believe the self to be.
Permanent objects of structure, a dynamical feature, or an illusion.
In general, most people almost regardless of age believe the self to be a permanent object
or a dynamical feature, with slight preference towards a separate option.
So really age didn't come into this one a lot, and almost no one believed it to be an
illusion.
Now, according to the Chi-squared test, this relationship is not super significant.
So while we can't really expand this to sort of universally, it is still interesting to
see what these specific people's thoughts were, and you know, comparing it to other
data points that we have.
Relationship three was about sort of people's background in education and interest, really,
against whether or not they think we should be developing these life forms.
So we're comparing whether they had a computer science background with their thoughts on
development of new life forms.
And people in the computer science field are slightly more in favor of developing novel
life forms.
It's still pretty 50-50, a lot of people leaning towards maybe, but overall there were more
yeses than there were noes, even though maybe it was the most dominant category.
And the Chi-squared test has confirmed that this data is significant.
This one, very similar again with the same novel life forms question, but this time it's
philosophy background instead of computer science, and this relationship still is significant.
So people in the philosophy field actually twice as more likely to think that we should
in fact be developing these new creatures.
So computer science people sort of on the fence, slightly lean towards yes, but it's
really mixed with the philosophy people, it's just really a lot more in favor.
In relationship five, we wanted to test whether people's interactions with the types of AI
we have right now with ChatGPT or even oldest stuff like Akinator or Cleverbot, whether
or not that had any impact on their thoughts on humanity, AI in relation to humanity, and
whether or not they thought AI would take over humanity.
And so people who have interacted with AI are more likely to believe that AI will end
up taking over humanity.
The people who have had experience with these things, who have interacted with them in some
way, are really more certain that humanity is going to be taken over.
If people haven't, they're saying, okay, maybe I have nothing to base this on, but with the
people who have, it's definitely much more significantly the yes portion.
And as you can see, with the Chi-squared test, this is a significant relationship.
This one, we want to get a little bit more specific.
So we want to know how do people's views on the self affect their answers to this question.
Here's the question we presented with, you are visited by a genie who offers you a chance
at a really pleasant experience that you would normally enjoy.
You have two options, A, you have the experience right now, but absolutely no memory of it
afterward, or you'll have a perfect memory of doing it, but it's a false memory and you
never actually get to.
And so we want to see what people's answer to the self-question, you know, dynamical
feature, permanent object illusion, how that would affect their thoughts on memory versus
experience.
Here's the data we got.
And as you can see, experience just blew everything out of the water here.
Regardless of people's views on the self, they overwhelmingly want the experience without
the memory.
It's just not even close, as you can see from that diagram there.
Relationship seven, again with the genie question, this time we were comparing that to do they
believe the immaterial solar mind as distinct from the brain.
So if you sort of think of your soul or your mind as being apart from, you know, the brain
just, you know, some flesh inside your head, well, if there's a difference, how does that
affect whether you want an experience or memory?
And again, regardless on their view of the immaterial mind, most people prefer the experience
with no memory.
But proportionally, the more uncertain ones are the minority who prefer the experience
without the memory.
In relationship eight, we want to see whether people's belief in a higher power, so a super
national being or a god, their belief in that, how does that affect whether or not they think
we should be developing novel life forms?
And actually, I think this is really part of why we want to see this.
This is an interesting case where the results go pretty significantly against what you might
expect.
People who believe in a supernatural being generally also agree that we should be developing
new life forms.
I think there's a lot of anemic that a lot of people have that those sort of ideals are
incompatible and that someone who believes in a higher power wouldn't want us to be,
you know, as some people say at playing God, but actually that's not the case in the data
we found.
And as you can see, the Chi-squared test, this is again a significant relationship.
This one, again, with the higher power question, but we're comparing it to seeing whether people
would think AI is taking over humanity.
And people who believe in a supernatural being are also likely to believe that AI will take
over humanity.
It's 67% who are saying yes to both.
That's a pretty significant amount of people.
It's sort of, again, it might go against what you might believe of sort of a divine plan
or something that maybe that includes being taken over by AI.
Here, we have a little bit of a twist.
These questions we did something interesting.
So we have, we have two paragraphs that were written by ChiGPT.
We know we can prompt ChiGPT, but how good is ChiGPT at prompting us?
So for one second of the survey, we automatically and randomly, of course, split the participants
into groups to answer several questions based on introductory paragraph meant to push them
towards a specific answer.
However, as I just mentioned, half the prompts were written by AI, and half the prompts were
written by a human.
We did this to see which was better at prompting the participants towards different answers.
Here are the results.
So here you can see neither the human nor the AI's prompts can change people's minds
on the question.
Regardless of what the push was, whatever paragraph they saw, they almost exclusively
wanted the experience now, regardless of what anyone else was trying to say to them beforehand.
So regardless of the author, the prompt was unable to push people's opinion in either
direction.
No matter what argument they were presented with, 82 to 89 percent of participants chose
to have the experience without the memory.
So that's most of the data that we had and all the interesting relations we could find.
There were obviously some limitations.
The sample size was somewhat limited.
As I mentioned, it was a little bit over 350 people.
So obviously, bigger would be better because we could have a more diverse group of people
and we could get more opinions, and therefore the answers we would get would be more representative
of the global population.
And since we used M-Turk, the way M-Turk works is there has to be a payment, the payment
for taking this survey was $1, and so that introduces possible unknown incentives.
So inclusion, why are these findings important?
What can we learn from them?
Well, I think going forward in time, a lot of these questions are not going to be hypothetical
stuff you deal with in a survey.
It's going to be stuff that we're dealing with in the real world.
When AI starts becoming more self-aware, we realize that aliens exist is something.
Anything that isn't within the realm of intelligence that we're aware of currently is going to
be start raising some really difficult questions because all of our society basically is sort
of presumed on the ideas of, okay, we can determine what is intelligent and what isn't.
These are all the things we're aware of and we've built this system around them.
And I think it's going to be a nasty surprise once we start having to widen our standards
and try to figure out all these egg cases where it's sort of gray, where stuff fits
in.
And the earlier we start thinking about this, the better we're going to be prepared.
So what you can do now, so you can actually take the survey right now, if you just scan
that QR code, you can get open the survey up for yourself and answer all the questions.
You can study this fascinating topic of diverse intelligence, there's lots of great material
out there that you can learn from and go beyond just what we've talked about here.
And if you make your own survey and deploy it, just gathering more stuff even if it's
just you who looks at it, just the more informed we all are as a society about these sort of
things, the better everything's going to go in the future.
Here is some acknowledgments.
We had just a great amount of help from Dustin Erdash.
Mike Eleven was really a key member of this, we couldn't have done it without him.
And the funding which we used to pay the people on EmTurk, we got from the Diverse Intelligence
Summer Institute.
And if you have any questions, feel free.
