Book cover of Handbook of Evolutionary Machine LearningGenetic and Evolutionary Computation
Series Editors
Wolfgang  Banzhaf
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA
Kalyanmoy  Deb
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA
The area of Genetic and Evolutionary Computation has seen an explosion of interest in recent years. Methods based on the variation-selection loop of Darwinian natural evolution have been successfully applied to a whole range of research areas.
The Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Book Series publishes research monographs, edited collections, and graduate-level texts in one of the most exciting areas of Computer Science. As researchers and practitioners alike turn increasingly to search, optimization, and machine-learning methods based on mimicking natural evolution to solve problems across the spectrum of the human endeavor, this growing field will continue to surprise with novel applications and results. Recent award-winning PhD theses, special topics books, workshops and conference proceedings in the areas of EC and Artificial Life Studies are of interest.
Areas of coverage include applications, theoretical foundations, technique extensions and implementation issues of all areas of genetic and evolutionary computation. Topics may include, but are not limited to:
Optimization (multi-objective, multi-level) Design, control, classification, and system identification Data mining and data analytics Pattern recognition and deep learning Evolution in machine learning Evolvable systems of all types Automatic programming and genetic improvement
Proposals in related fields such as:
Artificial life, artificial chemistries Adaptive behavior and evolutionary robotics Artificial immune systems Agent-based systems Deep neural networks Quantum computing will be considered for publication in this series as long as GEVO techniques are part of or inspiration for the system being described. Manuscripts describing GEVO applications in all areas of engineering, commerce, the sciences, the arts and the humanities are encouraged.
Prospective Authors or Editors:
If you have an idea for a book, we would welcome the opportunity to review your proposal. Should you wish to discuss any potential project further or receive specific information regarding our book proposal requirements, please contact Wolfgang Banzhaf, Kalyan Deb or Mio Sugino:
Areas: Genetic Programming/other Evolutionary Computation Methods, Machine Learning, Artificial Life
Wolfgang Banzhaf Consulting EditorBEACON Center for Evolution in Action Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824 USA banzhafw@msu.edu
Areas: Genetic Algorithms, Optimization, Meta-Heuristics, Engineering
Kalyanmoy Deb Consulting EditorBEACON Center for Evolution in Action Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824 USA kdeb@msu.edu
Mio Suginomio.sugino@springer.com
The GEVO book series is the result of a merger the two former book series: Genetic Algorithms and Evolutionary Computation https://​link.​springer.​com/​bookseries/​6008and Genetic Programming https://​link.​springer.​com/​bookseries/​6016
Editors
Wolfgang  Banzhaf, Penousal  Machadoand Mengjie  Zhang
Handbook of Evolutionary Machine Learning
Logo of the publisher
Editors
Wolfgang  Banzhaf
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA
Penousal  Machado
Department of Informatics Engineering, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal
Mengjie  Zhang
School of Engineering and Computer Science and Centre for Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand
ISSN 1932-0167e-ISSN 1932-0175
Genetic and Evolutionary Computation

				ISBN 978-981-99-3813-1e-ISBN 978-981-99-3814-8
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-3814-8
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #21-01/04 Gateway East, Singapore 189721, Singapore
Preface
The Handbook of Evolutionary Machine Learningin front of you is the work of many authors. Even if the field is still small compared to either Machine Learning or Evolutionary Computation, no single author can any more hold all the methods, techniques, and applications present in their head.
A look at the references cited by the authors in each of these chapters reveals that many of the developments of the last decade, which really is the time of visible exponential growth of this new field, have been in the making for many more years. The history of Evolutionary Machine Learning is rich, and as a tree in nature, it has many roots.
The editors of this handbook have strived to give voice to a multitude of research directions in the field. Initially, it was not easy to structure all the material appropriately, but we believe we have arrived at a good balance of the presentation as the book grew.
We start with the basics of the field in Part I, then report on the interpretation of some Evolutionary Computation techniques as Machine Learning (Part II). We next delve deeper into the modern understanding of Machine Learning as embodied by Neural Networks, with its exciting methods of generative systems in Part III. Part IV reports on the applications of Evolutionary Computation in Machine Learning, which exemplifies the beneficial hybridization of both techniques. Finally, Part V discusses applications of Evolutionary Machine Learning in diverse fields, providing many fascinating perspectives.
This handbook is primarily intended for researchers, engineers, graduate and postgraduate students interested in evolutionary machine learning, evolutionary computation, machine learning, and broad artificial intelligence and use them for different applications. It is highly suitable as a reference book for postgraduate research students with directions in evolutionary machine learning, where they can use the techniques in this handbook as a baseline for further improvement and innovations. It is also suitable to use a selection of chapters for postgraduate and high-level undergraduate courses in artificial intelligence, data science and machine learning majors. Furthermore, this handbook can also contribute potentially to real-world applications in primary industry, climate change, (bio)medical and health, cybersecurity, renewable energy, high-value manufacturing, economy and finance, and public policies and decision-making that generate impact on the economy, environment, health outcome and social aspects.
Wolfgang  Banzhaf
Penousal  Machado
Mengjie  Zhang
East Lansing, MI, USACoimbra, PortugalWellington, New Zealand
July 2023
Acknowledgments
In 2020, the annual EvoStar series of conferences established the EvoApps special session on Evolutionary Machine Learning. Over time, the event grew organically, eventually becoming a joint track of EuroGP and EvoApps. The increasing interest in the field and the high quality of the submissions made us realize that the time was ripe to bring forth this book. Therefore, the origins of this book are closely connected with these EvoStar events, and we seize this opportunity to extend our heartfelt gratitude to all the EvoStar chairs, organizers, authors and participants with whom we have had the privilege of collaborating and engaging over the years.
We express our appreciation to our colleagues and friends in the field who have contributed to one or more chapters of this handbook. Thanks should also go to the reviewers who provided constructive comments, suggestions and feedback to the chapters’ authors, improving the handbook through this process. We appreciate the help of MSU postdoctoral fellow Dr. Jory Schossau, who helped create this volume’s index.
The sabbatical leaves of Penousal Machado, which was partially spent at Michigan State University with Wolfgang Banzhaf, and Wolfgang Banzhaf’s sabbatical, partially spent at Victoria University of Wellington University with Mengjie Zhang, played a crucial role in the design and development of this book. They allowed us to collaborate closely, filling whiteboards with sketches, taxonomies, ideas and topics, many of which have ultimately made it into this book. We sincerely thank our institutions, the University of Coimbra, Portugal, Michigan State University, USA, and Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand, for their invaluable support and the exceptional conditions they have provided us and our guests.
Finally, we thank the publisher, Springer-Nature, and particularly Computer Science book editor Mio Sugino, who supported the handbook from its inception to its final publication in the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation book series.
East Lansing, MI, USA
Coimbra, Portugal
Wellington, New Zealand
July 2023
Wolfgang  Banzhaf
Penousal  Machado
Mengjie  Zhang
Contents
Part I Evolutionary Machine Learning Basics
1 Fundamentals of Evolutionary Machine Learning3
Wolfgang  Banzhafand Penousal  Machado
2 Evolutionary Supervised Machine Learning29
Risto  Miikkulainen
3 EML for Unsupervised Learning59
Roberto  Santana
4 Evolutionary Computation and the Reinforcement Learning Problem79
Stephen  Kellyand Jory  Schossau
Part II Evolutionary Computation as Machine Learning
5 Evolutionary Regression and Modelling121
Qi  Chen, Bing  Xue, Will  Browneand Mengjie  Zhang
6 Evolutionary Clustering and Community Detection151
Julia  Handl, Mario  Garza-Fabreand Adán  José-García
7 Evolutionary Classification 171
Bach  Nguyen, Bing  Xue, Will  Browneand Mengjie  Zhang
8 Evolutionary Ensemble Learning205
Malcolm  I.  Heywood
Part III Evolution and Neural Networks
9 Evolutionary Neural Network Architecture Search247
Zeqiong  Lv, Xiaotian  Song, Yuqi  Feng, Yuwei  Ou, Yanan  Sunand Mengjie  Zhang
10 Evolutionary Generative Models283
João  Correia, Francisco  Baetaand Tiago  Martins
11 Evolution Through Large Models331
Joel  Lehman, Jonathan  Gordon, Shawn  Jain, Kamal  Ndousse, Cathy  Yehand Kenneth  O.  Stanley
12 Hardware-Aware Evolutionary Approaches to Deep Neural Networks367
Lukas  Sekanina, Vojtech  Mrazekand Michal  Pinos
13 Adversarial Evolutionary Learning with Distributed Spatial Coevolution397
Jamal  Toutouh, Erik  Hembergand Una-May  O’Reilly
Part IV Evolutionary Computation for Machine Learning
14 Genetic Programming as an Innovation Engine for Automated Machine Learning:​ The Tree-Based Pipeline Optimization Tool (TPOT)439
Jason  H.  Moore, Pedro  H.  Ribeiro, Nicholas  Matsumotoand Anil  K.  Saini
15 Evolutionary Model Validation—An Adversarial Robustness Perspective457
Inês  Valentim, Nuno  Lourençoand Nuno  Antunes
