University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy
Risto  Miikkulainen
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
Cognizant AI Labs, San Francisco, CA, USA
Jason  H.  Moore
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Vojtech  Mrazek
Faculty of Information Technology, Brno University of Technology, Brno, Czech Republic
Giorgia  Nadizar
University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy
Kamal  Ndousse
Anthropic Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA
Bach  Nguyen
Centre of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence & School of Engineering and Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand
Bernd  R.  Noack
School of Mechanical Engineering and Automation, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, PR China
Michael  O’Neill
Natural Computing Research & Applications Group, School of Business, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
Una-May  O’Reilly
MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, MA, USA
Sadman  Sadeed  Omee
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
Yuwei  Ou
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
Federico  Pigozzi
University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy
Michal  Pinos
Faculty of Information Technology, Brno University of Technology, Brno, Czech Republic
Pedro  H.  Ribeiro
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Anil  K.  Saini
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Erica  Salvato
University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy
Roberto  Santana
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), San Sebastian, Gipuzkoa, Spain
Jory  Schossau
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA
Lukas  Sekanina
Faculty of Information Technology, Brno University of Technology, Brno, Czech Republic
Sara  Silva
LASIGE, Department of Informatics, Faculty of Sciences, University of Lisbon, Lisboa, Portugal
Stephen  L.  Smith
Department of Electronic Engineering, University of York, York, UK
Xiaotian  Song
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
Yuqi  Song
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
Lisa  Soros
Computer Science, Barnard College, New York, USA
Kenneth  O.  Stanley
OpenAI Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA
Yanan  Sun
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
Julian  Togelius
Computer Science and Engineering, New York University, Brooklyn, NY, USA
Odl.ai, Copenhagen, Denmark
Jamal  Toutouh
ITIS Software, University of Malaga, Malaga, Spain
Inês  Valentim
University of Coimbra, CISUC, DEI, Coimbra, Portugal
Moritz  von  Looz
European Space Agency ESA, Noordwijk, Netherlands
Lai  Wei
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
Bing  Xue
Evolutionary Computation Research Group at the School of Engineering and Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand
Centre of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence & School of Engineering and Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand
Cathy  Yeh
OpenAI Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA
Mengjie  Zhang
Evolutionary Computation Research Group at the School of Engineering and Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand
Centre of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence & School of Engineering and Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand
Ryan  Zhou
School of Computing, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, CanadaPart IEvolutionary Machine Learning Basics
In which we introduce some of the basics of Evolutionary Machine Learning: Its foundation, and the three principal learning methods—supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and reinforcement learning.©  The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.  2024
W. Banzhaf et al.(eds.)Handbook of Evolutionary Machine LearningGenetic and Evolutionary Computationhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-3814-8_1
1.  Fundamentals of Evolutionary Machine Learning
Wolfgang  Banzhaf1and Penousal  Machado2
(1)
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI  48864, USA
(2)
Department of Informatics Engineering, Centre for Informatics and Systems of the University of  Coimbra, University of Coimbra, 3004-531  Coimbra, Portugal
Wolfgang  Banzhaf
Email: banzhafw@msu.edu
Penousal  Machado(Corresponding author)
Email: machado@dei.uc.pt
Abstract
In this opening chapter, we overview the quickly developing field of evolutionary machine learning. We first motivate the field and define how we understand evolutionary machine learning. Then we take a look at its roots, finding that it has quite a long history, going back to the 1950s. We introduce a taxonomy of the field, discuss the major branches of evolutionary machine learning, and conclude by outlining open problems.
1.1 Introduction
Machine Learning is the branch of Artificial Intelligence that concerns itself with building models of systems and making predictions based on extracted data from data sources or system observations. The term Machine Learning was coined in 1959 by Arthur Samuel of IBM [87], the first person to make a computer perform a serious learning task, a checkers playing program [7]. Since the late 1940s Samuel had worked on games as study objects for computer programming and intelligence [106]. In his seminal 1959 contribution that started the field of Machine Learning with a bang, Samuel writes:
Two machine-learning procedures have been investigated in some detail using the game of checkers. Enough work has been done to verify the fact that a computer can be programmed so that it will learn to play a better game of checkers than can be played by the person who wrote the program. Furthermore, it can learn to do this in a remarkably short period of time (8 or 10 hours of machine-playing time) when given only the rules of the game, a sense of direction, and a redundant and incomplete list of parameters which are thought to have something to do with the game, but whose correct signs and relative weights are unknown and unspecified. The principles of machine learning verified by these experiments are, of course, applicable to many other situations [87].
Many decades later, Machine Learning (ML) has become a mainstream topic in Computer Science research, taking up more and more space also in other Scientific and Engineering disciplines, with even the Arts and Humanities becoming involved, as will be amply demonstrated in this book. The success of ML relative to the lingering progress of other areas of Artificial Intelligence can be attributed to mainly four factors: 
1.
The explosive development of hardware
2.
The availability of data
3.
The grounding in Mathematical/Statistical thought
4.
