Other
2013
[30] Cardona et al.
ES
Multi. (advers.)
Procedural
Dynamic
Most of the research within the literature concerning machine learning models evolved by evolutionary computation has to do with the evolution of artificial neural networks and CPPNs [190], and with the use of neuroevolutiontechniques such as NEAT[191]. Because most fixed-topology neuroevolutionmodels typically generate artificial neural networks to be used for classification tasks, such approaches are not within the scope of this section. For literature regarding the use of evolutionary approaches in supervised and unsupervised learning, see Sects.  1.6 and  2.5, respectively.
There have been a number of works inspired by the CPPN-NEAT framework proposed by Stanley [190] to generate images by augmenting and evolving a CPPN [63, 181, 182, 206, 216]. It is worth noting that some of the mentioned works have been applied to the GAN model, as is the case with the replacement of a standard deep convolutional GAN generatorwith a CPPN evolved with NEAT, proposed by Ekern and Gambäck [63]. Another example related to GANs is the work by Turhan and Bilge [206], which combined a variational auto-encoderwith the pixel-wise generative capability of CPPNs to create a GAN-variational auto-encoder model, i.e. a GAN with an inference mechanism in the form of an extra encoder network. Similar to Sect.  10.6, despite most models in this section not exhibiting competition, these last two studies can be identified as having a competition between isolated components [63, 206].
Apart from NEATapproaches, but still within the context of genetic algorithms, Wang et al. [211] proposed E-GANs, which consisted in the evolution of populations of generators. Similar works also used GANs to evolve samples from the generator [34]. Costa et al. [49] worked on the coevolutionof sub-populations of generatorsand discriminatorsbased on CoDeepNEAT[149] with multiple variants, e.g. one based on novelty searchwith local competition [47]. The technique of evolving both the generatorand the discriminatorwas applied in other works, both with different sub-populations for each component [33] and in a single population where each individual represents a tuple consisting of both components [68].
Regarding coevolutionary approaches, we can identify a sub-category of models dealing with spatial coevolution. This idea was first proposed by Al-Dujaili et al.  [1] with the introduction of the Lipizzaner framework using a grid of cells where GANs are allowed to evolve and communicate. Other works expanded on Lipizzaner by hybridising it with E-GAN and Lipizzaner to increase solutiondiversity [203] and proposing a ringtopology for the spatial cell grid instead of a toroidal one [205]. Other works apply the same idea by scaling the framework in the context of a high-performance computing setting for the medical domain [65] or by further exploring the features of Lipizzaner [81, 204]. Lastly, although during our literature review, we did not find a substantial bodyof work in this section outside of the image domain, it is interesting to note the evolution of Markov chains in the realm of music using genetic algorithms [13], an approach later explored further by Scirea [179] for the generation of music from scientific papers.
In the realm of music generation, many of the studies analysed here also employ NEATto evolve CPPNs. These approaches typically use functional scaffolding, a technique that exploits the fact that a pattern of notes and rhythms in different instrumental parts of the same song is functionally related. These studies were initially performed by Hoover et al. [88] and Hoover and Stanley [89], who started by presenting a framework called NEAT Drummer for the generation of drum patterns, which was later extended to the application of full-fledged music composition [86, 90]. Concerning text generation, we point out the work of Liu et al. [112] pertaining to the creation of a category-aware model employing a genetic algorithm to evolve a population of GANs.
Albeit not many, there are a few noteworthy works in the scope of this section that are concerned with the generation of artefacts not pertaining to imagery or music. It is the case with the generation of shapes in video games by Liapis et al. [111], as well as other work exploring the coevolutionof controllers[30, 200]. Furthermore, Dubbin and Stanley [59] generated dance moves using the CPPN-NEAT model.
As shown in Table  10.4, genetic algorithms account for the vast majority of approaches in this section (31 out of 32 papers), with only one using genetic programming to design both the structure and connectivity of the convolutional neural networks  [192]. As a matter of fact, the standard NEATframework representation is used in almost half of the models analysed herein and it is procedural by definition (in  total there are 33 procedural, 2 parametric and no descriptive representations). Lastly, regarding the fitness assignment, we conclude that most approaches are dynamic, especially the ones in an adversarial setting.
10.9 Open Problems and  Challenges
Throughout the history of evolutionary generative models, several problems have been tackled progressively. It is the case with the fitness assignment of early evolutionary computation as discussed in Sect.  10.4. The first explorationsof the generative capabilities of evolutionary computation models required the user to select the outputs for the evolutionary generative model. For many years, and especially in the fields of evolutionary artand music generation, user fitness assignment was the de factotechnique. However, researchers noted that having the user in the loop with the system presented an enormous bottleneck that had to be addressed for the field to progress, and thus some papers started tackling this issue [12]. Nowadays, even though interactive systems are still very prolific, the most standard way of dealing with fitness assignment is to have some automatic algorithm, be it analytical, statistical (such as Markov models and classifiers) or indirectly informed in some other way. This section addresses some of these problems along with the strides that have recently been taken in addressing them.
Throughout this survey, we have identified the following challenges when dealing with evolutionary generative models
10.9.1 How to  Represent the  Space of  Solutions Generated by  the  Model?
GANs and other generative machine learning approaches are characterised by having a latent space, from which one selects a sample from that space, inputs it into the model and generates the output solution. Moreover, GANs allow for the conditional explorationof solutions through algebraic vector operations such as addition, subtraction and interpolation, to mention a few, which will, in turn, ease the explorationof such solutions. However, most evolutionary generative models, especially those that apply evolutionary computation directly (see Sect.  10.5), do not aggregate solutions in such an organised latent space. Therefore, a way to better represent the space of generated solutions is oftentimes needed. In this scope, several viable alternatives are considered throughout the literature. Although not latent spaces, spatial representations of the solutions have been constructed by resorting to an archivethat stores solutions according to their novelty [42, 144] or by employing manifold learningalgorithms to aggregate solutions on a space with lower dimensionality with techniques such as t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding (t-SNE) [48]. Another trending solution is to build a latent spaceby combining a variational auto-encoderinto the model by training an additional network that learns to encode an image into a smaller latent vector. These are called the GAN-variational auto-encoderapproaches  [206]. Atthe moment, this challenge differentiates evolutionary computation without machine learningand evolutionary computation aided by machine learningapproaches from machine learning aided by evolutionary computationand machine learning evolved by evolutionary computationbecause by using machine learning as a generative approach, typically the machine learning model will have the latent spacewith a solution space to be drawn. In the case of evolutionary computation-based approaches, we have solutions being evolved but they are independent solutions, unstructured, and not contained in a defined space, which can be seen as a drawback.
10.9.2 How to  Navigate the  Generated Space of  Solutions?
This challenge concerns the explorationof all feasible solutions that can be generated by the model. Within the models that organise their solutions in a latent space, an effective way of exploring these solutions is to perform latent variable evolution directly over this space. Because a latent vector is the genotype representation of latent variable evolution, the types of algorithms used are mostly genetic algorithms  [64, 73], and evolutionary strategies in some cases [22] (see Sect.  10.7for a thorough analysis). For models where a latent spacedoes not exist, the explorationof the solutions space cannot be done directly, and thus other methods need to be employed to aid solution explorationduring evolution, e.g. explorationwith variation operators or novelty search[110, 209]. Such methods typically involve hand-crafting specific variation operators to fence off the biasof the models. This can be seen, for instance, in the work by Li et al. [107] with the proposal of a new crossover operator for the E-GAN model and in the implementation of a mutation operator with features tailored to ease the process of interactive 3D design by Byrne et al. [28].
10.9.3 How to  Evaluate the  Generative Capabilities of  a  Model?
In this challenge, we are concerned with evaluating the generative capabilities of the model by itself without comparing it to similar generative models, whether evolutionary or not. This problem is often difficult to tackle as it depends a lot on the desired output of the model and the process itself. For instance, when it comes to music composition, Ng and Jordan [155] used genetic programming to examine evolving compositional processes instead of a musical piece. As further explained by Loughran and O’Neill [118], it is imperative to look beyond the generated output of a model when investigating the ability of the system to compose. This way, as analysed by Li et al. [106], there are two ways to evaluate a music composer: by evaluating the music it composes or by evaluating the composition process. This idea can be extended outside the specific domain of music generation. Given the difficulties in evaluating isolated solutions, we might see more works where models evaluate the generative process itself and not only the output solutions.
10.9.4 How to  Compare Evolutionary and  Non-evolutionary Models?
Following the challenge of isolated evaluation, we turn our attention to the comparison of performance between different generative models, namely, between generative models with and without evolutionary computation. It is demonstrated that in adversarial generative models, the loss functionis not stable enough to be taken as a comparative measure of generative performance [46]. In fact, it is shown that even simple metrics such as the inception score, which applies the Inception Model  [194] to every generated image in order to get the conditional probability distribution of classes in the original data [173], fails to capture similarities between generated images adequately. For this reason, the Frechét inception distance metric [83] has been proposed. Although the Frechét inception distance was specifically developed to evaluate the performance of GANs, it can be applied to any image generationmodel. The Frechét inception distance directly compares the statisticsof real samples with the statistics of generated ones, allowing for the capture of features used for a collection of both real and generated images gathered from training the network on image classificationtasks. One major shortcoming of the inception scoreand Frechét inception distance scores is that they fail to determine whether the proposed model is overfitting or underfitting [20]. This problem pertains not only to evolutionary generative modelsbut also to standard generative models. To overcome this hurdle, metrics such as the Reconstruction Error [212] and the Kernel Inception Distancewere introduced [20]. Even though applying these metrics in evolutionary generative modelsstill seems very rare, we posit that using these more advanced metrics will become more widespread in the study of evolutionary generative modelsas research in the field keeps taking off.
10.9.5 How to  Improve the  Computational Efficiency and  Scalability of  Evolutionary Generative Models?
Generally speaking, when it comes to improving computational efficiency, there are two ways a model can be optimised: through macro-optimisations, i.e. algorithmic improvements in our case, or through micro-optimisations, which in computer science typically means small statement-level optimisations to the source code. However, by micro-optimisations, we refer to the adaption of the model to run in different hardware according to the demands of operations in its algorithm. As an example, the work by Turhan and Bilge [206] tackles the problem of efficiently generating high-resolution versions of handwritten digits, which is a slow task in conventional GAN-variational auto-encodermodels. The proposed model converges more efficiently and thus faster than the baseline models by allowing the feature-wise reconstruction of a GAN-variational auto-encoderhybrid model instead of the standard pixel-wise reconstruction approach. This is a typical example of an algorithmic improvement. Another noteworthy example in the category of computational performance is TensorGP [9]. TensorGP is a genetic programming engine that not only performs algorithmic optimisations by changing the internal representation of symbolic expressions from the traditional tree graph to a directed acyclic graph, thus avoiding code re-execution but also has the option to evaluate expressions in dedicated hardware if available. This way, while most of the evolutionary stages such as variation operators, selection and other control mechanisms run on the central processing unit (CPU), the evaluation can take place in graphics processing units (GPUs)or tensor processing units (TPUs), which are capable of vectorising the pipeline of genetic programming operations, something that is still not implemented in many off-the-shelf genetic programming engines [8]. With the continued slowing down of Moore’s law and GPUcomputing still on the rise, it makes sense to expect an increase in the number of frameworks using parallel capable hardware not only in evolutionary generative modelsbut in generative models.
Coupled with the problem of computational efficiency, there is the problem of complexity associated with the generative process. The early works by Sims [185] in image generationusing symbolic expressions are straightforward examples of low computational costin terms of the generative process. As a counter-example, the work by Correia et al. [45] in enhancing image pipelines is fairly heavier than most generative processes because the evolutionary generative modelencompasses more transformation steps. In this work, genetic programming was used to evolve image filters that, aside from requiring the traditional evaluation of the individual tree graphs, are then applied to a predefined image, which is, in turn, evaluated using an external classifier for fitness assignment. Overall, it seems that as time passes by, generative models tend to complexify, demanding more computational resources and thus becoming harder to scale and deal with.
10.9.6 How to  Improve the  Interaction of  Evolutionary Generative Models?
Another aspect that we believe to be extremely relevant is the way we interact with evolutionary generative models. Not all generative models are easy to use for the average user, offering a poor user experience which will probably limit their reach to a broad audience. Therefore, it is essential to explore effective ways to control and visualise the different elements of an evolutionary generative model. This goes beyond facilitating a given action. Interaction can help to understand a certain functionality or aspect of the models that are often very technical.
For instance, although interfaces for large language modelssuch as ChatGPT1have been trending as of late, the generative pre-trained transformer (GPT) model from which ChatGPT was built is not widely known despite having been created earlier [25]. The main reason for this lies in the fact that ChatGPT has a simple, natural and inviting user interface. Likewise, Midjourney,2a system which offers a model for the generation of images from natural language descriptions in the form of text prompts, is another example of an increasingly popular artificial intelligence service. Both examples have the benefit of being easily accessible: ChatGPT through the OpenAI website and Midjourney through a server hosted on Discord, a popular chat application.
Historically, interfaces in evolutionary generative modelswere created to aid the user to interact with them, control the evolutionary process, preview individuals and assign fitness [124, 181]. Other systems allow the designing of fitness functions [130, 144], a process that poses challenges in terms of interpretabilityand explainabilityto its design. There are other systems that allow for inspecting and navigation ofthe outputs [80, 143, 182], which also poses challenges from the implementation and user interaction perspectives.
However, the majority of evolutionary generative modelspossess neither this level of user-friendliness nor accessibility. In fact, most evolutionary generative modelframeworks use their own interfaces, with different layouts and sometimes unintuitive functionality, lacking both generalisation and scalability.
We believe that the interaction with these models can be planned not only with human users in mind but also with other computational systems with which they can be integrated, following the example of nowadays machine learning-based systems. This can be done by developing APIs that allow for the development of new systems while promoting their modularity. The solution of using APIs solves the decoupling of the generative model, however, does not solve the part of adding a standardised experience for the interaction with the generative model which can be seen as an open problem.
10.9.7 How to  Increase the  Availability of  Evolutionary Generative Model Systems?
As a final open challenge, we address the availability of the implemented systems to the general public. Within the surveyed literature, the number of papers with publicly source-code repositories is relatively scarce. Truth be told, this is not a problem specific to the field of generative models or even to artificial intelligence but one that is common in most research fields. Albeit a big challenge, websites such as huggingface.com and paperswithcode.com are a good step forward as they help disseminate and organise machine learning and artificial intelligence papers alike, along with their respective code. Moreover, we believe that having open access to new methods and their respective implementations is especially important to advance the field of evolutionary generative models
Having identified the core challenges and future trends in evolutionary generative models, it is clear that some are inherently more difficult to tackle than others. Challenges such as the availability of implemented evolutionary generative modelsystems are more of an ongoing problem that, arguably, is not expected to be solved so soon as it is pervasive in many other fields. Similarly, despite recent breakthroughs, technical challenges such as the construction of organised solution spaces or the evaluation of the generative capabilities of a model are non-obvious challenges that, due to being very dependent on the type of evolutionary generative model, will likely keep posing challenges as the topic of evolutionary generative modelsevolves, and new approaches are proposed. In contrast, challenges such as bottleneck mitigation and overhead reduction can arguably be easier to implement in the sense that they typically consist of general techniques that can be applied to a wide range of models. For instance, with the continuous rise in parallel computing, techniques as well as research and development investments in hardware with vectorisation technologies are increasing. Nonetheless, instead of dwelling on the many hurdles surrounding this topic, it is also worth praising the number of positive efforts being put in place to help advance and develop research on evolutionary generative models
10.10 Conclusions
In this chapter, we presented a comprehensive survey on evolutionary generative models, analysing their main properties, along with a taxonomy to categorise these models. The lack of a well-established categorisation of these models in the literature led us to identify four main categories of evolutionary generative models: evolutionary computation without machine learning, evolutionary computation aided by machine learning, machine learning aided by evolutionary computationand machine learning evolved by evolutionary computation
The importance of this contribution is twofold. First, it aims to standardise or at least provide a basis for further classifications of evolutionary generative modelswhile easing the process of analysing the existing bodyof research. Second, we collected and categorised some of the most prominent literature concerning evolutionary generative models. We are aware that the work in evolutionary generative modelsis extensive, and therefore it is not feasible to carry out an exhaustive survey of all existing approaches.
Early instances of evolutionary generative modelsstarted as plain evolutionary computation approaches. With the growth in the research and adoption of machine learning seen within the past decades, the evolutionary computation approaches evolved into models incorporating machine learning techniques. For this reason, we have performed an in-depth listing of applications, surveys, position papers and other research pertaining to and spanning from the beginnings of the use of evolutionary computation as a generative model to the state-of-the-art approaches. Overall, more than 200 publications ranging from plain evolutionary computation systems to evolutionary generative machine learning for the generation of images, music, text, as well as other domains were explored and classified. Each publication was classified according to the main properties that we have identified, namely, application domain, evolutionary algorithm, population, representation and fitness.
Furthermore, the extent of the present study made it possible to identify open problems and challenges for evolutionary generative models. Namely, challenges such as the need for adequate metrics for evaluating and validating generative performance, the aggregation of the generated outputs in a single, organised solution space as well as the search for well-suited operators capable of efficiently navigating through the associated solutions space is at the forefront of current open problems. It is worth noting that the growth of evolutionary generative modelsis tied to the maturity of the field of evolutionary machine learning, which, as an emerging field, is primarily propelled by the transparencyand availability of the implemented systems to the general public. This challenge is in no way less relevant than the above-mentioned ones.
With the emergence of more promising methods such as GANs and other deep learning techniques, the use of evolutionary computation in the context of generative models might seem lost at first sight. However, based on recent trends demonstrated throughout this chapter, the future of the topic seems to point towards the symbiosisbetween both fields, where the power of machine learning interplays with the representation flexibilityof evolutionary computation to improve the generative performance and computational efficiency of current and future evolutionary generative models
Acknowledgements
This work is funded by the FCT—Foundation for Science and Technology, I.P./MCTES through national funds (PIDDAC), within the scope of CISUC R &D Unit-UIDB/00326/2020 or project code UIDP/00326/2020 and by European Social Fund, through the Regional Operational Program Centro 2020, under the FCT grant SFRH/BD/08254/2021.
References
1.
Al-Dujaili, A., Schmiedlechner, T., O’Reilly, U.M.: Towards distributed coevolutionary GANs. In: Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) 2018 Fall Symposium (2018)
2.
Al-Najjar, K., Hämäläinen, M.: A master-apprentice approach to automatic creation of culturally satirical movie titles. In: Krahmer, E., Gatt, A., Goudbeek, M. (eds.) Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Natural Language Generation, Tilburg University, The Netherlands, pp. 274–283. Association for Computational Linguistics (2018). Accessed from 5–8 Nov 2018
3.
Albarracn-Molina, D.D., Raglio, A., Rivas-Ruiz, F., Vico, F.J.: Using formal grammars as musical genome. Appl. Sci. 11(9) (2021)
4.
Alvarado, F.H.C., Lee, W.H., Huang, Y.H., Chen, Y.S.: Melody similarity and tempo diversity as evolutionary factors for music variations by genetic algorithms. In: Cardoso, F.A., Machado, P., Veale, T., Cunha, J.M. (eds.) Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Computational Creativity, ICCC 2020, Coimbra, Portugal, pp. 251–254. Association for Computational Creativity (ACC) (2020). 7–11 Sept 2020
5.
Angeline, P.J.: Evolving fractal movies. In: Proceedings of the 1st Annual Conference on Genetic Programming, pp. 503–511. MIT Press (1996)
6.
Ashlock, D.A.: Evolutionary exploration of the mandelbrot set. In: IEEE International Conference on Evolutionary Computation, CEC 2006, part of WCCI 2006, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 2079–2086. IEEE (2006). Accessed from 16–21 July 2006
7.
Aupetit, S., Bordeau, V., Monmarché, N., Slimane, M., Venturini, G.S.: Interactive evolution of ant paintings. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, CEC 2003, Canberra, Australia, pp. 1376–1383. IEEE (2003). Accessed from 8–12 Dec 2003
8.
Baeta, F., Correia, J., Martins, T., Machado, P.: Speed benchmarking of genetic programming frameworks. In: Chicano, F., Krawiec, K. (eds.), GECCO ’21: Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, Lille, France, pp. 768–775. ACM (2021). Accessed from 10–14 July 2021
9.
Baeta, F., Correia, J., Martins, T., Machado, P.: Tensor GP - genetic programming engine in tensor flow. In: Castillo, P.A., Laredo, J.L.J. (eds.), Applications of Evolutionary Computation - 24th International Conference, Evo Applications 2021, Held as Part of Evo Star 2021, Virtual Event, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 12694, pp. 763–778. Springer (2021). Accessed from 7–9 April 2021
10.
Baeta, F., Correia, J., Martins, T., Machado, P.: Exploring expression-based generative adversarial networks. In: Fieldsend, J.E., Wagner, M. (eds.) GECCO ’22: Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, Companion Volume, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, pp. 1862–1869. ACM (2022). 9–13 July 2022
11.
Baker, E., Seltzer, M.: Evolving line drawings. In: Forrest, S. (ed.) Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Genetic Algorithms, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA, p. 627. Morgan Kaufmann (1993)
12.
Baluja, S., Pomerleau, D., Jochem, T.: Towards automated artificial evolution for computer-generated images. Connect. Sci. 6(2–3), 325–354 (1994)Crossref
13.
Bell, C.: Algorithmic music composition using dynamic markov chains and genetic algorithms. J. Comput. Sci. Coll. 27(2), 99–107 (2011)
14.
Bentley, P.J., Kumar, S.: Three ways to grow designs: a comparison of embryogenies for an evolutionary design problem. In: Banzhaf, W., Daida, J.M., Eiben, A.E., Garzon, M.H., Honavar, V.G., Jakiela, M.J., Smith, R.E. (eds.) Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO 1999), Orlando, Florida, USA, pp. 35–43. Morgan Kaufmann (1999). Accessed from 13–17 July 1999
15.
Bergen, S., Ross, B.J.: Automatic and interactive evolution of vector graphics images with genetic algorithms. Visual Comput. 28(1), 35–45 (2012)Crossref
16.
Bergen, S., Ross, B.J.: Aesthetic 3D model evolution. Genetic Program. Evolvable Mach. 14(3), 339–367 (2013)Crossref
17.
Biles, J., Anderson, P., Loggi, L.: Neural Network Fitness Functions for a Musical IGA. In RIT Scholar Works, Rochester Institute of Technology (1996)
18.
Biles, J.A.: GenJam: a genetic algorithm for generating Jazz Solos. In: Proceedings of the 1994 International Computer Music Conference, ICMC 1994, Aarhus, Denmark. Michigan Publishing (1994). Accessed from 12–17 Sept 1994
19.
Bilotta, E., Pantano, P., Cupellini, E., Rizzuti, C.: Evolutionary methods for melodic sequences generation from non-linear dynamic systems. In: Giacobini, M., Brabazon, A., Cagnoni, S., Caro, G.D., Drechsler, R., Farooq, M., Fink, A., Lutton, E., Machado, P., Minner, S., O’Neill, M., Romero, J., Rothlauf, F., Squillero, G., Takagi, H., Uyar, S., Yang, S. (eds.) Applications of Evolutinary Computing, EvoWorkshops 2007: EvoCoMnet, EvoFIN, EvoIASP, EvoINTERACTION, EvoMUSART, EvoSTOC and EvoTransLog, Valencia, Spain, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4448, pp. 585–592. Springer (2007). Accessed from 11–13 Apr 2007
20.
Binkowski, M., Sutherland, D.J., Arbel, M., Gretton, A.: Demystifying MMD GANs. In: 6th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Conference Track Proceedings (2018). Accessed from April 30–May 3 2018
21.
Bontrager, P., Lin, W., Togelius, J., Risi, S.: Deep interactive evolution. In: Liapis, A., Cardalda, J.J.R., Ekárt, A. (eds.) Computational Intelligence in Music, Sound, Art and Design - 7th International Conference, EvoMUSART 2018, Parma, Italy, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10783, pp. 267–282. Springer, (2018). Accessed from 4–6 April 2018
22.
Bontrager, P., Roy, A., Togelius, J., Memon, N., Ross, A.: Deep master prints: generating master prints for dictionary attacks via latent variable evolution. In: 9th IEEE International Conference on Biometrics Theory, Applications and Systems, BTAS 2018, Redondo Beach, CA, USA, pp. 1–9. IEEE (2018). Accessed from 22–25 Oct 2018
23.
Bontrager, P., Roy, A., Togelius, J., Memon, N., Ross, A.: Deep master prints: generating master prints for dictionary attacks via latent variable evolution. In: 9th IEEE International Conference on Biometrics Theory, Applications and Systems, BTAS 2018, Redondo Beach, CA, USA, pp. 1–9. IEEE (2018). Accessed from 22–25 Oct 2018
24.
Brown, J.A., Ashlock, D., Orth, J., Houghten, S.: Autogeneration of fractal photographic mosaic images. In: Proceedings of the IEEE congress on evolutionary computation, CEC 2011, New Orleans, LA, USA, pp. 1116–1123. IEEE (2011). Accessed from 5–8 June 2011
25.
Brown, T.B., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Agarwal, S., Herbert-Voss, A., Krueger, G., Henighan, T., Child, R., Ramesh, A., Ziegler, D.M., Wu, J., Winter, C., Hesse, C., Chen, M., Sigler, E., Litwin, M., Gray, S., Chess, B., Clark, J., Berner, C., McCandlish, S., Radford, A., Sutskever, I., Amodei, D.: Language models are few-shot learners. In: Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M., Lin, H. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS 2020, Virtual Event, pp. 1877–1901 (2020). Accessed from 6–12 Dec 2020
26.
Browne, C., Maire, F.: Evolutionary game design. IEEE Trans. Comput. Intell. AI in Games 2(1), 1–16 (2010)
27.
Burton, A.R., Vladimirova, T.: Genetic algorithm utilising neural network fitness evaluation for musical composition. In: Smith, G.D., Steele, N.C., Albrecht, R.F. (eds.) Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Neural Nets and Genetic Algorithms, ICANNGA 1997, Norwich, UK, 1997, pp. 219–223. Springer (1997)
