125.
Yue, W., Ma, W., Miao, Q., Wang, S.: Multimodal continuous ant colony optimization for multisensor remote sensing image registration with local search. Swarm Evol. Comput. 47, 89–95 (2019)
126.
Yang, H., Du, Q.: Particle swarm optimization-based dimensionality reduction for hyperspectral image classification. In: 2011 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium. IEEE (2011)
127.
Yang, Y., Xue, B., Jesson, L., Zhang, M.: Genetic programming for symbolic regression: a study on fish weight prediction. In: 2021 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC). IEEE, June 2021
128.
Zhang, Q.-S., Zhu, S.-C.: Visual interpretability for deep learning: a survey. Front. Inf. Technol. Electron. Eng. 19(1), 27–39 (2018)
129.
Zhang, Yu., Tiňo, P., Leonardis, A., Tang, K.: A survey on neural network interpretability. IEEE Trans. Emerging Top. Comput. Intell. 5(5), 726–742 (2021)Crossref
130.
Zhang, Y., Zhou, Y., Jiang, S., Ning, S., Jin, J., Cui, Y., Wu, Z., Feng, H.: A simulation study using machine learning and formula methods to assess the soybean groundwater contribution in a drought-prone region. Water 14(19) (2022)
Footnotes
1
Frequently also called feature extraction, feature generation, feature learning, feature discovery, feature synthesis, or constructive induction.
©  The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.  2024
W. Banzhaf et al.(eds.)Handbook of Evolutionary Machine LearningGenetic and Evolutionary Computationhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-3814-8_20
20.  Evolutionary Machine Learning in  Medicine
Michael  A.  Lones1and Stephen  L.  Smith2
(1)
Department of Computer Science, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK
(2)
Department of Electronic Engineering, University of York, York, UK
Stephen  L.  Smith
Email: stephen.smith@york.ac.uk
Abstract
This chapter reviews applications of evolutionary machine learning within the medical domain. It is divided into three parts. The first two parts give examples of recent work in two important and representative diseases, cancerand COVID-19, showing how evolutionary methods can be applied to diverse tasks in diagnosis, epidemiological modelling, and the design of drug interventionsand treatment plans. The third part presents a case study of our own work within the area of Parkinson’s disease, demonstrating how an evolutionary machine learning approach has been successfully translated and applied within clinical settings.
20.1 Introduction
Medicine and evolutionary algorithms (EAs) have been bedfellows for quite some time. EAs work well on problems that are difficult and poorly understood, and medicine is full of problems that are difficult and poorly understood. Medicine is a broad field, and the applications of EAs within medicine reflect this. However, it is not practical, nor perhaps desirable, to review everything that has been done in this area. Rather, in this review, we predominantly focus on areas of medicine where EAs have been widely applied, and/or where we have done work in the past and have enough expertise to comment intelligently on what has been done. The review focuses on evolutionary machine learning (EML), i.e. where EAs are used as part of a data-driven machine learning process. However, where relevant, we also note applications that are not directly data-driven. We focus on three domains: cancer, COVID-19and Parkinson’s disease. The first of these, cancer, is a large and important area of medicine and gives us an opportunity to demonstrate the breadth of EA-based approaches used in medicine. The second, COVID-19, is a recent application area (at least at the time of writing) and allows us to highlight EML methods which are currently popular in the medical domain. The third, Parkinson’s disease, allows us to present a case study of our own work where EML research has been taken through the translational pipeline and is now being used within a clinical setting. After reviewing these three areas, we conclude with some thoughts on recent trends and future directions within EML in a medical context.
20.2 Cancer
Cancerhas a major impact on people and society, and, consequently, has become a popular target of ML methods. In this respect, EAs are no exception, and the literature on applying EAs to problems in cancer goes back for decades. In order to make this review more focused and contemporary, we mainly limit it to papers published in the last 5 years (for a review of earlier work, see [81]). However, we also reference seminal studies from earlier years. Potential applications in this area are diverse, since there are many types of cancer, and each has its own considerations in terms of factors such as diagnosisand clinical intervention. Nevertheless, existing work can generally be divided into that which seeks to improve diagnosis, and that which seeks to improve treatment, and this section is organised into two parts to reflect this. Table 20.1summarises the papers covered in this review.
Table 20.1
Selected applications of EAs within cancer, ordered by publication date
Study
EA
Application
Walker et al. [79]
Cartesian GP
Breast cancer diagnosis from mammograms
Lones et al. [41]
Cartesian GP
Raman fingerprints of thyroid cancers
Fan et al. [24]
Not specified
MRI imaging biomarkers for breast cancer
Sadowski et al. [62]
MOEA
Optimisation of brachytherapy
Paruch [59]
GA/ES hybrid
Parameterisation of hyperthermic therapy
Beford et al. [9]
GA
Radiotheraphy design and device evaluation
Luong et al. [46]
MOEA
Optimisation of brachytherapy plans
Lu et al. [44]
GA
Breast cancer prognosis
Wang et al. [80]
Memetic
Combination chemotherapy schedules
Wu et al. [82]
GP (and PSO)
Cancer diagnosis using DNA microarrays
Elia et al. [22]
Multi-gene GP
Early diagnosis from fluid samples
Fan et al. [25]
Not specified
Radiogenomic prediction of survival
Shindi et al. [67]
Hybrid MOEAs
Optimisation of chemotherapy
Su et al. [72]
MO memetic
Biomarkers for five cancer types
Alderdice et al. [4]
GA
Gene targets for immune-checkpoint therapy
Keshavarz et al. [53]
GA
Optimised model of lung cancer metastasis
Li et al. [34]
GA
Repurposing drugs for anti-cancer therapy
Maleki et al. [47]
GA
Lung cancer staging and prognosis
Panjwani et al. [58]
NSGA-II
Chemotheraphy planning for late stage cancer
Stillman et al. [71]
GA
Design of anti-cancer nanomedicines
Taou et al. [74]
GA
Controlling gene expression states in cells
Tsompanas et al. [76]
