The riseof machine intelligence provides a grand opportunity to expeditiously design and discover novel molecules through smart search. The discovery of new functional molecules has led to many technological advances and remains one of the most critical approaches to overcoming technical problems in various industries, such as those in organic semiconductors, displays, and batteries.
Evolutionary designhas gained significant attention as a useful tool to accelerate the design process by automatically modifying molecular structures to obtain molecules with the target properties. However, devising a way to rapidly evolve the molecule while maintaining its chemical validityis a challenge. Kwon et al. [68] proposed a GA along with RNN and DNN models that were used to evolve the fingerprint vectors of seed molecules. The RNN decoder reconstructed chemically valid molecular structures in the SMILES format from the evolved fingerprint vectors without resorting to predefined chemical rules. The method employed DL models to extract the inherent knowledge from a database of materials and is used to effectively guide the evolutionary design. Designing a new therapeutic drug can be a time-consuming and expensive process. It also enables rapid discovery of new drug candidates by performing intelligent searches in a wide molecular structure space. In [2], Abouchekeir et al. proposed a new approach called adversarial deep evolutionary learning (ADEL) to search for novel molecules in the latent space ofan adversarial generative model and keep improving the latent representation space. In [125], Yoshikawa et al. proposed a new population-based approach using a grammatical evolution named ChemGE that can update a large population of molecules concurrently and ChemGE succeeded in finding hundreds of candidate molecules whose affinity for thymidine kinase is better than that of known binding molecules in a database (DUD-E). Li et al. [74] proposed a deep evolutionary learning (DEL) process that integrates a fragment-based deep generative model and multi-objective evolutionary computation for molecular design, which can generate promising novel molecular structures.
Optimizing molecules for desired properties is a fundamental yet challenging task in chemistry, material science, and drug discovery. In [27], Chen et al. developed a novel algorithm for optimizing molecular properties via an Expectation Maximization (EM) like an explainable evolutionary process. They showed that the evolution-by-explanation algorithm is 79% better than the best baseline in terms of a generic metric combining aspects such as success rate, novelty, and diversity
Evolutionary algorithms have found increasing applications in both the discovery and optimization of novel molecular structures. Artificial evolutionary methods, such as GAs, can not only explore large and complex search spaces very efficiently, but also can be applied to the identification and optimization of new molecules faster than pure physical experiments. ML models can enhance the suitability of experimentally measured molecules to accelerate the discovery of useful and novel molecules in a broad composition or property space. For example, Tu C. Le and Nhiem Tran [69] reviewed how GAs have been used to solve optimization problems in computational drug designincluding catalyst discovery and optimization. They also describe the use of both experimental and computational fitness functions to evolve materials into promising areas of catalyst space. Among these applications, neural networks have been used widely as in silico fitness functions based on these neural structure-property models.
18.2.2.2 EML for Molecular Dynamic Simulation
Molecular dynamics (MD) hasbecome a powerful tool for studying biophysical systems due to increased computing power and the availability of software. Efficient computational strategies for the targeted generation and screening of molecules with desired therapeutic properties are therefore urgently required.
Because of the negative environmental impact of damaging organic solvents and the high cost of chemical waste disposal, the search for alternative, renewable solvents is a top priority in the chemical industry. Zhong et al. [128] facilitated the development of optimized potentials for liquid simulation (OPLS)-based force field (FF) parameters for eight unique deep eutectic solvents (DESs) based on three ammonium-based salts and five HBDs at multiple salt-HBD ratios. DESs are a class of solvents often composed of ammonium-based chloride salts and a neutral hydrogen bond donor (HBD) at specific ratios. These cost-effective and environmentally friendly solvents have seen significant growth in multiple fields, including organic synthesis, and in materials and extractions because of their desirable properties. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus type 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has led to a global pandemic. DL techniques and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are two mainstream computational methods for studying the geometric, chemical, and structural features of proteins and guiding protein structures. Sun et al. [107] introduced the latest progress of the DL-based molecular dynamic simulationapproaches in structure-based drug design (SBDD) for SARS-CoV-2 which could address the problems of protein structure and binding prediction, drug virtual screening, molecular docking, and complex evolution. MD can also help researchers develop new molecular materials in biomaterials science. Collagen is the most abundant structural protein in humans, providing crucial mechanical properties, including high strength and toughness, in tissues. In [61], Khare et al. developed a general model using a GA within a DL framework to design collagen sequences with specific Tm values. They discovered that the number of hydrogen bonds within collagen calculated with molecular dynamics (MD) is directly correlated to the experimental measurement of triple-helical quality.
18.2.3 EML for Astronomy
The fundamental advantage of EML is that they deliver high-quality results even when computational resources are constrained. The so-called comprehensive optimization methods are primarily constrained by the scale of the problem or data since the field of astronomy often involves optimizing problems of great complexity or processing enormous amounts of data. For this reason, EML has been used in various significant applications in astronomy such as orbital parameter determination, stellar spectra modeling, stellar structure modeling, planet search, gamma emission analysis.
18.2.3.1 Orbital Parameter Determination
Dueto the sheer number of unknown parameters involved in the problem of finding orbital parameters, it is considered a highly difficult task. As a result, in the absence of an efficient approach, one is forced to either accept an extremely coarse-grained parameter space scan or limit the search space by setting the ranges of certain parameters. Wahde  [112] proposed a method based on GA for efficiently searching vast space of possible orbits. The goal of this paper was to evaluate the effectiveness of using a GA-based method to determine the orbital parameters of interacting galaxies provided photometric observations and systemic velocities of the pair of galaxies. Later Wahde and Donner  [113] extended the simulation part of this GA-based approach to investigate the impact of past interactions between the NGC5195 and the Messier M51 galaxies. In another work, Theis and Kohle  [110] showed that if adequate data are provided, their GA-based method can reliably calculate orbital parameters. The use of a GA theoretically enables a uniqueness test of a preferred parameter combination and so the authors use it on the parameter region determined after the fast restricted N-body method. Cantó et al.  [21] designed a modification of the canonical GA to observe the orbital parameters of the planets orbiting 55 Cancri. The GA is predominantly used here to maximize a function where traditional methods are ineffective.
18.2.3.2 Stellar Spectra Modeling
Modelinga good fit of cosmic stellar spectra is a very challenging objective. However, this task is very crucial as a wide range of stellar attributes can be inferred from this. The first known evolutionary computing-based analysis of stellar spectra was performed by Metcalfe  [79]. The work proposed employing a GA to compare the observed light curves to those produced by theoretical models to determine the properties of binary stellar systems. In this work, GA was used to randomly populate the defined parameter space, which also allowed the trial parameter sets to evolve over time. The optimal set of parameters and the mean set of parameters have very negligible differences after 100 generations. Mokiem et al.  [82] developed a parallelized GA which served as the foundation for an autonomous fitter of the spectra of massive stars with stellar winds. With the utilization of a rapid performance stellar atmosphere code named FASTWIND  [92] and a fitting method based on GA named PIKAIA  [25], a fast and efficient method for automating the fitting of the continuum normalized spectra of Oand early Btype stars with stellar winds is described in this paper. The GA-based routine PIKAIA is employed for parameter optimization of FASTWIND. PIKAIA optimizes a population till a predetermined number of generations is reached rather than until a specified criterion is met. PIKAIA is also used on other several noteworthy papers. One such important application can be found in the work by Baier et al.  [14]. They combined the radiative transfer code DUSTY  [58] with PIKAIA to notably enhance the spectral fit of the dust spectra of AGB stars. PIKAIA, which is based on the evolutionary natural selection process, seeks to maximize the function , where is the observed spectrum and is a model spectrum computed using DUSTY.
18.2.3.3 Stellar structure Modeling
Anotherimportant application of EML in astronomy is stellar structure modeling. The internal structures of stellar objects vary depending on their classifications and ages, reflecting the components they are made of and how they transfer energy. Metcalfe and Charbonneau  [80] obtained a number of intriguing physical discoveries for stellar structure modelingof white dwarf stars, thanks to the effective, concurrent exploration ofparameter space enabled by GA-based numerical optimization. The authors also use the GA-based routine PIKAIA  [25] (described in the paragraph above) and re-implement it as a fully parallel routine to provide an objective estimate of the globally optimal parameters for a particular model versus an observational dataset. A total of five parameters were allowed to evolve by the parallel GA for obtaining structural and physical details about the white dwarf stars. Zhang et al.  [127] calculated stellar effective temperatures and identified angular parameters using a stochastic PSO on known stellar flux data in specific bands. The system’s input settings were first set. Second, each particle’s fitness value was determined. The fitness values of each particle with the prior best predictions were then contrasted. Following the generation of the new particle, other particles’ positions and velocities were updated. When a specific stopping criterion is met, the stochastic PSO terminates. Another work describes a novel approach based on GA for estimating the age and relative contribution of various stellar populations in galaxies  [9]. Using charge-coupled device (CCD) images in the U, B, V, R, and I bands, the authors apply this technique to the barred spiral galaxy NGC 3384. Using the hypothesis that just two stellar populations, each with a different color, age, metallicity, etc., are responsible for the observed light from a galaxy, the GA is used to solve the equation set that describes the relationships characterizing the two stellar populations’ mixing-tracks found from [1].
18.2.3.4 Astronomical Object Discovery
Even though there are a great number of astronomical objects, we have only discovered and examined a small fraction of them. This necessitates the creation of algorithms for efficiently finding astronomical objects. Nesseris and Shafieloo  [86] developed a null test for the cosmological constant model using the so-called Om statisticin combination with GAs to recreate the expansion history of the universe in a model-independent way. In this paper, the GA is applied on the SNIa dataset (with the selected execution parameters)  [99] to find a solution for the “distance modulus” term of its fitness function. Based on evolutionary optimization of the classifiers, Wierzbiński et al.  [117] created an effective and precise classifier for cosmic objects that are mostly used to discover the best parameters for the voting classifiers to categorize stellar spectra of stars, quasars, and galaxies. With their default parameters as a starting point, the authors trained a collection of 21 classifiers. Then, they optimized the hyperparameters using GA. Cassisi  [23] used an evolutionary algorithm in which the equations for convective mixing and nuclear burning are solved using a single common scheme to undertake the first complete evolutionary computations of stars undergoing “He flash mixing”. For the evolutionary calculations, the authors employ an evolutionary code from   [103]. Joseph et al.  [59] used GA to search through four nonlinear parameters of each planet to fit a full Keplerian orbit. Chan et al.  [24] used a GA for locating stars formed after supernovae explosion and eventually backtracking to stars formed after the big bang. As applying a complete search is computationally very expensive, the authors employed a GA with a local search boosted with random initial solutions. In a study by Geyter et al.  [34], the SKIRT  [12], a Monte Carlo radiative transfer code designed to examine the impact of dust absorption and scattering on the gas and star kinematics of dusty galaxies, its output is optimized using the GA library GAlib  [114] by searching through the vast model parameter space.
18.2.3.5 Dark Matter and Dark Energy Analysis
Dark energy makes up around 68% of the universe and dark matter about 27%. They are predominantly responsible for the bulk of galaxies and galaxy clusters as well as the large-scale organization of galaxies. So they are very significant to understand the formation of the universe. Bogdanos and Nesseris  [18] employed GAs to study standard SNIa data  [67] to extract model-independent restrictions on the evolution of the dark energy equation of state. With the selected execution settings, the GA is applied to the original SNIa dataset to produce a solution for the reduced distance modulus. Ruiz et al.  [95] applied PSO to analyze merger trees obtained from a common Lambda Cold Dark Matter N-body simulation and the Semi-analytic Model of Galaxy Formation (SAM). The PSO is mainly used here to calculate the best possible set of SAM parameters. Moster et al.  [83] devised a reinforcement learning approachto compute the galaxy properties for dark matter haloes and train the parameters using a PSO technique. The authors compute the galaxy properties for all haloes for a specific set of weights and biases and then produce mock statisticsfor GalaxyNet, which is trained using a reinforcement learningapproach. These statisticsare compared to the observations to determine the model loss, which is minimized using PSO.
18.2.4 EML for Biology
The protein structure designproblem is one of the most exciting challenges of modern computational biology. Because of its scientific complexity, research on understanding the function of proteins, and studying the relationship between amino acid sequences and protein structures is very difficult. ML-guided evolution is a new paradigm for a biological design that enables optimizing complex procedures. And the multi-objective evolutionary algorithm is introduced as it can deal with several functions when designing protein structures.
18.2.4.1 Protein Function Prediction
Protein function predictionmethods are techniques that bioinformatics researchers use to understand the biological or biochemical roles of proteins. Proteins often function poorly when used outside their natural contexts and directed evolution can be used to engineer them to be more efficient in new roles. Wu et al.  [118] incorporate ML into the protein’s directed evolution workflow, to reduce the experimental effort and to explore the sequence space encoded by mutating multiple positions simultaneously. They have validated their approach on a large published empirical fitness landscape and demonstrated that ML-guided directed evolution finds variants with higher fitness than other evolution approaches.
18.2.4.2 Protein Structure Comparison
Identifying structural similarities is essential for assessing the relationship between structure and function in proteins. Szustakowski and Weng [108] developed a structure alignment algorithm using GA for three-dimensional structures of proteins. They first align the proteins’ cores, as represented by their secondary structure elements, by minimizing the difference of distance matrices using a GA. And then extend the alignment to include any positions in loops or turns deemed equivalent in a convergent process. Carr et al.  [22] developed a new approach to structural comparison by using a Multimeme evolutionary algorithm. In a Multimeme algorithm, an individual is composed of its genetic material (that represents the solution to the problem being solved) and its memetic material (that defines the kind of local searcher to use). During crossover, both genetic and memetic transmission will be done. In [11], Bacardit et al. used GA to design automated procedures to reduce the dimension of protein structure prediction datasets by simplifying how the primary sequence of a protein is represented. Reducing the size of the alphabet used for prediction from twenty to just three letters resulted in more compact and human-readable classifiers. And the loss of accuracy accrued by this substantial alphabet reduction is not statistically significant compared to the full alphabet.
18.2.4.3 Protein Structure Design
ML-guided directedprotein structure design enables optimization of complex functions. Pegg et al.  [90] developed a GA for structure-based de novo design. They use molecular interactions evaluated with docking calculations as a fitness function to reduce the search space. Durrant et al.  [39] developed a protein inhibitor design algorithm that uses a growth strategy to build the core scaffold, molecular fragments are added at random to this scaffold. An evolutionary algorithm is then used to evaluate the scores of each population member, and the best ones become founders of the subsequent generation.
18.2.4.4 Multi-objective Optimization of Proteins
Using only one energy function is insufficient to characterize proteins because of their complexity. Multi-objective algorithms can provide a better protein with less computational resource requirement than DL methods. Brasil et al.  [19] developed a multi-objective evolutionary algorithm for ab initio protein structure prediction without using any earlier knowledge from similar protein structures. Gao et al.  [44] adopted a solvent-accessible surface area into a multi-objective evolutionary algorithm with three objective functions to improve protein structure prediction accuracy and efficiency. Traditional multi-objective algorithms cannot obtain the desired solution because the selection pressure decreases as the number of objectives increases. To address this problem, Lei et al.  [71] proposed a many-objective evolutionary algorithm with four types of objectives to alleviate the impact of imprecise energy functions for predicting protein structures.
18.2.5 EML for Geography and Geophysics
Process in evolutionary ML has contributed to significant advances in geography and geophysics research, such as climate change[94], geological features, geographical information systems, and transportation
18.2.5.1 Climate Change
Recently, oneof the biggest problems confronting humanity is climate change. Storms, droughts, fires, and flooding have become stronger and more frequent [94]. The main strategies for addressing climate changeinclude reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and preparing for resilience and disaster management, named mitigation and adaption respectively. Mitigation of GHG emissions requires changes to electrical systems, transportation, buildings, industry, and land-use. Many experts are exploring how to use ML methods to tackle the issue of climate change. Considering both adaption and mitigation response to climate change, Paton et al.  [89] incorporated GHG emissions into the multi-objective evolutionary algorithm (MOEA). The application of this method in Adelaide, Australia’s southern water supply system has illustrated the framework’s useful management implications. For spatially allocating land-use, analyzing climate changeimpacts may be a useful and fundamental long-term adaptation strategy. Joo Yoon and co-workers[124] utilized multi-objective GA to identify climate adaptation scenarios based on existing extents of three land-use classes in South Korea. Specifically, five objectives were established for predicting climate changeimpacts and regional economic conditions: (1) minimization of disaster damage, (2) existing land-use conversion, (3) maximization of rice yield, (4) protection of high species richness areas, and (5) economic value. This method showed better performance than other spatial land-use compositions for all adaptation objectives. Climate changetrends have already affected many ecosystems, such as species range and diversity, and this effect is different and varies from place to place. Rezayan et al.  [97] provided an optimal combination of the common species distribution models (SDMs), and employed a GA to model the climate changeeffects on the spatial distribution of Quercus brantiiin the west of Iran.
18.2.5.2 Geological Features
Severalattempts have been made to predict and analyze geographic properties by EML methods, such as earthquake hypocenter location [64, 96, 102], surface water reservoir control [100], ocean wave height [115], and magnetic anomalies [16].
In the geophysical research area, the determination of reliable and accurate earthquake hypocenters is a crucial task. In 1993, Sambridge and Gallagher [102] published a paper in which they used GAs to predict earthquake hypocenter location, which can refine a population of hypocenters collectively by exploiting information from the group as a whole, rather than relying on only local information about a single hypocenter. Kim et al. [64] applied a GA and a two-point ray tracing method [63] to solve non-uniqueness problems in determining reliable hypocentral parameters including latitude, longitude, source depth, and origin time. With the increasing riskof flood and drought impacts and the changing water allocation requirements among complex users, an efficient multipurpose reservoir management strategy is critical. Salazar et al. [100] carried out a diagnostic assessment framework of the surface water reservoir control for the Conowingo reservoir in the Lower Susquehanna River Basin, Pennsylvania, USA. Specifically, they use Evolutionary Multi-Objective Direct Policy Search(EMODPS) [48] as the decision analytic framework where reservoirs’ candidate operating policies are represented using parameterized global approximators. And then, they use multi-objective evolutionary algorithms to optimize those parameters for discovering the Pareto approximate operating policies. To predict the heights of ocean waves accurately and quickly, which is an important problem in marine detection and warning, Wang et al.  [115] reported a hybrid Mind Evolutionary Algorithm-BP neural network strategy (MEA-BP). It can avoid early convergence and improve the prediction accuracy by combining the local searching capabilities of the BP neural network and the global searching ability of the MEA. Their experiments cover a wide range of geographical locations (from 12 observation points across two geographically distinct regions - the Bohai Sea, and the Yellow Sea) and different weather (from Jan 1, 2016, to Dec 31, 2016) and show faster running time and high prediction accuracy. Balkaya and co-workers [16] demonstrated the differential evolution algorithm for 3D nonlinear inversion of total field magnetic anomalies caused by vertical-sided prismatic bodies. Li et al. [72] used an artificial neural network (ANN) to capture ionospheric spatiotemporal characteristics with a powerful capacity and capability and used a GA to improve the ANN’s learning efficiency for predicting ionospheric peak parameters including foF2 and hmF2.
18.2.5.3 Geographical Information Systems
GAshave recently generated much interest in the field of geographical information system(GIS) including optimal location search [73], and land partitioning [35]. Optimal location search is usually required in many urban applications for establishing one or more facilities. When it involves multiple sites, various constraints, and multiple objectives, the search task is very complex. In work [73], it demonstrated that GAs can be used with GIS to effectively solve the spatial decision problems for nfacilities. Land partitioning is a basic process of land consolidation [105], it involves the subdivision of land into smaller sub-spaces subject to several constraints [36]. Demetriou et al. [35] proposed the GIS and GAs integrated model: Land Parceling System (LandParcelS) which automates the land partitioning process by designing and optimizing land parcels according to their shape, size, and value.
18.2.5.4 Transportation
Bicycle-sharing systemshave become an important part of urban transportation systems [43]. To increase the number of bicycles available for rent and improve profits, it is better to collect bicycles in the evening and redistribute them to the main stations. This relies on the model that accurately forecasts rental demand. In [45], Gao et al. presented a moment-based rental prediction model by a fuzzy C-means (FCM)-based GA with a back propagation network (BPN) with more than ten factors, including the date, time, weather (e.g., temperature, humidity, and wind speed) and season, all of which make different contributions to the final demand. Firstly, they use the unsupervised FCM-based GA method to pre-classify historical rental records into groups. Next, the classification results are fed into a BPN predictor which is trained using these categorized records. After training, the BPN predictor can predict the demand at future moments.
18.2.6 EML for Engineering
Evolutionary algorithms are being used to enhance and optimize traditional ML systems. The quick convergence and flexibilitythat comes with evolutionary algorithms make their performance so useful in so many different areas. The use of evolutionary algorithms with ML is growing, and it is being used in many engineering areas such as software security, energy production, radiation prediction, civil engineering, and hardware design.
18.2.6.1 Software Security
Cybersecurity andpreventing unwanted attacks on computer networks is a very important and constantly changing field. Intrusion detection systems (IDS) are being used to keep malicious software out and are constantly being developed. With the addition of ML algorithms, these IDSs can classify network traffic as normal or not. Hosseinei and Zade [53] made a novel hybrid intrusion detection method that has two phases, a feature selectionphase, and an attack detection phase. In the feature selectionphase, a GA is modified to have a new multi-parent crossover operator and combined with a support vector machine (SVM) to improve performance and help reduce the dimensions and select relevant features. For the attack detection phase, an ANN was used to detect any attacks. To train the ANN, a hybrid system was created using hybrid gravitation search and PSO algorithms. Al-Yaseen et al.  [4] proposed another IDS that involved the use of a wrapper-based differential evolution algorithm for feature selectionand an extreme learning machine as the classifier. The differential evolution algorithm is similar to a GA, but mutation occurs first before crossover. The feature selectionfrom this algorithm is fed into an ML algorithm to classify and detect intruders. In [51], Halim et al. proposed a similar IDS system that used a GA for feature selectionas well as an ML algorithm-based prediction system. Another aspect of cyber securitythat is often developing is the detection of spam and phishing websites. Spammers are creating new techniques that dodge filters and phishing attacks are becoming a larger problem for web security. In [42], Farris et al. proposed a new detection system for spam using a GA in combination with a random weight network. This new system can better handle the massive data flowthat needs to be processed to be able to accurately filter out spam. The system uses a GA to find possible feature subsets and an RNW as the base classifier. Ali and Ahmed [6] created a new hybrid phishing website prediction model. The model uses a GA for feature selection, figuring out the most important features and providing proportional weight to these features for optimal results, and applies it to a deep neural network to accurately predict which websites are phishing sites. Detecting where future attacks on software could come from is also very important to the securityof that software. These are done using a vulnerability prediction model (VPM). Sahin et al. [98] designed a new model to predict vulnerabilities in software, applying symbiotic GA and DL methods. The proposed VPM used a deep neural network-based symbiotic GA to predict where the software may be lacking in security. The method used two versions of GA and a population-based dominance mechanism to identify the dominant-feature representations.
18.2.6.2 Energy Production
Energy production and consumption are both very necessary for this world. The shift to more natural energy sources has already started, but to see if they can even keep up with what a place or country needs, the amount of renewable energy produced needs to be optimized and measured, and the energy demand needs to be predicted. Prediction systems are developed to help with this, but the feature selectionprocess can be improved with the help of evolutionary approaches. Zhou et al. [129] created a prediction system of photovoltaic cells to see solar energy production. The system utilized a GA and a customized similar day analysis based on an extreme learning machine to predict the photovoltaic output. In [101], Salcedo-Sanz et al. focused on renewable energy uses and developed a new system that used a coral-reef optimization algorithm with a substrate layer for feature selection. Then an extreme learning machine was used to predict renewable energy production. Hu and Chen [55] were looking more specifically at wind energy and wind speed prediction. The proposed model included a differential evolutionary algorithm in conjunction with a Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) to accurately predict wind speeds and wind energy production. Neshat et al. [85] also used an LSTM in combination with six different evolutionary algorithms to test them all for wind speed and wind energy production predictions. Prediction systems for the demand of places are also being developed and enhanced using evolutionary algorithms. Mason et al. [78] created a new system that applied a Covariance matrix adaptation evolutionary strategy to train neural networks to predict the energy demand for Ireland. It resulted in accurate predictions with fast convergence times. Seyedzadeh et al. [104] similarly made an energy consumption prediction model for non-domestic buildings. A gradient-boosted regression tree model was used for prediction, and an evolutionary algorithm was used to optimize the model by adjusting the hyperparameters.
18.2.6.3 Radiation Prediction
Ghimire et al. [47] proposed a self-adaptive differential evolutionary extreme learning machine (ELM) to predict daily solar radiation for solar-rich cities. For the feature selectionfor the predictors of solar radiation, a swarm-based ant colony algorithm was used. The learning algorithm used was optimized from a standard ELM: a self-adaptive differential evolutionary extreme learning machine. This system was compared to others used to accomplish the same task, and it performed on par, if not more accurately for predicting solar radiation forecasts. In [62], Kilic et al. were looking at global solar radiation prediction. They implemented a hybrid ANN system, using an evolutionary algorithm for feature selectionand to help train the ANN. The hybrid system was compared to usual ML algorithms for the prediction of radiation, including an ANN, SVM, and a DL model. Guijo-Rubio et al. [49] did something similar, using an evolutionary algorithm to train and evolve an ANN to predict solar radiation. Marzouq et al. [77] utilized a GA for the selection of critical inputs for the ANN to predict solar radiation. This new evolutionary ANN model outperformed usual algorithmic models for solar radiation prediction. Amiri et al. [7] took the solar radiation prediction further, predicting on a tilted plane. The evolutionary algorithm was used to find the proper topology, and the study was conducted in two ways, assuming the satellites where the data was pulled from had the same tilt angle, and assuming the angles could be different.
18.2.6.4 Civil Engineering
Inducing blasts is a common occurrence in rock mining and construction. Being able to predict the vibrations of these blasts and the impact they will have on the surroundings is key to the safety of the operation and the workers themselves. When researching the vibrations, the goal is to measure the peak particle velocity as a base parameter. Chen et al. [30] proposed new solutions to the problem, combining various evolutionary algorithms with either an SVM or an ANN. A firefly algorithm, GA, PSO algorithm, and a modified firefly algorithm were all hybridized with both an SVM and an ANN in two separate systems, and the results of all were compared. The systems were all accurate at predicting peak particle velocity (PPV), with the modified firefly algorithm support vector regression (SVR) system performing the best. Azimi et al. [10] did something similar, focusing on using a GA to optimize an ANN to predict blast vibrations for quarry mining. When constructing different reinforced concrete structures, beam-column joints are an important point in the construction, often being the first place to shear and break off. Yaseen et al. [123] predicted the shearing of these joints with the use of a GA combined with a deep neural network. The GA was used for the input selection during the modeling phase, and the DLNN was used for the prediction phase: to identify any structural problems. Huang et al. [56] also predicted the shearing of steel fiber-reinforced concrete columns. Two hybrid systems were created, combining a GA with an ANN and a PSO algorithm with an ANN. In [20], Cai et al. used a GA hybridized with a back-propagation neural network to predict the capacity reinforced concrete beams had to flex in the structure. Moayedi et al. [81] created a prediction system for ultimate bearing capacity, to see the possible load a bearing can handle. Many systems were developed, including a hybrid GA and ANN system, and a PSO and ANN system to predict the bearing capacity.
18.2.6.5 Hardware Design
The optimal design for hardware and technologies is a big part of engineering and production. Owoyele et al. [88] proposed an automated ML GA as the system for optimizing the design of engines. Using computational fluid dynamic simulations, the system can optimize engines with a hands-off approach. In [13], Bagheri et al. designed a system that would optimize the design of piezoelectric energy harvesters using simulations. The system included a NN which was trained by a GA to optimize the prediction of the optimal design. Technology is becoming more and more advanced, and in so-called advanced technologies, standard cell layouts are done manually for the design of their nodes. Ren and Fojtik [93] proposed a system using reinforcement learningin combination with a GA to help predict the optimal layout of the standard cells. Materials that are for the absorption of microwaves are important to technologies related to stealth. Huang et al. [57] proposed a large mutation GA to optimize the honeycomb meta-structure to have absorption coverage over broadband microwaves as well as have successful mechanical resistance. The deployment of new technology is also very important, trying to efficiently upgrade a system with minimal downtime. Ko [65] designed a system using reinforcement learninghybridized with a GA to create a system to deploy a new wireless charging tram system optimally.
18.3 Discussion
EML has experienced a significant upward trend and facilitates fundamental research in various science and engineering fields, including physics, chemistry, astronomy, biology, geography, and engineering. The technology has proven invaluable in the development of machine learning algorithms that can evolve and adapt in response to changing data and environmental conditions, enabling researchers to gain a deeper understanding of complex systems. To illustrate the scope and impact of EML-related research, we have included a summary of related works in Fig.  18.1. We hope this provides a glimpse into the exciting possibilities that EML can offer to researchers across various disciplines.
Despite the promising advancements in EML, there are still several challenges that need to be addressed. One of the key challenges is the optimization of EML algorithms, which requires the use of efficient search techniques to identify the best solutions in large and complex search spaces. Another challenge is the interpretabilityof EML models, which can be difficult due to the complex and nonlinear relationships between variables. Additionally, EML requires significant computational resources, including high-performance computing and large-scale data storage, which can be costly and difficult to maintain. Furthermore, EML models may suffer from overfitting or underfitting, leading to poor generalization and limited applicability in real-world scenarios.
Challenges also represent opportunities, EML can also be applied to a wide range of domains, including finance, business, healthcare, and others. In these domains, EML can be used to develop predictive models that can inform decision-making and improve efficiency. Additionally, EML can be used for optimization tasks, such as scheduling and resource allocation, to improve performance and reduce costs. Furthermore, EML can be used in combination with other advanced deep learning techniques, such as transformer and diffusion models, to improve model performance and achieve more accurate predictions. By leveraging the strengths of both approaches, researchers can develop more robust and effective algorithms and models.
18.4 Conclusion
The combination of evolutionary computation and ML has unique advantages in solving challenging modeling and design problems arising in diverse fields of sciences and engineering. This is due to the powerful gradient-free evolutionary search and the strong modeling capability of ML and especially deep neural network models. In this chapter, we have shown that the EML paradigm has been widely applied in physics, materials science, chemistry, astronomy, life sciences, geology, and engineering, ranging from black-box modeling, analytical modeling, data-driven differential equation learning, inverse design, hyperparameter optimization, training of deep neural network models, multi-objective optimization and design using ML surrogate models
18.5 Contribution
Conceptualization, J.H.; resources, J.H.; writing–original draft preparation, J.H., Y.S. L.W., S.O., R.D., S.G.; writing–review and editing, J.H; visualization, J.H. and Y.S.; supervision, J.H.; funding acquisition, J.H.
Acknowledgements
The research reported in this work was supported in part by National Science Foundation under the grant 2110033, 1940099, and 1905775. The views, perspectives, and content do not necessarily represent the official views of the NSF. We appreciate the help of Dylan Johnson for proofreading the manuscript.
References
1.
Abdel-Hamid, H., Notni, P.: Stellar population analysis from broad-band colours. Astron. Nach. 321(5–6), 307–314 (2000)
2.
Abouchekeir, S., Tchagang, A., Li, Y.: Adversarial deep evolutionary learning for drug design. In: 2021 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence in Bioinformatics and Computational Biology (CIBCB), pp 01–09. IEEE (2021)
3.
Adam-Bourdarios, C., Cowan, G., Germain, C., Guyon, I., Kégl, B., Rousseau, D.: The higgs boson machine learning challenge. In: NIPS 2014 Workshop on High-Energy Physics and Machine Learning, pp. 19–55. PMLR (2015)
4.
Al-Yaseen, W.L., Idrees, A.K., Almasoudy, F.H.: Wrapper feature selection method based differential evolution and extreme learning machine for intrusion detection system. Pattern Recogn. 132, 108912 (2022)
5.
Alderete, N.A., Pathak, N., Espinosa, H.D.: Machine learning assisted design of shape-programmable 3d kirigami metamaterials. NPJ Comput. Mater. 8(1), 1–12 (2022)
6.
Ali, W., Ahmed, A.A.: Hybrid intelligent phishing website prediction using deep neural networks with genetic algorithm-based feature selection and weighting. IET Inf. Secur. 13(6), 659–669 (2019)
7.
Amiri, B., Gómez-Orellana, A.M., Gutiérrez, P.A., Dizène, R., Hervás-Martínez, C., Dahmani, K.: A novel approach for global solar irradiation forecasting on tilted plane using hybrid evolutionary neural networks. J. Clean. Prod. 287, 125577 (2021)
8.
Artrith, N., Urban, A., Ceder, G.: Constructing first-principles phase diagrams of amorphous li x si using machine-learning-assisted sampling with an evolutionary algorithm. J. Chem. Phys. 148(24), 241711 (2018)
9.
Attia, A.-F., Ismail, H.A., Selim, I.M., Osman, A.M., Isaa, I.A., Marie, M.A., Shaker, A.A.: Stellar population analysis of galaxies based on genetic algorithms. Chinese J. Astron. Astrophys. 5(4), 347 (2005)
10.
Azimi, Y., Khoshrou, S.H., Osanloo, M.: Prediction of blast induced ground vibration (bigv) of quarry mining using hybrid genetic algorithm optimized artificial neural network. Measurement 147, 106874 (2019)
11.
Bacardit, J., Stout, M., Hirst, J.D., Sastry, K., Llora, X., Krasnogor, N.: Automated alphabet reduction method with evolutionary algorithms for protein structure prediction. In: Proceedings of the 9th Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation, pp. 346–353 (2007)
12.
Baes, M., Verstappen, J., De Looze, I., Fritz, J., Saftly, W., Pérez, E.V., Stalevski, M., Valcke, S.: Efficient three-dimensional nlte dust radiative transfer with skirt. Astrophys J. Suppl. Ser. 196(2), 22 (2011)
13.
Bagheri, S., Nan, W., Filizadeh, S.: Application of artificial intelligence and evolutionary algorithms in simulation-based optimal design of a piezoelectric energy harvester. Smart Mater. Struct. 29(10), 105004 (2020)
14.
Baier, A., Kerschbaum, F., Lebzelter, T.: Fitting of dust spectra with genetic algorithms-i. perspectives and limitations. Astron. Astrophys. 516, A45 (2010)
15.
Baldominos, A., Saez, Y., Isasi, P.: On the automated, evolutionary design of neural networks: past, present, and future. Neural Comput. Appl. 32(2), 519–545 (2020)
16.
Balkaya, Ç., Ekinci, Y.L., Göktürkler, G., Turan, S.: 3d non-linear inversion of magnetic anomalies caused by prismatic bodies using differential evolution algorithm. J Appl. Geophys. 136, 372–386 (2017)
17.
Behler, J.: Four generations of high-dimensional neural network potentials. Chem. Rev. 121(16), 10037–10072 (2021)
18.
Bogdanos, C., Nesseris, S.: Genetic algorithms and supernovae type ia analysis. J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 2009(05), 006 (2009)
19.
