DE+PSO
Feature selection for X-ray classification
Li et al. [35]
GA
Optimisation of IR plasmonic sensor
Louati et al. [43]
GA
Optimising CNNs for X-ray classification
Luo et al. [45]
GA
Epidemiological model of various countries
Matabuena et al. [48]
ES
Stochastic epidemiological model of Spain
Miikkulainen et al. [49]
MOEA
Optimisation of RNN-generated interventions
Milani et al. [50]
DE
Optimisation of vaccine sites
Pinto Neto et al. [54]
MOGA
Compartmental model of Sao Paulo
Rodriguez et al. [33]
PSO
Evolving GANs for X-ray synthesis
Singh et al. [69]
MOGA
Optimising CNNs for X-ray classification
Shukla et al. [68]
MOGA
Fine-tuning DNNs for X-ray classification
Vieira et al. [78]
GA
Fine-tuning DNNs for X-ray classification
Yarsky et al. [83]
GA
SEIR epidemiological model of US states
Zhang et al. [85]
GA
Hybrid epidemiological model of Brazil
Bi et al. [10]
DE
Optimisation of intervention sequences
De Falco et al. [23]
DE
Training if-then rules for X-ray classification
De Freitas et al. [18]
ES+PSO
Feature selection for blood analysis
Gopalakrishnan et al. [28]
GA
Discovery of drug targets
Panigrahi et al. [57]
GA
Epidemiological models of India
Tange et al. [73]
NSGA-II
Optimisation of vaccine sites and allocation
20.3 COVID-19
This review was written during the COVID-19pandemic. Unsurprisingly, many recent papers focus on applications related to this disease. This section provides an overview of these works and highlights several key studies. It is divided into four parts: these review the use of EAs in diagnosing COVID-19, building models of how the disease spreads, designing therapeutic and preventative interventionsand scheduling resources to manage the disease. Table 20.2summarises the papers covered.
20.3.1 Diagnosis
Mostof the EA literature in COVID-19diagnosis focuses on classifying radiographic images, particularly using thoracic X-rays andcomputerised tomography (CT) scans. Many authors cite this as a potentially faster and more accurate route to screening than conventional diagnostic tests, and the barrier to entry for research in this area is low due to the availability of numerous public data sets.
The majority of these studies focus on the use of EAs within the training of deep neural networks (DNNs). A common approach is to use the EA to adapt a complex pre-trained DNN model to the specific task of discriminating COVID-19from normal images, typically by optimising hyperparameters of the model [6, 68, 78]. A good example is the work of [6], who used a GA to tune the block-level properties, the number and sizes of the fully connected layers, the location and characteristics of dropout layers and the choice of optimisers for three pre-trained DNN models (ResNet50, VGG19 and Xception). Others have used EAs to perform a more general architecture search, with the aim of finding new architectures that work well within this particular context [43, 69], and there has also been work on optimising the topologies of GANs to generate synthetic COVID-19images for use within a data augmentationcontext [33]. Another notable study used EAs to train ensembles of DNNs [11]. Rather than optimising hyperparameters of the DNNs, this approach used a selection of 170 pre-trained DNNs and then used a GA to combine these base models into an ensemble. The authors explored various ensemble models and used the GA to optimise membership, weights, and, in the case of an MLP-based meta-model, the model’s parameters. The authors found the resulting model to generalise particularly well across a number of different data sets.
A common criticism of DNN models is that they are difficult, and often impossible, to interpret. This is a particular problem in medicine, and has motivated some authors to focus on simpler models for COVID-19diagnosis. In most cases, this involves a two-stage process of feature engineeringfollowed by training a more traditional machine learning model, with the EA potentially involved in either of these two stages. There are various methods of extracting features from images, but these typically result in a lot of features, many of which are redundant. To address this, a popular use of GAs is to carry outfeature selection [3, 12, 20, 65]. In [12], for example, the authors used a relatively shallow CNNmodel to extract convolutional features, and then a GA to further reduce these. Although their focus was on reducing computational overheads, this approach also goes some way towards making neural models more interpretable within a medical context.
Other authors have focused on using EAs to explicitly train more interpretable models[8, 23]. In [23], a DE-based approach was used to construct interpretable if–then rules, with each rule having a simple conjunction of feature value ranges as its condition. The authors used only 29 features, each capturing relatively interpretable characteristics of the image, such as colour and texture moments. However, it remains uncertain whether these features will be meaningful from a clinical perspective, but this highlights the implicit difficulty of building interpretable modelsfrom image data. There are also a few examples in the literature of authors applying EA techniques to non-image data sets. For example, in [18], a hybrid feature selectionapproach based around ES and PSO is used to reduce numerical and categorical features derived from blood analysis.
A further interesting example of an EA being used with a diagnostic context is work by [35], in which a GA is used to optimise the configuration of a novel sensing device. Their work was motivated by issues associated with existing screening techniques: for instance, the low speed of PCR tests, and the need to disinfect CT scanners between patients. The GA was used to optimise the arrangement of nano-metal structures within an infrared plasmonic sensor, and was able to find a structure that detects the infrared fingerprint of COVID-19molecules with high sensitivity.
20.3.2 Epidemiological Modelling
Epidemiological modelsare used to predict the temporal or spatial spread of a disease within one or more geographical areas. There is usually a need to fit certain parameters of the model to historical disease data, a process referred to as calibration. Since the relationship between model parameters and model behaviour is, in general, highly non-linear and poorly understood, it makes sense to use a gradient-free optimiser to carry out this calibration process. Within this context, there are many examples of evolutionary algorithms being used. Reflecting their wider popularity, GAs have been widely used for this [31, 32, 45, 54, 83, 85]. Differential evolution (DE) has also become popular within the broader model calibration literature, and there are also numerous examples of DE being used to calibrate COVID-19models [17, 29, 57, 60]. Evolutionary strategies have also been used [48]—though perhaps less than might be expected, given that model evaluation is an expensive process where there might be a benefit to using algorithms with smaller populations.
These approaches have allowed many different types of epidemiological model to be fitted to COVID-19data, including relatively unusual approaches such asprobabilistic cellular automata [27]. In this respect, evolutionary approaches provide a useful tool for experimenting with new kinds of models. A further benefit to using evolutionary methods is the ease with which they can be extended to multi-objective problems, allowing the explorationof trade-offs between models. An example of this is [54], who used a multi-objective GA to consider interventionsover a broad range of scenarios in their epidemiological modelof São Paolo.
Once an epidemiological modelhas been calibrated, it can then be used to make predictions. However, there has also been some investigation of using evolutionary approaches to directly model disease trends from data, specifically by using GP to construct equations that predict the case numbers within a particular geographical region [5, 55, 63, 64]. As the authors of [64] note, a benefit of using GP in this context is that it leads to relatively interpretable modelsthat can provide insightinto the factors driving disease trends.
20.3.3 Designing Interventions
A further useof epidemiological modelsis to explore the effect of interventionson disease dynamics. However, a number of authors have gone further and used EAs in the process of designing interventions[10, 36, 49, 52, 56, 84]. These approaches generally view the design of interventionsas an optimisation process and, given that the search spaces associated with interventionsare generally large and complex, EAs are a natural choice for exploring them. Typically, a pre-trained epidemiological modelis coupled to some kind of controllerwhilst it executes, with the main difference between the various approaches being the form of the controller. In the simplest cases, the controller is a fixed sequence of interventionsthat are applied at regular intervals; for instance, [10] use a multi-population form of DE to explore sequences of weighted pre-specified interventionpolicies. Other approaches use conventional closed-loop controllersto control parameters of the epidemiological model, with the EA being used to tune parameters of the controller. For instance, in [56], a GA is used in this role to tune the control of lockdown levels. In the case of [49], the controlleris a recurrent neural network whose form is optimised using a surrogate-assisted EA. A further benefit of using EAs in this context is the ease with which multiple objectives can be added, and both [49] and [10] make use of this feature to explore trade-offs between reduction in case numbers and the number and/or costs of non-pharmaceutical interventions. These two papers also demonstrate a clear benefit to using an EA-driven search for interventionsover the use of other approaches.
EAs have also been used in the design process of pharmaceutical interventions. In fact, evolutionary approaches have been widely used in drug designthanks to the presence of EA-based optimisers in the popular open-source package AutoDock. This is a piece of software that implements in silico molecular docking as a means for carrying out virtual screening of drug candidates. It does this by simulating the fit between a drug candidate and a target molecule, and the EA is used within this process to determine the optimal fit between the two structures. In this context, EAs have been used in a number of studies of COVID-19drug candidates; for example, in [14], the authors note that AutoDock’s Lamarckian GA was used to determine the fit between existing antivirals and the crystal structure of COVID-19molecular components. In [13], the authors also use AutoDock’s GA to determine the fit between COVID-19 components and prospective drug candidates. However, they go one stage further and also use a GA in the search for drug candidates. Specifically, a graphvariational autoencoderis used to learn the molecular structure of existing drugs, and is then used to generate an initial population of prospective candidates. A GA is then used to optimise this population, using various crossover operators to create new candidate structures, and these candidate structures are then evaluated using AutoDock to provide a measure of fitness. Using this approach, the authors were able to find a number of structures that had greater binding affinity to components of the COVID-19virus than existing antivirals.
Another example of a GA being used in the drug development pipeline, described in [28], focuses on identifying the components of COVID-19which are likely to be useful targets for drugs. Specifically, they use the GA within the process of modelling the virus’s protein–protein interaction network, with the GA being used to fine-tune the weights of the network. Those components of the network with a high degree of centrality are then hypothesised to be the most influential within the infection process, and the authors use this analysis to identify several potential drug targets.
20.3.4 Scheduling Resources
Scheduling and planning is an area in which EAs have long been used, and there are several interesting examples of EAs being applied to problems related to COVID-19. Two of these studies relate to the planning of vaccine sites. In [50], the focus is on optimising the spatial distribution and capacities of vaccine units. Specifically, the authors developed a layered grid-based model of population distribution and transportation infrastructure, and used EAs to optimise a COVID facilities overlay. Notably, in an experimental comparison of optimisers, they found DE to work best for this particular problem. In [73], the authors used a somewhat different approach to address the somewhat similar problem of planning vaccine site location, the composition and replenishment of each vaccine site, and the allocation of recipients to sites, whilst optimising for both patient travel distance and operational cost. They formulated this as a mathematical programming model, and found that an EA-based approach (specifically using NSGA-II)was more effective than a conventional method, achieving significantly better savings for both objectives.
A different problem is targeted in [7], whose authors developed a discrete-event simulation of a hospital environment for use in capacity planning. Similarly to the epidemiology models discussed above, the problem here is to fit the parameters of the simulation to data. However, this example is particularly challenging due to noise and relatively high dimensionality and the authors tried out a number of different optimisation methods before finding one that worked—which turned out to be a surrogate-based EA. Specifically, this uses two component EAs: DE to select the hyperparameters of a Gaussian process-based surrogate model, and a form of ES to optimise the parameters of the simulation.
20.4 Parkinson’s Disease Case Study
The authors have been involved with a number of studies targeting Parkinson’s disease (PD) in which EML was used as a central mechanism. These include the development of models and tools to diagnose PD at an early stage [40, 70, 77], to measure symptoms and inform medication regimes [26, 38], interpret MRI imaging [19], for use within clinical trials [16], and in the study of animal models of the disease [30, 61].
One of the central methods used in a number of these studies was a form of GP known as implicit-context representation Cartesian Genetic Programming (IRCGP), a derivativeof CGP [51] that uses a bottom-up representation introduced in [39]. This was used to fit symbolic arithmetic expressions to PD data, using the resulting model as a classifier. One of the benefits of this approach was that it offered a more expressive representation than traditional decision trees whilst maintaining a reasonable level of interpretability, something that could not readily be achieved using neural networks and other traditional ML models. A benefit to using a CGP-derived method in particular was the use of a grid to constrain the size and topology of expressions, avoiding the kind of bloat seen in other forms of GP and increasing the likelihood of finding interpretable and generalizable expressions.
Fig. 20.1
A symbolic expression learnt to discriminate finger taps performed by Parkinson’s patients from those performed by aged-matched controls, showing ahow expressions are laid out on a Cartesian plane and receive inputs from windows of movement data, bthe evolved expression, with integer-valued terminals representing offsets within a window and the dotted-line showing reuse of a sub-expression, ca correctly classified PD finger tap, dtwo correctly classified control finger taps, highlighting the diversity in movements amongst subjects [40]
As an example of this, Fig. 20.1shows a symbolic expression that was learnt to discriminate finger tapsperformed by Parkinson’s patients from those performed by aged-matched control subjects [40]. Whilst apparently quite simple, this achieved a level of discrimination that exceeded many trained clinicians. Further analysis in [37] revealed that it captured a number of subtle features of the movement process, including the peak magnitude of deceleration during the closing phase of a finger tap, which by itself turned out to be a better measure of PD severity than those commonly used in clinical assessment. This model went on to be used as a component of an ensemble model used in a tool for clinical diagnostic support [26].
A similar approach was later used for measuring the side effects of Parkinson’s medication [38]. Because of side effects and the non-linearity of drug response, the clinical management of PD drugs tends to be quite challenging. The system we developed specifically measured the side effects of levodopa, one of the primary drugs used in PD management, indicating whether the dosage level was too high. Prescribing levodopa is a fine balance between treating symptoms of the disease (such as tremor and impaired movement) and the occurrence of uncontrollable movements, known as levodopa-induceddyskinesia, or LID. Again, we found that a relatively simple symbolic expression could be used to recognise LID, and it was also able to correctly classify different severities of LID. This model is also now embedded in a tool being used in clinical settings.
In [30], this approach was used in a slightly different context to characterise movement disorder in zebrafish. In particular, gene editing had been used to induce a movement disorder in zebrafish whichis analogous to PD in humans. The intention was to use this animal model to speed up the development of new treatments for PD in humans, whilst also reducing the need for vertebrate animals in research. Within this context, it is also worth noting our work in [61] which was also concerned with reducing the need for animals in research—in this case using an EA to fit a biophysical computational model of PD.
Although IRCGP has been a key method within many of these approaches, it is not the only evolutionary method that we have used. For example, another key element within the ensemble model [40] developed for clinical diagnostic support was an artificial biochemical network. This is a relatively unusual computational approach that came out of a project looking at developing new connectionist models motivated by cellular biochemical networks, with the aim of finding models complementary to existing artificial neural networks. Since we were doing this research in parallel with our PD work, it was natural to try out some of these models within a PD context. In particular, it turned out that artificial metabolic networks (whose function was motivated by cellular metabolism) were particularly good at discriminating signals in movement data.
More generally, this is a good example of the flexibilityof EAs, which can (within reason of course) be used to fit the parameters of almost any kind of model to data. This is in contrast to learning algorithms commonly used in deep learning, which require model components to be differentiable in order to calculate gradient and back-propagate errors. In our case, it allowed us to investigate a wide range of models, some of which contained quite exotic components. The model we eventually selected was notable for using coupled discrete maps, which are non-linear systems that exhibit chaotic dynamics. In [42], we reasoned that these elements allowed the system to respond to quite subtle signals in the data stream.
20.5 Conclusions
In this review, we have presented and discussed various examples of how EAs, and EML in particular, have been used to solve medical problems. Generally speaking, the EA approaches used within this domain are broad and diverse, and have been applied at various stages of the ML pipeline. However, certain trends are apparent. Perhaps most notable, in terms of the number of citations, is the wealth of feature selectionexamples, an area in which EAs seem to offer useful benefits over more traditional ML approaches.
Arguably a more significant trend, however, is the increasing use of EAs for hyperparameter optimisation. Whilst there are still examples of EAs being used to directly optimise the parameters of ML models, e.g. when using GP or exotic models that do not have a natural optimiser pairing, more recent papers have tended to use EAs to optimise the hyperparameters of ML models. This is most evident when deep learning models are used, where the large number of parameters do not favour the use of EAs. However, EAs are clearly useful for tuning the hyperparameters of these models, as well as performing other related tasks such as model selection and ensemble learning. Beyond deep learning, their use for hyperparameter optimisation has also been amply demonstrated within the fitting of hyperparameters for data-driven epidemiological models
A clear benefit of EML is the ready availability of mature multiobjective methods. Despite the ubiquitous occurrence of multiobjective problems in the real world, most techniques used within both traditional ML and deep learning do not seriously consider the trade-offs between objectives. In this context, multiobjective EML can offer a fresh perspective, and numerous studies have shown its benefits.
Nevertheless, these are challenging times for any methodology that is not deep learning. The recent advent of transformers, particularly in the area of medical imaging, has been rapid and significant. In a recent review article by Shamshad et al. [66], work is reported that claims to fully replace standard convolutions in deep neural networks by employing vision transformersoperating on a sequence of image patches. These have been successfully applied to image operations, such as classification, object detection and registration, that are of significance to medical applications. However, EML has proven to offer a flexible means of investigating medical systems, particularly clinical assessments, where properties such asinterpretabilitycontinue to be a valuable research tool to better understand the condition under examination.
References
1.
Abdikenov, B., Iklassov, Z., Sharipov, A., Hussain, S., Jamwal, P.K.: Analytics of heterogeneous breast cancer data using neuroevolution. IEEE Access 7, 18050–18060 (2019)Crossref
2.
Ain, Q.U., Al-Sahaf, H., Xue, B., Zhang, M.: Genetic programming for automatic skin cancer image classification. Exp. Syst. Appl. 197, 116680 (2022)
3.
Akram, T., Attique, M., Gul, S., Shahzad, A., Altaf, M., Naqvi, S.S.R., Damaševičius, R., Maskeliūnas, R.: A novel framework for rapid diagnosis of covid-19 on computed tomography scans. Pattern Anal. Appl. 24, 951–964, 8 (2021)
