Shaker, N., Yannakakis, G., Togelius, J.: Towards automatic personalized content generation for platform games. Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. Interact. Digit. Entertain. 6, 63–68 (2010)
89.
Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C.J., Guez, A., Sifre, L., Van Den  Driessche, G., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., et  al.: Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature 529(7587), 484–489 (2016)
90.
Silver, D., Schrittwieser, J., Simonyan, K., Antonoglou, I., Huang, A., Guez, A., Hubert, T., Baker, L., Lai, M., Bolton, A., et  al.: Mastering the game of go without human knowledge. Nature 550(7676), 354–359 (2017)
91.
Smith, A.M., Lewis, C., Hullet, K., Smith, G., Sullivan, A.: An inclusive view of player modeling. In: Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Foundations of Digital Games, pp. 301–303 (2011)
92.
Sobester, A., Forrester, A., Keane, A.: Engineering Design via Surrogate Modelling: a Practical Guide. Wiley (2008)
93.
K.O Stanley. Compositional pattern producing networks: a novel abstraction of development. Genet. Program. Evolvable Mach.8, 131–162 (2007)
94.
Stanley, K.O., Bryant, B.D., Miikkulainen, R.: Real-time neuroevolution in the nero video game. IEEE Trans. Evolut. Comput.9(6), 653–668 (2005)Crossref
95.
Stanley, K.O., D’Ambrosio, D.B., Gauci, J.: A hypercube-based encoding for evolving large-scale neural networks. Artif. Life 15(2), 185–212 (2009)
96.
Stanley, K.O., Miikkulainen, R.: Evolving neural networks through augmenting topologies. Evolut. Comput. 10(2), 99–127 (2002)Crossref
97.
Sudhakaran, S., González-Duque, M., Glanois, C., Freiberger, M., Najarro, E., Risi, S.: Mariogpt: open-ended text2level generation through large language models (2023). arXiv:​2302.​05981
98.
Summerville, A., Mateas, M.: Mystical tutor: a magic: the gathering design assistant via denoising sequence-to-sequence learning. Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. Interact. Digit. Entertain. 12, 86–92 (2016)
99.
Summerville, A., Mateas, M.: Super mario as a string: platformer level generation via lstms (2016). arXiv:​1603.​00930
100.
Summerville, A., Snodgrass, S., Guzdial, M., Holmgård, C., Hoover, A.K., Isaksen, A., Nealen, A., Togelius, J.: Procedural content generation via machine learning (pcgml). IEEE Trans. Games 10(3), 257–270 (2018)Crossref
101.
Tanabe, T., Fukuchi, K., Sakuma, J., Akimoto, Y.: Level generation for angry birds with sequential vae and latent variable evolution. In: Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 1052–1060 (2021)
102.
Adaptive  Agent Team, Bauer, J., Baumli, K., Baveja, S., Behbahani, F., Bhoopchand, A., Bradley-Schmieg, N., Chang, M., Clay, N., Collister, A., et  al.: Human-timescale adaptation in an open-ended task space (2023). arXiv:​2301.​07608
103.
Open Ended  Learning Team, Stooke, A., Mahajan, A., Barros, C., Deck, C., Bauer, J., Sygnowski, J., Trebacz, M., Jaderberg, M., Mathieu, M., et  al.: Open-ended learning leads to generally capable agents (2021). arXiv:​2107.​12808
104.
Togelius, J., Karakovskiy, S., Koutník, J., Schmidhuber, J.: Super mario evolution. In: 2009 Ieee Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Games, pp. 156–161. IEEE (2009)
105.
Togelius, J., Lucas, S.M.: Evolving controllers for simulated car racing. In: 2005 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, vol.  2, pp. 1906–1913. IEEE (2005)
106.
Togelius, J., Lucas, S.M.: Evolving robust and specialized car racing skills. In: 2006 IEEE International Conference on Evolutionary Computation, pp. 1187–1194. IEEE (2006)
107.
Togelius, J., Schaul, T., Wierstra, D., Igel, C., Gomez, F., Schmidhuber, J.: Ontogenetic and phylogenetic reinforcement learning. Künstliche Intelligenz 23(3), 30–33 (2009)
108.
Togelius, J., Schmidhuber, J.: An experiment in automatic game design. In: 2008 IEEE Symposium On Computational Intelligence and Games, pp. 111–118. IEEE (2008)
109.
Togelius, J., Yannakakis, G.N., Stanley, K.O., Browne, C.: Search-based procedural content generation: a taxonomy and survey. IEEE Trans. Comput. Intell. AI Games 3(3), 172–186 (2011)Crossref
110.
Torrey, L., Shavlik, J.: Transfer learning. In: Handbook of Research on Machine Learning Applications and Trends: Algorithms, Methods, and Techniques, pp. 242–264. IGI global (2009)
111.
Volz, V., Rudolph, G., Naujoks, B.: Demonstrating the feasibility of automatic game balancing. Proc. Genet. Evolut. Comput. Conf. 2016, 269–276 (2016)
112.
Volz, V., Schrum, J., Liu, J., Lucas, S.M., Smith, A., Risi, S.: Evolving mario levels in the latent space of a deep convolutional generative adversarial network. In: Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 221–228 (2018)
113.
Wang, R., Lehman, J., Clune, J., Stanley, K.O.: Paired open-ended trailblazer (poet): endlessly generating increasingly complex and diverse learning environments and their solutions (2019). arXiv:​1901.​01753
114.
Wiens, A.L., Ross, B.J.: Gentropy: evolving 2d textures. Comput. Graph. 26(1), 75–88 (2002)
115.
Yannakakis, G.N., Liapis, A., Alexopoulos, C.: Mixed-initiative co-creativity. In: Foundations of Digital Games. ACM (2014)
116.
Yannakakis, G.N., Togelius, J.: Artificial Intelligence and Games. Springer (2018)
117.
Zaltron, N., Zurlo, L., Risi, S.: Cg-gan: an interactive evolutionary gan-based approach for facial composite generation. Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. 34, 2544–2551 (2020)
118.
Zhang, Y., Fontaine, M.C., Hoover, A.K., Nikolaidis, S.: Deep surrogate assisted map-elites for automated hearthstone deckbuilding. In: Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 158–167 (2022)©  The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.  2024
W. Banzhaf et al.(eds.)Handbook of Evolutionary Machine LearningGenetic and Evolutionary Computationhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-3814-8_26
26.  Evolutionary Machine Learning in  the  Arts
Jon  McCormack1
(1)
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
Jon  McCormack
Email: jon.mccormack@monash.edu
Abstract
This chapter looks at artistic and creative applications of evolutionary machine learning. While both evolutionary computing and machine learning techniques have been applied to all kinds of creative and artistic projects, it is more rare to see them used in combination. The chapter will examine the origins and uses of evolution in the arts, before presenting a case study of an evolutionary machine learning artwork. The discussion presents the technical, conceptual, and creative aspects of developing an artwork. The chapter concludes with a discussion on the rise of generative AI and how evolution might contribute to the next wave of artistic possibilities for evolutionary machine learning.
26.1 Introduction
This chapter looks at the applications of Evolutionary Machine Learning (EML) to the creative arts. While evolutionary methods have been used for creative applications independently for well over 30 years, and ML and AI methods for perhaps even longer, it’s more difficult to find specific applications of artistic systems that combine both evolutionandmachine learning. In researching this field, it was difficult to find many artistic examples beyond just proof-of-concept ideas or research experiments, so this chapter should not be considered a broad survey of EML artistic or creative systems. Rather, the focus is to examine the conceptual issues and practical implications for using EML in the arts, with a view to how they might be used in the future. Along the way, I’ll use one particular system (my own) as an example, not because it is necessarily the best example, but it is one that I’m highly familiar with.
While evolutionary methods have been well explored in the arts for many decades, at the time of writing, large ‘foundation models’ are what everyone is currently talking about [5]. The rapid rise of deep learning and generative AI has captured the imagination of many artists and designers. Moreover, the accessibilityand power of these technologies has also rapidly increased, making it trivially easy for anyone to use and explore, for example, prompt-based systems that transform a high-level text description of a scene into a photo-realistic image, a video or even 3D scene. In contrast, designing and using an evolutionary system for creative applications still require significant effort, both in terms of the conceptual design and technical realisation. While there are many useful and accessible evolutionary software frameworks, they can’t compete with the integrated use of generative text-to-image tools like Stable Diffusion and MidJourney or large language modelslike OpenAI’s ChatGPT or Google’s Bard,1all of which use simple text interfaces and produce impressive results in seconds. Such ubiquity, ease of use, and minimal effort required by any user of these systems has led some to question if, for example, prompt writing can be considered an artistic practice [24].
The chapter begins with a brief review of the use of evolution in the arts and also a few, select, examples of how machine learning has been used. Next, I’ll use my own artistic system, Edenas an example of how EML can be used as the basis for an interactive artwork. Following that, I’ll move on to looking at the implications of current large generative models and discuss ways in which evolutionary methods might help us use generative models creatively.
26.2 Evolution and Creativity
When considering the creativitywe observe in the world, we’re confronted by two distinct sources: the creative ability of evolutionary processes, which have ‘discovered’ things such as flight, vision, language and intelligence, all via a non-teleological process of evolution by natural selection. The second is human intelligence, which has built cities, great works of art and nuclear weapons via the evolved collective intelligence and creativityof our species and our environment. In a basic sense, these two different sources of creativity mirror the approaches taken by researchers in developing artificial creative systems. The first is a ‘bottom-up’ process of adaptive and emergent complexity, the second is a ‘top down’ approach by training complex neural networks on large datasets of digitised human culture.
It could be argued that evolution is the more powerful process, as it is responsible for all life on earth, including our own species and our highly capable brains and bodies. In this section, I’ll look at why evolutionary methods might remain the best hope for creating newcreative systems and forms of artistic creativity
Fig. 26.1
Some example forms evolved by Dawkins using his Biomorphsoftware
The application of evolutionary computing methods to creative art and design began in 1986 [17], when evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins’ book, The Blind Watchmakerincluded a description of software that evolved simple, two-dimensional stick-like shapes drawn by the computer, known as ‘Biomorphs’ [10]. The previous evolutionary computing methods required a computer-representable function that could evaluate the suitability or fitnessof individuals in a population, allowing them to be ranked, then the highest ranked (most fit) individuals used for breeding. Attempting to craft a computer function that measures concepts like aesthetics, beauty or even ‘plant or animal likeness in stick figure drawings’ was (and, in general, remains) an exceedingly difficult problem [23]. Dawkins circumvented the problem of devising such a machine-representable fitness function by getting the human user to perform fitness evaluation for each design at each generation in the evolutionary loop. His goal was to demonstrate the power of evolution as a design algorithm, one that could design complexity without the need for an explicit designer (the human user simply evaluates the suitability of individuals at each generation). The results surprised even Dawkins’ himself, far surpassing his expectations for what such a simple system could produce:
Nothing in my biologist’s intuition, nothing in my 20 years’ experience of programming computers, and nothing in my wildest dreams, prepared me for what actually emerged on the screen...
— Richard Dawkins [10]
What surprised Dawkins was the variety of forms he was able to evolve, many reminiscent of real biology, at least as much as could be conveyed in a two-dimensional stick representation (Fig.  26.1). These forms resembled trees, insects, fish and birds. The fact that such a variety of natural-looking forms could be evolved was due, in part, to Dawkins’ experience as a Biologist – he was very familiar with the morphology of a wide variety of species, recognising traits like lateral symmetry and self-similarity, and built these into the Biomorph generative system that evolution acted upon.
Fig. 26.2
William Latham evolving hand-drawn forms in 1989 (left) and a drawn example of the process (right)
It did not take long for people interested in creativityand art to grasp the significance of this idea, and how it might be used to create a new kind of art and design: one that was evolved rather than directly created by human hands and minds. In theory and in practice, this allowed a human designer to be freed from the limits of their own imagination, permitting the generation of designs that could not be directly conceived in the mind or created by the artist alone. Evolutionary computing finally broke the so-called ‘dictum of Descartes’: that no designer can create a system that outperforms the knowledge and imagination of its designer [2].
The early adopters of Dawkins’ ‘Blind Watchmaker’ process (now known as the Interactive Genetic Algorithm or IGA) were Karl Sims in the USA [30] and William Latham and Stephen Todd in the UK [36, 37]. Latham and Todd developed new computer-aided design software, called ‘Mutator’, based on ideas Latham explored while studying at the Royal College of Art in London where he manually executed an evolutionary process to create a complex evolutionary treeof hand-drawn 3D form (Fig. 26.2). Mutator was used to evolve 3D forms via human-evaluated aesthetic selection in the computer. In the early 1990s, Latham created a series of otherworldly, organic, surreal virtual sculptures and animated films based on the idea of evolving form. At the same time, Sims used Dakwins’ technique to evolve dynamic systems, Lisp expression images and exotic plant-like structures. Along with Latham, Sims’ seminal animationsPanspermia(1990) andPrimordial Dance(1991) demonstratedthe potential for evolution using human-evaluated aesthetic measures to offer genuinely new possibilities for human–computercreativity[31]. Experiments with evolutionary music began at a similar time with a system devised in 1991 by Andrew Horner and David Goldberg used genetic algorithms for thematic bridging [16]. Al Biles’ famous ‘GenJam’ (1994) software used evolutionary methods to create an automated jazz accompanist that improvised with its human creator [1].
In the years that followed, many more artists and researchers became interested in using evolutionary methods. Sims went on to apply evolutionary methods to evolve ‘virtual creatures’ where both the physical form and behaviour were evolved simultaneously, akin to evolving bodyand mind, mimicking (in a highly abstracted and simplistic sense) the evolution of life on Earth (probably one of the first applications of EML to creativity). The system also incorporated a Newtonian physics simulationand physical environment, giving the creatures physically realistic movements and behaviours. To Sims’ surprise, his system was able to evolve a series of viable forms and behaviours, many highly reminiscent of real animals, including snake-like shapes that swam towards a light, legged figures that evolved to walk or move using a variety of different locomotive strategies such as jumping or walking, even creatures that learned to battle for possession of an object, some devising strategies such as pushing their opponent away or covering the object with their large ‘arms’ to prevent an opponent making contact. Even today, 30 years on, the work remains one of the leading examples of how evolution in a computer can be used to generate new and complex form and behaviour [32].
Fig. 26.3
An isometric diagram of the physical layout of Eden, showing the use of transparent screens, video projectors, camera sensors and speakers
The combination of EC and ANNs in the visual domain dates to 1994, where interestingly deep models were used [3]. The competitive concept found inGenerative Adversarial Networks (GANs) is predated by competitive co-evolution, an early example is Todd and Werner’s Composer/Criticsystem for music composition [35]. Machado and colleagues also worked with competitive co-evolution between EC and ANN models [19].
These early and pioneering forays into the creative applications of evolution and EML heralded much interest and excitement, both for artists, researchers, even philosophers and cultural theorists. Many imagined novel and exciting possibilities for art and design, motivated by the technological optimism evangelically expressed in features such as Moore’s Law (the exponential growth in the number of transistors in integrated circuits). However, as researchers and artists began to look more closely at these systems, over the coming years their limitations became apparent. ‘Interactive’ evolution circumvented the problem of devising a fitness representation for subjective criteria such as aesthetics, but the repetitive human evaluation of fitness was more akin to a process of selective breeding than real biological evolution. Users of these systems suffered from selection ‘fatigue’, assuming a passive and simplistic role in the design process, limiting the results that could be achieved. In specialist domains, it was shown that interactive evolution wasmore valuable to non-experts than experts, for expert users it was generally counter-productive [34]. The bold predictions of technological advancement did not eventuate.2
While evolution continues to be a useful method, it has also found scepticism in the art world. Such scepticism is summed up by media theorist Jussi Parikka in a discussion on the use of electronic art made with genetic algorithms [28]:
if one looks at several of the art pieces made with genetic algorithms, one gets quickly a feeling of not ‘nature at work’ but a Designer that after a while starts to repeat himself. There seems to be a teleology anyhow incorporated into the supposed forces of nature expressed in genetic algorithms.
Parikka’s point is that art made using evolutionary techniques appears to reflect more of the human designer’s intention that that of open-ended evolution. With techniques such as the IGA often described as ‘pigeon breeding’ it is unsurprising that the results reflect mainly the aesthetic preferences of the human fitness evaluator. Moreover, what any evolutionary system can produce is limited by both the mechanisms that generate phenotype from genotype, and a person’s ability to find or discover any specific phenotype. Clearly, organic chemistry is a powerful generative system—capable of building a vast array of all the different forms of life that have existed on Earth. What can be simulated in a computer remains far less capable.
Nonetheless, biological evolution remains a powerful and deep explanatory mechanism, an idea that suggests many interesting possibilities for art and creativity. These possibilities include the self-organisational properties of matter, the emergent properties of bottom-up systems, or the cybernetic concept of open-ended behaviouras expressed in Descartes Dictum, discussed earlier   [2]. One (obvious) aspect often overlooked by technologically focused research is that computers are notbiological. Computing methodologies are primarily process-focused, because computers must be programmed using algorithms (recipes for processes). This necessarily requires abstracting the physical and forcing representationsin software, due to software’s representational limitations. The field of Artificial Life, for example, is built on the premise that life can be defined by process and hence is not specific to any particular physical materialisation. So, in this view, life could be carbon-based like the life on Earth, or it might be silicon-based and running on a computer. These issues have already been well discussed and relate to broader philosophical issues of embodiment, representation, semioticsand physical ontology. For now, I’ll just flag it as a problem for the reader to keep in mind as we further explore the creative possibilities of EML.
To that end, in the next section, I present a case study of a specific EML art project, with a view to both laying out the technical, conceptual and creative issues that EML works might address.
26.3 Eden: A Case Study
As an example of how evolutionary machine learning can be used in the arts, I’ll give a detailed description—both technical and conceptual—of my artwork, Eden, which uses EML methods. The work is interactive, in that human presence and behaviour influence the work’s appearance, sound and behaviour. Conceptually, it is an evolutionary ecosystem of virtual ‘creatures’ that develop a symbiotic relationship with the work’s human audience as the system learns and evolves. I began working on this project in the early 2000s and it went through a number of iterations before I arrived at the version described here. Various improvements and updates were made up until 2017 when the work was acquired by a museum. Edenhas been exhibited numerous times at museums, galleries and festivals in Australia, Europe, the UK, Russia, South and North America and Asia and has received a number of awards, including the John Lansdown Prize for interactive art.3I list these achievements, not for the sake of self-promotion, but as evidence that the work itself has been recognised for its technical, creative and artistic significance.
The goal of Edenwas to create an open-ended artistic system that is adaptive to its environment (in this case—the art gallery environment, see Fig.  26.4). In order to address this goal, two important questions were explored during the design and development of the work: first, is it possible to create a virtual world that evolves towards some subjective criteria of the audience experiencing it, without the audience needing to explicitly perform fitness selection and, second, how can the relationship between real space and virtual simulation be realised in such a way that integrates those two in a phenomenological sense?
