Chapter 2. Photons at the Beach.
Light is an electromagnetic wave that is actually comprised of discrete packets of energy.
The cover of the August 1928 issue of Amazing Stories, shown in Figure 1, which contained Buck Rogers' debut,
featured a young man flying via a levitation device strapped to his back,
while rocket packs would be labeled Buck Rogers' stuff and levitating belts would soon be featured in Buck Rogers' newspaper strip adventures.
The cover of this issue of Amazing Stories actually illustrated E. E. Smith's story, The Skylark of Space.
The cover depicts Dick Seton, a scientist who is testing out a flying device that employs a newly discovered chemical.
When an electrical current is passed through this substance, element X, while it is in contact with copper,
the intra-atomic energy of the copper is released, providing an energy source for a personal levitation belt,
or a spaceship, The Skylark of the title, or a handheld weapon firing explosive bullets.
The Skylark of Space leaves vague the exact nature of the intra-atomic energy,
released by the copper when catalyzed by element X and an electrical current.
A rival scientist of Seton's puts it as follows.
Chemists have known for years that all matter contains enormous stores of intra-atomic energy,
but have always considered it bound, that is incapable of liberation.
Seton has liberated it.
As chemists certainly knew even in 1928 how to release the energy stored in chemical bonds between atoms and molecules,
such as nitroglycerin or TNT, the vast amounts of intra-atomic energy liberated by element X
may refer to the conversion of mass into energy through Einstein's relationship E equals MC squared.
This seems likely when a spaceship propelled by element X is accidentally set to full thrust.
The resulting acceleration becomes so great that nobody on board can move to the control board to decrease their speed,
and the ship stops its motion only when the copper supplies are exhausted.
While illustrating Einstein's principle of the interrelation between energy and mass,
this scene contradicts the special theory of relativity,
when it is revealed that this uncontrolled acceleration has resulted in the ship traveling many times the speed of light.
When Seton wonders how this can be reconciled with Einstein's famous work,
his companion replies,
That is a theory.
This measurement of distance is a fact, as you know from our tests.
Like any good scientist, Seton agrees that observation is the final arbiter of correctness and concludes of Einstein.
That's right.
Another good theory gone to pot.
The scientists in the skylock of space should not be so quick to abandon Einstein,
for their explosive bullets of intra-atomic energy provide confirmation of another of his theories.
This application of element X, as well as the ray guns wielded by Buck Rogers, Flash Gordon,
and other heroes of the science fiction pulps and comic strips,
is not too far from the mark, as reflected in the first quantum principle at the top of this chapter.
As proposed by Albert Einstein the same year he developed his special theory of relativity,
all light consists of bullets, that is, discreet packets of energy termed photons.
Now that we have the answers to quantum mechanics, what were the questions that called for these new physical principles?
The ultraviolet catastrophe alluded to earlier concerned the brightness of the light emitted by an object as a function of temperature.
Certain objects such as graphite and coal dust are black as they absorb nearly all light that shines on them.
In equilibrium, the light energy absorbed is balanced by light giving off.
The spectrum of light of such black bodies, that is, how much light is emitted at a given frequency,
depends only on how hot it is and is the same for metals, insulators, gases, liquids, or people, if they are at the same temperature.
The theory of electromagnetic waves, developed by James Clerk Maxwell in the middle of the 19th century,
was able to account for the energy emitted by a glowing object at low frequencies, such as infrared light,
but at higher frequencies, above visible light, this theory predicted results that were nonsensical.
Calculations indicated that the light from any heated object would become infinitely intense at high frequencies,
above the ultraviolet portion of the spectrum.
Thus, anyone looking at the glowing embers in a fireplace or the interior of an oven should be instantly incinerated with a lethal dose of X-rays.
If this were true, most people would notice.
In order to resolve this so-called ultraviolet catastrophe, which as indicated was a catastrophe more for theoreticians making the predictions than for anyone else,
Planck suggested that when the atoms in a glowing object emit light, the atoms lose energy, as if they were moving down the steps of a ladder,
and that they must always move from rung to rung of the ladder and cannot make any other transitions between rungs.
Why this would resolve the ultraviolet catastrophe will explain in section 4.
For now, let's focus on this ladder of possible energy values.
Planck firmly believed that light was a continuous electromagnetic wave, like ripples on the surface of a lake, as theoretical considerations and extensive experimental evidence indicated.
Note, as light from the sun reaches us through the vacuum of empty space, electromagnetic waves are unique in not requiring a medium in which to propagate.
His proposal of discreteness in atomic energy loss was fairly modest, or as modest as a revolution in scientific thought can be.
It turns out that while Planck justly receives credit for letting the quantum genie out of the bottle, there were other experimental conundrums waiting in the wings regarding how atoms interacted with light that would require far bolder steps than Planck was willing to take.
At the same time that scientists were measuring the light given off by hot objects, giving rise to the ultraviolet catastrophe, Philip Lennard was studying the electrons emitted by metals when exposed to ultraviolet light.
This led to a different catastrophe, both personal and scientific.
In the late 1800s, physicists had discovered that certain materials, such as radium and thorium, gave off energy in the form of what would eventually be termed radiation.
Scientific researchers entered a library phase, cataloging all of the different types of radiation that different substances emitted.
Using the Greek alphabet as labels, alpha, beta, gamma, etc., instead of A, B, C, and so on, they started with alpha rays, which turned out to be helium nuclei.
Two protons and two neutrons ejected from atoms found near the end of the periodic table of the elements, then moved on to beta rays, high speed electrons, followed by gamma rays, very high energy electromagnetic radiation.
When a nucleus emits an alpha particle, it transmutes into another element, as discussed in detail in section 3.
George Gamov, brilliant physicist and famed practical joker, once added Hans Beta as a co-author of a paper he wrote with his graduate student Ralph Alpha, so that the scientific citation list of authors would read,
When William Rentkin discovered a form of radiation that would fog a photographic plate, passing through paper or flesh but not metal or bones, he termed this unknown radiation X-rays,
skipping the Greek nomenclature and using the letter X, as it is the letter traditionally employed in math problems for the unknown quantity.
Rentkin's X-rays were the forerunner of many science fiction X-based characters, such as the X-men, Professor X, Planet X, Dimension X, Element X, and X the unknown.
It was later shown that X-rays are simply electromagnetic waves, that is, light, with more energy than visible and ultraviolet light, but less than gamma rays.
These varieties are of radiation, provided scientists at the end of the 19th century with new tools to study matter.
By exposing different materials to these forms of radiation and observing their effect, they could probe the inner working of atoms.
They were able for the first time to metaphorically take off the back plate and examine the mechanisms inside the atomic watches.
Admittedly, this tool was more like a hammer than a jeweler's screwdriver, but you use what you have.
Lenard was working at the University of Berlin and investigating the influence of light exposure on various metals.
He discovered through a series of careful experiments that certain metals, when illuminated with ultraviolet light, would give off beta rays, that is, electrons.
It would turn out that the electrons he was observing originated from the sea of electrons that explain why all metals are good conductors of heat and electricity.
This, in hindsight, is not that surprising. Light carries energy, and when an object absorbs energy, it warms up.
Some of the excess energy in the metal can be transferred to the electrons, and if they are sufficiently energetic, they can fly free,
not unlike the energetic water molecules leaving the liquid surface of a hot cup of coffee, forming a cloud of steam above the mug.
Philip Lenard said about systematically investigating how the number of electrons emitted from a given metal and their speed depended on the frequency of the ultraviolet light he used and its intensity.
Here, the troubles began.
Imagine a metal as a sandy beach at the ocean's shore, and the electrons in the metal as small pebbles randomly scattered along the beach, sketched in Figure 3, which you can view at www.tentor.com.
The ocean waves crashing onto the beach can be considered the ultraviolet electromagnetic waves shining on the metal in Lenard's experiment.
This allegorical beach has a gentle slope away from the water's edge, so that one must do work against gravity to push the pebbles away from the shoreline.
When the pebbles have advanced up the beach all the way to the boardwalk, we'll consider them free, and as our stand-ins for electrons in a metal, they will represent those electrons that are ejected from the solid by the ultraviolet light in Lenard's experiment.
In this analogy, it is reasonable that the energy responsible for picking up the pebbles and moving them up the beach come from the water waves.
The bigger the wave, the more energy the pebbles will have.
The more frequently the waves arrive, the greater the number of pebbles will be advanced.
If the waves have small amplitudes, one might have to patiently wait for several wave fronts to transfer sufficient energy to the pebbles before they can move up the beach front.
Perfectly reasonable.
Except this was not what Lenard observed.
He found that the energy of the electron leaving the metal did not depend on the intensity of the light.
Raising the light intensity did not affect the electron's speed, though it did increase the number of electrons emitted per second.
But the number of electrons ejected per second was supposed to depend on the frequency of the waves, that is, how many wave crests arrived per second and not their amplitude.
Moreover, there was a threshold for electron emission.
If the frequency of the light were below a certain value, which varied for different metals, then no electrons came off regardless of how bright the light.
In the water analogy, this would suggest that if the number of wave peaks per second were below a given value, then even a tsunami would not push the pebbles up the beach.
What did govern whether or not the electrons were emitted was the frequency of the light.
For the beach analogy, this would be as if once the number of wave peaks per second rose above a certain threshold, then even a very low amplitude,
gentle waves would promote pebbles up to the boardwalk, just as long as the time between crests was short enough.
Finally, if the frequency of the light was above this threshold, then electrons came off instantly with no time delay, no matter how low the light's intensity.
These experimental results were challenged to understand within the context of light being a continuous electromagnetic wave.
But we already know the answer to this question stated at the start of this chapter.
Light is not a continuous wave, but is composed of individual energy bullets, termed photons.
How does light, actually consisting of discrete packets of energy, explain Lenard's experimental results?
What we took to be a continuous uniform series of waves washing up on shore, gently pushing the pebbles up the beach,
is actually comprised of bullets fired at the pebbles by a machine gun sweeping back and forth across the beach.
With light being a collection of photons, then the brightness of the light is determined by the number of photons passing through a given area per second.
For our machine gun, this is equivalent to the rate at which bullets are fired.
That is, more bullets per second leads to more intense illumination.
One bullet a second is a weak light source, while a million shots per second is much brighter.
The energy of the photons would be reflected in our analogy in the speed of the bullets.
Let's suppose, for the sake of argument, that we have a magical machine gun that provides independent control over the speed of the bullets it fires.
It turns out that if you imagine the light striking the metal as analogous to a spray of machine gun bullets, rather than continuous ocean waves,
Lennard's results are completely reasonable.
He found that the brighter the light, the more electrons were emitted from the metal.
In the machine gun analogy, brighter light means more bullets per second, which will push more pebbles per second.
There will be no time lag between light coming into the metal and electrons coming out.
For once a bullet hits a pebble, and it has sufficient energy to knock it up the beach, then of course the effect will be instantaneous.
The faster the bullets are traveling, the more energy will be imparted to the pebbles, and the faster they will move up the beach.
This corresponds to saying that the greater the energy of each light photon, the more kinetic energy the ejected electrons will have.
If the speed of the bullet is too low, they may move the pebbles a little bit, but not knock them significantly up the beach.
So the threshold effect Lennard observed is also explained.
The only snag is that Lennard did not control the energy of his light to vary the energy of the emitted electrons, but rather its frequency.
And here we come to the personal catastrophe for Lennard.
For the resolution of this last remaining puzzle would cause him distress of a decidedly non-scientific nature.
More on this in a bit.
If light does indeed consist of discrete packets of energy, what determines the energy of each packet?
Planck's solution to the spectrum of glowing hot objects was to propose that atoms could lose energy only in finite jumps.
In order to get the equations to work out, he assumed that the energy of the jump was proportional to the frequency of the light.
That is, the bigger the frequency, the larger the energy of the quantum step.
Again, I'll explain why this worked later on.
For now, the important point is that if the energy is proportional to the frequency, then we can say that the energy is equal to the frequency when multiplied by a constant.
We often deal with situations involving simple proportions, such as the relationship that the longer you drive your automobile at a constant speed, the greater the distance you travel.
But you do not measure distance in hours, so to figure out how far you have driven, you need to multiply the hours in the car by a constant of proportionality,
namely your constant speed, say 60 miles per hour.
Then the product of the time driven, 2 hours, and the uniform speed, 60 miles per hour, will determine the distance traveled, 120 miles.
In the same way, the energy of the photon is proportional to the frequency, so that when the frequency is multiplied by a constant of proportionality, it is converted into a quantity of energy.
Planck used the letter H to represent this constant of proportionality, and everyone who has followed has stuck with that convention, so that H is referred to as Planck's constant.
Planck himself called it Boltzmann's constant after Ludwig Boltzmann, one of the founding fathers of a branch of physics known as statistical mechanics.
Boltzmann has a constant in his field named for him, so we can let Planck have H.
The equation for the energy lost by an atom in a glowing object by the emission of light is as follows.
Energy equals H times frequency.
Let's plug some numbers into this simple equation, which is mathematically no different from distance equals speed multiplied by time.
One way to measure energy is in a unit term Joules, named after James Joule, a Scottish physicist who demonstrated the clear equivalence between heat and mechanical work,
thereby providing a foundation for the field of thermodynamics.
For point of reference, a major league baseball thrown at 60 miles per hour has a kinetic energy of 53 Joules, while an automobile traveling at 60 miles per hour has a kinetic energy of 350,000 Joules.
Frequency is a measure of how many times a periodic function repeats a complete cycle in a given unit of time, and is most naturally measured in terms of number of cycles per second.
A child's playground swing that takes two seconds to go all the way back and forth would have completed only one half of a cycle in a second, so it would have a frequency of one half per second.
A much faster playground swing that went back and forth in one tenth of a second would complete ten loops in one second and thus have a frequency of ten cycles per second.
Visible light has a frequency of 1,000 trillion cycles per second.
In order to fit his equation for the spectrum of light given off by a hot glowing object to the experimentally measured curves, Planck had to set the value of his constant H to be H equals 660 trillionth trillionth trillionth of a Joule sec, which may seem very small, but it is in fact very, very, very super small.
Planck argued when justifying his proposed equation that atoms could lose energy only in finite steps. The closest these energy levels could be was E equals H times F. For light with a frequency of 1,000 trillion cycles per second, this equation gives a spacing between adjacent energy levels of 66 millionth trillionths of a Joule.
If you compare this energy of a photon to the 120 joules of kinetic energy of a fastball, you can see that the separation is so small compared to the energy scale of our everyday activities that it's nearly impossible to observe.
Consequently, to take a quantum jump involves a very, very tiny baby step and not some enormous leap.
But the size of the step is, in fact, irrelevant, as the important and revolutionary concept introduced by Planck is that there is a step.
As mentioned, Planck was actually somewhat conservative in his quantum hypothesis. For him, light was still a continuous electromagnetic wave, like the metaphoric ocean waves washing onto the shore.
While he argued that atoms could lose energy only in discrete steps, he was not so bold as to suggest that when they did so, the light emitted was also a discrete packet of energy.
But as the humorist James Thurber once wrote, fools rush in where angels fear to tread, but most fools are alive while all the angels are dead.
Perhaps Planck's hesitancy to extend the quantum graininess to the light itself came from the caution of age. He was a grand old man of 42, after all, when he developed his quantum hypothesis.
It was left to a younger man of 26 to suggest that Lenard's results could be qualitatively and quantitatively accounted for if light itself were discrete packets, the machine gun bullets in our beach metaphor, where the energy of each bullet is determined by E equals H times F.
That young man was Albert Einstein.
When Einstein wrote his paper on the photoelectric effect, for that is the name used to describe Lenard's experiment, he was an underemployed 26-year-old patent clerk third grade. That would soon change.
For Einstein's paper was published in 1905, the same year he published his special theory of relativity, followed by a paper describing the equivalence between energy and mass, E equals MC squared.
And two other papers on an atomistic explanation for Brownian motion and diffusion processes that would have cemented his reputation as a theoretical physicist of the first order, even if he'd done nothing else.
Within a few years of their publication, Einstein would be offered professorships and honors. Most scientists would be thrilled to have their work permanently associated with Einstein, but not Lenard for one simple reason.
Einstein was Jewish, and Lenard was a rabid anti-Semite, to such an extent that Adolf Hitler named him chief of Aryan physics. Thus did his experiments on the influence of ultraviolet light on metals cause a personal catastrophe for Lenard.
He spent such effort denouncing Einstein and his interpretation of the photoelectric experiments that his own scientific reputation was ruined, and he is now remembered as much for his bigotry as for his talent as an experimentalist.
Fortunately for Einstein, Lenard was not the only physicist who strongly disagreed with the hypothesis that light was comprised of discrete packets of energy.
Many others, notably the American physicist Robert Millican, were convinced that light was a continuous wave and that Einstein's suggestion, the title of his original paper described his proposal as a heuristic viewpoint,
which is fancy talk for, not a rigorous solution but I should get the credit if it turns out to be right, could not possibly be correct.
I say fortunately for Einstein, for he did indeed turn out to be right, and it was Millican who proved it. Millican was one of the most careful and gifted experimentalists of his day, and he spent ten years trying to show that Einstein was wrong.
What he wound up showing in fact was that the only possible explanation for the photoelectric effect was Einstein's hypothesis.
Even though he still believed that Einstein's photon idea was crazy, he stood by his data, which not only unambiguously supported Einstein's claim, but also won Millican the Nobel Prize.
The best advocate for your position is someone who initially doubts but is converted by overwhelming evidence.
Einstein's heuristic viewpoint is now everyone's viewpoint, and Einstein received the Nobel Prize in physics, not for his work on relativity or E equals MC squared, but for his theory of Lennard's photoelectric effect and the introduction of the concept of the light photon, though Gilbert Lewis was the first to use the term photon in 1926.
Now, for a very long time, a lot of smart people firmly believed that light was a wave, based on a large body of compelling experimental evidence.
To cite just one manifestation of the wave-like nature of light, consider the rainbow of colors one sees on an oil slick following a rainstorm.
Anyone who lives in a city or has a messy driveway may be familiar with the spectrum of light reflected from a thin layer of oil when the ground is wet from a good soaking.
In this case, the oil is repelled by the water and sits as a thin, freestanding slab that may be only a fraction of a millimeter thick.
Rarely will the surface be atomically uniform, so the thickness of the oil slick will vary from location to location.
Some of the light striking the oil slick reflects from the top surface, while some penetrates through the oil and then bounces off the oil-water interface.
As illustrated by the sketch in Figure 4, to view this figure, go to www.tentor.com.
If the thickness at one particular spot on the oil slick is exactly equal to one-fourth of the wavelength of one particular color of light,
then the light reflected from the top and the light that passed through the slick and bounced back out will be exactly in phase and will add up coherently.
The light at that color will thus be particularly bright.
Just as two pendulums, if they are swinging side by side with exactly the same frequency and the same phase,
so that they both are at the top of the arc or both at the bottom of the swing at the same time, are said to be coherently oscillating,
the light that is coherently reflected will add up and give a much more intense color.
All other colors will have wavelengths that are not exact multiples of the oil slick thickness of that location, and they will not add up constructively.
This familiar phenomenon is termed interference and is a signature property of waves.
Note, for an oil slick on water, the thickness needs to be one-fourth the wavelength of light for constructive interference,
while for a glass slab with air above and below, the constructive interference criteria call for the thickness to be one-half the wavelength.
The difference involving phase changes at the top reflection surface is not important for the discussion here.
We therefore must figure out why light exhibits phenomena that indicate that it is a wave when it is in fact comprised of photons.
It is tempting to argue that the wave-like properties of light are some sort of collective behavior when many photons interact with one another.
Oh, if it were only this simple, consider the following situation.
If I sent not a continuous beam of light at the oil slick described above, but single photons, one at a time,
then the photons would reflect from the slick from either the top or bottom surface and be detected by some sort of light sensor.
We would see a single flash at a particular location on our detector when each photon had reflected from the slick.
When many such photons had been reflected, the resulting pattern of flashes of light observed would be an interference pattern,
identical to what we would see if a continuous beam had been used.
That is, even though the photons saw the slick individually, they reflected in such a way that when added together, they yielded a wave-like constructive interference pattern.
Technically, a photon is defined as a quantum of excitation of the radiation field.
Well, that certainly clears that up.
For our purposes, we will simply accept the notion of photons as discrete entities that move at the speed of light that have a definite energy,
and hence frequency, through E equals H times F.
Definite momentum, and hence wavelength, through the relation wavelength equals speed of light divided by frequency, which we will discuss later on.
And definite intrinsic angular momentum, the spin of a photon equals H, measured in the direction it is moving.
The photon does not spread out as it travels the way a wave on the ocean surface does, but propagates unchanged until it interacts with matter or other photons.
There are no simple or satisfying answers to such questions as how big the photon is or whether it is a wave or a particle.
If you find this confusing, join the club.
It's a big club, with some rather distinguished members.
The president of this club would be the scientist who introduced the photon concept in the early days of quantum mechanics.
As Albert Einstein reflected, all the 50 years of conscious brooding have brought me no closer to the answer to the question, what are light quanta?
Of course, today every rascal thinks he knows the answer, but he is deluding himself.
