Chapter 3 Fearful Symmetry
Matter is comprised of discrete particles that exhibit a wave-like nature.
Readers of the February 1930 issue of Science Wonder Stories were treated to thrilling tales
of the streamers of death and a rescue from Jupiter.
They traveled to the land of the bipose and visited the world of a hundred men.
The cover features a scene from the bipose yarn.
Two robbers that have broken into the home laboratory of a Dr. Sanborn who was experimenting
on methods to send living beings to another world, whether in this universe or an alternate
one is never made clear, have been trapped in a large glass device.
This cylinder, large enough to hold two grown men, is described in the story as a cathode
ray tube, though its appearance is quite different from the cathode ray tubes one finds in older
model television sets.
Sanborn is shown moments before throwing a switch that will convert the two thieves
into electricity.
They will then travel at the speed of light to the land of the bipose, where they will
be reassembled into their human form.
Scientists apparently are a race of intelligent three-foot-tall penguins.
The means of transportation appears to be an early ancestor of Star Trek's famed transporter.
That Sanborn was able to construct such a fantastic scientific marvel with no outside assistance
and using his own financial resources is perhaps not so surprising once we discover that in
his day job Dr. Sanborn is a drugist.
This wonder stories was not devoted solely to fantastic scientific fiction, but also featured
descriptions and discussions of real-world current scientific advances.
This particular issue contained a symposium in which an essay on the question, can man
free himself from gravity, was followed by letters by knowledgeable experts.
The short essay by T.H. Wolf of Berlin was translated for the pulp from the original
German.
Wolf tantalized readers with a report of an American physicist, Charles Brosh, who claimed
to have discovered a material comprised of silicates, the exact composition known only
to Brosh, that exhibited an acceleration due to gravity of only 9.2 meters per second
per second, rather than the larger value of 9.8 meters per second per second, that all
normal matter experiences.
If true, this would be a fine achievement, allowed Wolf, for by increasing the valuable
property of these mysterious substances, one might perhaps attain approximate or even
complete freedom from gravity.
Let us wait for it.
But Wolf did not think we should hold our breaths while waiting, for he went on to correctly
point out that such a material would represent an irreconcilable contradiction to the Newtonian
law of gravity, which indicates that the acceleration of a falling object is the same for all matter,
regardless of composition.
Brosh's report, Wolf informed readers, must with absolute assurance be relegated to the
realm of fiction.
If there were exceptions and deviations from the general law of gravity, these would certainly
have appeared before now in manifold and various ways, and it would not need the discovery
of mysterious substances to bring them to our knowledge.
So much for flying cars, even back in 1930.
But then, Wolf goes too far and dismisses space travel when he incorrectly calculates
that the chemical fuels of the time would limit any rocket ship to heights no greater
than 400 kilometers above the Earth's surface, a mere fraction of the 384,000 kilometers from
the Earth to the Moon.
This last point was challenged in letters from members of the Science Wonder Stories
Board of Associate Editors, notably Robert H. Goddard of Clark University in Worcester,
Massachusetts.
Goddard pointed out that in 1919, he had authored a scientific publication in the miscellaneous
collections of the Institute, namely the Smithsonian Institute, which was funding his rocket research,
that a multi-stage rocket, essentially of the design employed by NASA 50 years later,
would indeed be able to exceed this 400 kilometer limit.
Thus, while hopes of flying cars and perpetual motion were dashed, the promise of rocket
trips to the Moon and beyond were affirmed in the science fiction pulps.
Note, Goddard correctly pointed out that any gravity screen as suggested by Brush would
enable one to lift a large mass with little effort.
Upon removal of the gravity shield, the mass would then fall as any normal weight and thus
could provide a work output greater than the energy required to lift the mass, thereby
violating the law of conservation of energy.
Goddard was an early example of a prominent scientist whose research would inspire many
science fiction tales and whose choice of field and research subject was, in turn, inspired
by science fiction.
In a fan letter sent to H. G. Wells, the 16-year-old Goddard extolled the influence that reading
The War of the Worlds had on him, such that no more than a year later, he decided that
what might conservatively be called high-altitude research was the most fascinating problem
in existence.
Goddard was not the first scientist, of course, to find a muse in science fiction.
Herman Oberth, the Transylvanian-born scientist who is considered the father of modern rocketry,
had an encounter at age eleven with Jules Verne's from the Earth to the Moon that set
the trajectory of his scientific career.
Both Oberth and his pupil, Vernevon Braun, would serve as technical advisors for Woman
in the Moon, a 1929 Fritz Lang science fiction motion picture that featured the first countdown
to launch a rocket in film or in the real world.
Real science, as opposed to fiction, was also imparted in science wonder stories regular
features, what is your science knowledge, science questions and answers, and science
news of the month.
Here in this latter section, a brief item entitled, Electron Found to Have Dual Character,
read in its entirety.
G. B. Thompson, British scientist, has made a new discovery in the field of physics.
He states that the electron acts like a flying particle and also behaves like a wave.
He rolled gold, nickel, aluminum and other metals, each to about one-tenth the thickness
of gold leaf, and shot electrons through them.
After passing through the films, the electrons came in contact with a photographic film and
were recorded as concentric circles and other circular patterns.
If the magazine had contained a description of the chemical composition of an actual anti-gravity
shield, it would not have presented a more profound or revolutionary report than this
brief blurb regarding the electron's dual character.
The second quantum principle listed at the top of this chapter states that just as there
is a particle aspect to light, there is a corresponding wave-like nature to matter.
Unlike the case of the photoelectric effect in the last chapter, this strange symmetrical
hypothesis about the nature of matter was not proposed in order to resolve a mysterious
experimental observation that contradicted expectations of classical physical theory,
but was suggested precisely because it was a strange symmetrical hypothesis.
In 1923, Prince Louis de Broglie – yes, he actually was a French prince as well as
a physicist – struck by the counterintuitive suggestion that light was comprised of corpuscular
particles, proposed that there was a wave originally termed a pilot wave associated
with the motion of real particles, such as electrons, protons and atoms.
De Broglie had an answer for why this pilot wave had not been previously observed.
Its wavelength varied inversely with the momentum of the moving object, so the larger
the object, which is easier to observe, the smaller the wavelength of its pilot wave.
How to test the proposal that there is a wave associated with the motion of matter?
As mentioned in the last chapter, interference effects, such as when white light creates
a spectrum of reflected colors from an oil slick suspended on a wet surface, would be
an excellent test of the existence of waves.
To recap, when the thickness of the slick is exactly equal to a given color's wavelength,
or exactly twice the wavelength or three times the wavelength and so on, the waves corresponding
to this color reflected from the top, and those that have traveled through the slick
bounced off the bottom and passed again through the slick and exited from the top surface,
add together coherently.
When this happens, the color is brighter to us due to this constructive interference.
Other waves corresponding to other colors at this location add up incoherently, out
of phase, and the net effect is that from the white light shining on the oil, one color
is primarily reflected from the slick from a given point on the slick.
As the thickness of the slick can vary from point to point, we observe different colors
across its surface.
The thickness of an oil slick can be several thousand nanometers.
One nanometer is approximately the length of three carbon atoms stacked one atop the
other, while the wavelength of visible light ranges from 600 nanometers for red light to
250 nanometers for violet.
Thus, only very thin oil slicks, whose thickness is no more than a few times the wavelength
of light, exhibit the interference pattern described above.
If the slick is too thick, then the light traveling through the oil has too great a chance to
be absorbed and won't make it back through the top surface.
If we want to use a similar interference effect to verify the wave-like nature of the motion
of matter as proposed by De Broglie, we first need to know how large or small the matter
wavelength will be.
De Broglie proposed that the connection between the wavelength of the pilot wave for any moving
object and its momentum is given by the following expression.
This equation indicates that the larger the momentum, the smaller the wavelength.
The product of the two quantities is a constant, and De Broglie suggested that it should be
Planck's constant.
Again, this equation is mathematically no different from the relationship described
in the last chapter, connecting distance traveled and time driving, that is, distance equals
speed multiplied by time.
In order to determine how long a car trip to Chicago from Milwaukee may take, we note
that the distance is a constant, roughly 120 miles and not open to alteration.
If our average speed is 60 miles per hour, then this equation indicates that the trip
will last two hours.
A slower speed will lead to a longer trip, and to shorten the trip to one hour we must
look to a speed of 120 miles per hour.
We must also look for the police.
In principle, the trip may last as short or as long as we like, as long as we vary our
average velocity so that when multiplied by the travel time, it yields a distance of 120
miles.
The momentum of an object is defined as the product of its mass and its velocity.
The bigger an object, the more momentum it has at a given speed, and the harder it would
be to stop.
Which would you rather have collide with you, a linebacker or a ballerina, both running
at the same speed?
If we use the mass and speed of a major league fastball in De Broglie's equation above, we
find that its De Broglie wavelength is smaller than a millionth trillionth of the diameter
of an atomic nucleus.
There is no structure that can be conceived of that would exhibit interference effects
of a baseball.
One way to increase the size of the De Broglie wavelength is to decrease the momentum of
the object, as their product is a constant, and the simplest way to do that is to consider
smaller objects.
That is, the smaller the object, the lower its momentum, just as the ballerina has a
smaller momentum than the football player, and consequently the larger its De Broglie
wavelength.
An electron obviously has a much smaller mass than a baseball, and a correspondingly
smaller momentum.
Even for an electron traveling at a speed of nearly 0.1% of the speed of light, its momentum
is a trillion trillion times smaller than the baseball's, and its corresponding De Broglie
wavelength is a trillion trillion times larger.
For just such an electron, the De Broglie wavelength turns out to be about one-third
of a nanometer, or roughly the diameter of an atom.
In order to observe interference effects that would reflect the wave-like nature of matter,
we would thus need to send a beam of electrons at an oil slick that is only a few atoms thick.
That's still pretty small, but fortunately nature provides us with just such slicks.
We call them crystals.
Any solid the size of a sugar cube, such as a sugar cube, contains a little under a trillion
trillion atoms.
How these atoms are arranged, their chemical composition, and the nature of the connections
to their neighbors, determines whether the solid in question conducts electricity and
is shiny, that is, reflects light, like a metal, or does not conduct electricity and
is transparent to visible light, like a diamond.
Consider a carbon atom, which chemically prefers to have four chemical bonds.
There are many different ways that a collection of carbon atoms can chemically bond to one
another, and if one brings the atoms together in a haphazard random manner, one such resulting
configuration is soot.
An alternative bonding scheme would have each carbon atom located carefully in relation
to its neighbors, so that all four chemical bonds for each carbon atom have their ideal
strength and location.
One such uniform periodic arrangement of carbon atoms is termed diamond.
Chemically, diamond and soot are identical, and yet they have very different structural
properties.
Diamond is hard while soot is soft.
Optical conduction, soot is a pretty good conductor of electricity, while diamond is
an excellent insulator.
Optical characteristics, soot absorbs visible light, which is why it appears black, while
diamond is transparent in the visible portion of the spectrum.
And financial, diamond is expensive precisely in proportion to its scarcity.
And don't try to give a soot ring to your beloved, certainly not if you want them to
remain your beloved.
If soot and diamond are identical chemically, then all of these differences must be due to
the arrangements of the carbon atoms in the two substances.
A deep understanding of why the carbon atoms would form certain types of chemical bonds
in one circumstance, and very different bonds in another, would not arrive until the full
formal theory of quantum mechanics was developed by Schrodinger and Heisenberg.
I describe how quantum mechanics accounts for all of chemistry later on.
For now, we are interested in the fact that for certain solids, the atoms are arranged
in periodic arrays, like the oranges stacked in a grocery store display, which enables
large-scale three-dimensional uniform crystalline solids.
Note, while technically, soot refers to particulates formed from the incomplete combustion of fuels,
such as coal, oil, or wood, and is mostly carbon, but may contain other elements depending
on the nature of the burning material.
Here I am using the term as a shorthand for amorphous carbon.
These crystalline arrangements of atoms can be used as atomic-scale oil slicks for interference
experiments, as shown in Figure 6, available to view at www.tantor.com, providing uniform
layers that reflect electron beams striking them, with each layer being one atom thick,
which is just the length of the de Broglie wavelength of our electrons.
Thus, if we send in a beam of electrons traveling at the right speed, their momentum will be
such that their corresponding pilot wave will have a de Broglie wavelength equal to the
spacing between atomic layers in our crystal.
The incoming electrons will be repelled by the electrons around each atom in the crystal,
as identical electrical charges experience a repulsive force.
As any given collision between the electron beam and the crystal's electrons is random,
one would expect that the intensity of scattered electrons would be fairly uniform, regardless
of the direction one looks.
But thanks to quantum mechanics, this is not what is seen.
Just as in the case of the light scattered from an oil slick, where all colors are present
in the incident white light, but only certain colors constructively interfere, one finds
that the intensity of scattered electrons is not uniform.
Rather, there are regions where a high intensity of scattered electrons are found, and other
regions devoid of electrons, with a pattern exactly as one would expect for interfering
waves, rather than colliding particles.
Figure 7, also at www.tantor.com, shows strikingly similar interference patterns when green light
from a laser passes through a fine metal mesh, and when an electron beam passes through
a graphite crystal.
The wavelength of green light is much longer than that of the electron beam's de Broglie
waves, so the spacing between wires in the metal screen is correspondingly larger than
the separation between atoms in the carbon crystal.
The intensity of scattered electrons from uniform layers of atoms in a crystal, when
the electrons have a suitable momentum, so that their de Broglie wavelength is equal
to the spacing between crystal planes, displays an identical interference pattern, as is seen
when x-rays that also have a wavelength equal to the atomic spacing are reflected from the
crystal.
This interference pattern holds not only for reflected electrons, but also for those passing
through the thin crystal, as in Thompson's experiment summarized in the February 1930
issue of Science Wonder Stories.
As in the case of photons, described in the previous chapter, this interference effect
is not a result of large numbers of electrons behaving in a collective fashion like a wave.
Consider the electrons passing through the crystal in Figure 7, detected by striking
a chemically coated screen that emits a flash of light whenever an electron strikes it.
You're probably familiar with this.
It's an old style cathode ray television tube.
Modern flat panel liquid crystal display models work differently.
Decreasing the current of the incoming beam of electrons striking the crystal, we can
arrange it so that only one electron strikes the crystal every few seconds.
We would see not a full interference pattern, but a series of individual flashes of light
on the TV detector screen.
The more electrons we send in, the more flashes of light.
If we recorded the location of each flash, and at the end of the day added them all together,
instead of a uniform coverage over the screen, as would be expected, if the hard sphere electrons
collided with the electrons in the crystal's atoms, sending them randomly in all directions.
We see an interference pattern, not unlike that observed on the surface of a pond, when
a rock is thrown into the water.
I have argued that light consists of a collection of discrete packets of energy that interact
with electrons in a metal as if they were particles.
When there are many such light particles, photons, their collective behavior is well
described by a coherent wave.
X-rays, more about these later as well, correspond to electromagnetic waves with a wavelength
roughly equal to an atomic diameter, just as for the electrons we considered in the scattering
experiment.
The X-rays scatter from the electrons in the crystal's atoms, though the mechanism is a
little more involved than simple electron-electron repulsion, but we can decrease the intensity
of the light so that one X-ray photon strikes the crystal every few seconds as well.
Here again, a detector screen will record distinct flashes of light, and when all the
flashes are added together from the scatter of many photons, the observed interference
pattern is identical to that found using electrons.
Note, there may be a slight difference owing to technicalities.
The electrons scatter most strongly from the top few atomic planes, while the X-rays can
penetrate deeper into the crystal.
This is because the electron-electron repulsion that governs the electron scattering is much
stronger than the photon-electron interactions.
If the crystal structure of the top surface differs from that of the bulk crystal, a different
pattern may be observed.
But this is a detail that does not affect the basic point of wave-particle symmetry.
The dual-character symmetry between particles and waves holds for both matter and light.
This we will see is truly the most amazing science story of the 20th century.
