Section 2, Challengers of the Unknown.
Chapter 5, Wave Functions All the Way Down.
In 1958, Jonathan Osterman, Ph.D. in Atomic Physics, Princeton University, began his postdoctoral
research position at the Gila Flats Research Facility in the Arizona Desert.
Here he participated in experiments probing the nature of the intrinsic field.
This is the collection of forces that is responsible for holding all matter together, aside from
gravity.
This would include electromagnetism to account for the negatively charged electrons attracted
to the positively charged protons in the atom's nucleus.
Electricity is much stronger than gravity, so much stronger, in fact, that the electrostatic
attraction between the electrons and the protons in an atom's nucleus is more than
100 trillion trillion trillion times stronger than their gravitational attraction to one
another.
Consequently, we can indeed neglect gravity's contribution to the intrinsic field holding
matter together.
In addition to electromagnetism, the intrinsic field must be comprised of additional forces
that act on the protons and neutrons within each atomic nucleus.
While opposite electrical charges are attracted to each other, similar electrical charges
are pushed away.
The nucleus contains positively charged protons that are electrostatically repelled from one
another and electrically uncharged neutrons that are immune to the electrostatic force.
The closer two charges are, the greater the electrical force between them.
Given that the protons within a nucleus are less than 10 trillionth of a centimeter from
each other, the electrical repulsion between protons is very powerful, and any force capable
of overcoming this must be very strong.
So strong, in fact, that physicists named it the strong force, and it is also therefore
a component of the intrinsic field binding matter together.
Note, here physicists seem to have anticipated superhero comic books.
In X Factor number 78, when Guido, a super strong member of a team of super powered mutants,
realized that nearly all other such teams have at least one member whose superpower
involves super strength, he adopted the code name strong guy.
The strong force was originally believed to operate between protons and neutrons within
the nucleus, holding them together.
With theoretical and experimental investigations, indicating that each of these nuclear particles
is composed of quarks, which are in turn electrically charged, the strong force is now identified
as the force that holds the quarks together and bleeds out to neighboring particles within
the nucleus.
The experimental evidence for this force is indirect, as it turns out to be very difficult
to slice protons and neutrons open and probe the quarks directly.
But clearly there must be an attractive force operating within the nucleus that is able to
overcome the electrostatic repulsion between protons at very close quarters.
In addition, physicists were unable to explain why certain elements nuclei are unstable and
emit high energy electrons, despite the binding glue of the strong force.
The neutron, discovered in 1932 by James Chadwick, was found to be unstable.
A neutron out in free space has a half-life of roughly 15 minutes.
That is, in a quarter of an hour, a neutron outside of a nucleus has a 50% chance of decaying
into a proton, an electron, and a neutrino, technically an anti-neutrino.
As the neutron is uncharged, this has nothing to do with electromagnetism, and as it is
outside of a nucleus, the strong force does not apply.
This decay is also found to occur for neutrons inside certain nuclei.
There must be some other type of force that can turn a neutron into a proton.
This additional force can't be stronger than the strong force, or else nuclei would not
hold together at all, but it appears to be not simply electromagnetism.
This somewhat weaker force is termed, creatively enough, the weak force, and it is the third
component of the intrinsic field.
The strong force within the nucleus is roughly 100 times stronger than electromagnetism,
which is why nuclei with 90 to 100 protons, such as uranium and plutonium, are stable,
while the weak force is 100 billion times weaker than electromagnetism.
Physicists at the HeLaFlaTz facility in the late 1950s, attempting to investigate the
nature of the intrinsic field that governed the inner workings of the atom, studied what
happened when the intrinsic field was removed.
This was essentially a variation on the traditional experimental technique to study subatomic
matter, smash the atoms together.
Actually, these atom smashers study collisions not of atoms, but of their building blocks,
such as protons and electrons.
Particle accelerators push protons around a ring at velocities very near the speed
of light.
Note, some accelerators use electrons or atomic nuclei instead of protons, but the idea is
the same.
When they collide with a fixed target, or with another beam of protons traveling in
the opposite direction, the large energy of the collision can enable the generation of
other exotic particles, providing a practical application of Einstein's relation e equals
mc squared.
It is through such violent reactions that the structure of matter has been elucidated.
The physicists attempting to explore the intrinsic field took essentially a subtler, though no
less destructive, approach.
To isolate and remove the intrinsic field, they created another intrinsic field that
was completely out of phase with the original field.
Here, they applied the same principle of interference, illustrated in figure 4b, that certain sound
elimination devices employ, creating sound waves that are 180 degrees out of phase with
the ambient sound, such that the two wave fronts completely cancel each other out, resulting
in the removal of the original sound.
Similarly, in order to cancel the intrinsic field of matter, one must identify the frequency
and phase of the field, and create an identical field with the same amplitude, but exactly
out of phase with the original.
Thus, it takes an intrinsic field generator to perform an intrinsic field subtraction.
Without the electromagnetic, strong or weak forces, there is nothing to hold atoms or
nuclei together, and all matter would rapidly and violently be torn apart.
Unfortunately for Dr. Osterman, just such a fate befell him when he was accidentally
locked in the intrinsic field chamber during one such test run in 1959.
Osterman, along with Concrete Block No. 15, which was the intended target of that day's
intrinsic field removal experiment, was completely dematerialized once his strong, weak, and
electromagnetic forces were negated.
Through a process that remains poorly understood to this day, Osterman was able to recreate
himself, atom by atom, cell by cell, to become the superpowered being known as Dr. Manhattan.
John Osterman, also known as Dr. Manhattan, was created by Alan Moore and Dave Gibbons
in the graphic novel Watchmen, originally published in 1986-87 as a 12-issue miniseries.
Figure 11, online at www.tantor.com, shows the scene from Watchmen when Osterman first
manifests in his post-intrinsic field extraction form, one of the most striking aspects of
the reborn Dr. Manhattan is that his skin is light blue, while Osterman had been a fairly
typical Caucasian male.
Another feature of Dr. Manhattan that is hard to miss is that when he first successfully
reintegrates his corporeal existence over the lunch tables in the Gila Flats cafeteria,
he was completely naked.
This aspect of the story turns out to be accurate.
We physicists are extremely secure in our sexuality.
Similarly from a practical matter, the molecular chemical bonds that link the trillions and
trillions of atoms in a person represent a vast amount of stored electrostatic energy.
In order to cancel out the intrinsic field for a person, would require more energy than
could be provided by all of America's power plants running simultaneously at full capacity.
Even assuming that we could turn off the strong, weak, and electromagnetic forces, there is
no way that any poor scientist subjected to such a procedure would be able to reconstitute
himself following this ordeal.
But in considering the array of abilities that the character Dr. Manhattan displays in the
pages of Watchmen, there does appear to be some interesting physics at play.
In addition to his now bright blue appearance, Osterman gained the ability to alter his size
at will, to teleport himself and others instantly from one location to another, to cause other
objects or people to disintegrate, and to be aware of the future, that is, to experience
time past, present, and future simultaneously.
That is to say, following the removal of his intrinsic field and subsequent rebirth as
Dr. Manhattan, John Osterman appears to have gained independent control over his quantum
mechanical wave function.
His quantum mechanical what?
We have now reached the point in our amazing story where we consider what a wave function
is and why gaining control over it would be akin to possessing superpowers.
Here's the short answer.
The quantum mechanical aspect of any object is reflected in its wave function.
By performing simple mathematical operations on the wave function, one can calculate the
probability density, that is, the probability per unit volume, of finding the object whether
it is an electron, an atom, or a large blue-naked physicist at any point in space and time.
If you could indeed alter your wave function at will, I will show, you would gain the ability
to instantly appear at some distant location without ever technically traveling between
your initial and final points.
You could change your size from either very large to tiny, you could diffract into multiple
versions of yourself, and you would be cognizant of your future evolution.
And you'd likely give off a blue glow, though as we'll see later, that is more a consequence
of leaking high-energy electrons, a side effect of rebuilding yourself at the atomic level.
While John Osterman is not a real person, nor is there a wave associated with an intrinsic
field, nor any such thing as an intrinsic field for that matter, the rest of the preceding
discussion about the fundamental forces of nature, that is, electromagnetism and strong
and weak nuclear forces, was correct.
The experiments described in section 1 demonstrated that there is a wave associated with the motion
of electrons and atoms, and in fact with the motion of any and all matter.
The concept of a wave function introduced by Irwin Schrodinger in his matter-wave equation
is the key to understanding all atomic and molecular physics.
It might as well be called the intrinsic field, for the central role it plays in the understanding
of chemical bonding, by which all matter is held together.
At the start of the 20th century, physicists debated whether the electrical charges in
an atom were spread out throughout the atom, uniformly distributed in space, or existed
as concentrated point-like, negatively charged electrons and positively charged protons.
A series of experiments by Ernest Rutherford and Frederick Saade convinced scientists by
1905 that atoms were comprised of massive, positively charged protons in a physically
very small nucleus toward which the lighter negatively charged electrons are electrically
attracted.
This is the familiar solar system picture of the atom that you might remember from grade
school, but an electrically charged solar system atom has a big problem in stability.
The Earth is pulled toward the Sun by gravity, so what keeps our planet from falling into
the Sun?
It turns out that this is a common misconception.
The Earth is falling into the Sun all the time.
Don't panic, we're not on a death spiral to a fiery end.
The Earth is moving at a high velocity at nearly a right angle to an imaginary line
connecting us to the Sun.
The gravitational pull toward the Sun deflects the Earth away from its straight-line path.
An object in motion will remain in motion, unless acted upon by an outside force, such
as gravity from the Sun.
The combination of the acceleration toward the Sun and the motion at a right angle away
from the Sun results in a circular trajectory.
The actual orbit is an ellipse, a distorted circle.
The stable orbits of the planets in our solar system are possible only through the continual
falling toward the Sun.
The Earth maintains its orbital motion as there is nothing to slow it down.
Space particles provide a very small frictional drag that we can neglect, while the conditions
that led to the Earth's original velocity about the Sun are, as they say, a subject
of current research.
As the force of electrical attraction between the electrons and protons in an atom is mathematically
similar to the attractive force of gravity, a completely analogous argument suggests that
the electrons should move in circular or elliptical orbits about the nucleus, not unlike
the way the planets orbit the Sun in our solar system.
The main difference is that planets do not emit energy as they orbit the Sun, but orbiting
electrons do lose energy.
In fact, quantum mechanics was developed in part to explain why all atoms don't suffer
a death spiral to oblivion.
It was known from the days of the American Civil War that whenever an electric charge
changes its direction, as in an elliptical orbit about an atomic nucleus, it would emit
electromagnetic radiation, that is, light.
Since light carries energy, the electrons should lose energy as they orbit, and the slower
they move, the less they are able to resist the attractive pull of the positively charged
protons in the nucleus.
In a short time, actually less than a trillionth of a second, they should spiral into the nucleus.
However, atoms form chemical bonds with other atoms, by which materials such as table salt,
sand, and DNA are possible.
The chemical bonds holding molecules and solids together involve interactions of the orbiting
electrons between neighboring atoms, which would not be possible if the electrons were
sitting on the nuclei.
Something in the picture had to be wrong.
If accelerated electric charges did not emit electromagnetic radiation, then radio and
TV would not be possible.
In such a world, to quote Crusty the Clown, the living would envy the dead.
An important step in reconciling this puzzle was Niels Bohr's suggestion in 1915 that the
electrons in an atom can assume only particular trajectories about the nucleus.
That is, only certain planetary-like orbits are allowed.
Electrons can jump from one orbit to another, but they may not follow any arbitrary path
around the nucleus.
An analogy.
The city of Minneapolis in Minnesota contains a series of lakes that can be circumnavigated
by paved paths.
There are several paths encircling each lake, one intended for pedestrians, another for bicycles,
and a third for automobiles.
Which pathway separated from the others by a grassy median?
Bohr's electronic orbits were analogous to these pathways, where electrons were free
to travel but were forbidden from walking on the grass, as shown in figure 12, which
you can view at www.tentor.com.
The closer the orbit was to the nucleus, the more tightly bound the electron would be,
so that more energy would have to be supplied to remove an inner orbit electron than would
be required to remove one from an outer ring.
The electron could jump from an outer pathway to an inner loop with the emission of the
appropriate amount of energy by giving off a photon, that is, light.
Alternately, by absorbing just the right amount of energy, it could be promoted from an inner
orbit to a higher energy outer orbit, provided that the path had an open available space
for the electron.
Bohr proposed that, for some reason that he could not explain, the electron would not
emit light during its orbit, despite the requirements of Maxwell's equation for a charge that is
constantly changing direction, but rather give off light only when moving from one orbit
to another.
Bohr's proposal that only certain discrete orbits were possible was an attempt to account
for the spectrum of light emitted by different atoms.
Why are neon signs red, while the light from sodium lamps has a yellow tint?
Neon, sodium, and in fact all atoms have the color they do because the electrons in these
atoms have a predominant absorption and emission at only specific colors of light.
The chemical differences between neon with 10 electrons and 10 protons in its nucleus
and sodium with 11 electrons, balanced by 11 nuclear protons, leads to the separation
between the relevant orbits corresponding to light in the red and yellow, respectively,
portions of the electromagnetic spectrum.
One can test this quantum principle tonight at dinner.
Sprinkle a little bit of salt into the table candle, not so much that you smother the flame,
and you will see a distinct yellow tinge to the candle's light.
The energetic atoms in the flame will excite electronic transitions in the sodium and the
salt crystals, with electrons moving from one quantum orbit to another, and when the
sodium relaxes back, it gives off yellow light.
In fact, independent of sodium, the light we see from a candle results from the electrons
in the hot gas atoms near the wick being excited into high energy orbits.
When the electrons return to their lower energy states, they emit photons, which is the source
of the light in a flame.
We cannot have a complete understanding of fire, the oldest technology, without an understanding
of quantum mechanics.
Each element has its own unique spectrum of absorption or emission lines, specific wavelengths
of light that correspond to allowed transitions from one electron orbit to another.
Just as in the case of fingerprints or snowflakes, no two elements have exactly the same spectrum
of absorption lines.
By measuring the different wavelengths of the light emitted by an atom, one can identify
the element or molecule.
In fact, this is how the element helium, the second most common element in the universe
after hydrogen, was discovered.
When absorption lines from light from the sun were studied, the line spectra for hydrogen
were observed, but there was another series of lines that did not correspond to any element
known on earth.
This newly detected element was named helium after the Greek god of the sun, Helios.
If you want to see what a line spectrum for a previously unknown element would look like,
consider the November 1955 issue of Strange Adventures, a science fiction anthology comic
book published by National Periodicals, home of Superman and Batman.
As shown in Figure 13, scientist Ken Warren uncovers the existence of a radioactive metallic
element hitherto undiscovered in the entire solar system.
Note, comic books back in the 1950s, at the height of Frederick Wertham's seduction of
the innocent scare, may indeed have been corrupting young readers' minds.
After all, isn't that what literature is supposed to do?
But one could hardly complain that they weren't improving readers' vocabulary or reading
comprehension.
In order to trace the source of this new metallic element, Dr. Warren uses a scintillometer.
A caption box in the story informs the readers that this is a device capable of detecting
even the smallest amount of radioactivity.
While nowadays a scintillometer refers to a device that detects small variations in the
optical properties of the atmosphere, back in 1955, this was indeed the term used to
measure the presence of ionizing radiation.
Dr. Warren discovers that the radioactive element was brought to earth by an alien spacecraft.
This in turn leads to his capture by two would-be invaders who intend to set the entire
planet aflame.
Apparently, if earth could be converted into a flaming sun, then the temperature on the
moon would rise to a point that would accommodate the alien's physiology.
The fact that the sun is not actually a large planet that has been set on fire seems to have
escaped these aliens, who have nevertheless managed to master interstellar flight.
But it turns out to be a moot point, as Dr. Warren and his chemist colleague Hank Forrest
are able to trick the aliens into abandoning their plan and leaving our solar system.
In a sense, Bohr's proposal that atomic line spectra arise from energy emission or absorption
from electrons residing in discrete orbits managed only to reframe the mystery of atomic
spectra.
Now, instead of wondering why atoms absorbed or emitted lights at only particular wavelengths,
one could ask why only certain electronic orbits were possible about the atomic nucleus.
Prince de Broglie's Matterwaves provided an answer.
Schrodinger was one of the first physicists to recognize that de Broglie's Matterwave
hypothesis could neatly solve this riddle of why the electrons did not collapse into
the nucleus.
For if there is indeed a wave associated with the motion of the electron, and Davidson and
Germa's experiments described in Chapter 3, as well as Thompson's observations reported
in the pages of Science Wonder Stories, indicated that there is, then this wave has to be a
standing wave.
A guitar string, clamped at both ends, as shown in Figure 14, online at www.tantor.com,
cannot oscillate with any wavelength.
Only those waves are possible for which the amplitude is zero at the two fixed ends.
This common sense constraint leads to a very restricted set of possible waves that the
string can support, which is why when plucked, the guitar string vibrates only at certain
frequencies.
Wavelengths, as illustrated in Figure 14b, are simply not possible.
This is the whole point of a musical instrument, after all, as a string that vibrated at all
frequencies would be pretty useless for constructing harmonies.
The possible waves of a clamped string, constrained by the fixed ends and unable to travel down
the length of the string, are called standing waves.
Say there is a wave associated with us as we walk along the pedestrian pathway, circling
Lake Harriet in Minneapolis.
And we do in fact have a matter wave moving along with us, but of such a small wavelength
that it is undetectable.
Once we have returned to our starting point, our wave must join up smoothly and perfectly
with the wave begun when we left for our stroll.
If the wave were at its highest point, a crest, at the start of our walk, then as we walked
around the lake, the wave would oscillate down to a valley, back up to a crest, and so on.
Once we are back at our starting point, the wave must again be at a crest.
This simple common sense aspect of waves, what would it look like if the cycle of the wave
were such that our wave was at a valley when we returned to our starting point, where the
original wave was a peak, leads immediately to the consequence that only certain pathways,
those that correspond to different wavelengths that start and end correctly, around the lake
are possible.
Similarly, a wave associated with an electron in a closed orbit returning to the same point
after a full rotation can assume only certain wavelengths.
Once an orbit has been completed, the wave must be at the same point as when it left.
This single-valued constraint, that at any point the wave can have only one amplitude,
that is it can't be a peak and a valley at the same time, restricts the infinite range
of possible wavelengths to a very small set of allowed orbits.
Just as the guitar string has a lowest pitch, it is impossible to excite a wave on the clamp
string lower than its fundamental oscillation, which is determined by the length of the string.
There is a lowest standing wave electron orbit that can be constructed around the nucleus.
Thus, electrons do not continuously lose energy and spiral into the nucleus with ever-decreasing
radii, as there is no way for the apparently very real matter wave to form standing waves
with a lower wavelength than the lowest possible orbit.
The De Bruy hypothesis of matter waves saves the stability of atoms and also accounts in
a natural way for the line spectra, as shown in Figure 11 of atoms.
Following a seminar presentation by Schrodinger of the standing wave model of electrons in
an atom, Max Bourne, a senior physicist in the audience, pointed out that if electrons
had waves, there should be a corresponding wave equation to describe them.
Just as Maxwell had found a wave equation for electric and magnetic fields that turned
out to accurately describe the properties of electromagnetic waves, that is, light,
and challenged Schrodinger to find it.
Taking up this assignment, Schrodinger accomplished the deed in just six months.
A consequence of Schrodinger's work was the realization that the electrons could not really
be considered as mini-planets in a nuclear solar system.
The resulting equation, which now bears his name, would garner him a Nobel Prize, change
the future, and lead to philosophical arguments over the nature of measurements of quantum
systems that so disturbed Schrodinger that he would claim that he was sorry he brought
the whole thing up.
