Section 3 Tales of the Atomic Knights
Chapter 9 Our Friend the Atom
In the 1949 Warner Bros. musical motion picture, My Dream is Yours, a young Doris Day auditions
for a spot as a featured singer on a popular radio show.
Her manager, played by Jack Carson, advises her to curry favor with the sponsor by crooning
a tender love ballad.
She instead decides to belt out a bouncy uptempo ode to a new invention, no larger than an
adding machine that few have ever seen.
As the song continues, joined by the refrain of tick, tick, tick, it becomes clear that
Doris Day is singing the praises of, and comparing her quickly beating heart to, a geiger counter.
Five years later, a ticking geiger counter in another film would lead uranium prospector
Mickey Rooney onto an atomic bomb testing site.
Not realizing that a nuclear weapon detonation was imminent, he innocently took refuge in
a test house populated with mannequins and helped himself to a peanut butter sandwich
as the countdown progressed.
Rooney survived the nuclear explosion without even having to take refuge inside the model
refrigerator.
The resulting exposure to radioactivity would transform Mickey Rooney into the atomic kid,
and he would go on to employ his newfound ability to glow in the dark and issue explosive
sneezes to help the FBI break up a communist spy ring.
A few years after Mickey Rooney's misadventures on a nuclear weapon testing site, a darker,
though equally inaccurate depiction of the effects of radiation exposure would be presented
in The Beast of Yucca Flats, 1961.
In this cautionary tale, former Swedish wrestler Tor Janssen, a Plan 9 from outer space fame,
also accidentally wanders into an atomic bomb test run.
Janssen plays defecting Russian scientist Joseph Chavursky, who, while fleeing KGB assassins,
winds up on the famous desert Yucca Flats testing range, right before an atomic bomb detonation.
The resulting radiation transforms Janssen into a hulking, mindless, homicidal monster,
though he looks pretty much the same as before the explosion.
Certainly, the true effects of radiation exposure were publicly known at least by August 1946,
with the publication in The New Yorker of John Hershey's Hiroshima.
But in the years immediately following the conclusion of World War II, popular forms
of entertainment maintained, for the most part, an optimistic view of the benefits
to come in an atomic-powered world of tomorrow.
The 1957 television program Disneyland featured Dr. Heinz Haber, a German rocketry expert in
Our Friend the Atom, which likened atomic power to a genie in a bottle that could grant
us three wishes for a brighter future.
The first wish would be for power, from the generation of electricity to atomic-powered
airplanes.
The second wish was for food and health, and involved using radiation to sterilize foodstuffs
and in the treatment of diseases.
The third wish was for wisdom, to use nuclear energy wisely and peacefully.
In 1952, Collier's Magazine commissioned a series of articles by science writers from
Renevon Braun and Heinz Haber to Willie Lay to envision the future of space travel.
With illustrations by Chesley Bohnstel, who did the background artwork for Destination
Moon, and Rolf Klapp, these articles were published as three issues of the magazine,
and later compiled into a book form under the title Across the Space Frontier.
Here again, the genie of atomic energy would provide the power to run space stations and
enable manned missions to Mars.
Before the grim realities of mutated Swedish former wrestlers set in, there was a real
sense of optimism, that the taming of the atom and our understanding of nuclear physics
would make the promised utopias of science fiction a reality.
What went wrong?
While we fortunately avoided glow-in-the-dark Mickey Roonies, we never got the atomic planes
either.
Well, the atomic planes were a bad idea from the start.
Haber's Dell paperback companion to the Disneyland television program argued, in aviation the
weight of the fuel has always been a discouraging limitation.
Now it's the cost of the jet fuel.
But back in 1956, no one envisioned the end of cheap oil.
While a smaller nuclear reactor can replace a large quantity of fuel, the shielding necessary
to prevent killing or sterilizing the passengers and crew would more than compensate for the
missing fuel weight.
Haber suggested using water as shielding, but the now heavier plane would require a
runway miles long, all of which hardly seems worth the trouble simply to be able to avoid
refueling on long flights.
Similarly stillborn were plans for atomic automobiles.
In 1957 Ford proposed a car called the Nucleon, in which the internal combustion engine was
replaced by a small nuclear reactor located in the back trunk.
Note, a nucleon is the term physicists use for a particle inside a nucleus, either a
proton or a neutron.
The heat from a nuclear fission reaction would boil water and the steam would turn turbines
providing torque for the wheels and electrical power, as in a nuclear electricity power plant.
The hazards to the driver from exposure to nuclear radiation and to other motorists from
a traffic accident was to be offset by the improved mileage.
It was anticipated that the Nucleon could travel 5,000 miles before the atomic core
needed replacement.
Though never built, the 3 eighth scale model unveiled by Ford is notable for a mini cooling
tower behind the passenger section for the nuclear reactor and tail fins nearly as tall
as the car itself.
Certainly the benefits of atomic powered travel outweigh the costs when considering under
water transportation.
The first US Navy nuclear powered submarine, the Nautilus, was launched in 1955 and since
then a considerable fraction of the global fleet of submarines is powered by small nuclear
reactors.
The Nautilus and Jules Verne's 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea was powered by electricity drawn
from the ocean via a mechanism not clearly described.
Professor, said Captain Nemo, my electricity is not everybody's and that is all I wish
to say about it.
And consequently was also able to travel great distances without refueling.
20,000 Leagues refers to the distance the Nautilus travels, not its depth beneath the
water surface, and is equivalent to 60,000 miles.
As the sole market for submarines is military, profitability constraints do not apply.
Note, the sponsor for the Disneyland program Our Friend the Atom was General Dynamics,
the manufacturer of among many things nuclear submarines.
It is true that nuclear power is extremely efficient compared to other methods of generating
heat, at least when compared to the equivalent mass of fossil fuel needed to produce the
same energy.
The devil is in the details, particularly in the waste products.
While there is danger in the waste exhaust of fossil fuels, there the hazard is long
term, while radioactivity is of immediate concern to all its strikes.
To see why we must be concerned when a nucleus decays, we first need to understand why any
nucleus sticks together in the first place.
When Ernest Rutherford and Frederick Soddy conducted experiments involving high speed
and alpha particles, consisting of two protons and two neutrons, essentially a helium nucleus,
scattering from thin metal foils, they observed that occasionally, say one time in 10,000,
the alpha particles were reflected backward from the metal foil.
These data led them to conclude that the atom was mostly empty space, which we now understand
to be occupied by the probability clouds for the electrons, and a small inner core in which
the positive charge resides.
The positive charges have to be in the center, for only a concentrated volume of positive
charge could generate a repulsive force sufficient to deflect the high velocity alpha particles,
which themselves contain two positive charges, backward from their initial trajectory.
This nucleus had to be small, in fact, roughly one ten-thousandth the diameter of the atom
itself, in order to account for the fact that only one in ten-thousand alpha particles
experiences a significant deflection, as a direct hit is necessary to send the alpha
reeling backward, assuming that the alpha particle is electrically repelled before striking
the nucleus.
Knowing that the positive charges in the atom were in the nucleus, answered the question
of the structure of the atom, but raised several more.
It was known from chemistry that the number of positive charges in an atom, balanced by
an equal number of negatively charged electrons, determined its chemical nature.
Hydrogen has one proton in its nucleus, helium has two, and carbon has six protons, while
gold has seventy-nine.
The electron's mass is nearly two-thousand times smaller than a proton's, so nearly
all of the mass of the atom derives from its nucleus.
But the weight of atoms does not correspond to the number of net positive charges it has.
Hydrogen has a mass equivalent to a single proton, but helium's mass is equal to that
of four protons.
Carbon's is twelve, and gold's mass would suggest that it has one-hundred ninety-seven
protons in its nucleus.
How can helium have a nucleus with only two positive charges, but a mass four times larger
than that of hydrogen?
For a while, physicists thought that the nucleus contained both protons and electrons.
That is, a helium nucleus would consist of four protons and two electrons.
That way it would have a mass four times larger than hydrogen's single proton, as observed,
but a net charge of positive four minus two equals positive two, which also agreed with
the experiments.
As the electron has a much smaller mass than the proton, measurements at the time were
not precise enough to rule this possibility out.
Experiments on the nuclear magnetic field remember that protons have small magnetic fields,
as discussed in chapter four, and how it influenced the manner by which the electrons in the atom
absorbed light, more on this when we discussed magnetic resonance imaging, led scientists
to conclude that a helium nucleus, for example, could not have four protons and two electrons.
Instead, there must be two protons in a helium nucleus and two other particles that weigh
as much as a proton but have no electrical charge.
In 1932, James Chadwick bombarded beryllium with alpha particles and detected a new part
of the atom, the neutron.
Thus, one mystery about the nucleus was solved.
The atom consisted of electrons orbiting a nucleus that contained protons and neutrons.
But this left another more challenging mystery.
As it is well known that like positive charges repel one another, this was after all the
basis by which Rutherford and Soddy discovered the nucleus, by observing it repel positively
charged alpha particles, then why do the positively charged protons in the nucleus not fly away
from one another?
The answer is, they do.
Protons feel electrical forces inside the nucleus, just the same as outside the nucleus.
The fact that they stay inside the smaller nuclear volume implies that they feel a second
stronger force that prevents them from leaving the nucleus.
A clue about this force is found by considering the heavier siblings of each element, termed
isotopes.
Two atoms are isotopes if their nuclei have the same number of protons, thus making them
identical chemically, but differing numbers of neutrons, thus giving them different masses.
There are versions of hydrogen that have one proton and zero, one, or two neutrons, but
there are no isotopes of helium or any other element that have two or more protons and
no neutrons.
This indicates that the neutrons in the nucleus play a crucial role in providing the strong
force that holds the nucleus together.
The same strong force we encountered in Chapter 5.
To maintain stability in a nucleus requires a critical balance of the number of neutrons
and protons.
Consequently, isotopes such as hydrogen with one proton and two neutrons may be unstable
and decay more on this soon.
How much stronger is this force than electromagnetism?
If this additional force were 10 times greater than the electrical repulsion, then it would
be hard to make heavy elements such as silicon with 14 protons or titanium with 22 protons.
If the force were a thousand times stronger, then we might expect to see elements with
several hundred protons in the nucleus, and we do not.
The fact that the heaviest natural element found on Earth is uranium with 92 protons
indicates that this strong attractive force holding the nucleus together is roughly 100
times greater than the electrical repulsion between the protons.
But even uranium is not stable.
If you wait long enough, all of your uranium will undergo transmutations to smaller elements
by a process known as radioactive decay.
Lead, with 56 protons and 126 neutrons, is the largest element that does not decay and
is therefore stable.
You can construct heavier nuclei, but when the tower of blocks of protons and neutrons
becomes too tall, for each additional proton means more neutrons have to be present to
keep it together.
Eventually, the slightest perturbation will cause the tower to collapse.
When it does, it loses energy by emitting radiation in the form of high-energy photons,
gamma rays, or high-speed somatomic particles, such as electrons, neutrons, or alpha particles.
In fact, some of the larger nuclei are so unstable that all you have to do is give them
a tap and they fly apart.
Uranium, so valuable in the middle of the 1950s that it would tempt Mickey Rooney out
onto an atomic testing site, is one such element.
A dictionary from the end of the 19th century described uranium as a heavy, practically
worthless metal.
But this was before Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann split a uranium nucleus apart in 1938.
Nuclear fission is the breaking apart of a large nucleus into two roughly equal nuclei.
It turns out that to get a uranium nucleus to split into smaller pieces, one must hit
it gently with a slow-moving neutron.
Electrons are too light to do much damage, and protons or positively charged alpha particles
are deflected by the large positive charge of the uranium nucleus and therefore can't
get close enough to do any harm.
Thus, until the discovery of the neutron by Chadwick in 1932, there was not a suitable
tool with which to strike the uranium atom.
However, the neutrons released from radioactive decays in Chadwick's experiment were too energetic.
A fast neutron has a large momentum, and through the de Broglie relationship, Chapter 3, the
larger the momentum, the smaller the de Broglie wavelength.
Finding the nucleus within an atom is always a difficult trick.
If the electron's probability cloud, which denotes the size of the atom, were the size
of your thumbnail, about one square centimeter, then the nucleus on the atom would be smaller
than a single cell in the thumbnail.
In 1937, Italian physicist Enrico Fermi discovered that passing a beam of neutrons through a
length of wax caused the neutrons to slow down as they collided with the large paraffin
molecules, but not come to rest, as they did when striking a similar length of lead.
The slower the neutron is moving, the lower its momentum, and the larger its de Broglie
wavelength.
A larger wavelength gives the neutron more of a chance to intersect with the nucleus's
matter wave, just as you have a greater chance of coming across a bush in a garden at night
if you walk with your arms outstretched, rather than flat against your sides.
If the neutron strikes the uranium nucleus, then there is a chance that the strong force
within the nucleus will capture this neutron.
Recall that the strong force has a very short range, and the neutron has to be right at
the nucleus to feel it, making the uranium nucleus slightly heavier.
But the tower of protons and neutrons in the uranium nucleus was already barely stable,
and the addition of one more neutron turns out to be too much for the nucleus to support.
So it usually tumbles into two smaller nuclei, typically krypton, with 36 protons and 89
neutrons, and barium, with 56 protons and 144 neutrons.
But alternate fracture products are observed, along with releasing either two or three more
slowly moving neutrons, and energy, in the form of kinetic energy of the smaller nuclei
and gamma rays.
Note, this depends on the detailed decay fragments of the fissioning uranium nucleus.
How exactly the unstable uranium nucleus decays into smaller nuclei is a complicated process.
Where does the kinetic energy of the nuclear fission byproducts come from?
Electrostatics.
While gravity and electromagnetism can exert a force even when objects are miles and miles
apart, though the force gets weaker the greater the distance, the strong force holding the
nucleus disappears for lengths larger than the diameter of a neutron.
Consequently, once the two large nuclear fragments break apart in the fissioning uranium, there
is no strong force to hold them.
But the 36 protons in the krypton nucleus and the 56 protons in the barium nucleus repel
each other, and as they are initially very close, the repulsive force between them is
strong.
The kinetic energy of the nuclear fission products, which accounts for the horrible destructive
capacity of an atomic blast, derives from basic electrostatics.
Elements such as uranium or plutonium are easier to break apart than lighter elements,
but all matter would violently explode if the strong force could be even momentarily
turned off, as in Watchman's unfortunate Dr. Osterman from Chapter 5.
Many chemical reactions such as when dynamite undergoes combustion give off heat as a byproduct.
By heat, I mean that the reaction products have a larger kinetic energy than the initial
reactants.
Nearly all chemical reactions have an energy scale of roughly 1 electron volt per molecule,
within a factor of 10 or so.
That is, sometimes the reaction takes a fraction of an electron volt, while in some other cases,
depending on the chemistry, the reaction could involve 10 electron volts or more.
In contrast, a single uranium nucleus undergoing fission and splitting into two smaller nuclei
releases about 200 million electron volts of energy.
Consequently, the energy released in fission is much higher per atom of initial material
than in a chemical reaction, but 200 million electron volts from a single uranium atom
would be less noticeable than a mosquito bite.
By gathering together several thousand trillion trillion uranium atoms, the resulting energy
released can be devastating, even though these thousand trillion trillion uranium atoms would
only weigh a few pounds.
It would take more than 12,000 tons of dynamite to release an equivalent amount of energy.
Three pounds of uranium is dangerous, but one and a half pounds is not.
Why not?
When the uranium nucleus captures a slow-moving neutron and fissions into two lighter nuclei,
it also releases two or three slowly-moving neutrons.
Thus, the decay of one uranium atom provides the means to cause two more uranium nuclei
to undergo fission, and each one of those can make two more nuclei decay.
Starting with the fission of a single atom, a large number of additional atoms can be induced
to decay in a chain reaction, but only if the neutrons emitted from the first uranium
atom strike other nuclei.
Remember that most of the atom is empty space, and that the diameter of the nucleus is only
one-tenth thousandth that of the atom itself.
If the decaying uranium atom does not have a sufficient number of other atoms surrounding
it, then there will be low-level decays that provide energy, useful for an electrical power
plant, but not enough reactions to yield an explosive chain reaction.
The trick to making an atomic bomb is to have two separate pieces of uranium, each less
than the critical mass, so defined as, at this mass a chain reaction is insured, and
bring them together into one volume quickly enough that the reactions do not die out but
continue to grow.
It's not the mass itself that is critical for a chain reaction, but the number of uranium
atoms, so that the released neutrons have a high probability of striking another nucleus
and initiating another fission event.
In this case, only a few pounds of uranium is transformed into an atomic bomb, can annihilate
several square miles, and can still cause extensive damage at larger distances.
Children in the early 1950s could learn all about radioactivity if their parents shelled
out fifty bucks for the Gilbert's U-238 atomic energy lab.
This kit was the nuclear physics version of a chemistry set, and came complete with radioactive
sources that emitted alpha, beta, and gamma radiation, a Geiger counter, and a mini-cloud
chamber for seeing the tracks created by high-speed radioactive particles.
The kit included both an instruction manual and an informational comic titled, Learn How
Dagwood Splits the Atom.
This comic featured text that was scientifically thorough and accurate, with an introduction
by Joe Considine, an international news service correspondent who covered the Bikini Ahtal
nuclear tests and wrote the script for the 1947 docudrama about atomic energy, The Beginning
or the End.
Not to be confused with the 1957 science fiction film, The Beginning of the End, which featured
the attack of radioactive giant locusts, and a foreword by Lt. Gen. Leslie R. Groves,
the head of military operations at the Manhattan Project.
In the accompanying comic, Mandrake the Magician shrinks Dagwood Bumstead, his wife Blondie,
and their kids and dogs to subatomic size, so that they, together with Popeye, Olive oil,
and Wimpy, can observe first hand the inner workings of nuclear decay and fission.
Chapter 22 shows a page from this scientific text.
As Dagwood, unable, even with Popeye's assistance, to overcome the strong nuclear force holding
a uranium-235 nucleus together, is nevertheless able to initiate a chain reaction of fission
decays when he uses a neutron bazooka to strike the nucleus just right.
While the world read in their newspapers on August 7, 1945, of the previous day's successful
detonation of an atomic bomb by the U.S. military over Hiroshima, Japan, this was not the first
time atomic weapons entered the public consciousness.
Figure 23 shows a Buck Rogers newspaper strip published in 1929.
When the submarine that Buck and his colleagues are on is held fast by a giant octopus, their
only hope is to blast themselves free, using the awful destructive potential of an atomic
torpedo.
A full 16 years before the Manhattan Project, Phil Nolan and Dick Kalkins, creators of the
Buck Rogers' 2429 AD comic strip, were confident that their readers would know that an atomic
torpedo was a more powerful version of the regular underwater missile.
Moreover, according to AdventurePulp magazines, Japan as well knew of the ability of atomic
weapons to destroy a major city, six years before the U.S. bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
In Secret Service Operator No. 5, issue No. 47, published in September 1939, it is the
United States that is attacked by the invading troops of the Yellow Vulture, a thinly disguised
racist version of the Japanese Empire.
In a tale titled Corpse Cavalry of the Yellow Vulture, the troops of the Yellow Vulture obliterate
Washington, D.C., killing the president, Agent Q.6, fathered to Operator No. 5, and most of
the Washington establishment, using an atomic bomb.
One of the earliest recorded uses in fiction of atomic as a modifier to signify the enhanced
lethality of a weapon is in a 1914 science fiction novel by H.G. Wells.
In The World Set Free, Wells describes atomic bombs raining down with horrible destructive
power, dropped from noiseless atomic-powered airplanes.
How did the general population know about atomic weapons years before the Manhattan Project?
It was, thanks in part, to the writings of Frederick Soddy, Ernest Rutherford's colleague
in the discovery of the nucleus.
Soddy penned a series of popular science books, the best known of which, The Interpretation
of Radium, being the substance of six free popular experimental lectures delivered at
the University of Glasgow, was a best-seller when published in 1909.
It made quite an impression on Herbert George Wells, who incorporated the concept of atomic-based
weapons weighing only a few pounds, releasing tremendous energy and lingering radiation
damage into his novel, The World Set Free.
In Wells' novel, an atomic war between the nations of Europe and the United States leads
to the formation of a proto-United Nations, where the surviving world leaders decide to
form a new world order and establish a one-world government based upon the principles of socialism,
rejecting capitalism, which was to blame for leading the nations into a nuclear confrontation.
This novel made a strong impression on one particular reader in 1932.
Both Wells' vision of a one-world government run by socialistic principles and equally important,
his descriptions of horrific atomic weapons galvanized Hungarian physicist Leo Szilard.
This fan of Wells was no ordinary reader.
Szilard would, in 1933, be the first to conceive of a possible nuclear chain reaction, patenting
the idea in 1934, four years before Han and Strossman first split a uranium nucleus.
In 1939, Szilard wrote and delivered a letter to President Franklin Roosevelt, signed by
himself and Albert Einstein, urging the development of a nuclear weapons program, which became
the Manhattan Project.
Thus, a popular science book by Saadi, written for a general audience, inspired an H.G. Wells
science fiction novel suggesting the possibility of atomic weapons, and this novel in turn
was directly responsible for the creation of actual atomic bombs.
When publisher Hugo Gernsback launched his science fiction pulp magazine Amazing Stories
in 1926 with a reprint of a story by Wells, it is doubtful that he realized how prophetic
would be his magazine's motto, extravagant fiction today, cold fact tomorrow.
