Chapter 10 Radioactive Man
The fates of Mickey Rooney and Tor Janssen and the Atomic Kid and the Beast of Yucca
Flats, respectively, are of course ridiculous, non-realistic portrayals of the effects of
radiation exposure.
By the mid-1950s, Doris Day's light-hearted song about the wonders of a Geiger counter
would give way to darker implications regarding the effects of nuclear weapon testing.
Ten years after the use of atomic bombs at the end of World War II, science fiction films
would clearly and unambiguously establish that the real risk of exposure to radioactive
fallout is unchecked gigantism.
James Whitmore and James Arnes battled ants mutated to the size of helicopters by lingering
radioactivity in the New Mexico desert in the 1954 Warner Bros. film Them.
According to an atomic testing site, would similarly transform Lieutenant Colonel Glenn
Manning into the amazing Colossal Man, 1955, who would return to wage War of the Colossal
Beast, 1958.
Feasting on fruits containing radioactive isotopes would create giant locusts, signaling
the beginning of the end, 1957.
A diet of radioactively contaminated fish similarly causes an octopus to grow to fantastic
size in It Came from Beneath the Sea, 1955, and radiation in a swamp would provoke the
attack of the giant leeches, 1959.
Occasionally, radioactive exposure would instead lead to miniaturization, as reflected in the
strange case of The Incredible Shrinking Man, 1957, and the experiments of Dr. Cyclops,
1940, whose shrinking beam was powered by atomic rays five years before the Manhattan
Project.
Radioactivity is an umbrella term for particle or light emissions from nuclei.
As discussed in the previous section, when electrons in an atom move from one quantized
energy level to another, they do so via the emission or absorption of light, which can
span a wide range of wavelengths, from the microwave to infrared to visible light to
ultraviolet and x-rays.
Note, there is a process by which, when an electron drops from a high energy state to
a lower level, another electron in the atom is ejected, but for the most part, electric
transitions within the atom involve emission or absorption of photons.
Application of the rules of quantum mechanics to the protons and neutrons inside the atomic
nucleus find that, similarly, only certain quantized energy levels are possible.
The energy spacing between these quantized levels is much larger than in the atom, thanks
to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
As the spatial extent of the nucleus is much smaller than that of the atom itself, the
uncertainty in the location of the protons and neutrons is reduced.
Consequently, the uncertainty in the value of their momentum is increased, and the larger
the momentum, mass times velocity, the greater the kinetic energy, momentum squared divided
by twice the mass.
While typical electronic transitions in an atom involve energies on the order of a few
electron volts, and occasionally one can observe x-ray emission, which has an energy of a thousand
electron volts, nuclear energy transitions involving electromagnetic radiation consists
of gamma rays with energies of several million electron volts.
As the protons and neutrons inside the nucleus settle from a higher energy level to a lower
level, referred to as the ground state, there are other ways for them to shed energy aside
from emitting gamma ray photons.
There are some nuclei that can lower their energy by emitting an alpha particle, consisting
of two protons and two neutrons.
The two protons and two neutrons that comprise a helium nucleus are very tightly bound to
each other, so if the large, excited nucleus is going to emit any of its protons or neutrons,
it is energetically favorable to do so in packets of alpha particles, rather than expending
energy breaking the alpha apart.
In this way, the number of protons inside the larger nucleus decreases by two, so the
electronic repulsion between the protons is reduced as well.
The alphas come out with a considerable amount of kinetic energy, several million electron
volts typically.
This made them convenient probes for Rutherford and Soddy when studying the structure of the
atom, investigations that led to the discovery of the nucleus.
Even though the nucleus can lower its energy by ejecting an alpha particle, the particles
within the alpha are still subject to the strong force, which acts like a barrier holding
the subatomic particles together within the nucleus.
This barrier is high enough that ordinarily one would not expect any alpha particles to
be able to leave the confines of the nucleus.
Since alpha particles have been observed exiting the nucleus, there must be a mechanism by
which they are able to leak out through this barrier.
Here, the bizarre phenomenon of quantum mechanical tunneling comes into play.
The strong force is so effective at holding the nucleus together that the alpha particle
has only one chance in one hundred trillion trillion trillion of escaping.
However, its small spatial uncertainty within the nucleus leads to a large momentum uncertainty,
and it rattles around inside the nucleus, striking the strong force barrier a billion
trillion times a second.
Consequently, if one waits several billion years, one will see an alpha quantum mechanically
tunnel outside of a nucleus.
Once beyond the range of the strong force, the alpha particle is propelled at a high
velocity by the same electrostatic repulsion that imparted energy to the fragments of a
fissioning uranium nucleus.
Several billion years is a long time.
So how are we able to see alphas emitted by radioactive isotopes without waiting so long?
The answer to this question leads to an understanding of the concept of a radioactive half-life,
and in turn elucidates how we know the age of the Earth.
First, a basic point about probability.
In a lottery involving the random drawing of three digits from zero zero zero to nine
nine nine, there are one thousand possible outcomes.
The lottery office draws the three digits at random.
So one day the winning number may be two seventy five, and the next it may be one thirty or
four seventy seven and so on.
If I purchase a ticket with one particular combination, say nine two seven, there is
thus one chance in a thousand that I will win the jackpot.
Some that I always play the same number nine two seven, I could win on the very first day.
It's possible, though there is only one chance in a thousand that I will.
It is conceivable that I may have to wait extremely long, much longer than a thousand
draws, before my one ticket matches the three numbers.
Certain combinations may appear as winning numbers many times before my particular ticket
pays off.
My track record playing the lottery provides direct empirical evidence of this phenomenon.
I therefore may need to play the game for a long time before my ticket matches that
day's winning numbers.
One important similarity between the lottery scenario and the decay of unstable nuclei
is that for both, the chance of an event occurring, either matching your ticket's numbers with
that day's drawings, or having the nucleus undergo a transition to a more stable configuration
with the release of radiation, is the same on any given day.
In a real standard lottery run by most states, there is no restriction on whether a given
set of numbers, from the predetermined pool of possible numbers, can be repeated before
all other possible combinations are drawn.
On any given day, one particular combination of numbers is as likely as any other.
Similarly, as the quantum mechanical transition to a lower energy configuration is a probabilistic
occurrence, the nucleus is as likely to decay on the first day, the one hundredth, and the
one hundredth, or the millionth.
There is no upper limit on how long the nucleus can exist in the excited state before radiating
back to the ground state.
If the nucleus is able to remain in this excited state for a long time, it is not due or expected
to radioactive decay, but is as likely to relax to the ground state on the millionth
day as on the first.
If one plays the lottery long enough, eventually every number that can occur will be drawn.
Similarly, if one waits long enough, every unstable nucleus will decay to a lower energy
state.
Depending on the nucleus of the nature of the unstable excited state it is in, the probability
of decay may be very high or very low.
In the lottery analogy, you may need to guess only one number from zero to nine in order
to win the jackpot, or you may need to match seven random two-digit numbers in precise order.
In the first case, one would not need to play the game very long before winning, while in
the second case it could take much longer than several lifetimes, if the lottery selected
fresh numbers every day, before a winning match is obtained.
Similarly, some elements on stable nuclei undergo radioactive decay within, on average,
a few days or months, while others may take several billion years.
However, in the first case, there is no reason any given nucleus could not remain on decayed
for a long time, while in the second situation there is no physical reason why any given
nucleus could not decay almost immediately.
It is possible to hit even a seven-digit lottery jackpot with your very first ticket, though
I should be so lucky.
If I start with a large number of radioactive atoms, then a plot of the number that avoid
decaying into some other isotope as a function of time follows what's termed an exponential
time dependence.
To understand this concept, imagine a car driving at 60 miles per hour that suddenly
slams on the brakes.
How long does it take the car to come to a complete stop?
If we assume that the brakes provide a constant deceleration of 10 miles per hour per second,
then in six seconds the car will come to a rest.
What if the brakes provided a deceleration that depends on how fast the car is moving
at any instant?
That is, when the car is moving very fast, the brakes provide a large force slowing
you down.
But if you were driving much more slowly in a parking lot, say, then the brakes would
provide a lower force.
If the deceleration is proportional to the velocity, then it turns out that the car never
comes to a full stop.
Well, for long times it may be moving so slowly that we could for all intents and purposes
say that it had stopped.
But if we were to measure the speed, we might find that it is very, very small, less than
one millionth of a mile per hour, for example, but never truly zero.
In the first case, that of a constant deceleration, the auto speed decreases linearly with time.
In the second situation, where the deceleration varies with the speed, initially the car slows
down dramatically as it is moving fast and that means the deceleration is large.
But as it goes slower and slower, the braking force decreases so that for long times it
is moving very slowly, but the brakes are exerting only a very weak force.
A plot of the car's speed against time would be a concave curve called an exponential decay
function.
While the slowing automobile with velocity-sensitive brakes is artificial, the reverse phenomenon,
exponential growth that leads to faster and faster increases, is more familiar, at least
for those who have watched their savings grow through compound interest.
The small amount deposited in the bank that earns a steady fixed interest rate compounded
continuously will show a small increase initially.
But as time progresses, both the original investment and the total interest earned will
be subject to the same interest rate, and the returns will soon become much larger as
your bank balance benefits from an exponential growth.
Just such an exponential dependence is found for the decay of tritium, an unstable isotope
of hydrogen.
Normally, hydrogen has one proton in its nucleus.
The neutrons participating in the strong force are needed in larger nuclei to overcome the
electrical repulsion between protons.
As hydrogen has only one proton in its nucleus, it is the only element that does not need
neutrons, though it is possible for neutrons to be present in the hydrogen nucleus.
In hydrogen, one electron is electrostatically bound in a quantum mechanical orbit to the
single proton in the nucleus.
As the chemical properties of an atom are determined by the number of electrons it possesses,
which in turn are set by the number of protons in its nucleus, one could form an alternative
form of hydrogen containing one proton and one electron, with an extra neutron in the
nucleus and it would behave for the most part like ordinary hydrogen.
We would call this isotope deuterium.
If there were two neutrons and one proton in the nucleus, about which one electron orbits,
this isotope is termed tritium.
A nucleus with two neutrons and two protons is called helium, or when ejected from a larger
unstable nucleus, an alpha particle.
As illustrated in figure 24, tritium is unstable and through a mechanism I describe in the
next chapter, decays to form an isotope of helium, along with a high speed electron,
a beta ray, like those in chapter 8 responsible for Dr. Manhattan's blue glow.
Figure 24 shows another page from Learn How Dagwood splits the atom, whereby the addition
of two neutrons to a hydrogen nucleus, that is a single proton, yields an unstable result.
One of the neutrons converts to a proton and another electron, through a mechanism governed
by the weak nuclear force, discussed in detail in the next chapter.
The decay of tritium is very fast, such that for a given nucleus, after only about 12 and
a half years, there is a 50-50 chance of the isotope decaying.
If the decay rate is so fast, why is there any tritium still around?
Because it is constantly being created, when high speed neutrons formed from cosmic rays
collide with nitrogen atoms in the atmosphere.
The now unstable nitrogen nuclei decay to form normal carbon and tritium.
The tritium generated in the upper atmosphere can be captured by oxygen atoms and forms
a version of heavy water.
Consider that aside from the heavier nucleus, tritium behaves chemically the same as normal
hydrogen.
This tritium-rich water reaches the ground in the form of raindrops.
Because we know the decay curve of tritium, comparisons of water from the surface of the
ocean to that obtained from greater depths, enable determinations of the cycling time
for oceanic circulation currents.
Ideally in order to measure the time dependence of the tritium decay, one would like to have
samples of rainwater from more than a hundred years ago to the present.
By measuring the fraction of tritium as a function of the age of the water, one could
verify the exponential time dependence of its decay.
The problem is that one does not have bottles of rainwater dating back more than a century.
In a 1954 paper in The Physical Review, Sheldon Kaufman and Willard F. Libby did the next best
thing and examined the tritium content of vintage wines.
As shown in figure 25, a plot of the tritium concentration per wine bottle as a function
of time, determined from the vintage label, shows that when measured in 1954, the tritium
concentration was very high in a 1951 Hermitage Rhone, but the concentration was dramatically
lower in a 1928 Chateau Lujac Bordeaux.
The full curve is very well described by an exponential time dependence.
Based on this curve, if in 1954 we wanted a wine with a tritium concentration half as
large as that in the 1951 Hermitage, we would decant a 1939 vintage, from which we conclude
that the half-life of tritium is 12.5 years.
Different radioactive nuclei have different decay rates.
All unstable nuclei have exponential decay functions, but the time scale over which the
decay occurs may be very different from minutes to billions of years.
For measurement of nuclei with short decay times, such as the tritium in wine bottles
example, we can confirm that the number of nuclei that decay does indeed follow an exponential
time dependence.
We assume that the physics of the nucleus does not change depending on which element
we are considering.
For those nuclei that have very low decay rates, so that the time to decay is very
long, we can nevertheless measure the initial portion of the exponential decay curve.
Mathematical fitting of this curve indicates when the decay function is expected to reach
the 50% point, and thus we can determine that the half-life of uranium, for example, is
several billion years, even though we have not sat in the lab for this length of time
to measure the full decay curve.
For a radioactive nucleus with a half-life of one year, then if I start with a million
atoms, after one year I will have approximately half a million remaining.
They will typically be fluctuations about this average number of half a million, as the
decays are probabilistic.
As the decay rate is independent of the age of the atom, then in the next year, 50% of
the remaining atoms will decay.
That is, from an initial number of one million, I will have approximately half a million after
one year, a quarter of a million after two years, 125,000 after three years, and so on.
Because the time necessary for one half of the initial population of nuclei to decay
is precisely known, we can use carbon dating to determine the age of archaeological artifacts.
Let's say we start with a million unstable isotopes of carbon.
Normally, carbon has six protons, and a corresponding six electrons in quantum mechanical orbits,
and six neutrons in its nucleus, and is as stable as anything we know of.
As there are 12 particles in its nucleus, this form of carbon is called carbon-12.
Occasionally collisions with cosmic rays lead to the creation, through a process that we
don't have to worry about now, of a form of carbon with six protons but eight neutrons
in its nucleus.
As it has the same number of protons and electrons as carbon-12, this heavier isotope
is chemically identical to normal carbon.
However, this form of carbon with eight neutrons, called carbon-14, is unstable and radioactively
decays into a form of beryllium.
The rare heavier carbon-14 is constantly being created by random collisions with cosmic rays,
and is constantly decaying away into another element.
About 97% of the carbon in the world is normal carbon-12, 3% is heavy unstable carbon-14,
this same ratio holds for the food weed, the clothes we wear, and pretty much everything
that contains carbon atoms.
Consequently, about 3% of the carbon in our bodies is this unstable heavier form.
The half-life for heavy carbon to decay to beryllium is about 5,400 years.
So normally we ingest heavy carbon by its random presence in the food weed, and we lose
heavy carbon through normal biological processes when we eliminate old cell material.
This process comes to a rather abrupt stop when we die.
The flux of cosmic rays on the earth's surface is low enough that we don't have to worry
about carbon-14 creation in our corpse.
At death, the amount of heavy carbon in our bodies, our skin, our tissues, and our bones
is fixed at about 3%.
A future archaeologist finding our skeletons measures the quantity of heavy carbon and
finds that it is only 1.5% of the amount of normal carbon-12.
She can then confidently state that we died approximately 5,400 years ago.
If the amount of heavy carbon is 0.75% of the normal carbon, then two half-lives must
have passed, and our death is placed at roughly 10,800 years in the past.
In this way, any material containing organic matter, whether it be ancient bones or their
shroud of torrent, can be dated from its last point of carbon intake.
Similarly, longer-lived isotopes such as Uranium-235 and Uranium-238 have half-lives
of billions of years.
These two forms of uranium were generated in a supernova explosion that created all the
atoms that went on to form the planets and moons in the solar system.
More on this later.
Assuming that initially they are created in equal concentrations, ascertaining their
half-lives through independent measurements, and seeing the fraction of Uranium-235 and
Uranium-238 present on the Earth today, we can calculate how long the Earth has been
around to give the Uranium isotopes a chance to decay to their present proportions.
The answer turns out to be about 4.5 billion years.
We thus know the age of the Earth through our understanding of quantum mechanics.
The same quantum physics that underlies the field of solid-state physics.
Without quantum mechanics, there would be no semiconductor revolution, and the nearly
countless electronic devices we employ would not be possible.
It is, of course, your right to believe that the Earth is actually much younger than its
age determined by radioactive isotope dating, but to be consistent, you should stop believing
in your cell phone, too.
Elements that emit gamma rays, alpha particles, or beta particles are radioactive, while materials
that are exposed to these nuclear ejections are described as irradiated.
As mentioned at the start of this chapter, science fiction films in the 1950s are described
through irradiation, the mutation of animals and people into giants, although occasionally
a miniaturization effect was possible.
What exactly are the real non-Hollywood movie effects of exposure to radiation?
Not all radioactivity is created equal, and some is more harmful than others.
The emission of radioactivity results when a nucleus makes a quantum transition from
a high energy state to a lower energy configuration.
Recall that the energy spacing between quantum states and the nucleus is on the order of
a million electron volts, while electronic states in an atom are on the order of a few
electron volts.
Electronic transitions involve energies in the ballpark of visible light, while the energy
scale of nuclear quantum jumps is much larger.
When the electrons in a neon atom make quantum transitions, they emit red light, which we
associate with neon signs.
When the neon atom's nucleus makes a transition, the energy is about a million times greater
and has the potential to do extensive damage.
We evolved in a sea of visible and ultraviolet light, and aside from a sunburn and the concomitant
long-term skin damage, this radiation does not harm us.
Light a million times more energetic is rare and we are not equipped to shrug off such
radiation.
If you were wandering around a nuclear weapon testing site, you would be exposed to the
fallout, radioactive isotopes that are created as the byproducts of the fission reaction.
A variety of secondary hazardous unstable nuclei can be generated depending on the nature
of the atomic blast.
They in turn emit radioactivity as they relax to lower energy states.
You would wish that the radioactivity present would be alpha particles, consisting of two
protons and two neutrons, rather than beta rays or high-speed electrons.
The energy in the form of kinetic energy of either the alpha particle or beta ray is about
a million electron volts.
The mathematical expression for kinetic energy is Ke equals one-half times mv squared, where
m is the mass of the object and v is its velocity.
Therefore, for a given kinetic energy, the larger the mass, the smaller the velocity.
Protons and neutrons have a mass roughly two thousand times larger than that of an electron,
where the alpha particle is nearly eight thousand times more massive than an electron.
Thus, if both an alpha particle and a beta particle have comparable energies, as they
both arise from nuclear quantum transitions, the alpha will be moving nearly ninety times
slower than the beta.
The slower a particle moves through matter, the more time it spends near each of the atoms
in the object, increasing the likelihood of its losing energy through collisions with
the electron surrounding each atom.
Lower alpha particles can be stopped by a single sheet of paper, and they almost never
penetrate a person's clothing, while it takes a quarter-inch thick sheet of aluminum to
stop much faster beta rays, and they can indeed get under your skin.
Gamma ray photons are high-energy light, several hundred times more energetic than x-rays,
and you would have to be exposed to the equivalent of twenty dental x-rays to receive the same
damage as a single dose of gamma rays inflicts.
As gamma rays are photons of light and uncharged, they do not interact directly with the electronic
charges in atoms, which makes them much harder to stop.
It takes about one half-inch to an inch of dense material such as lead to stop gammas,
and they will penetrate through an entire person.
Some nuclei, such as uranium-238, may also emit neutrons that in themselves are not harmful,
but when they collide with hydrogen atoms in the body, the resulting high-speed ricocheting
protons can be damaging.
By the time neutrons were discovered, the identity of nuclear radiation was better understood,
and the ray nomenclature was no longer employed.
If you are unfortunate enough to ingest an unstable nucleus so that it is inside you
when it undergoes radioactive decay, then even alpha particles can be deadly.
Rather than striking the dead skin cells on your epidermis, which you slough off naturally,
alpha particles inside you have a direct path to your internal organs.
In this case, the alpha particles prove to be very efficient in stripping electrons from
the atoms they strike, disrupting the chemical bonds within the cell and causing extensive
chromosomal damage.
In 2006, Russian journalist Alexander Litvinenko was murdered when he drank tea that was spiked
with Polonium 210.
This unstable nucleus has a half-life of just over 138 days, and emits high-energy alpha
particles when it decays.
A pound of Polonium 210 releases energy at the rate of nearly 64,000 watts.
Because its probability of radioactive decay is so high, even 0.05 micrograms of Polonium
210 is considered to be lethal.
It is believed that Litvinenko had 10 micrograms in his body at the time of death.
So alpha's on the outside, not too much of a problem.
On the inside, a rather big problem.
Which is probably why it was fortunate that Gilbert stopped marketing their U-238 Atomic
Energy Lab in 1952.
I mentioned in the last chapter that this kit contained a mini-cloud chamber.
Part of the radioactive elements supplied with this chamber was a small piece of potent,
though short-lived, radioactive Polonium 210.
Of course the fact that some forms of radiation can cause sufficient damage to kill the living
cells they impinge can be a good thing.
The cells in a piece of meat from the butcher are non-living, but the bacteria within the
meat that can cause Salmonella or other diseases are very much alive.
Exposure to radiation does no significant damage to the cells in the food that are already
dead, but can penetrate and kill the bacteria living in the food, thus making the food much
safer to eat.
The exposure to radiation does not convert the stable nuclei in the food's atoms into
unstable nuclei, and they will not in turn emit their own radioactivity.
A material that has been irradiated does not, with very few exceptions, itself become radioactive.
A lot of the harm of nuclear radiation is caused when either negatively charged beta
rays or positively charged alphas or gamma ray photons collide with atoms and cause them
to lose their electrons.
This process is called ionization, and when an atom loses some or all of its electrons,
its chemical properties can be radically changed.
Sometimes these changes are beneficial.
The earth is constantly being bombarded with cosmic rays, which are primarily, though not
exclusively, high-energy protons that come from sources as close as our sun and as distant
as other galaxies.
When these protons, a few of which have energies of a million trillion electron volts, strike
the atmosphere, they can generate a slew of other elementary particles moving near the
speed of light.
When some of these particles strike the DNA in our cells, they can cause ionizing damage
and alter the chemical properties of our genetic code.
If the affected DNA is in a sperm or egg cell, these changes may be passed along to offspring.
In this way, exposure to cosmic rays is a natural source of genetic mutation, leading
to biological modifications that can be harmful, but occasionally improve an organism's ability
to adapt to its environment.
But beneficial mutations that do not harm the original organism and lead to genetic alterations
that improve the offspring's reproductive success are extremely rare.
More commonly, chemical modifications induced by ionizing radiation can destroy cells themselves
or induce alterations in chromosomes or DNA.
This damage often leads to the formation of malignant cancerous tumors, quite different
from the runaway cell growth presented in science fiction movies, such as The Amazing
Colossal Man or The Attack of the Giant Leeches.
