Thought experiments and physics are pivotal for the generation of novel ideas, the dissolution
of old ones, or simply for an original take on specific phenomenons that already exist.
Given that fundamental physics has been stalled in the past few decades, primarily due to
a lack of data as well as other factors, and I'm trying to put forth my own theory of everything
and integrate it with consciousness, I thought, how far can I go with thought experiments?
James Robert Brown is a professor of philosophy, specializing in the philosophy of mathematics
and physics at the University of Toronto, and he was generous enough to give me a few
hours of his time.
He's written several books, which I recommend you check out, and we spoke yesterday, which
is what you'll see first, as well as at the end I'm going to append a sliver of a conversation
that me and him had about two years ago, but I never posted.
This is perhaps the deepest dive you'll see on YouTube on thought experiments, as well
as Platonism.
There's even a test to see whether or not you're a Platonist or non-Platonist or Newtonian
or Leibnizian, and they're in the timestamps.
Again, in these podcasts, I tend to not shy away from technical details, for one, because
I think when you sacrifice details, it's akin to sacrificing the truth, or at worst, giving
a false impression, as well as I think that the audience, that is, you, are extremely
smart and you can keep up.
Enjoy.
This is my first time.
All right, man.
Hello, Professor Brown.
How's it going?
It's going well.
And please call me Jim.
Okay.
Jim.
So Jim, what are you working on these days?
I'm working on the connection between mathematics and ethics.
There's some features of both that are already well known, for instance, our mathematical
knowledge and our ethical knowledge don't come from sensory experience.
Yeah, do you mind expounding?
Well, by sensory experience, I just mean sight, hearing, smell, taste.
You don't know that there are infinitely many prime numbers because you've gone out
and seen them.
Right.
You don't know that root two is an irrational number because you held up a ruler on a diagonal
square and got an irrational number.
Our mathematical knowledge is definitely not empirical, though it might be connected
to the empirical world in some indirect ways, but it's certainly not like the natural sciences
at all.
Well, what does that have to do with ethics?
Well, ethics is exactly the same.
So you could see one person kill another person.
That could be an empirical experience.
To judge it as an immoral act is not empirical.
Somebody pulls out a gun and shoots somebody else and a red light doesn't flash in the
corner of your eye saying, this was wicked.
This was wicked.
And how we acquire ethical knowledge and how we acquire mathematical knowledge are surprisingly
similar in a number of ways.
You mentioned before in one of your talks on YouTube about the distinction between thick
and thin concepts.
Do you mind delineating that for the audience?
Not at all.
This is a really interesting idea.
It's fairly new inside ethics.
So the idea of thin concepts are thin concepts can be anywhere.
They can be in the sciences in everyday life and in ethics.
So if I say the host is on fire, I'm using thin concepts.
If I say words like mass, color, taste, those are all thin concepts.
But they're from the factual realm.
And then in the ethical or evaluative realm are more thin concepts.
But they're just in a different realm.
So good, bad, beautiful, ugly obligation.
Those are thin concepts from ethics.
So the world, it seems like, is made up of thin concepts, summer in the factual realm,
summer in the normative, evaluative ethical realm.
Now then a few years ago, people began to focus on a number of words that we use in
daily life and they seem to be really important in how we treat things and how we reason.
And these words are called thick.
And that's because they're simultaneously fact type terms and evaluative terms.
So if I say, Kurt, you're very healthy.
That's actually, I'm saying two things.
I'm talking about your health in a factual sense.
Your blood pressure is 120 over 80, all right?
For instance.
But I'm saying more than that when I say you're healthy.
I'm saying, and it's a good state that you're in.
So there's an evaluative component as well as a factual component when I say you're healthy.
What's another example beside, OK.
Yeah, I'll give you lots more.
Brave, courageous, OK?
Courageous, if I say Mary was courageous, that includes a kind of factual component,
especially if we've just seen Mary run into a burning house and save the family's pet dog.
OK, so she's pulled it out.
So there's a straightforward factual component to that about Mary's action.
OK, but there's also an evaluative component.
Like what she did was a good thing.
It's good to be brave.
Well done, Mary.
We're really proud of you.
So brave is different.
It's thick.
Brave is thick.
Now, some people say you don't need thick concepts.
They're very convenient.
Well, you don't need them because I could say this.
Mary ran into the house.
She brought out the family dog.
And here comes the evaluative.
And what she did was good.
Or I can just sort of summarize it.
Mary was very brave.
And the word brave, courageous, those sort of terms, those are thick concepts.
And we use them a lot.
And we reason with them a lot.
Something is, and once you get the feeling, you can find them all over the place.
Why is the word good not a thick concept?
Because it's just thin.
It's just pure evaluation.
It doesn't tell you anything factual.
It doesn't tell you anything factual.
That's why it's thin evaluative.
And if I say, Mary entered the burning house,
that doesn't tell you anything evaluative.
It just gives you a factual description of something that happened.
But once you get the hang of it, you see all sorts of terms are thick.
Loyal, liar, dastardly, untrustworthy.
If I say, Kurt, you're very untrustworthy.
I'm suggesting that you cheated me on something,
or you've lied to other people or something like that.
And it's a bad thing.
So you see how it's a thick term.
Right.
Does it always go to good or bad on that one line spectrum?
No, if we were in the artistic realm, it might be rather than good or bad.
It might be beautiful, ugly, something like that.
But you can see the evaluative term from the one realm
and the straightforward factual.
So if I describe a picture like, well, there's a little bit of red here
and there's some blue there, that's the sort of...
You just read the RGB values.
That's a thin description of the painting from a factual point of view.
And then if I want to say, it's spectacularly beautiful,
or it's charming, sorry, charming would be a thick concept.
It's beautiful, just plain beautiful.
Okay, that would be a thin concept.
And if I say it's charming, it's evocative
and suggesting a combination of things that are both factual
and evaluative simultaneously.
Those are the thick ones.
Okay, so why am I interested in that?
Because that's what I just told you is sort of...
Right, and how does that relate to mathematics?
Exactly, okay, that's the important question.
So I've been thinking about...
By the way, thick concepts in ethics, that's commonplace, okay?
And everyone in ethics knows about thick thin
and the standard views about them.
Okay, when I was thinking about ethics and math,
I'm looking for all kinds of connections between ethics and math,
not just the one about neither of them are empirical, okay?
Our knowledge isn't empirical in either case.
What are the other connections?
Well, one of them might be an inside math and physics,
a kind of thick concept.
So I don't want to talk about facts and values now.
I'm just using this as an analogy.
So there can be math and there can be physics.
Pure math, okay?
You understand pure math is just nothing but set theory.
And pure physics has got nothing mathematical about it.
And the way math gets applied is math provides models
for the physical realm.
This, what I just said is slightly contentious.
It's probably a majority opinion,
but there are lots of people who would dispute it.
Let's just stick with the majority opinion for now.
Math provides models of the world.
And what a physicist will do is look at the range of models
in Plato's heaven and say,
I think this one is structurally very similar
to the physical realm, okay?
And we apply math in that sort of way.
Now, that would be thin.
Pure math is just thin.
Those are nothing but thin concepts.
Pure physics without any math in it,
nothing but pure physical concepts.
Could there be a thick concept
that somehow or other involves both?
Not just modeling.
Modeling by itself isn't going to do it.
A thick concept would be a kind of really intimate intertwining
of the two.
And I was sort of vaguely thinking about this
and I came across a wonderful quote
in a famous calculus book.
The book for any mathematicians who are watching,
they'll know the book.
It's by Spivak.
It's just called calculus.
Did you take physics and math?
Yeah.
Do you know the book I'm talking about?
Yeah, it's a famous book.
It's first year.
157, Matt 157.
Ah, okay.
But it's a wonderful, it's a wonderful book.
And the second book is also great.
It's like a Dirac book where it's tiny.
Oh, yeah.
Because the book is large
and then the second book on manifold.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, you're right.
You're absolutely right.
It's like two pages long
to have you hold semester to get through that.
Well, one page of exposition followed by 10 pages
of gut wrenching problems that are so hard to solve.
Okay.
So anyway, there was this wonderful passage
in the calculus book.
So he's just doing elementary stuff
and he's teaching derivatives.
First derivative, second derivative.
And he says, all of this stuff is really important,
especially the second derivative.
Why?
Well, think about Newton's law.
F equals MA, acceleration is the second derivative.
Okay, we got that.
Then he says, next time you're in a car
and you go around a corner,
you can feel the second derivative.
You think about that.
No, no, I feel the acceleration, right.
And it's modeled.
I don't feel a second derivative.
Come on, I don't feel a second derivative.
Don't be ridiculous.
Nobody can feel a second derivative.
It exists in Plato's heaven.
You can't smell an infinite series.
You can't taste a tangent plane
and you can't feel the second derivative, right?
That's what you should say.
And the more I thought about it,
I thought, I wonder if people who work with,
well, with math in general,
physicists and engineers in particular
who maybe have to do problems of motion
where acceleration is important
and they get so used to treating physical acceleration.
Think of the acceleration as an actual physical process
and attaching it to the second derivative to calculate.
It's become so internalized with them
that acceleration and second derivative
becomes a single concept.
It's just a fused concept.
This would be an example of a thick concept.
And I got talking to some physicists friends about this
and they're, now they don't exactly understand
and appreciate what I'm trying to get at,
but there's enough of an understanding
that they could sort of agree that some parts of math,
not all, but some parts of math that they use,
they've so internalized that to utter the math
or to utter the math less physical description,
they're just so intertwined.
It's become one single thing.
What else besides acceleration is there for math?
Well, this would be hard.
Cause I don't want to say it's all the time
cause I wouldn't want to say that someone in quantum mechanics
who thinks about the state of the system
just flips over to a Hilbert space,
which is how we represent states in quantum mechanics
and just thinks of them interchangeably.
It's a possible candidate
because we do use the same notation for both.
We just use a simple side function
for the vector in the Hilbert space
or for the state meaning the physical property
of a quantum mechanical system.
That's a candidate,
but I'd be reluctant to say that's thick.
Maybe an example is a very old example, a good example.
And that's real numbers and points on a line.
So you have a line, just say the unit interval.
And we just attach all the real numbers between zero and one.
And we think of a real number
and a point as the same thing, just back and forth.
And once you, it's, well,
it's the whole basis of analytic geometry.
Ever since Descartes said it was 400 years ago
when he just said real numbers and points on a line
or pairs of numbers and points in the plane and so on.
We just, they're just completely interchangeable.
Right, and you're saying that that's a thick concept
because the word line implies space?
Not line, let's say point.
Point and number, point and number,
they become almost a single concept.
Now we can separate them.
Okay, I can ask you to separate in your mind
and you can do that, but they're so interchangeable.
In fact, they're so interchangeable that Girdel
in a famous article called,
What is Cantor's Continuum Hypothesis?
Starts out, he says the continuum hypothesis
is the question, how many real numbers are there
or equivalently, how many points are there on a line?
It just takes them to be the same issue.
And that's surprising for a logician who is,
you know, super, super careful about making distinctions
when he thinks it's appropriate.
Okay, so what's the significance of this?
Why are you spending your time thinking about this?
I think it's intrinsically interesting,
but for me, it can, it might actually do some work.
You know, the continuum hypothesis,
this is the claim that the first uncountable infinity
is aleph one, and it might be, and then the claim is
that it is the real numbers.
The real numbers have size aleph one.
The natural numbers are, it's infinitely many,
but there's only aleph zero of them.
The real numbers are a bigger infinity,
and the conjecture is that they're the next biggest
infinity, so they'd be aleph one.
No one's been able to prove the continuum hypothesis
or refute it, and in fact, there's an independence proof,
meaning you can't prove it and you can't refute it
on the basis of existing axioms of sept theory.
Right.
And if you think that the existing axioms of sept theory
are adequate for the whole of mathematics,
what that really means is the continuum hypothesis
is independent of all of mathematics.
Right, right.
And you can know everything in math,
you still wouldn't know the continuum hypothesis.
So it's, you could just arbitrarily make it a new axiom
that would solve the problem,
but it would be very unsatisfying,
because why are you doing that
rather than making its negation the new axiom?
So we're looking around for what you might call
independent evidence for the continuum hypothesis
one way or the other, what might work?
Well, maybe physical analogies would work,
you just sort of think about it, you're not gonna prove it,
you're not gonna have any old fashioned proof,
but you might have some other kind of argument.
If you are a realist or a mathematical Platonist,
you're gonna say, it is true or it is false,
I just don't know which.
Okay, now question, how much detail do you want?
Oh, that's fine, well, let's go in more.
I know Girdle was a Platonist
and he believed it's either-
Girdle was a Platonist, yeah, yeah.
I think that he proved that it's,
I don't recall if it's both either the negation
or the positive affirmation of the continuum hypothesis.
He showed that it's consistent,
it's consistent with the rest of step three.
Yeah, you can add it and you won't get into trouble.
Right.
And it was later Cohen showed that you can add the negation
and you won't get into trouble.
And the two results together give you independence.
The audience will keep up,
get into as much detail as you like.
Let's go into a disproof of the continuum hypothesis.
Okay.
You'll have to be hand wavy
because we don't have papers and pens.
That's right.
Powerpoint slides.
This is a result a number of years ago
from Chris Freiling, an American logician.
And it's wonderfully clever.
And it's a refutation of the continuum hypothesis.
Okay.
So as you say, it'll be a bit hand wavy.
So for those with a math education,
they will know what,
oh, I'm going to start out with what's called
Zermelo-Franco set theory,
including the axiom of choice.
Okay.
Now, with the axiom of choice,
we can prove what's known as the well ordering theorem,
which means that you take any set whatsoever
and you can give it a well ordering.
And that's to,
and that means you can line it up with the ordinal numbers.
So one, two, three, four, five,
and then omega, which is now the first infinite ordinal.
And then you keep counting ordinals, ordinals, ordinals.
And then when you get all of the countable ordinals done,
you get into the uncountable ordinals.
This is, this will sound like a mystical nonsense
unless you've taken a course in set theory
and learned about the hierarchy of infinite sets.
So anyway, the well ordering theorem says
that you can put any set,
including the real numbers between zero and one,
you can line them up with this infinite string of ordinals.
Now they won't go in the same order
as the natural less than order.
They'll be jumping all over the place.
You know, like one half might be associated.
It's not an intuitive ordering.
It's not like we have any apprehension of it.
No.
The theorem just guarantees it.
Yeah, I think the well ordering theorem guarantees
that it exists, but nobody has any idea
of what a well ordering of the real numbers will be.
No one's found one yet.
We've got well orderings of the rational numbers
and they're pretty straightforward,
but not of the real numbers.
So, and-
And technically the well ordering theorem says
that the subset, that any subset is well ordered.
It says that any subset has a first element.
Right.
Right.
Just to see that the ordinary ordering
is not a well ordering.
If I say, take all the real numbers greater than one half.
Sorry, can you repeat that just to say that what?
Take the real numbers.
Yep.
Greater than one half.
What's the first element?
Right, right, right.
Greater than is not including one half.
Doesn't have.
Yeah, that's right.
It doesn't have a first element.
So that's just not a well ordering.
But with some other bizarre ordering,
I might take them, any subset,
and it would have to be a first element.
Okay, so we imagine that we've got a well ordering
of the real numbers, just between zero and one.
That'll do.
Okay, now comes a little statistical argument.
You and I are gonna throw darts.
We're gonna throw darts at the real line between zero and one.
It's a thought experiment.
Can't do it in reality, but a thought experiment.
I throw a dart and I get a number P,
somewhere between zero and one.
You throw your dart and you get a number Q,
also on the line between zero and one.
Now I'm gonna make the following argument.
Your dart hit the number Q,
which is going to be later in the well ordering
than my dart P.
Why?
Because there's only a countable infinity at most
of numbers earlier in the well ordering from P.
And an uncountable infinity after.
And so that you might be earlier than me,
but the probability is zero.
Right, right, right.
And your dart, you've hit number Q
and you can say exactly the same argument.
You're gonna say the chance that I'm earlier
in the well ordering is zero.
And the chance that it's later is one.
Now we've got an absurdity.
Because I've said you've gotta be later
than me and you argued correctly
that I've gotta be later than you.
Right, I have different points.
Yeah, and now we've just got an absurdity.
And what led to this absurdity?
The assumption that there are ALIF one real numbers.
If there were ALIF two, it wouldn't be a problem.
Okay, why is that?
Because I might have landed in an uncountable,
there might be an uncountable number of points
earlier than me and an uncountable earlier than you.
So we couldn't argue.
We wouldn't be able to do that.
The trick is when you've got a countable infinity
of numbers, and here comes the result
from what's known as measure theory.
The chance of landing in there is zero.
It's not impossible, but it's zero probability.
Right, and that's interesting for people
to wrap their head around that you can have
a zero probability if possible.
That's right, it's not the same as impossible.
Okay, if anyone, just to take a slight tangent,
anyone who finds that absurd, think of a roulette wheel
with every real number between zero and one on it.
You spin the wheel and it's gonna stop somewhere.
What's the chance it's gonna land on, say, one half?
Well, there's infinitely many places that could stop.
So the chance is one out of infinity,
which is going to be zero.
It can happen, but it's gonna be zero probability.
Okay, so you and I now have this little,
we've each got this little argument,
and we each show that the other guy is impossible.
And this is absurd, and the assumption,
the background assumption that led to this,
that the continuum hypothesis is true, is in trouble.
Gotta throw it out, okay?
All right, now, this is really interesting.
I mean, it could be an argument that settles
the continuum hypothesis, but it's not approved
for any ordinary mathematical sense.
It's really different.
Mathematicians who look at this are,
whoa, they're very queasy.
They don't like this kind of reasoning.
They don't mind suggestive reasoning
that's outside of mathematics,
but they don't wanna take it as real evidence
that this could be a theorem, a real genuine,
sure to be true result, very uneasy about it.
And I'm uneasy about it.
I'm also curious as how it works.
I mean, I know how I can reproduce the proof.
I know how it works in that sense,
but why the hell does it work?
It shouldn't work.
And then-
As in, what is its connection to reality?
How is it that we can think this and it's true?
Is that what you mean by how it works?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's behind it all for sure.
But in particular, there are assumptions made
for this little argument to go.
And here are some of the assumptions.
First of all, the real numbers
and the points on the line correspond, okay?
So the geometric line between zero and one
and the uncountable infinity between zero
and one real numbers, they're exactly the same.
They pair up-
Ah, ah, yeah, okay.
It's an obvious assumption to make,
given the long history of analytic geometry,
but I just wanna make sure it's there.
Second thing, when you threw a dart
and I threw a dart,
each of us hits a point at random.
The chance of hitting any point along the line
is no different than any other point, okay?
It's equi-probability for every point, okay?
That's true for my dart, also true for your dart.
There is a symmetry between our throws
in the sense that it doesn't matter
if you throw first and I throw second
or I throw first and you throw second
or if we throw simultaneously, it's irrelevant.
And finally, independence.
Your result has no effect on my result, vice versa.
Okay.
Now, when you think of all of those assumptions,
these are crucial assumptions.
Things like probability can be captured
completely inside set theory.
Independence can be captured
and completely inside set theory.
The symmetry of the two throws
can be captured completely inside symmetry.
How come the damn argument works?
Because if I try to spell out the probability
of my little argument or the symmetry of the independence,
I tried to spell it out in standard mathematics
and could get that result,
then something would have gone terribly wrong.
I can't get that result from ordinary mathematics.
So the probability in my argument,
the independence in the argument,
the symmetry in the argument can't be
the probability, symmetry and independence
of standard mathematics.
Something else, something weird's going on.
It must be a related but a different concept in each case.
What do you think is going on?
I think it's a thick concept.
I think probability as we normally use it is a thin concept,
a thin mathematical concept.
I think in the Dart thought experiment,
to refute the continuity of my hypothesis,
I think probability has taken on a new richness.
In the example, it's become physicalized in some sense.
And so here's where I'm looking at the analogy with ethics.
Instead of a thin concept from mathematics
or a thin concept from physics,
I've got a thick, this is thick probability.
It's got both physical and mathematical aspects to it.
Like courageous is both.
In set theory, we can formalize probability.
Yeah.
So what's thick about this?
Just throwing the Dart,
but we can not use the Dart and say
we pick a point at random.
And there's obviously random variables
which have nothing to do with darts.
So what's thick?
I don't hear what's thick about this.
I don't know.
Maybe I'm thick.
You gotta help me out.
No, no, not at all.
The thickness will come in,
the way the thought experiment is done,
you're supposed to imagine yourself
throwing a Dart at an actual line.
Try to make it physical.
Even if you think it's mathematical,
it's outside of set theories.
Why do you have to imagine that?
Why can't you just say pick a point at random
instead of throwing a Dart?
Is there a difference?
Well, the Dart is supposed to be a guarantee
that it's genuinely at random.
If I asked you to pick a real number
between zero and one at random,
I'm almost certain you couldn't do it.
I know, I know.
What I'm saying is that you can formalize
what it means to pick a number from zero to one randomly
in statistics,
independent of saying throw a Dart.
And you can formalize it with set theory, no?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's true, that's certainly true.
The thing is, well, here's what I'm faced with
and you're faced with.
If we assume that the argument works,
the fridling argument works as a reputant,
we assume it works.
And it does seem to make these crucial assumptions.
Well, it assumes Zermelo-Franco set theory with choice, okay?
And then it assumes the randomness of the Dart throw,
the symmetry of the Dart throw,
the independence of the Dart throw
and the correspondence between real numbers
and points on a line.
It assumes that if all of that is just part of mathematics,
existing mathematics,
then we would have derived a refutation
of the continuum hypothesis inside.
Right, right, right.
And that's already something.
It wouldn't have been independent after all.
Since it is independent, demonstrably independent,
one of those premises has to be false.
I see, I see.
And so if I just say, well, let's take the randomness one.
I don't know which one is false.
At least one of them has got to be false.
So the randomness one is false.
There must be the randomness that we're assuming
in the thought experiment cannot be analyzed
in normal set theory terms.
It's got to have some kind of physical component
that enriches it so that we can pull off this argument.
So that's where, this is where the thick concepts come in.
I see, I see.
So it becomes not ordinary randomness in standard math.
It's becomes a thick randomness.
It's got a physical, it's become physicalized
in some important sense.
Now you say physicalized with the grimace.
Is that because there is your Platonist
and you feel like, well, if it's not a thin mathematical,
by the way, is there a connection between thin
and thick and Platonism and non-Platonism?
I don't know.
Most of the people who talk about thick and thin in ethics,
what they are, they often conclude
that this is the end of the fact value distinction.
So if you think of facts as part of the physical realm
and if you were a Platonist about ethics
and they're declaring the end of this dichotomy
between moral reality and physical reality,
then I'm not sure about the status of moral reality
when it's all over.
I would like to think it's still there
and these are a kind of hybrid human-made concepts,
both in ethics and in math.
So I was to say that you would like to believe
that morals are a part of the Platonistic world
or morals are a part of the moral world?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I'm a moral realist.
Yeah, for me, there's, I hate the distinction
between fact and value because it makes it sound like
values aren't themselves facts, but they are.
They're moral facts.
Murder is wrong, that's a moral fact.
Setting kittens on fire for pleasure to watch them burn
and suffer, it's a moral fact that that's wrong.
How do we get that moral fact?
Where does that moral fact come from?
Okay, now this gets back to the problem,
a simultaneous problem for both ethics and for mathematics.
So most Platonists believe not only in the reality
of mathematics and if you're a Platonist about ethics
or a moral realist, you believe in objective moral facts.
The big problem and the thing that people who are empiricists
and naturalists complain about is you have no access
to these facts, even if they did exist
because you can see, smell, touch and so on.
But if these live in a realm completely separate from us,
you have no contact with them,
you couldn't learn about them and so on and so on.
The response from a moral realist Platonist
is to appeal to intuition.
An intuition is a cognitive capacity that we have
that will give us knowledge.
So to take math, we have, everybody has, you know,
scads of moral intuitions about math.
Even if you had almost no mathematical training,
you have a powerful intuition that two plus two equals four.
And that's a moral intuition?
Sorry, no, a mathematical intuition
that two plus two equals four.
And if I pressed you and I said,
oh, look, I just read in the newspaper today
that in Brazil, some wonderful physicists in Brazil
have just done some fine tune measurements
and they have discovered that two plus two
actually equals 3.95.
It doesn't equal four after all.
Right, this is actually germane
because there was a recent controversy
about two plus two equals five.
I don't know if you've heard of it.
No.
Okay.
So I take it that one side
we can talk about that afterwards.
No, no, no, the other side was being serious.
It was because they were saying that the way that math
is set up is Western and it's not taking into account
other modes of knowing and there are possible worlds
where two plus two could equal five
and in different interpretations, which it's true.
I mean, if you have modulo something,
I'm sure you can make two plus two equal five
or you round out.
Oh, sure, you can have modulo, you're absolutely right.
But it doesn't mean like standard interpretation.
And there's probably good rules of thumb
in some sciences where you're now not talking two plus two.
You're talking about two some things and two some things.
So if you're talking about, what is it?
Water, a liter of water mixed with a liter of alcohol,
perhaps doesn't give you two liters of liquid.
It gives you something like 1.9 liters of liquid
because of the, you know, some atomic goings on
reduces the volume of the whole thing.
You might conveniently talk that way
because you're in the lab and it's very constrained.
But no, two plus two equals four.
And more generally, you know, a little bit of arithmetic
and I can become abstract and I can say any number M
and any number N, if I add them together, M plus N,
it's going to equal N plus M.
And everybody, they think about that for a minute and a half
and say, yeah, yeah, right, I see it.
Yes, it's true and it has to be true.
That's an example of a mathematical intuition.
Okay.
Okay.
It's not empirical though.
Math and ethics have been the two thorns
in the side of empiricism.
Okay, I'm gonna play devil's advocate just for a second
because I'm trying to wrap my head around this.
When you have N plus, when you have like A plus B
equals B plus A just so that it's clear for,
do we not define that with the addition being commutative?
Like you, and then we make a model
and say that our numbers correspond to it.
We do, but people's elementary experience
with arithmetic would lead them in that very direction.
Okay.
If they've done enough adding, they've been making change.
They've been counting pebbles.
Who knows what?
And after a while, they come to realize that
whether they've been told that the commuter...
Okay.
You're strictly speaking about the intuition behind it,
not proving it to be true.
That's right.
Because to the audience...
He's proving it to be true.
That's really interesting.
We actually assume it in the way that we define addition
and multiplication, that they're commutative.
Doing arithmetic in any formal sense,
we typically start out with something known
as the piano axioms.
Okay.
And they tell us how to add, how to multiply,
and they give us a principle called mathematical induction.
And then everything in arithmetic follows.
Well, I need to qualify for that.
Almost everything in arithmetic follows.
There is a problem about completeness,
but never mind that.
And everybody's intuition,
if you've been playing with arithmetic for a while,
you'd say, yeah, this is the truth.
This is how addition works.
This is how multiplication works.
Okay, let's not get hung up on it.
Let's assume that we have an intuition.
That's a strong intuition and we prove it.
Those are examples of intuitions.
Now, we have the same thing in ethics.
So if you saw somebody,
if you saw some teenage kids catch a kitten,
pour gasoline on it, set it on fire,
you would be aghast, you would be morally outraged.
You have a very strong moral intuition
that that was an evil thing to do.
But those kids don't.
They might.
They might, and they are just overwhelmed
by peer pressure and gang behavior and stuff like that.
And then you're right, they might not even...
Now, let's imagine they might not.
Let's take the edge case.
The which?
The edge cases, just to investigate this.
So what if they genuinely don't have anything wrong with that?
Like Genghis Khan, for example, said,
the best life would be conquering his enemies
and enslaving their women.
And now we look at that and say that that's ridiculous.
But let's believe him,
that that actually invoked pleasure in him
and he thought that was morally correct.
Okay, well, I don't know enough about him
to know exactly what's going on.
So I'll give you the short answer
and that is we've made a hell of a lot of moral progress
since that announcement.
Right, how do we make the claim
that we've made moral progress
without already assuming what we're trying to prove?
That's a very difficult,
that's an extremely difficult question.
I don't want to say, well,
my views have won over the long run, though they have.
Like my view is we shouldn't have slavery.
And almost everybody agrees with that now.
My view is that women should be treated equally with men.
And most people agree with that now,
that they wouldn't have a century ago.
My view is that gays and lesbians and so on
should be treated with equal rights and dignity
and so on and so on.
And I'd say at least a strong majority of Canadians,
if not a strong majority of the world population
agree with that.
So I don't have a hard and fast non-circular argument.
I can say that as people think about these things over time,
they tend to change their views in the direction
that we have come.
Not many people were against slavery for years and years
and then had an epiphany and said,
I made a terrible mistake.
I think we should have slaves.
I think that'd be a great idea.
People don't go in that direction.
Let me press for a bit.
I actually agree with you, but here's what I'm thinking.
Here's what pops into my head.
So social consensus, what is required
and what if 10 years from now,
you know there's some evidence that people
who are on the lower end of the IQ spectrum
have more children.
Let's just imagine that many people
and we can even demean them and say conservatives.
Let's say we're left to imagine that we're
We're oppressive liberals.
I'm not saying we are,
but let's say these foolish reactionary conservatives
are the ones that populate the earth
and then they like its slavery later
and the majority of the earth likes slavery,
except those who are enslaved, but they're a minority.
Does that make that correct?
No.
Okay.
No, no, no.
There is something else, so what's going on?
Okay, so there's two questions.
Is there such a thing as objective right or wrong?
Yes.
I mean, correct.
Is there an objective shape of the earth?
Yes.
I think it's round.
It's spherical.
And I think we've got a ton of evidence that this is so.
But if for some reason in the future,
people said, no, we're pretty sure it's flat.
And then I would say, well,
I pity that future civilization.
They've got it wrong.
It made a terrible mistake.
That's straight factual stuff.
Okay, morally, if people actually said,
well, we think slavery is a pretty good idea.
I'd say, no, I would say they'd made a terrible,
terrible mistake, but I acknowledge the possibility
that it could happen.
Germany was a very progressive country
in the 19th and very early 20th century.
And then by the time, horrible calamities in the 30s,
Hitler comes to power and a majority of Germans
are willing to go along with some pretty horrific
news.
Yeah, they're just wrong.
They're just wrong.
Okay, we can talk about that another time.
But basically my argument was this,
well, first of all, I wanna make it clear
to the people who are watching that,
I don't think low IQ people are conservative.
I was just straw manning for the sake of argument.
Okay, second, I thought that what you were suggesting
was given that we have a line toward something
that over time people believe in a certain value,
that's evidence that the value is objectively correct.
And then I was saying, well, what if that reverses
or we go into another direction?
And then you're saying, no, that's wrong.
But how does that not jive with saying
that there's societal movement towards a certain direction?
And that corresponds to being objectively correct morally.
No, no, this is a very good question
and it's very hard to answer.
I don't have a terrific answer.
I only have a weak answer.
And my weak answer is that it's like science.
We make progress in science.
It's possible that what we believe today
about let's say quantum mechanics and relativity,
100 years from now people will say, I don't know.
Let's go back to Newton.
Let's believe Newton, okay?
I think the chances of that are minuscule.
And the thing is that there's been incremental evidence,
it's fallible evidence,
but incremental evidence all along pushes people upward.
It makes us brighter, we know more,
we're more sophisticated in physics.
And I think something like that goes on
in our moral and political lives too.
Interesting, okay.
Now with regards to Newtonian physics
becoming relativity and then, okay.
We say that one is more correct
because it can explain more.
So it's just-
That's evidence.
That's evidence.
Is pure explanatory power what makes the theory correct?
And the reason why I say that is-
No, no, explanatory power is a sign,
is evidence that it's correct.
I see.
Okay.
It is, this much is logically possible
for anyone who's a realist
that all the evidence could point away from the truth.
Everything that we count is evidence.
Like, is it explanatory powerful?
Yeah.
Does it, is it incredibly accurate?
You know, does it make spectacular predictions
to the 25th decimal place?
Yeah, might do that too.
And yet in spite of all of this, it might be false.
What are your views on free will by the way?
Do you believe in it?
Yes.
Oh, interesting.
Okay, now are you like Daniel Dennett
where you say, well, I have a compatibilist view?
No, I have, here I feel completely at sea.
I speculate away.
I operate, I live my life as if I have free will.
I eat too much and I blame myself.
I blame by willpower.
And while it would be very nice to blame something else,
I can't, I just blame myself.
I get angry at others.
I get angry.
I mean, some people I think can't help what they believe.
Others I think have gone out of their way
to make themselves stupid and I blame them for that.
So I'm happy to blame people for not doing
what I think they ought to do.
And I do think they have free will.
I don't know how to live in a world
where we really don't have free will.
But I may have, I may be just highly,
that's not an argument for free will.
That's just an argument for we have to live
as if there is free will.
I don't know how really to live otherwise.
Now, I've seen some people who are very sophisticated,
talk about this subject and maybe they'll be able
to persuade me in the long run
that we don't have free will
or there's a very good chance we don't have any free will.
But we should, we can act like this and this
and this and this and so on.
So I really, I have childish, immature,
underdeveloped views about free will.
The standard view that's opposed to free will is,
well, what caused you to make so-and-so decision
and then it's your neurology.
Okay, well, what caused that?
And you keep going until you get to a cause.
That's not you.
So you just get along that chain of causes.
Right, right.
Where does that chain of reductionism,
because we just talked about physics
being extremely powerful and more and more accurate
and there doesn't seem to be room for free will.
So where does free will comport with our view of physics
in the way that it's formalized currently?
No, it's terrible, but it doesn't have to be quite as crude
as you just put it.
Here's another issue in which I do not have strong views,
but it's sort of in the background.
And this is the difference between,
this is the issue of reductionism and emergence.
So if you have a complete reductionist view
and your world is deterministic,
it's very hard to make room for free will.
But if you have an emergentist view,
that is, yeah, physics is at the bottom,
but in a certain level of complexity,
there could emerge biological laws.
Like strong emergence.
Yeah, and out of that could emerge psychological laws
and so on.
And free will would be something that is emerging
at some higher level.
It's not gonna emerge out of elementary particle physics.
I mean, sometimes people try to do that
because they take quantum indeterminacy to be,
you know, it's just stupid.
It's just really bad arguments.
But if we did have some kind of emergence,
you might have free will.
Right.
But again, I can't make up my mind on that either.
Okay, yeah.
Where I was gonna go is,
there's no evidence for strong emergence,
but there's plenty of evidence for reductionism.
Like there's no link in the chain that's broken
in the reductionist account as far as we could tell.
So then to believe that we have free will,
and I'm not suggesting that I don't believe,
I'm just throwing something out.
So to believe that we have free will
seems to be counter to evidence.
So how do you jive with saying that I'm a person
who goes wherever the evidence leads me,
but simultaneously saying that I'm someone
who believes in free will?
And when I say go wherever the evidence believes,
sorry, that I'm a person who goes wherever
the evidence leads, I mean,
evidence in terms of scientific evidence,
because obviously you can be a spiritualist
and say, well, I have the intuitions.
You might appeal to intuitions,
but I'm curious.
So what do you say to that?
Well, I do.
I do count myself as somebody who's led by the evidence.
Scientific evidence.
On the other hand, I don't agree with you about,
there's no gaps in the going from us to elementary particles.
I mean, try to imagine accounting for Donald Trump's election
in terms of writing down the Schrodinger equation
for the population of the world and then solving it
and getting out that Donald Trump is president.
What I meant was that so far,
there's no link that's been shown to be false.
That doesn't mean that there is.
No, no, no, I completely agree with you.
So there's no evidence for it.
Anyway, it would be very reliable.
That would be like religious people who argue
for the God of the gaps.
God fills in the gaps in our scientific knowledge.
Yeah, it's a foolish way of doing it.
Let's talk about Platonism.
Do you mind defining for the audience what Platonism is?
Sure.
Modern Platonism, as opposed to being a strict follower
of Plato, modern Platonism is simply the view
that there are abstract entities,
numbers being the most obvious example of this.
That they exist in some way, shape or form?
Yep, they're real.
They exist and there are facts about them
like two plus two equals four.
There are infinitely many prime numbers and so on.
And these objects and these facts
are completely independent from intelligent creatures.
So even if no intelligent life existed anywhere
in the universe, it would still be true
that there are infinitely many prime numbers.
If you believe that, you're a Platonist.
In fact, there's a little litmus test
for audience members who've never thought about it before.
Ask yourself, do you think mathematicians discover
new truths of mathematics
or do they somehow invent or create them?
Shakespeare created Hamlet.
If Shakespeare or no intelligent being had ever existed,
Hamlet would not exist.
On the other hand, the spherical shape of the earth
would still be a fact,
even if no intelligent being had ever existed.
I say math is more like the shape of the earth
and less like Hamlet.
That's what it is to be a mathematical realist
or a Platonist.
When you say, something that just popped into my head
was the infinite monkeys on the typewriter
and then you can make an analogy
between Shakespeare and information.
So just say the works of Shakespeare
is just one extremely large number
given that you can translate it to bits,
isomorphically.
Okay, and that number exists.
So then did Shakespeare actually invent Hamlet
or did he discover it?
No, no, no, no.
A arithmetic is rich enough that it can encode Hamlet.
That's all.
So technically, did he discover it or did he create it?
Hamlet was created by Shakespeare,
not discovered by Shakespeare.
Okay.
But when the mathematician discovers or produces
when Euclid produced the theorem
that there are infinitely many prime numbers,
Euclid discovered something.
He discovered something that exists,
that is true, independent from him.
He didn't make it up.
I see.
It's not a cultural item of any sort.
It's just a group way the world is.
I see, I see, I see.
But it's the abstract world.
It's not a physical object.
It's an abstract entity.
Yeah, now what creates this platonic world?
It's always been there.
Nothing created it.
Yeah, so how do we talk about the platonic world
without sounding mystical, without sounding theological?
It's like it's always there.
It's ever present.
It is timeless.
It's an uncaused cause.
Yeah.
Well, you can imagine the universe,
the physical universe always existing, right?
In fact, there's a good reason to believe
that it always has.
I know we talk about big bang cosmology
and we're what, 13.8 billion years old.
But the inflationary scenario,
we're probably just one of the multiverse.
And these things have been going on forever.
So our universe is just one of a infinite number
of pocket universes.
Pocket universes have always existed.
And they generate more through this process
called eternal inflation.
Or just go back to pre big bang cosmology,
where we used to believe standard physics believe
that the universe was infinitely old.
It didn't have a beginning and it won't have an end.
It just is eternal, not created by God.
This is atheists were happy to believe this.
It's just, this is the way things are.
So the platonic world was always there.
Or even to say the word always implies formulating
in terms of time, and it's timeless.
This is an old philosophical distinction
we hardly use anymore between eternal and SEMP eternal.
SEMP eternal?
SEMP eternal.
So SEMP eternal means true at all times.
Eternal means outside of time.
So mathematics is true outside of time.
If numbers were somehow or other,
which a small number of people believe,
a kind of part of the physical realm,
but somehow attached to the physical realm.
So if the physical realm didn't exist,
numbers wouldn't exist.
That would be a SEMP eternal version.
So in casual talk, we say, yeah, it's eternal.
It's always the case.
But this distinction, like God,
standard view of God, God is eternal outside of creation.
Right.
Whereas whatever God created is,
and if God created anything that lasted forever
in creation, that would be SEMP eternal.
I see, I see.
Wittgenstein had a quote about this.
He said, if eternal means infinite temporal length, then...
That would be SEMP eternal.
Right.
If it didn't mean that,
but instead meant outside of time,
then anyone who lives in the present moment
is living eternally.
Yeah, well, that's beautiful.
Also a bit mystical.
A few weeks ago, I emailed,
or maybe a couple of months ago,
I emailed you about thought experiments,
or I don't recall how the conversation started,
but you sent me a book on thought experiments.
You didn't know that I was thinking of writing a book.
I actually started, but your book was far more articulate
than mine about thought experiments.
Just, I recommend people who watch this to read.
It's like Spivak's second book on manifolds.
It's a short read and compendious.
Something I've been trying to develop is,
is there a way of formulating the laws of physics
from pure thought experiments?
What drove me to think that was the Galileo experiment,
the thought experiment with Galileo?
And you had already thought about this as well.
And in fact, you just started writing a book about it.
It's not like you solved the problem otherwise.
We've invented plenty of new technology,
but you've made what I think is progress.
So let's talk about that book.
Do you think that ultimately the laws of physics
can be generated from armchair philosophy
just sitting back and thinking a thought experiment?
Certainly not all.
In fact, not even most,
but just every now and then,
I think we can learn something about the world
in a non-empirical way.
And my favorite example is Galileo and Falling Objects.
Galileo's a wonderful thought experimenter.
Maybe the best ever.
He's absolutely terrific.
Einstein was a very good thought experimenter too.
They're probably in the same league,
but if anything, I think Galileo is a notch above.
My favorite thought experiment of all time,
and I remember hearing it when I was an undergraduate
and thought it was the most dazzling thing I'd ever heard.
And this is the argument for all objects,
regardless of how heavy they are, fall at the same rate.
So it's a thought experiment.
You imagine yourself going up on the Leaning Tower of Pisa,
if you like, and you're dropping a cannonball,
which is quite heavy, and a musketball,
which is relatively quite a bit lighter.
Now, the common sense view and the view in Aristotle
are the same.
It says that heavy objects will just fall faster
than light objects.
And we've got a lot of experience to that effect.
I mean, if you do throw a cannonball and a feather,
you know that the cannonball's gonna hit the ground
a lot sooner.
So Galileo says, all right,
if heavy objects fall faster than light objects,
let's imagine a compound object
consisting of a cannonball and a musketball
glued together, okay, and drop it.
Now we've got three things.
We've got a cannonball, a musketball,
and this composite objects.
Now, on the principle that heavy objects fall faster,
this composite object is gonna fall
fastest of all of the three.
But unfortunately, it's not.
It's gonna be slowed down by the fact that
the cannonball part of the composite object
wants to fall at its fast rate,
but it's gonna be held back
by this little musketball attached to it,
who's wanting to fall at a slower rate.
So it's like jumping out of a window
with a little tiny parachute.
It's gonna slow you down.
And so that's absurd.
The composite object will be both faster and slower
than the heavy cannonball by itself.
There, and that was the end of common sense
about falling objects and the end of Aristotle
on free fall.
And but the solution, how fast do things fall,
is obvious when you've reached this point.
And here's where the,
where a physical intuition actually comes in
and you don't need to perform the experiment.
You just think about it and you realize,
oh, they all have to fall at the same rate.
And that'll, and that's how things fall at the same rate,
regardless of how heavy they are.
To me, this is still one of the most beautiful
thought experiments as well.
And it, it's what led me on the journey of thinking.
I wonder how much more of physics can be gleaned
by just thinking about what's consistent,
what's contradicts.
Oh, a ton of things.
Galileo's other, I think,
his other very, very famous thought experiment
is the inside the ship,
where he can't tell by hypothesis,
he can't tell whether the ship is stationary in the port
or moving across a very smooth ocean.
And he says, okay, I'm inside
and birds are flying around inside,
front to back.
And it's the same whether I'm sailing or at port.
I throw up a ball to my friend back and forth,
same whether we're moving or in port.
Fisher in an aquarium tank inside the ship
and they swim back and forth in the tank.
And it doesn't matter whether we're stationary or moving.
Everything is the same on the inside.
And that's his argument for
what has become the principle of relativity,
that inertial frames, the laws of nature
are exactly the same in any inertial frame,
whether it's a stationary one at rest in port
or moving smoothly over the sea.
What was the impetus for him thinking
of this thought experiment?
Was it because he was suggesting the earth is moving
and people were wondering, well, shouldn't we be moving
if the earth is moving or was it something else?
That's exactly right.
There was another thought experiment prior,
not Galileo's, but prior to Galileo.
This is a medieval thought experiment,
sometimes called the tower experiment.
And that is if the earth is moving either around the sun
or spinning around its own axis, either way.
And you dropped an object from a tower,
then as the earth moved,
the object would fall way behind the base of the tower.
And if it does that, it always falls right down at the base.
Right, and you can use a similar ship argument
where if you're on a ship and the ship is sailing
and you drop a ball, it'll fall behind the ship
or where the tail end of the ship was.
That's right.
That's what the equivalent tower argument would use,
but Galileo says, no, no,
it's not gonna be like that at all.
If you're just inside the ship and you can't see out,
you drop a ball, it'll land at your feet.
And if you're moving over the sea at 20 knots
and you drop a ball,
it's still gonna land at your feet either way.
Right, right.
And that's the, and then more general,
of course, you just make the claim,
the laws of nature are gonna be the same
in any inertial frame of reference.
And that's the principle of relativity.
That's Galileo's version.
Then it's the version, it's the only version we use.
When Einstein gave us a special relativity,
he hung on to the principle of relativity
because it was in danger.
It was in danger from Maxwell's electrodynamics,
which seemed to need a universal ether
as if there was a single frame
in which physics was correctly described.
And they're moving, anything that was moving
in the ether frame,
you wouldn't get the right results.
That is, you'd have to take that into account.
The laws of nature are...
Now let's get to Newton with the absolute space in the bucket.
So Newton had a thought experiment
that demonstrated absolute space.
Okay, so this is another extremely famous thought experiment.
And Newton gave...
Well, this I can show a diagram from the book
or from any other place I don't wanna take
from the copyright holder.
No, no, no, have you got it there?
No, I mean, I'll show it when I'm editing.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, you can show it from my book,
don't worry.
Sure.
Yeah, I grant you permission.
Thank you, I appreciate that.
Okay.
Now, so Newton gave two versions of this.
One was the bucket, okay?
And so the way you should think of it is,
you've got a bucket and you can twist the rope, okay?
And here's the bucket and the water is very smooth on top.
And you let the bucket go because...
And it's the only thing in the universe for this.
For the bucket, there's Newton
and there's everything around.
Okay, never mind.
Let me do the bucket and then I'll switch to the other one.
Sure, sure, sure.
This is the empty universe.
Okay, so at first the water is flat
and the bucket starts to rotate.
And gradually, so, and so initially,
before anything happens,
the water and the bucket are at rest
with respect to one another.
Then they start to rotate
and they're rotating together,
both the bucket and the water
and the water starts climbing the walls.
And then you stop the bucket
and the water's still climbing
and it gradually subsides to flat again.
Now the question is, how do we explain the difference
between the water and bucket being at rest initially
and the water's flat?
And later on, the water and bucket are at rest
with respect to one another,
but the water is concave, okay?
The water's climbing up the walls.
How do you explain the difference?
And Newton says, okay, you know what's gonna happen.
Here's the explanation.
In the first case, the water bucket system is not
rotating with respect to space.
And later, when the water's climbing the walls,
the whole system is rotating with respect to space itself.
And then conclusion, therefore, space exists.
It's not just something that we use
as a convenience or something like that.
Actually, let me go back and people can figure out
what their instinctive view is on this, okay?
This'll be the difference between a Newtonian
on the one hand and a Leibnizian relationalist
on the other hand, okay?
Question, if there was nothing in the gold universe,
no object existed anywhere in the universe,
would space still exist?
Could space still exist?
And I find that when I ask my students that question,
about half of them say, yeah, empty space, no problem.
There could be empty space.
And the other half said, that's ridiculous.
There couldn't be such a thing as empty space.
If there's no objects, there's just no space, period.
This sounds like the tree falling in the woods.
The space-time version.
There's no connection to that, you're right.
And there's a counterpart to that for time.
If I say to my class, okay,
imagine that nothing ever happened.
Everything was just frozen solid.
Could time still pass?
Half the class will say no, no events, no time.
The other half will say, yeah, time's still passing,
but nothing's happening.
Very different instincts people have about this.
And that one's also about 50-50?
Yeah, roughly 50-50.
Same people, the same people.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
They're highly correlated.
Okay.
Yeah.
So if you think empty space makes sense,
and you think time without events makes sense,
you're a Newtonian.
You're with Newton.
And if you think that no objects, no space,
or no events, no time,
you're an instinctive Leibnizian, a relationist.
And what about you?
My instincts are mostly with Newton.
It's also another thing that's interesting about this
is that my class will be typically half physics,
half philosophy students.
And it doesn't break along that line at all.
Oh, interesting.
Half the physicists are Newtonians in instinct,
and half of them are Leibnizians.
And the philosophy students exactly the same.
Half of them are Newtonians,
half of them are Leibnizian.
Have you done this with mathematicians?
I'm curious.
Oh.
What they're half, half.
I do it with mathematicians.
I do it with mathematicians for other things,
and often that are philosophically interesting.
And I am often surprised at the split
in the mathematical audience exactly corresponds
to the split in the philosophy audience.
That is, you can't tell from someone's answer
whether they're a mathematician or a philosopher.
By the way, do you consider,
are you a professor of philosophy of math
or philosophy of physics or both?
No, just philosophy.
But my specialty inside is things like math and physics.
I see.
This is some, I mean, some philosophers are,
they specialize in the history of philosophy
or in ethics and so on.
Math and physics are my specialties inside.
As an aside, another aside,
why did you end up choosing to go into the philosophy
of math instead of math?
Is it just purely based on what interests did you
or was there something else?
That's a really interesting question.
I think it was pretty much at right at the beginning,
like when you're a beginning undergraduate and you,
so then you have to pick majors and stuff like that.
I thought I can do anything in the world as a philosopher
and no one will say,
yeah, you're not doing philosophy anymore.
One of my first questions for this that I wrote down,
it's, has any philosophical question ever been solved?
And this relates to that because I'm curious to know,
it's something I've been thinking about.
I searched this on Google and it's not clear.
The only one that I can think of is maybe Zeno's paradox
with saying, well, you're only accounting for finite time,
but have any major philosophical problems ever been solved?
I'd be more confident in saying a lot of you
have been decisively refuted.
So there's a lot of people in the philosophy saying,
well, we don't know that we're,
we know that we're making progress in this limited sense
that we now know certain things are false
that we didn't know were false,
you know, 50 years ago or something like that.
But I mean, there are lots of,
I have lots of philosophical views
about which I'm fairly confident.
And I think those might count.
People would disagree with me, of course.
Right.
But there'd be a, there'd be some significant number
of people who would say, yeah, we think that's right.
Indefensive.
Yeah, I mean, to take one of the most important
and oldest is Plato's,
Plato's refutation for the need for God
in order to have objective ethics.
It's in the dialogue called the Euthyphroid.
And it's a very simple little argument.
And it doesn't, it doesn't refute the existence of God.
It just says, no, no, no, objective ethics,
objective right and wrong is completely independent
from God.
God's got nothing to do with it.
It's a wonderful little argument.
And if you are an atheist,
you're happy with the conclusion, right,
we can have objective ethics, we don't need God.
And if you do believe in God, you could say, well,
I still believe in God and I believe in objective ethics.
The intimate connection that I thought was there
actually isn't there, but everything else is.
Or wonderful.
Or someone can reject the conclusion and say,
yes, God can advocate for the murder of a child
and that would still be good because God advocated for it.
That's the essence of the Euthyphroid argument
because everyone will pocket that.
And they think, well, something is moral
because God says so.
And then you say, oh yeah, so if he told you
you had to rape every woman you can see,
then that would be a good thing to do.
Is that what you believe?
And no one will believe that.
And then they realize that this is stupid.
I can't, what I've been saying all along
is a really stupid view.
The most we can get out of God is God
is a truthful reporter of objective moral rules.
Like we can trust God to tell us what the moral rules are,
but God isn't making up.
They have to be independent.
That's a really, it's a wonderfully interesting problem
that's underappreciated.
I think the theologians don't want to touch it.
And there's another one that they even more don't want to touch.
And that is how powerful God is.
The one about ethics is a lot like
what Leibniz thought about God's power.
He'd say, Leibniz, do you think God is all powerful?
He'd say, you betcha, you can do anything.
Descartes, Leibniz wouldn't say that though,
because Leibniz is all powerful.
He'd have a qualification, which I'm gonna give you
in a second.
Okay, okay.
He'd say, Descartes, can God do everything?
He'd say, you betcha, he can do anything.
And then you say, well, can he make it rain?
It's a sunny day right here.
Can he make it rain?
Sure, he can make it rain.
Leibniz, could he make it rain?
You betcha, he can make it rain, just like that.
And then you say to Descartes,
could he make it rain and not rain simultaneously?
Descartes would say, yes, he can even do that.
I can't imagine what it would be like, but he can do it.
And Leibniz would say, no, we can't do that.
He can make it rain, he can make it not rain,
but he can't pull off a contradiction.
So God can do anything that's possible.
That's God's power.
Right.
And the Leibniz view about what God can do
in the physical realm is very much like Leibniz,
I think, with all the same view about ethics.
You know, God can advocate almost anything,
but God actually couldn't make murder okay.
God couldn't make torturing kittens morally okay.
He doesn't have that kind of power.
You know, when we're talking about
whether or not philosophical problems have been solved,
something I found online, which it's funny,
it's the reason why philosophical problems
have not been solved is that as soon as they have been solved,
they get relegated to something like physics or math.
For example, you know, physics was called
natural philosophy before.
And then when we...
No, that's a good, that's actually a really good point.
The hardest problems stay in philosophy.
The ones that are unsolvable stay in philosophy.
As soon as they're solved,
they get outside the realm of philosophy.
And that's why philosophical problems
seem to have never been solved.
That's a really good point.
In fact, that's how a lot of philosophers
think of their discipline as giving birth to the sciences.
Once we sort something out, it takes off a life of its own.
Sometimes when I talk to hardcore physicists,
they don't like to deal with concepts that are,
maybe you might call them thick,
although I might be using your terminology incorrectly.
I'm gonna call them ambiguous.
Like, for example, consciousness or free will or...
Yeah, yeah, those are, those are, yeah.
And they would just say, I don't know what it means to,
I don't know what that means.
And so let me just stay with my rulers and protractors.
But the philosophers are willing to deal with
what seems meaningless and try and find meaning.
And then it's, and concretize what's ambiguous
or disambiguate what's ambiguous.
And then it goes into another realm.
Yeah, yeah, that's right.
And I don't particularly like the,
there's a dismissal and an arrogance that comes from
the purely mathematical and purely physical professors
that I've spoken to where they don't wanna deal with
certain concepts that seem, that are ill-defined.
They'll just say, well, I don't deal with that.
And that's meaningless.
And so you can pursue that, but that's a religious pursuit
to even talk about consciousness
or what it means to die or what does life mean.
Well, yeah, that seems rather short-sighted
because so many, I mean, I can understand them saying,
I don't want to deal with consciousness as a physicist.
I'm very happy to talk about it and think about it
and reflect on it, but it's probably outside the realm
of physics.
I'm also very interested to talk about politics
and how we should organize society,
but I wouldn't...
Derive it from the Schrodinger equation.
Exactly, right.
Okay, now the bucket.
Okay, so anyway, the bucket,
the Newton's final conclusion, water still initially,
water concave at the end, what's the difference?
Explanation, the bucket is not rotating,
then the bucket is rotating with respect to space itself.
And therefore, space exists.
It's meant to be an argument for the existence of space
as a thing in its own right.
As well as all these material objects all around us,
there is also space.
It's an extra thing.
Leibniz said, that's rubbish.
There's nothing to space except the relations
among physical things.
Get rid of the physical things,
there's nothing left over.
So Leibniz didn't agree with the conclusion
of the thought experiment
or he just didn't get presented
with this thought experiment.
No, that's really a good point.
They had a wonderfully interesting correspondence
back and forth.
It's called the Leibniz-Clark correspondence
because Clark is very close to Newton.
We don't really know whether Clark
was simply taking dictation from Newton.
He might have been,
or he might have just talked to Newton
about how to formulate answers,
but there's about six letters back and forth between them
and they keep getting longer and longer.
Leibniz died.
It never came to an end.
Leibniz just unfortunately died.
And Leibniz has wonderful answers
to a whole lot of stuff that Newton talks about.
Leibniz is a brilliant, brilliant person.
When people are talking about the luminaries,
they mentioned Einstein and Newton,
but Leibniz is, to me, on the same category of Newton.
Oh, yes, he's unquestionably
one of the all-time spectacular greats.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The universal great.
He's just brilliant in everything.
Yeah.
Okay.
Okay, so anyway, but that's the bucket.
But you see, Newton then said, gave a second version.
It's the same argument,
but this is the really interesting one.
So he says, you imagine two spheres
connected by a cord or a rod or something,
a cord, make it a cord, or an elastic.
And he says, there's a tension in the elastic, okay,
it's stretched.
The material.
Sorry, sorry.
Is this in your thought experiment book as well
that I can place in the book?
I think it is.
Okay.
It'll be in the same place.
Okay, I'm just trying to visualize it right now.
I'm visualizing something like a bar now.
It looks like a dumbbell, okay?
So you got the two spheres
and they could be made out of some massive thing.
Like it could be wood.
If they don't attract or it help.
But there's a tension, okay?
The cord is stretched.
Okay, okay, okay.
How could you explain this?
There's nothing in the universe.
It's an empty universe.
How do you explain it?
Newton says, easy.
The whole thing is rotating.
And you see the individual objects
try to move in straight lines.
They try to move inertially.
And hence, it's stretching the cord between them.
And that's how you look out for.
Well, what's the cause of this inertial motion?
Space itself.
Space is the source of inertial motion
and inertial forces and stuff like that.
This is the, now if you're someone like Leibniz,
you're gonna have real problems with this.
Because space, you see, for Newton,
space has real properties.
It can cause things.
It causes things to move in straight lines.
That's why if you throw an object, no force on it,
it'll move in a straight line.
It's space that sort of guides it as it were that way.
Okay.
And if there were no space,
there'd be no accounting for why it moves in a straight line
rather than just at random.
Leibniz died before he could really tackle that issue.
And who knows?
He might have even been won over by it.
You wanted to know about how Einstein reacted to this.
Right.
Einstein changed his mind, but early on,
and this is in the very first couple of pages
in the paper on general relativity.
For the audience, just to clarify,
the Newton bucket experiment demonstrated,
at least for Newton, the presence of absolute space.
That's right.
Space is a thing in its own right.
Yeah.
What Einstein does is he rejects the whole setup.
So he imagines two spheres that are rotating
with respect to one another,
and one is perfectly spherical,
and the other one's a kind of
an ellipse of revolution.
Okay.
So it's elongated at its equator.
Okay.
Just like our Earth spinning on its axis,
it's a little wider at the equator.
So Einstein imagines these two things
in an otherwise empty space.
And he says, how can you explain this?
And then he says, you can't.
You must appeal to distant matter.
This is really Mark's answer to all of this.
You must appeal to distant matter
that you can experience.
You can see it.
And one of the ellipse of revolution,
that object, not the spherical one,
but that object is rotating
with respect to that distant mass.
So it's not space itself
that causes inertial motion.
It's the presence of billions of terms of mass all over the Earth.
Let me see if I have this correct,
because I don't recall this.
So is what you're saying something like,
we don't know if we're rotating
unless we see stars rotating above us?
Yeah.
Or is this completely, is it-
That's Einstein, that's Einstein, yeah.
Okay.
What about the centripetal force or centrifugal force?
So what does he say about that?
We wouldn't just feel it unless-
It's not caused by rotation with respect to space.
It's caused by rotation with respect to distant matter.
In fact, this is Mark.
Mark made an empirical claim about this.
And I don't think it's very practical,
so no one can ever do it.
But Mark said, imagine that you did Newton's bucket
in a bucket where the walls of the bucket
were several miles thick.
Okay.
Okay, so imagine them 100 miles thick.
Incredible mass.
And then you rotate this thing.
So in Newton's bucket, when you rotated the wall,
the water starts to climb the wall.
Locke said, if you've got enough mass in the bucket itself,
the water would stay level.
Therefore, it's not rotation with respect to space,
it's rotation with respect to external masses.
Ah, ah, ah, ah.
The bucket itself becomes the-
Yeah.
I'm gonna read-
You need such a big bucket.
You couldn't ask the government to pay for this experiment.
They would be turfed out of power in the next election
when the population got wind of it.
In your thought experiment book,
you fractionate into two,
there's constructive, destructive types of thought experiments
and then constructive, conjectural, and so on.
Did you come up with that,
or was that something you found?
There's a little bit in the-
Well, I should tell you when I first decided,
let me back up a little more.
When I first heard about the Galileo thought experiment
of the falling bodies,
I thought that's the most wonderful thing I'd ever heard.
And then after I got tenure,
I thought, okay, they can't fire me now.
Return.
I'm gonna do what I wanted to do for a long time
and I start thinking about thought experiments.
And there was virtually no literature on it.
There's, you know, people make the odd offhand remark.
And of course, there are lots of thought experiments
floating around, but nobody had ever written about it in-
Like a collection.
What's their nature?
You know, how do they work and stuff like that?
And I was shocked that I could read almost everything
that had ever been written about thought experiments
in a long weekend.
There's almost nothing.
A bit by Mark and a bit by a few other people.
And that's it.
And so the few people who had commented on it,
usually divided things up into the positive, negative,
kind of thought experiments,
which, you know, try to give you a new theory
versus thought experiments,
which just destroy an old theory.
So shortyner's cat is a negative thought experiment
in the sense that it's just supposed to undermine
standard quantum mechanics.
But other thought experiments like Heisenberg's
Mike Gammeray microscope,
which gives you the uncertainty principle,
that's more positive,
give you a new positive result type of thought experiment.
So that was a beginning of a taxonomy, you know, there.
Then I just fine-tuned it a little bit.
Okay, you fine-tuned only the constructive part.
Well, the destructive part goes down to direct.
So it's like, I don't recall what directs was.
And then one of the constructives
goes down to direct as well.
Yeah, I think I can't remember now whether I,
I mean, there were some distinctions
I didn't bother making,
but might have made in passing
when I was describing that taxonomy.
The negative thought experiments,
I might have lumped them all together as just negative.
Yeah.
There's probably an important difference
between negative thought experiments
that follow from the theory itself,
which just shows that they're internally incoherent
and negative thought experiments which show a clash
between a theory and other more or less established knowledge.
So I could fine-tune there
and you could probably make more distinctions.
Anytime you're setting up a taxonomy,
there's a kind of balance between,
to what extent can this be simplified and enlightening?
And to what extent do you go into so much detail
it just becomes, you get lost and you get lost in the detail.
Have you been keeping up with theories of everything?
There's been a couple of new ones this year, yeah.
A little bit.
Have you read up on Wolframs or Eric Weinstein's?
No, Wolframs views,
he just thinks that the world is an automaton
and he sees digital computers as answering all questions.
I'm still sufficiently wedded to continuity
in a lot of places that I don't,
I think digitizing things is only a nifty approximation
and good for solving a lot of practical problems,
but I don't think it's gonna reveal the deeper truth.
I may be wrong, I may be wrong.
I have physics friends who do believe
that space-time is discreet.
Yep.
And if they're right,
then understanding the world as a gigantic digital computer,
that becomes a little more plausible.
You definitely should read that paper that you sent me,
which I thought that you knew Nicholas Jessen
and you were completely familiar with his work.
But anyway, just for the audience, I'm not listening.
I read it at the time, I do remember sending it to you,
but I just completely forgot it.
Okay, would you give a bit of background?
Would you give me a quick favor?
Yes.
Send it if you have it.
I'll send you a lecture from him because it's wonderful.
Nicholas Jessen is a physicist
who was answering a question that I was curious about,
which is why I asked Jim here.
I said, hey, is there any other logical foundation
of physics other than classical logic?
Cause I'm wondering, I'm always curious,
like what's holding us back from theories of everything?
And I'm trying to tackle it from as many angles as I can.
That's why I thought maybe this is one.
And you said, well, there is this person named Nicholas Jessen
who thinks that intuitionist logic is a way to go.
And when I read that.
Now I'm getting, now it's coming back.
Yes, yes, okay.
And so what he was saying,
he has a few different reasons for believing that
first of all, real numbers aren't real.
And the reason for this is to say,
is because there's only a finite amount of information
that can be in any finite volume.
So let's say it's a real number.
If it's an arbitrary real number,
then it's gonna collapse into a black hole.
If for whatever reason,
the particle somehow carries that information with it.
Okay, well, you can leave and leave that aside.
He says that all of deterministic physics
like classical physics,
actually is completely compatible
with an indeterministic view.
Forget about quantum mechanics.
And the reason is that all we can do
is test it to a certain precision.
Let's say 30 decimal places.
That's being a bit generous,
but let's say 30 decimal place for classical physics.
Then you can easily construct indeterminate function.
Indeterminate function.
So here's one.
I can't say it because I can't say it.
I would just have to write the function out.
But let's say you have the real line, so zero to one.
And then you somehow stretch the real line.
And then you cut the real line in half.
I'll have to tell you what the function is.
But either way, that real line,
you can describe any number as zero point B1, B2,
B, like the digits of, okay, great.
What that function effectively does
is remove the first digit.
So instead of it being zero point B1, B2, B3,
it's zero point B2, B3, B4.
Okay, now given that,
given that, let's say finite,
let's say non real numbers
are completely compatible with classical physics
because we don't know where the end of the error bar
effectively gives a real number,
or if it's just cut off,
you understand what I'm saying.
Sorry if I'm not explaining correctly.
Okay, given that, then we can have these simple systems
that actually are not just chaotic
because we don't have sufficient information,
but because within it,
it genuinely is indeterminate,
for example, that function.
Like if you just choose an arbitrary,
okay, so you get the idea.
Okay, so then he was saying that indeterminacy
is not incompatible with classical physics,
even though we like to think of classical physics
as being a determinant theory.
You can't, so then he goes on to say,
calling physics deterministic or indeterministic
is not a scientific question
because both models predict the exact same reality
that we see classically, forget about quantum mechanics.
And then he goes on to make a connection
between that and free will.
He's a proponent of free will, much like yourself,
and he says it can be saved.
The libertarian version of free will,
not the compatibilist,
that is that I choose from the possible world.
Oh, anyway, that's extremely intriguing to me.
I want to, so I thank you so much for that,
and I'm gonna talk to Nicholas about it.
Good, I'm glad you got so much out of it.
My instincts are to disagree quite strongly.
To start with, I'm a realist and a Platonist about math,
not a constructivist, not an intuitionist.
So I think all those decimal expansion,
to infinity, it exists,
but it exists in Plato's heaven.
So I don't know how he's,
I don't know where black holes would come in
unless he's trying to physicalize the numbers.
And then the decimal representation
would require an infinite amount of ink,
in a very small space,
and collapse into a black hole.
Some, no, I'm sort of joking and saying.
Yeah, I understand.
I understand.
But the thing is,
I think you need real numbers,
irrational real numbers in physics.
Think of, try to imagine doing physics without pi,
which is an irrational number.
Okay, it's got an infinite decimal expansion.
Try to imagine doing physics without the square root of two.
Square root of two comes up all over the place
just in quantum mechanics.
So you've got a two-state system.
It could be an upper or a down,
and you'd describe the state as one over root two up,
plus one over root two down.
And then to get the probability, you square that.
So square one over root two squared becomes one half.
And that, of course, you can measure accurately.
But you're gonna always represent it as one over root two.
You're gonna have to appeal to these.
Now, he may say, ah, but I'm only appealing
to an approximation of one over root two.
Like, I only need five, if I went five decimal places,
and so I'm really, it's really a rational number.
That's all I need for complete empirical adequacy.
It would be hard to argue with him over that.
I think my best argument against him
would be the utter simplicity of the real numbers,
as opposed to truncating them
and turning them into rational numbers to do physics.
But from an empirical point of view,
I may have to concede that there's not going to be
any empirical distinction between the two.
Okay, I'm gonna read from your book.
Oh, before I get to that, you did mention
that there are some examples
of non-plotonic forms of mathematical realism.
I can't conceive of that.
So do you mind expounding?
You said that mill or kitcher, kitcher, yes, that's right.
Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes, sure.
Okay, mill is the classic example.
So he'd be, you'd call him a mathematical realist.
Which mill is this?
John Stuart Mill.
Okay.
Okay, almost everybody uses a mathematical realist,
uses realism, Platonism, roughly interchangeably.
I mean, they might want to make some fine distinctions.
And that's because almost everybody who is a realist
is happy to be called a Platonist.
But there is, mill is a mathematical realist
who is absolutely not a Platonist.
So for mill, numbers are really just a kind of abstraction
from the physical realm.
They're part of the physical realm, a bit like colors.
So when I say two plus two equals four,
I'm actually talking about physical stuff.
So two apples, it's just a short form for more general,
it's a generalization of two apples
plus two apples equals four apples.
Two liters of water plus two liters of water
plus four liters of water, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
I just simplify it to two plus two equals four.
But it is learned empirically
and it's about the physical empirical world.
That's mill.
Okay?
Frege made a lot of fun of him.
Nobody believes Bill, they think it's repostor's view.
But you see how it's realist in the sense
that it's about reality and it's meant to be literally true.
Yeah, I just don't see how it's not Platonistic.
So can you help me out?
Because if it's saying that the generalities are true,
what does he mean by true?
Where did they exist?
So if you're saying that-
If I said, these apples are red.
Yeah.
Okay, that's a straightforward empirical realm.
The fact that they're red-
Wave length, I'm sure.
Right here, this is it.
And if I said these two apples
and these two apples make four apples,
it's all about what's right here.
Okay?
There's nothing about Plato seven in that.
It's all right here.
Okay.
It's just that when I say two plus two equals four,
without reference to apples or liters of water
or chocolate biscuit or anything like that,
it's kind of abstracted from,
but it's really about the physical realm.
Ah, okay.
So let me see if I get the difference.
Okay.
Okay.
The Platonist would say,
you're reflecting some other truer world.
And Mill would say,
you're predicated on this world.
It's true, but it's dependent on this world,
not some other world.
Is that what you mean?
Yeah, but Mill would say,
and there's no other world.
It's just this one.
The closest I can think of for an analogy
would be talking about colors.
So I mean, I can say this apple is red,
that banana is yellow.
But I can say at a slightly more abstract level,
but I'm still here in the world,
red plus yellow make orange.
See, I'm still here in the imperial world.
Yeah.
I see.
Even though I'm not talking about a particular apple
or a particular banana,
but red plus yellow make orange.
So why is that ridiculous?
Why is Mill's,
what you said that Mill is laughed at by Frigga
and many other mathematicians
that come later are philosophers.
If the universe is finite,
if we thought it was finite,
if we just standard big bang,
the universe is finite.
There's only finitely many elementary particles in it.
There's only finitely many things in it.
That means there's a biggest number.
And I say, oh, well, let's call it N.
Biggest number.
That's it.
I say, well, what about N plus one?
You think N plus one is bigger than N.
And of course you'd say, of course it is.
And Mill doesn't know how,
what's Mill gonna say?
There's no such numbers in plus one.
You're just making it up.
I see.
And so it just seems preposterous.
We believe there are infinitely many prime numbers,
infinitely many numbers.
Mill doesn't know actually what to do with this
if the universe is finite.
If the world, if the universe is infinite,
he got lucky.
And maybe he can get around that problem.
But he's gonna have a lot of problems.
Why does the universe being finite mean
that there has to be a finite conceptual number?
Because even with the-
If you think of numbers as-
As with reference to the physical world.
If you think of them as independently existing
and Plato's haven't, no problem.
The world could just cease to exist
and still all those things in Plato's heaven
would be just fine.
Could you still not save it by saying,
for example, right now on my desktop, I have a few items
and then there's n factorial way of,
well not your n, but little case n,
wave factorial way of arranging them.
And then you just keep adding.
So no matter what, even when you, okay.
Yeah, yeah.
You can keep doing the combinatorics at nauseam,
but you're still never going to break out
of the finite realm.
So let's say we find, okay.
I'm just trying to grapple with this.
So let's say we've come up with large n.
So that's your n.
Then I say, well, let's still permute that a bit more.
And then we get n factorial, the big n factorial.
And then we say, well, that's a maximum.
Then we just factorial again, and we still get infinity.
So we still get any possible number
can be reached with this, no?
For mill, they have to be tied somehow
to the empirical world.
Remember, he's a staunch empiricist
and he doesn't like Platonism.
He doesn't like abstract entities.
So if I had, if I have two apples,
if I have two apples, I can say, okay, one, two.
And then I can bunch them together
and I can say, now that's a third object.
Okay.
So he would have a problem with possibilities.
The reason why I say that is-
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
That's right.
You can't say-
I have to be measuring four apples.
I could say that possibly you can arrange them in eight,
but that's because there exists something else
that I can concretize as eight.
Sure.
Okay, okay.
That's right.
Okay, I get it, I get it.
Now I'm gonna read the last part of your book,
which I found wonderful.
You say this, my suggestion is very simple.
Distant correlations are caused by the laws of nature.
I realize this almost sounds silly.
One wants to say the correlations are the laws of nature,
but this, if you recall in the preceding chapters,
is not true.
A law of nature is an independently existing abstract entity,
a thing in its own right,
which is responsible for physical regularities.
Okay, now this was in regards to something called
the entanglement of bells and equality,
but we can forget about that.
What you're suggesting is that the physical laws themselves
are akin to entities.
And I haven't heard that expressed before.
And I think that's gonna take me maybe weeks or months
to fully apprehend.
And perhaps even contribute some of my own ideas to.
It's a brazen statement and I'm a fan of audacity.
So can you expound on this?
Yeah, I'm not sure.
I wrote that quite a while ago
and my views on quantum mechanics are constantly in flux.
So I'm not sure I would agree with that in particular.
However, with the general idea,
I certainly still think that is true.
So let me explain what I'm trying to get at.
For most philosophers, they really, really like David Hume.
David Hume has a view about the nature of causation
and the nature of laws of nature,
which is very empiricist.
And what it really amounts to is that a law of nature
is nothing but an empirical regularity.
So if I say all ravens are black,
or it's a law of nature that ravens are black,
what it just means is that every time I see a raven,
it's black.
That's it.
That's all there is to it.
It's just-
Hume does away with causation.
Yeah, causation is like that too.
Fire feels hot.
Every time I stick my hand in a fire, it feels hot.
The heat doesn't cause the pain.
It's just correlated with the pain, okay?
Every time I stick my hand in the fire, I feel pain.
It's just this regularity.
There's nothing more to causation than the regularity.
There's nothing more to a law of nature than a regularity.
So if I said, explain why this raven is black,
Hume would have to say, all ravens are black.
This is a raven, therefore this is black.
That's the only explanation he can give.
His laws of nature are really just summaries
of what we experience.
They can't really explain anything.
They don't have any explanation.
They're like data points and then generalizations.
And then the law is nothing but a summary of the data points.
Okay.
Yeah.
There's no explanatory power there.
Okay.
If you're a staunch empiricist, you're happy with that.
You say, science is in the business of organizing experience
and predicting experience,
but we're not in the business of actually explaining things.
Okay.
Forget explanation.
That's not our business.
Okay.
I hate that view.
I think we're in the business of explaining
and understanding and stuff like that.
So a lot of hard-nosed empiricists would call me,
oh, it's just mushy, sentimental nonsense.
But I'm sticking to my sentimentality
and I want understanding and I want explanations and so on.
So here's an alternative view of laws of nature.
Laws of nature are not just regularities.
They're actually connections between properties.
So I'll stick to the raven example,
even though it's probably a poor example,
but it's very easy to understand and illustrate.
So when I say, so there's properties,
raven, there's the property of ravenhood.
Okay.
There's the property of being a raven.
Being a member of that set of ravens, is ravenhood?
Sure.
Yeah.
Okay.
And there's the property of being black.
Okay.
And so the law of nature is not the regularity
that all ravens are black.
The law of nature is that the property
of being a raven is connected to the property of being black.
And that's the law of nature.
And that law of nature forces the regularity
that all ravens are black.
It's the law that explains why the raven is black.
Why is this raven black?
It's a raven.
It has the property of ravenhood
and that necessitates the property of blackness.
Okay.
Okay.
That's it.
I mean, it sounds like a hokey nonsense,
but the thing is you're actually introducing something new
in the world over and above the mere regularity
and that has explanatory power.
Okay.
So the way that I'm thinking about this
is that there's a set of all black objects
and then ravens are a subset of that,
but I don't see what's different than what he was saying.
There'll be a property, a property of ravenhood
and a property of blackness.
And it's not just a coincidence,
but there's that kind of what's sometimes called
a gnomic connection.
This is like a physical necessity
between the property of ravenhood
and the property of blackness.
There's a gnomic necessity between the property
of electronhood and negative charge.
Okay.
It's not just an accidental correlation.
There's something deep.
Yeah.
I guess what I'm having trouble is for an electron,
it's like we define it as that which has this,
if we found an electron with negative two
instead of negative one,
we wouldn't call it an electron.
We call it something else.
Probably that's true.
But that's an evidential thing.
Of course, all of this is fallible.
When I say all ravens are black,
it's a law of nature that ravens are black.
Could be mistaken.
We could find in Madagascar ravens that are green
or something like that.
Yes, yes, yes.
But you're saying, okay, hypothetically.
So I'm trying to understand this.
So hypothetically you're saying that a property
of ravenhood is that it's black.
Okay.
Okay, so what does this have to do with?
Sorry, what does this have to do with causality?
Okay, so let me back up and make this view
of laws of nature a bit more plausible.
As against the Hume view.
So you see Hume view,
it's just a regularity that all ravens are black.
Now, let us suppose you're doing this video
from your house, right?
Or your apartment.
Let's suppose that every human being
who's ever been in that apartment has worn socks.
Okay?
Yeah.
So is it a law of nature that everyone who enters
Kurt's apartment wears socks?
Is that a law of nature?
In this house it is.
It doesn't sound like a law of nature.
But it's a regularity.
And that apartment might be blown up tomorrow
so that in its entire history,
it was always true every time someone entered
that apartment they wore socks.
See, oh, that's not a law of nature.
That's just one of those accidents.
How can I distinguish a genuine law of nature,
which is a regularity for Hume from these accidental things?
Hume has no answer.
There's no way he can separate the two.
But if you believe that laws of nature are properties,
then I would say it's the law of nature
about ravens being black.
The property of ravenhood necessitates
the property of blackness.
However, the property of entering Kurt's apartment
does not necessitate the property wears socks.
That was just contingent.
That was just saying.
That's right.
And so now it's still empirical science has to discover
what are the accidental regularities versus what are the laws?
That can be really hard.
But the thing is there is a metaphysical difference
between the two.
And Hume hasn't got a metaphysical difference
between the two.
It's just, wow, it's just a big coincidence.
Okay, so now what does that have to do with?
Cosmation is just the flip coin of laws of nature.
So it is the law of nature that A's are B's
is the same as A's cause B's.
Yes, yeah.
What I'm curious about what I found most fascinating
was that it was as if you're saying
E equals MC squared is like an object itself
that comes in and influences the world.
Yeah, yeah.
It's hard to figure out what the law of nature would be.
I mean, I can say it's a law of nature, E equals MC squared.
It may be hard to figure out
putting it in these metaphysical terms.
The property of energy and how it's related
to the property of mass and the property of speed of light
and stuff like that.
But on this view, there would be such a relation,
a relation of necessitation between energy as a property
and mass as a property.
Have you heard of Lee Smolin's principle of precedence?
I know him well and I have heard of it
and I have forgotten what it is.
Okay, it's something like that one of the reasons
the electron collapses in the way that it does,
or that, sorry, this explains decoherence, I believe,
that the reason why a large object collapses
is because by chance somewhere else in the universe,
a large object has collapsed in a similar manner
and it's felt at some other part of the universe.
The patterns are felt and so they collapse similarly
and that explains some of the regularities to use that word.
Okay, that's the principle.
I don't know what to say about that.
I should, I'm just gonna have to go and review.
Right, right, right.
Right, well, what I was wondering is I'm curious
if that merges both Platonists and non-Platonists
because it's as if it's formulating something that's true
and putting it into this world that we now look to
to represent reality.
But it was being invented at some point.
Yeah, yeah, no, that's interesting the way you put it.
I'm inclined to think it's not
because as I said, I know him quite well
and we argue over the issue of Platonism all the time.
He's very anti-Platonist, yeah.
Are physicists generally anti-Platonists
and mathematicians are pro?
No, no, they're a mixed bag on it.
They're all over the place.
Most working physicists, I would say,
don't have strong views about the nature of mathematics.
For them, it's a tool.
They use it.
They just sort of grab it out of the tool bag,
use what they want,
and don't have philosophical views about it.
If they work in fundamental physics,
as Lace Molen does,
he says very strong philosophical views
about the nature of physics.
You know, is he a realist?
Is he, you know, what, and so on.
He's unquestionably a scientific realist
when it comes to physics,
but he's an anti-realist when it comes to mathematics.
Interesting.
Same with Carl Rovelli,
who Molen and Rovelli often work together.
Rovelli's, I've gotten to know Rovelli quite well,
because he now lives in London here.
He's my neighbor.
Oh, cool, cool.
And he's unquestionably a scientific realist
when it comes to physics,
but hostile to Platonism.
But this is true for both Rovelli
and Molen.
They can't quite put their finger
on what it is they dislike about Platonism so much.
So they're not winning the argument yet.
So it's just a feeling that they have,
but they dislike it
because it has a mystical quality to it?
Not sure.
Okay, Jim, thank you again so much.
I appreciate it.
Oh, great pleasure.
Do you think we can derive an is from an ought
or an ought from an is?
That's a really hard question.
The simple answer is no,
because one is an imperative sentence
and the other is a declarative sentence.
I mean, just logically, dramatically,
there are gonna be different kinds of things.
We can come close.
How can we come close?
Well, we can come close in the sense that,
let me actually back up
and talk about it in a very indirect way, okay?
There's a traditional view
that there's a distinction between facts and values.
It's the same thing.
There's just a cleavage between the two.
And science is totally concerned with the facts
and morality and maybe religion and other things
could be concerned with values.
The trouble with that view
is that too many things in science, it's messy.
There are all kinds of values
even in just doing science itself.
So for instance, I can tell you about how to find out
an infinitude of facts
and maybe one of them you might be interested in.
So what is the distance between the tip of my nose
and the center of mass of the sun?
Now I'm gonna move.
No, I can ask you about the center of mass of your nose
and the center of mass of that guy out on the street
from his nose to the center of mass of the moon.
You could measure all of those things
and they would all be factually correct
if you measured correctly.
But after one or two of these, that's enough.
And you're gonna make a value choice
that pursuing more of these is not worthwhile
and that there are other things that are more valuable.
So all facts aren't on a par.
Some are clearly better than others.
And you as a scientist
are going to make these kinds of value judgments
all the time.
And you're going to make methodological value judgments
which are even more important.
Like you're going to say,
okay, I've got two theories here,
which one should I believe?
Oh, this one's simpler.
Well, that's actually a value judgment
that simplicity is to be preferred to complexity
when you're talking about scientific theories.
So right away, so all right,
so we've got these two theories.
I choose this one on the basis of simplicity.
And now I say, oh, well the facts according to this theory
are different than the facts according to that theory.
What are the facts?
Well, I've just decided on this theory.
So now I found out what the facts are,
but it is value laden in the sense
that I've chosen this theory
on the basis of its simplicity.
So you see how the values begin
to infect the facts themselves.
And once you get into fairly sophisticated science
and you're making methodological choices
about how to pursue this,
you'll find that there's all kinds of values
that are getting tied up in there
and it's very, very hard to disentangle them.
So in essence, no,
it's not possible to derive an ought from an is.
That's right, you can't.
On the other hand,
the more important question is,
can you disentangle your oughts from your iss?
And the answer to that question is, I think, no.
And so now making a big fuss
about the distinction between is and ought
is probably a bad idea.
So when you're looking at another scientist,
don't ask, just give me the facts.
Because a good scientist wouldn't be able to,
who had a sophisticated view of this issue,
would not be able to tell you
what are the clear facts
and how much the facts as presented,
in fact, depended upon value decisions
made along the history,
the whole history of science up to that point.
Now that doesn't mean you can just say,
well, I'm a racist.
I'm proud of my values
and I'm gonna let that guide my research
from here on in.
You can't get away with that stuff,
though lots of people try.
But I do mean that there's going to be a lot of values
that you're not even aware of.
And they have been sprinkled through
the entire history of science up until the present day.
And it'll continue to be like that.
What's your problem with Sam Harris?
You said that you have some...
He's a militant atheist, as am I.
You are a militant.
A militant atheist.
So I have no trouble with Sam Harris on that front.
The only thing I dislike about Sam Harris,
and oh, by the way, he was the voice of reason
in his discussion with Jordan Peterson.
So you agreed with him there?
Oh, completely.
Yeah, yeah.
Much more than I was expecting
because I've seen Sam Harris before
and he sort of irritates me.
You don't like his views on talking for this?
Well, you see, there's a lot of militant atheists
and often they're condemned as a group.
Hitchens, Dawkins, and Harris,
Dennett, and Sam Harris.
But Harris worries me unlike the others.
And the thing that worries me is
that he has a special hatred for Muslims.
I don't.
I think Muslims have ridiculous religious views,
just like Christians have ridiculous religious views
as do Hindus and Buddhists and so on.
They're all just ridiculous.
But I think, especially in this age,
in the current conditions,
for anyone to pick on Muslims,
especially in the United States,
it's bordering on a kind of
a real bigotry that is worse than unhealth.
What if you're just criticizing Islam
and not the Muslim people themselves?
This is tricky.
You can criticize Islam except that
there are, Islam is actually the belief held by people.
So you can't criticize Islam
without criticizing people who are Muslim.
Maybe that's one of the problems
is that intellectuals like yourself, like I,
we like to debate ideas
and it's difficult to detach our egos from the ideas.
But we know that, okay, when a better idea comes along,
we adopt that and we take a little hit to the ego,
but we're different than our ideas.
So there is a separation between the people
and then the...
Sure, sure.
And I have no trouble with that.
The big trouble is when you're talking to,
and in a mass media and talking to a mass audience
and you start railing against Islam,
it just spills over to a dislike of that guy
who's sitting next to you, who happens to be a Muslim.
Yeah, so I don't trust him.
So I just wanna make sure I understand it.
So something like when you criticize Islam,
it's easily construed as criticizing Muslim people
and then the effects of you criticizing Islam
is that other people aren't gonna look at Muslim people
with a negative light.
That's right.
Yeah.
I mean, I don't like Islam any more
than I like Christianity,
but if I had a company and I'm gonna hire people,
I'm not gonna discriminate against Muslims.
I wouldn't hire a Christian over a Muslim.
That seems to me to be just grotesque bigotry.
I would hire an atheist over anybody.
But when it comes to religions,
I think if you're going to criticize them,
criticize them.
So all religions are equal in that they're all...
Equally groundless and yeah.
I think they've done,
I think religion is one of the worst things
that's ever happened to us.
Humanity, yeah, done a great deal of harm.
Let's get to Platonism.
Let's get to Platonism because this is your domain.
This is what you are.
So let's explain what Platonism is
and then let's give people a test
so that they can find out if they're Platonist or not.
Yeah.
All right.
Well, when I teach topics related to this,
I usually ask my students at the very beginning
whether they think mathematics is discovered or invented.
Is it discovered like physics
or is it invented like the game of chess?
And I'll get very mixed reactions.
What is it, 50-50?
No, I'd say more on the discovery side
but a very sizable number on the invention side.
Let's say two-thirds, one-third, something like that.
And then I tell them things that often surprise them
and that is that working mathematicians
are overwhelmingly Platonists.
That is, a Platonist is very briefly believes
that mathematics is there waiting to be discovered.
It's independent from us.
Mathematical facts would be true
even if no one ever discovered them,
even if there were no intelligent creatures
in the entire history of the universe.
Pi would still be an irrational number.
On the other hand, chess would not exist
if there were no intelligent beings.
Most working mathematicians,
now you were a math student
so you may have picked this up from your teachers.
Most working mathematicians are in fact Platonists.
They believe that when they do mathematical research
they're investigating something that's there
waiting to be discovered and if they get it right
they have discovered something new.
Okay, so that's Platonism.
That's Platonism in a nutshell.
And you're a Platonist.
I am a Platonist.
So what does it mean to exist?
What does that mean?
Because I actually consider myself to be a Platonist.
I would actually think that the game of chess
does exist in some form in the sense that
there are these rules and game theoretically
you can construct a model of chess.
And so that, if you can form a mathematical model of it
then it exists.
You're right.
You're right.
So my example, you can fuss with my example
but it's just meant to be a crude example
for getting an issue.
Can we not then extrapolate it and say that
everything that possibly is logical exists?
Well, there is a view about possible worlds.
Okay, so whenever we speak in a certain mode,
like I say, there are no elephants in this room
but it is possible that there is an elephant in this room.
It's not actual, but it is possible.
What does that mean?
What does that even mean?
Well, one view says you have to understand reality
as made up of possible worlds.
The actual world is one world and another world,
there's another world that's almost exactly like this one.
There's a counterpart.
I'm in it.
It's a multiverse theory of quantum mechanics.
No, yeah, completely different, yeah.
This is a logical thing, not a physics thing.
So there's another possible world
that's exactly like this one,
except there's an elephant over there in the corner, okay?
Otherwise they're exactly the same.
That is a possible world.
And for me to say it is possible
that there is an elephant in this room,
that is a true sentence because there exists
a possible world with an elephant in it, okay?
Can we not extrapolate that to God?
That it's true that God exists?
That's really an interesting question
and it's actually debated.
Cause it sounds like, well,
maybe atheism is true in this world,
but maybe there's another world in which there is a God.
That's gonna be problematic,
but it's actually up in the air.
It's logically tenable, at least there's a case.
It's not clear that it's logically tenable,
and that's why it's controversial.
Cause intuitively it seems like it ought to be.
Yeah, if an elephant can be here,
then why can't we make an abstract notion of something?
Yeah, there could have been a God, there just isn't.
Okay, that sounds sensible.
But if there could have been a God,
then there will be a God in a possible world.
The trouble with that is,
the way we conceptualize God is,
God is a necessary being.
And that means if God exists at all,
God must exist in every possible world.
It's a kind of all or nothing entity
because of the way God-
Cause omnipresence, the omnipresence of God?
Not just omnipresent, but I mean in every world,
whether there is a God or not, it's not an option.
It's either in no world or in every world.
Mathematics is like this.
See, if pi is an irrational number,
then pi is an irrational number in every possible world.
There's no world in which it's equal to
three and a quarter or something like that, okay?
It's always irrational.
And it's the same with God.
Either God just can't exist.
It's impossible.
Wait, how does that commensurate with the elephant though?
Because to me, if you can construct an elephant
in another world, how do you know that that elephant,
being true now, we have to get to some physics,
but how do you know that that elephant
can logically exist?
Just like logically, pi is irrational, okay?
We can prove that.
Pi is irrational.
Now we're saying there's an elephant in this room.
And we're saying that that's possible.
How do we know that's possible?
How do we know that's a possibility?
Just like we know for sure, pi is irrational.
Okay, fair enough.
Primaphasia, it's possible.
Like you can't think of any principled objection
to there being an elephant in this room.
You say, well, how did it get here?
Answer, it's a small elephant.
They brought it up in the elevator,
walked it over here and it's been sitting here
since we started talking.
You can easily imagine a scenario in which
something like that is the case.
So the possibility of an elephant in this room
is a pretty clear case of a possibility.
But the God one, that's a really hard not to crack
because it seems like God,
because remember God is defined in a certain way.
In fact, some people even define God as the necessary being.
And then anything that's necessary
must be true in every possible world.
This is standard logic talk about possibility.
And God would have the same status as two plus two equals four.
If it's true anywhere, it's true everywhere.
Two plus two equals five.
If it's false anywhere, it's false everywhere, okay?
And so God is either like one or the other.
I'm come down on the side that God's like
a contradiction and absurdity.
Well, that only disproves the Christian notion of God.
So what about these Hindu notions of God?
Oh, yeah, that's fine.
Yeah.
So then they could exist.
They could exist.
Yeah.
But you're against an omnipresent necessary being.
Don't say omnipresent.
Say omnipresent just means God is everywhere in space.
That's un-Christian and un-Muslim.
The standard view is God is external outside of space
and time and can observe us, cognizes us,
but isn't in here participating.
Might intervene for a miracle here and there.
But the idea that God is one of us, like that song,
God is one of us, just a stranger on the bus.
And so that's heresy for Christians.
Wouldn't Christians say that you're made in the image of God?
There's a little bit of God in you.
And every time you act, God is almost acting through you.
When you make a decision, it's like you're a conscious.
They're gonna take that as a metaphor.
I'm just debating you.
What if it's not?
What if that is the Christian notion of God?
That actually there's a little spark.
There is an external God, but also he's in you as well.
Okay.
Could that exist in these possible worlds?
Is that commensurate with the idea of?
Not if it's part and parcel of a certain kind of God
who can't exist in principle.
But a lesser God, I mean, look,
you know the difference between deism and theism?
Theism is like standard religion, organized religion.
God is, God cares about you.
God is a person, it's a personal God.
You can talk to God, he might answer your prayers,
you know, all of that sort of stuff.
That's a theistic view.
A deistic view of God just says,
there is a kind of supernatural creator of all of this,
but he doesn't give a damn about us.
Maybe he died after he created it.
Maybe even he's a committee.
You know, maybe there's 27 of them
and they fought over the details
and that's why a lot goes wrong.
It doesn't intervene.
It doesn't intervene.
Set things up to just run like a magnificent clockwork.
And that's a deism.
That's a deism, yeah.
Okay, so 18th century would-be atheists were often deists
and that's because Darwin hadn't come along yet
and they couldn't make sense of design in nature
and they thought you have to have
an intelligent designer for this.
They couldn't escape that.
They certainly didn't believe a word of Christianity,
but they did believe in some kind of
intelligent creator of all of this.
And that's a very common view in the Enlightenment.
The American founding fathers, you know,
like Jefferson, Franklin, Washington,
they were deists.
They weren't Christians.
Americans don't even know their own history.
They make a big deal of being a Christian nation.
Actually, they started out as an anti-Christian nation.
So you must love America.
Not with Trump.
I should explain Sokol's motivation, okay?
So, Sokol is very left-wing,
very concerned with social issues.
And he was worried that, well, like me,
I'm also quite concerned with a whole lot of social issues.
And I worry about students who would become,
you know, socially active in an efficient
and productive way, because they're pro-science.
They're willing to, you know, get the facts right
and do serious investigations
into the social situation and so on.
The trouble with post-modernism,
it becomes a bit lazy.
It's given to sloganeering.
It's given to analyses that,
that, well, I don't know.
They see certain things as political
that aren't political
and often just pick up the wrong end of the stick.
Anyway, Sokol, as you already indicated,
submitted this ridiculous paper
and said, I'd like to publish this.
And it made all kinds of claims
using quasi-technical jargon.
Some of the things you would know.
So he said, mathematics supports a woman's right
to an abortion.
It's in the form of the axiom of choice.
You know this?
Okay, now you, having a math background,
you understand that the axiom of choice
has got nothing to do with free will, choice,
and whether you have an abortion.
So it was full of jargon,
just ridiculous jargon like this,
and the editors published it.
I've always had a bit of a guilty conscience about it,
even though I completely support Sokol
and his motivation.
I was editing a journal at the time.
And when I saw the headline in the New York Times,
it was on the front page and all I could,
I joked, oh God, this could happen to me.
I wonder if anybody's hoaxing me.
And the thing is, in the popular press,
there's all this talk about peer review
and they don't really understand the peer review process
and why you would ignore the process in certain cases
and do something else.
And it's not intellectual corruption,
it's just something else that's going on.
So if you've got a journal, a physics journal,
it's a very well-established discipline
with the methodological guidelines
that have been laid down, they're reliable.
And if somebody follows them, they can be okay.
If they violate them badly, you think,
no, this is a piece of garbage.
We are not gonna take it seriously.
But if you're starting a new field,
like post-modern accounts,
post-modern accounts of science or something like that,
you don't have a long tradition that you can point to
and say, this sort of thing works,
that sort of thing.
You're in virgin territory.
And people who are doing that actually need
to be encouraged and given-
To explore?
Yeah, and given a lot of free reign.
Don't come down on them too hard
for publishing stuff that turns out to be crap.
Now, what about the grievance study affair?
Well, I'm in favor of giving them a lot of free reign.
By grievance studies, you mean things like women's studies,
black studies, aboriginal studies, and so on.
No, I think-
The most recent hoax that came out?
Yeah, yeah, I don't know it well.
I read a very short article on it.
But I don't like the spirit behind attacking them.
I think they do need to be attacked every now and then.
And they certainly shouldn't just think
that they can do any old crap at all.
But often, they're trying to do stuff
and they don't have guidelines to know
when something is gonna work well
and when something isn't going to work well.
They wanna encourage a very generous
and broad conversation about issues.
And I think that's fair and it's intellectually healthy.
That's in line with academic freedom.
And it's part and parcel with academic freedom.
The only thing I have against postmodernism,
not these disciplines like women's studies
or anything like that, I think it's terrific.
I think we should have women's studies and so on.
But I am on the pro-science side of the left.
And that's because I think once you,
if you're a serious postmodern who says,
oh, truth, truth schmooth, facts, smacks, whatever,
you end up shooting yourself in the foot.
It's really, really important to get things
like global warming right in order to understand
what's going on and to tackle it politically
to solve these problems.
I don't see that postmodernists have ever done anything useful
in combating climate change.
Facts about racism, the facts about the climate,
the facts about the pharmaceutical industry.
Those things are really important
that we get those things out.
There might be some truth to this.
So I usually back off and say,
well, some approximation to an egalitarian socialist world.
And maybe some people are five times as well off
as other people.
But that would be such an incredible improvement
over the current situation that I'd be,
I'd go happily to my grave if the difference
between the poorest and the richest
were only five-fold in wealth.
As you know, it's much, much, much, much greater
than that now.
I also think what I care about most of all,
a lot of people care about rights
and they care about freedom and freedom of speech
and so on.
And I think those things are important.
But I think human wellbeing trumps everything.
If all humans are reasonably well off
and they're happy and content,
then that's the kind of world I want.
If we have to sacrifice some rights,
say you leave and limit freedom of speech
to some extent for that,
I'd be willing to do that.
I think going to the wall for complete freedom of speech,
for instance, is a complete mistake.
I like Canada's laws, we have a great deal
of freedom of speech here, but not complete.
So for instance, we have hate laws.
I'm in favour of hate laws.
Now I have lots of philosophical colleagues
and American friends and so on who think the US
is much better in this regard.
There's just no constraints on your speech.
I mean, you can't libel someone.
You can't incite violence.
Yeah, you can incite violence.
But you can deny the Holocaust in the United States.
You could declare that Muslims are a treacherous group
of people and they ought to be oppressed and so on.
You can't say that in Canada.
You could be prosecuted under the law for that.
I favour those constraints on freedom of speech.
And I would favour probably other constraints too
on other kinds of things that we consider free,
for in exchange for an enormous increase in human well-being.
That we're happier, healthier, we have richer lives.
People can intellectually develop and physically develop
to the best of their abilities.
That's the kind of world I want.
That's very much a left-wing view of things.
I think that ought to be, you know, as far as you go.
But it's going a hell of a long way.
Usually when the left is attacked for going too far,
it's either they want to use a great deal of force
to bring about egalitarianism.
That's one way.
And the other way is the political correctness.
They're accused of excessive political correctness.
I think that's just, almost always that's a false charge.
That's just a bogus charge.
That's like Donald Trump, you know,
complaining that millions of people
are streaming across the Mexican border,
murdering and raping.
It's just a lie, right?
It's just a grotesque lie.
Okay, there is something.
We never actually talked about this,
but I'm going to interject this,
because this is an illusion back
to what we were talking about earlier.
Political correctness is not a threat to the university.
We're incredibly free to do whatever the hell we want.
Nobody is being suppressed inside a university.
It's a remarkable, universities are remarkable institutions.
I think they're wonderful institutions.
So what about what happened with Jordan Peterson,
where they didn't even want him to speak
and they had a whole protest against him
and they wanted to get him fired?
Yeah, that's probably a bad idea.
He should probably be allowed to speak.
Probably.
Yeah, I will say probably,
because I'm not absolutely definite.
Very likely, I think.
But I won't say that about absolutely everybody.
So for instance, let's take, what's his name?
Spencer.
Richard Spencer.
Richard Spencer, who's a white nationalist.
Yes.
See, I have serious qualms about allowing him to speak.
We, universities, that is,
are in a kind of a bind here.
If we let, if the universities let Richard Spencer speak,
he gets a kind of prestige and cachet.
So you're worried about legitimizing his own view?
Yeah, a little, he gets,
just by allowing him to speak at a university.
But if we turn him down,
then we get branded as censoring him,
political correctness and so on.
Universities can't win.
And often, right-wingers know we can't win.
And often they don't even care
whether they're allowed to speak or not,
because they know they're going to win
just by either speaking or being turned down.
And then they go to the press and say,
we're being censored.
And then they get, you know,
they win some notoriety for this.
Anyway, I don't think that intellectual,
real intellectual life of the university
is in any way harmed by so-called political correctness.
The real dangers to universities
is completely tangential to this.
The real dangers is the commercialization of research.
We haven't talked about that at all.
Yeah, I saw that.
And that's a really big deal.
And it's an incredibly deep subject
and you probably don't want to go into it.
And you have a talk about that, right?
Well, you touched on it in your past talk.
I used to do a lot of work.
I haven't done much recently,
but I used to do a lot of work on this.
Do you have one that's public that people can go to,
that people can search on YouTube?
Yeah, yeah, I can, I can,
I don't, not off the top of my head,
but I can find something and...
We'll put the links in the description.
And give you a link, yeah.
But the commercialization of research
is having a tremendous effect.
Pharmaceuticals, I think, are just about the worst.
Yeah, it skews research.
So health problems are not tackled by the best solution.
They're tackled by chemical solutions,
which might be the best solution,
but maybe diet, exercise, for depression.
Things like exercise are at least as effective
as the best antidepressants.
Without side effects.
But you can't, yeah.
But you can't make...
Can't patent it.
You can't patent it.
And so it's having an effect
on what kind of research is actually carried out.
That is a real worry.
So if we're interested in the truth,
and not just the truth,
but truths that are good for human beings,
that improves the quality of our lives,
our health, for instance,
then we have to really, really, really worry
and get a grip.
There's just far too much money coming in from industry.
And they're, in fact, often they don't give
all that much money,
but they'll, they top up.
But we get money from the government funding.
And that's arm's length.
The government doesn't interfere with that.
They just give the National Research Council money.
And then they distribute it in a peer-reviewed way
to physics and chemistry and so on.
But often individual researchers will go to,
will apply for money from a pharmaceutical company.
So they're getting a ton of money from the government.
And then the pharmaceutical company
will often give them significant top ups.
And it'll change the direction of the research.
And that's having a very bad effect.
And we're just getting crap drugs often these days
because of it.
And you're not a fan of the FDA?
Do you feel like the FDA doesn't?
The FDA's not so bad.
The FDA doesn't have enough.
I remember hearing a talk that the FDA's restrictions
are too much, are too restrictive,
because they're limiting the amount of drugs
that can come into market.
Oh, no, they're not restrictive enough in that sense.
Drug companies will complain that they're slow
and restrictive and so on.
No, we need to change the FDA rules
while the Americans need to change them.
Right now, they are mandated to license anything
that goes through a clinical trial
and is considered effective when compared with a placebo.
That can be incredibly minuscule, you know?
And yet billions of dollars will be spent on these drugs.
And if this drug gets patented
and there's only generics to compete with it,
then they'll pour a ton of money into advertising.
Doctors will start prescribing this
and doctors can be corrupted by their prescription habits
and get money from the pharmaceuticals.
Right, the cheerleaders.
Yeah, you know about the cheerleaders.
Yeah, that's remarkable.
And often a very old generic drug
is much, much better than these newer drugs.
Fewer side effects, better positive effect,
incredibly cheap to produce and so on.
It's really a tragedy.
It's hard to know how to combat it.
I think I know how to combat it in Canada.
Hard to know how to combat it in the United States
because the United States economy
is so structured around intellectual property rights.
I've tried to figure out how much
of American exports to the world
is in the form of IP rights.
And whenever you buy anything that's American,
I mean, you buy a piece of plastic,
but its value is in the form of IP rights mostly.
And so what percentage of the economy is actually IP rights?
I don't actually have views across the board on patents,
but on drugs, I think it's a terrible mistake
when we should eliminate patents on drugs.
One of the reasons is, unlike say my new iPhone,
full of patents, but I can tell whether the damn thing works.
I just turn it on and it works or it doesn't work.
But in the case of almost every drug,
there's no way for an individual to determine
whether he or she is benefiting from this drug.
All you can do is look at it in a very statistical way.
And there's an incentive to produce a drug
that works as long as you take it.
True.
And that's not good.
Oh, I see what you mean.
Yes, treating chronic diseases is much better
than curing something with a vaccine, for instance.
Yeah, all kinds of problems like this.
Anyway, commercialization, that's I think
is the real threat to intellectual life
and not political correctness,
which is really, really small potatoes,
even in its worst examples.
You said that you had some trouble
with Jordan Peterson's point of view of truth.
Oh, well, watching a video that you directed me to,
and I'm glad this was a video,
a discussion between him and Sam Harris.
Who you also don't necessarily like.
I have special problems with Harris.
Maybe we'll talk about that.
We'll talk about those later.
Yeah, so this was, Harris invited him on,
and Harris seems to be one of these people
who doesn't like political correctness
and thought that Jordan Peterson might be good,
a nice ally, perhaps,
because he too is anti-political correctness and so on.
But then they got bogged down on this notion of truth
and as far as I can tell,
Peterson is just wacko on the concept of truth.
I should just explain, when people talk about truth,
they're not talking about particular truths.
Like we can argue whether or not the neutrino has mass.
We don't know what's true and we don't know what's false,
and we can argue about that and produce evidence.
This is arguing about the very concept of truth itself.
What does it mean for something to be true?
And a normal person, normal philosophers,
standard philosophers,
take a more or less a common sense view about truth.
So a sentence, a statement, a belief is true
because it corresponds to the way things are.
So the sentence, there is a recording device on the table.
That's the sentence.
That's a true sentence because there is in fact a table,
a recording device, and one is on top of the other.
It's a very simple conception of truth.
There are other conceptions.
Some people say, no, no,
truth has got to be linked to evidence.
So the sentence, there is a recording device on the table
is true if and only if there's some method
of gathering evidence to establish that truth.
Lacking that evidence, it's not true.
If you're a realist about truth as I am,
then a sentence could be true
even though the evidence isn't there for it.
You shouldn't believe it if you don't have the evidence.
That's a different matter.
But truth and evidence are things that you can pry apart.
So what is Peterson's conception of truth
as you understand it?
It's a very easy idea that he calls Darwinian.
And so a sentence is true if it has survival value.
He's thinking of this as a very crude thing.
There are some philosophical ideas about truth
that are maybe a little close to that,
that he might, if he knew about them,
he could say, oh, I sort of believe that.
Pragmatism.
Pragmatism often identifies truth
with what is workable, detectable.
Serviceable to life.
Serviceable to life, but it's much more sophisticated
than mere crude Darwinian survival value.
But you can sort of see some kinship
between Peterson's view and pragmatism.
Now the trouble with Peterson's crude view is
there's a ton of stuff we know
that's independent of survival value.
In fact, it may even be true
contrary to survival value.
So just think of all the things you know
about quantum field theory
that wouldn't help you in life's struggle at all.
You could, if you were in the jungle
trying to, like our distant ancestors,
you're not going to survive thank goodness
based on your knowledge of quantum field theory.
You could make a Jordan type case
for a lot of crude, simple beliefs,
like trust your color perception
to distinguish edible things from non-edible things.
You know, that sort of level.
That's fine.
But to be, to enter into the realm of sophisticated science,
which he certainly wants to participate in,
he's got to have an awful lot more subtle
and sophisticated view of what he's doing
than his simple Darwinian view of truth.
