How are you doing today, Edward?
I'm doing great, Korot.
It's great to see you, and it's great to be back on the theories of everything podcast.
Yes, and to give some context for people who are wondering what is this particular episode
about, the reason we're here is that my good friend, professor of physics, Lucas Cardoso,
WhatsApp, messaged me a web page titled Proof of the Geometric Languages Conjecture,
and then he asked me if this was legitimate.
So I then WhatsAppped my other good friend, namely you, professor of mathematics, Edward
Frankel, to find out if it was indeed, and you said yes.
And moreover, we talked about how you're like forest gump, and many mathematical achievements
have you peppered in, either in the foreground or in the background.
The forest gump on mathematics.
Yes, exactly.
So Love and Math covers some of that.
That's your popular book, and the link to that will be on screen and in the description.
And in that book, you provide an accessible introduction to what's one of the most
abstract of all the mathematical topics, namely the Languages conjectures.
And since this isn't a recent monumental result, which is decades in the making,
this channel is one of the places where we can go into the technical details in podcast form
instead of overviews.
So you brought your trusty iPad, and you're going to walk us through
what this result means, how it was achieved, and what the future looks like.
That's right.
Yes.
So I'm happy to be back, and I also want to say that from watching your
videos, of your interviews, of your conversations on this podcast series of everything,
I feel like your audience is more interested in more in-depth discussion of some fairly
sophisticated topics in mathematics, quantum physics, and other areas.
So that's why I was actually happy to accept your invitation to talk about this subject,
which is very, it's quite esoteric and quite sophisticated and quite technical,
because I know that there is a sufficient, at least sufficient number of your viewers,
of your audience, who actually dig this kind of discussions, this kind of discussions,
which perhaps go deeper into more technical aspects than discussions on other podcasts.
Yes.
So I just want to say from the beginning that this is really a very important achievement,
indeed. And like you said, it cups several decades of work by a large group of mathematicians.
I have been involved in this since about 1990. So it was, you know, I was very small.
So I was, I met actually at the time, I met Vladimir Drinfeld, who was one of the pivotal
figures in the subject, Fields Medalist, and so on, as probably got all the major awards by now.
He's a professor at the University of Chicago. At that time, this is 1990, we were both at
Harvard University visiting, and he was actually very interested in my work because it actually,
he was anticipating starting this new kind of a new part of the Langlands program,
which became known as a geometric Langlands program. And he thought that my results, my ideas
were useful for that. And so then we would meet every day and talk about it.
And so then I was like, curious, what is this Langlands program? This is 1990. So there were
not, there weren't so many, it wasn't in the air. Like people weren't talking about this that much,
especially it's new, but it was quite removed from my initial area of interest, which was
representations of infinite dimensional algebra. And so I had the luck of actually having one of the
main figures in the subject teach me about this, the basics. And so this is 34 years ago. So that's
how many years I have been involved in this. And indeed, my work was important in
Drinfeld's work with Balanson, which launched this conjecture, geometric Langlands conjecture,
that kind of like flowered recently in this series of works by, I think it's nine mathematicians,
but led a team of mathematicians team work, it's really like 500 pages or more led by
Dennis Gaetzguri, who is an old friend of mine. We've written like, I counted today 11 papers
together, eight of which are very closely related to the subject and in fact, are used in the proof.
And there are many other great, you know, young mathematicians like Sam Ruskin and Dario Beraldo,
whom I have known. He was, I was basically his code advisor when he was a graduate student here
at Berkeley. So in other words, I'm kind of like well positioned to, to see the big picture and
I'm happy to share it with you and with your audience. Because the subject is quite abstract,
like you said. And so one needs some guidance to kind of penetrate through this, this abstraction,
this, you know, kind of maybe somewhat obscure notions and, and concepts, but they are important.
And I think that I think it's people don't necessarily have to understand the technical
stuff precisely, but just have an idea, have a gist of an idea of what these concepts are,
how they relate to each other. Because after all, you know, a lot of people know about quantum
physics, they know about entanglement, they know about various other kind of weird aspects of
quantum mechanics or quantum field theory. People know a little bit about string theory, for example,
and so on. Because physicists have done a great job kind of explaining these ideas in down to
first terms. Mathematicians haven't. Mathematicians haven't as much. So my book, you mentioned my
book, Love and Math, one of the motivations for writing this book was exactly to present these
ideas in accessible form to for the general audience was published 2013. So about 10 years ago.
And so I have always tried to do it. I was trying to share these ideas with the general audience.
And I think this is a great opportunity to do this again, because this is what we are witnessing
kind of a landmark achievement in the subject being done. Yes, in this, in this recent series
of work. So I think it's very opportune time to revisit some of the aspects of the Langley's
program to look at the big picture to talk about some of the concepts and ideas that go into this
proof. Because these are concepts and ideas not only important for the Langley's program,
but they are kind of bread and butter of modern mathematics. And so the more of us,
the more people are aware of this, these things become kind of in the air, in the conversation.
I think we all benefit from it. Mathematicians benefit because it helps us also to leave our
little office or a little desk, you know, and go talk to other people and kind of get maybe
it helps us to also get kind of a bigger picture. And but also helps other people to understand
what these guys are doing, what kind of ideas are being played, being played with today in
modern mathematics. Some of those people you mentioned that you collaborated with,
did you ever collaborate with Langley himself? Yes, I have just as an aside for people who
are listening, the name Langley's has been around for so long, decades now, the Langley's program,
that it sounds, it would sound like he's no longer around because it's such an historic name,
but he's alive and well at the Institute for Advanced Study. So I just want to show your Robert
Langley's here. So here he is sitting at his office at the Institute for Advanced Study in
Princeton. This picture was taken in 1999. Interesting fact, this is the office previously
occupied by Albert Einstein. I'm serious, it's not a joke. That's the office occupied by Albert
Einstein. And in fact, if you look, if you compare the photographs of Langley's at this office,
also he's given some talks, there are videos online, and so on. With the picture of Einstein,
you will see this is the same office. Now, as I mentioned, I have collaborated with Langley's.
We actually wrote a paper together with another mathematician, Bob Chalango, who is a field
medalist at the University of Chicago. That paper, I think we published in 2010 or something.
So I've known Langley's for many years, and we talked a lot, but especially between 2008-2010,
we collaborated quite closely. I visited him a number of times at the Institute for Advanced
Study. I've spent a lot of time at this office, sometimes arguing with him. He's a tough client.
I have to say, he doesn't take any bullshit. So sometimes we kind of went a little bit,
looked our horns. Can you give an example? Well, you know, he would be sometimes skeptical about
things. And, you know, I was kind of, I guess I was younger and I felt a little bit like I had to
prove myself. Occasionally, I would push back and say, no, that is correct. You don't understand.
I ended up being correct. Well, I would be biased, but I think.
Yes, two sides to every story. I think that I was, I held my own. And, well, we did complete the
paper and I'm proud of it. It was published, like I said, about 2010. And, you know, so obviously,
he accepted some of it, but his comments were always on point, I have to say also. All jokes
aside, you know, that even though he was already like in his 70s and so on, but he was still sharp
and kind of like, you know, quick on his toes and like, yeah, what is this about? He would pick up
exactly the things where things were not quite fitting together, for example. So anyway, that was
a lot of fun. So that's, that's who he is. So he's a mathematician, Canadian born, by the way,
Canadian born from British Columbia. And it's a beautiful story, actually, because he was,
you know, he lived in a small town. His father was a carpenter. And for all he knew, he would just
inherit his family business and, you know, make the windowsills and store windowsills and stuff
like that. But there was a teacher, there was a mathematics teacher at his school who inspired
him to go to university. He went to UBC, University of British Columbia. He wasn't planning to.
This is after the war, you know, he was like, okay, well, this is my town. This is what I'm
going to live here and, you know, do the stuff that my father is doing. But his teacher,
this is all according to like, he wrote a couple of biographical sketches, notes for when he received
some major awards, you know, so that's where I picked this up. He said something like, his teacher
shamed him in front of the classroom full of kids, his classmates saying that
you have to go to university, you know, it would be unforgivable if you don't go to university in
front of other kids. And he was like, okay, well, if he says so, maybe I should. And so he enrolled
in UBC, University of British Columbia. And he describes how he felt early, you know, first
year, second year, he felt kind of inferior to the kids from Europe who seemed to know a lot
more stuff than he did. He studied, you know, in this, in this provincial town, small town.
And he felt a little bit inferior to them. But I think it gave him a little bit of fuel,
like I'm going to show the guys. And so of course, you know, years later,
he comes up with these ideas, which became known as the Langlands program. So how did it happen?
So this was late sixties. In fact, 1967 is the year when he formulated his ideas for the first
time in writing, and it was in a letter. In those days, there was no email, obviously.
So sometimes mathematicians would write things or type things,
and, and, and, and either send it by mail, or if somebody was close enough, as, as was the case,
Andre Wei was a great mathematician who was in Princeton at the same time as Langlands,
and Langlands gave him this bunch of notes, and they were actually handwritten. And
I'll, there's a beautiful cover page, which I'll show you later. But Andre Wei could not make,
you know, understand his handwriting. So actually, he asked him to type, to type the letter. So
eventually he typed it up. And I think it's like 20 or 30 pages still available. You can find it
online, where he shared these ideas. It's not clear that Andre Wei, who was himself a towering
figure in mathematics, very important mathematician of the 20th century, a professor at the Institute
for Advanced Study. At that time, Langlands was not a professor at the Institute for Advanced Study.
He was at the Princeton University, I believe. And so, but they were in the same town and the
same place in Princeton. And I'm not sure, I'm not sure Andre Wei actually understood what he wrote,
but it was a great opportunity for Langlands to kind of like put these things organized on paper.
And then the whole thing just launched because this letter was shared was, you know,
people made photocopies, Xerox copies, you know, and a lot of people got interested in this stuff.
And that's how Langlands program was launched. So now, fast forward, 67, so fast forward, 2007,
40 years. I wrote this book, I wrote this book before Love and Math, I wrote this book, Langlands
Correspondence for Look Groups. Correspondence doesn't mean like sending letters to each other,
even though letters are very important in this story. Correspondence here means kind of like
one-to-one correspondence, a relation between two kinds of objects. And we will talk about this
later on. And a very first sentence in the in the preface to this book, this was published by
Cambridge University Press in 2007. And the first thing, the very first sentence I wrote
is that the Langlands program has emerged in recent years as a blueprint for a grand,
unified theory of mathematics. I just wrote it, you know. So it was a bit of a showmanship,
you know, like, okay, well, that's, you know, kind of like to present it in the most favorable light.
But interestingly enough, this expression caught on. And now I'm quoted in all kinds of places,
as one who said that this is a grand unified theory of mathematics.
So now this gave me an idea of for the opening. So because I know that you are interested,
well, first of all, your podcast is called Theories of Everything. So obviously,
you are interested in this general idea. It's another question whether what we mean by a theory
of everything and so on. But obviously, it's something that is very much on the mind of a
lot of physicists these days, right? And actually not on these days, but for many decades. And so
in physics, that's, you know, grand unified theory, theory of everything is something that people
talk about all the time, right? So then the question then is, okay, so what about mathematics?
Do we have a grand unified theory in any sense? And so in what sense the Languages program is a
grand unified theory. And so I thought I would just take a moment to discuss the difference between
physics and mathematics. I think it's a very essential point, which is actually missed by a lot
of people, because somehow there is sort of like people kind of merge the two and kind of like
don't differentiate them enough. People, as in the general public or mathematics? Even amongst,
well, I would say mathematicians, physicists do know, but in general public, the line between the
two is not clearly marked somehow in the minds of most people. I think it's important to talk about
this to understand. It's essential because this way we can understand all kinds of all kinds of
recent controversies, for example, about string theory. Because as you and I talked about about
a year ago on your podcast, in my opinion, string theory has been great for mathematics,
but it has not been great for physics. So see, there is a difference between the two because
the original promise of string theory was to give us the unified theory of this universe.
And it failed spectacularly, doing so. But it's not all bad. Yes, it has helped mathematicians
to come up with some interesting ideas and it's pushed mathematics. So if we blur the lines between
math and physics, we will say string theory is a success, right? So that's why it's very important
to understand that mathematicians and physicists actually have different goals, different tools,
and there are different expectations, different responsibilities, if you will.
So what is the difference? Let's talk about this. Yeah? Sure. Okay. So let me go back to the beginning
of my slides. And so I want to talk about unification because what does the idea of
unification in mathematics actually mean? And so I want to start with the famous quote
by Galileo. At the times of Galileo, the two things were really close to each other,
natural sciences and mathematics. And the Galileo said, famously wrote, the book of nature is written
in the language of mathematics, right? And he continued, its characters are the characters
in the language are triangles, circles, and other geometric figures without which it's impossible
to understand a single word without which one is left wandering in a dark labyrinth. So in other
words, mathematics is a language of nature. Okay. So now let's talk about, so let's talk about physics.
In physics, we have this nomenclature, we have unified field theory, which actually started
with early attempts by Albert Einstein to unify general relativity, which described his theory
describing the force of gravity. And electromagnetism, there were only two forces of nature known at the
time. Then eventually, physics found that there are two other forces that we can strong, the nuclear
forces, subatomic forces. And we have now the standard model, which describes three out of four
known forces of nature, electromagnetic weak and strong, with spectacular experimental success.
But of course, a lot of questions remain. For example, it has a Lagrangian of standard model
has something like 19 parameters. A lot of people are not satisfied with it. They feel that there
are much deeper theories yet to be discovered, right? And so then grand unified theory in physics
refers to an attempt to merge these forces into a single unified force, including gravity. So for
now, we don't have a quantum field theory of gravity. Strength theory promised us to give one,
but they failed in doing so during the period of 40 years. And it looks like it doesn't look
very good. If you had to bet, I think that you shouldn't put your money on this. Investment
advice. I don't put any money on this. Maybe short it. You know, like in the markets, you can buy
stock, you can short it. So shorting is probably still a good idea. But I think the stock has come
down quite a lot because more and more people kind of wake up from this dream and kind of like,
look at the reality of the situation and say, look, you know, we have to move on to other things.
All right. And so just a moment, do you say that with any reservation because you've published
in string theory in the past, or you've published with one of the most famous string
theorists? So it's picking a forest gump, right? So not only did I publish with Langlands and other
people I've mentioned, I also published a paper with Ed Whitton, okay, in 2007, around the time
when this book that I mentioned was published. But see, this is the thing. With Whitton, we published
a paper about mathematical ideas involved in string theory. And actually it was not even string
theory, but more like quantum field theory in higher dimensions. You see, well, in higher
dimensions, it's not a proper term. You see, string theory kind of turns things upside down,
because in string theory, the field theory, which is involved is a two-dimensional field
theory, because you're considering a propagation of strings, right? And what is a string? It's like
a circle. And when it moves, it sweeps an area. So it sweeps something two-dimensional. So in
effect, you're studying embeddings of what we'll discuss later, these objects called
Riemann surfaces. Think of the surface of a doughnut or of a Danish pastry or a sphere,
okay? They're maps or embeddings into the spacetime. So the spacetime is on the receiving end
of these maps. But the theory itself is defined on the surface, you see, on the Riemann surface.
That's weird, because you're taking the two-dimensional field theory in which the target
space is the spacetime. Normally, we take the theory is defined on the spacetime. So the roles
kind of switch, which is kind of like, it's really cool if you think about it now. But string theory
is not just a theory of a quantum field theory on a Riemann surface, because in string theory,
once you study these models, the quantum field theory is defined on surfaces. That's not enough.
That's the first step. The second step is to integrate over all possible Riemann surfaces.
And that involves summation over all possible topological types, like sphere or surface of
a doughnut and so on. They call the parameter, the logical parameter is called a genus. So sphere
is of genus zero. A torus is of genus one. The Danish pastry with two holes is of genus two.
The pretzel is of genus three. So you have to sum up the results corresponding to each topological
type of a Riemann surface. And then for each of them, you have to sum up over all possible
complex structures, basically. In fact, you have to sum up over all the metrics. But because
the theory is what's called conformity invariant, you actually end up with a finite-dimensional
integral over what's called a modular space of complex structures on the Riemann surface.
So string theory is not just a two-dimensional quantum field theory defined on a specific Riemann
surface. So if you imagine some two-dimensional world, you know, like some bugs, let's say you
have like a globe in your apartment or in your house, and you have a little spider who lives
on that globe. So that spider's space, well, it's more space than spacetime. But okay, let's forgive
me for this difference. Let's assume that the spacetime of the spider is a sphere, is the surface
of the globe. So then the quantum theory that the spider would observe if it were indeed her
spacetime would be a two-dimensional theory defined on a specific Riemann surface, namely the surface
of this globe. You see what I mean? Yes. But that's not string theory yet. String theory is when
you can see the spiders living on all possible Riemann surfaces. And you sum up all the every
calculation, you sum up over what happens across all of them. So that's string theory. So that's a
very simple explanation of the difference between quantum field theory and string theory.
So first of all, quantum field theory is not defined on a spacetime. Rather, spacetime is on
the receiving end of maps from a two-dimensional surface through this spacetime. So the theory
effectively is two-dimensional. Then the theory is what's called conformal invariant, which allows,
which gives us a possibility to actually sum up over all possible choices over Riemann surface.
And it's when you sum up, you get amplitudes from string theory, you see. So that's the,
and you have to admit that it's a very cool idea. It's a very cool idea. You turn things upside down
kind of, that your spacetime becomes the target space of the theory. It's not the space,
the ground of the theory. It's a kind of additional ingredient of the theory. The theory itself is
defined on Riemann surfaces, but it's sort of like, it's a cool idea, but at the same time,
it's actually kind of like precipitates its own demise, string theory, because then the question
is, which spacetime do you have to choose, you see. So it does not lock you because you don't
define your theory on your spacetime that is given to you, which is this our universe,
which has three spatial and one time dimension, but it becomes a parameter, right, of your theory.
And so, but the point is that it's an essential condition is that the theory be conformal invariant
on the Riemann surfaces, which means that all the metrics, that if you rescale your metrics locally,
then you will get the same result. And this enables you to go from an integration over some
infinite dimensional spaces, which is basically intractable to actually finite dimensional spaces.
Instead of the integration of all metrics, what's called metrics on the Riemann surface,
you go to the integral over all complex structures, which is a finite dimensional manifold,
so that the integral in principle could be computed, even though there are all kinds of
singularities that need to be regularized, which no one, no one as far as I know has been able to
do in general, actually. But at least there is a path to doing it. But the problem is that your
spacetime is a kind of an external thing that you put into the theory. And the question is,
how do you differentiate between them? How do you say, oh, our spacetime has to be this?
And so one condition is that the theory has to be conformal invariant, and that means that it's
halabi-yao. So you probably heard this said many times that the target space of string theory
is a halabi-yao manifold. Halabi-yao manifold is one for which the corresponding two-dimensional
theory of maps from your Riemann surface, say, donut, source of donut, a sphere, and so on,
to your spacetime is conformal invariant. But the problem is that there are too many
halabi-yaos, and the problem is that string theory is only when defined when this manifold is
ten-dimensional. Super string theory to be precise. Super string theory. For string theory,
it would have to be 26-dimensional. So it's a much bigger gap from what we observed to what
string theory allows you to work with. So the great, the first string revolution in the 1980s
was going from bosonic string theory to supersymmetric string theory, where you have a sort of a
balance between bosons and fermions, which enabled to bring the dimension down to ten.
And ten is kind of much closer to four than 26. So you have six extra dimensions. And then this
was like, okay, well, these six dimensions that curl onto this little halabi-yao manifold. But
which one? And the problem is nobody has been able to find. And the problem is also that it's not
just a single one, but it's moving also with the dynamics of the theory. This halabi-yao manifold,
this extra six dimensions, is also changing. And those changes lead to some long-range forces,
which nobody has been able to observe. So therefore, it's like immediately in contradiction with
experiment. Not to mention that it's supersymmetric. And we don't observe supersymmetry in this
universe. So anyway, that was a long kind of aside digression on string theory. Just to show you
what the problem is, if you're a physicist, this is a major issue because your job, your job, you
only have one job if you're a physicist. And I mean quantum physics. Obviously, there are other
areas of physics like solid state physics, statistical physics, and so on, where models are
much more diverse. But if you are quantum physicists who works on finding the theory of
everything, or granting you phytheria. If you're a high-energy physicist in fundamental physics.
You're a high-energy physicist. You only have one job, which is to describe this damn universe.
That's your job. You're not interested in describing all possible universes,
ten-dimensional, and so on. But mathematicians are interested in all of them. So that's the
difference between us. That's the major difference. As a mathematician, I love ten-dimensional
manifolds. Or ten-dimensional spaces, if you will. They're just as good. They're my children,
just like four-dimensional space times. I don't differentiate between them. I love all of them,
you see. Or even infinite-dimensional spaces. Briefly, mathematician is interested in a space
of any dimension. A high-energy physicist is only interested in four-dimensional spaces.
And not just some generic spaces, but the ones which I realize in this universe. Now,
there may be some other universes which are ten-dimensional. And maybe this theory describes
those universes. Okay, first of all, how do you find out? It's true, right? You have like,
pick up a phone, and they talk to some aliens who live in ten-dimensionally say, congratulations.
You have found the grand unified theory of our universe. Congratulations. But what is good
is it for us. Now, I have to also add, there is also another aspect that by doing this more
general theories, you can actually stumble upon some ideas which you may find it more difficult to
understand in the realistic theory. And then you can try to adopt it, to tweak it,
to apply it to this universe. So, for instance, lower-dimensional theories are usually simpler
than higher-dimensional theories. So, for instance, two-dimensional theories have been a great
playground for physicists to try to develop ideas or some three-dimensional theories as well.
This is a famous work by Alexander Polikov, a brilliant, you know, Russian-Soviet physicist
about three-dimensional, instanton since three-dimensional gauge theories, which became
classic because it gives you a mechanism of how instantons contribute to collision functions,
which we still don't understand how to apply in four-dimensions. And if we could, we would be
able to solve the confinement problem to understand why quarks cannot be separated
as you move them apart, which is a feature of four-dimensional gauge theory. This is just one
example. This is a phenomenon called instantons, which is understood much better in three-dimensions
and in two-dimensions than it is in four-dimensions. But this is that province, that area of research,
where you try different models in other dimensions. It's called mathematical physics proper,
really. That's the overlap. If you think of Zen diagram, I said Zen diagram. Well,
Zen diagram, okay. Something else. Zen diagram is something else, probably. So if you look at the
Venn diagram of mathematics and physics, yes, there is this overlap. And that's called mathematical
physics. So all my life, I was very interested in that because, you know, I actually, as a kid,
I was actually very interested in high energy physics and quarks and so on. And then I learned
that actually you have to understand mathematics to even speak about those theories. And as I
delve deeper and deeper into math, I realize that I actually love mathematics, proper.
But also, occasionally, it was SU3 that got you inspired. SU3, that's right. The quarks,
the description of elementary particles in terms of quarks, which goes back to Maury Gelman
and this Russian mathematician Swyke as well. So anyway, that's what my work was with and was
kind of in mathematical physics because it was about understanding certain models which are
closely related to quantum field theory and potential string theory as well. But it doesn't,
for example, those models are supersymmetric. The geometric Langlands conjecture that Witten
worked on, it is in four dimensions though. Yes, in a sense, yes, but yes, true. But supersymmetric
theories, that's what I'm trying to say. People think the general public thinks of supersymmetry
is just one supersymmetry, but there are extensions. There are perversions of supersymmetry. So they're
n equals 2, n equals 3 extensions. So typically, we study n equal 1, n equal 2,
n equal 4. And that's called maximal supersymmetry. So supersymmetry, by the way,
is a very simple idea. It's just that you have one of the requirements of quantum field theory is
the invariance under the Pankarei group. The Pankarei group combines the Lorentz group,
which is kind of all rotations or pseudo rotations in a Minkowski space. And translations.
So Pankarei group is built as a semi-direct product of the Lorentz group and the group of
translations. Everything in your theory has to be invariant under this action. So,
for instance, the space of fields, the space of states has to be what's called a representation
of this group, of the Pankarei group. In a supersymmetric theory, this representation has to
be extended to a bigger group. But in fact, not a group, it's called supergroup, because it has
both bosonic degrees of freedom and fermionic degrees of freedom. The bosonic degrees of
freedom will stay the same. It will be the same Pankarei group, but there will be some fermionic
transformations. The kind of weird little transformations, they're kind of like little
shifts. They are not even bona fide transformations in the ordinary way. And so this way you get an
enlarged supergroup, which, depending on its size, is classified as n equal 1, equal 2,
n equal 3, n equal 4. But the biggest one you can get, given all the requirements of cornfield
theory, is n equal 4. And that's the theory we're talking about. That's the theory which exhibits
what's called electromagnetic duality, gauge theory, super young mills, or super gauge theory,
n equal 4, in four dimensions, exhibits something that's closely connected to the
geometric Langley's correspondence, which is called electromagnetic duality.
So anyway, so this was just to put things in perspective of how similar phenomena actually
arise in both mathematics and physics, although today this phenomenon that we're talking about,
the Langley's correspondence, or Langley's program, or Langley's duality, or Langley's conjecture,
can use all these terms, they actually, so far, we only know how to apply them to supersymmetric
theories. So therefore, it's not physics proper, it's mathematical physics. You see what I mean?
Yes. Okay. Now, but now let's go back to this idea of unification. So in physics,
in theoretical physics, proper, not mathematical physics, like string theory, but real physics.
So I'm not, and I'm not trying to offend anybody. I'm just saying real physics means,
and I'm not a physicist, so I'm kind of looking from outside. I have no horse in this race,
to be honest with you. I'm just like, I'm kind of an independent observer. And all I know is
theoretical physics, you have to describe this universe. And I don't think anyone would argue
with that. So then, in the perspective of theoretical physics, there are these notions of
standard model, grand unified theory, and theory of everything, TOE. Okay. That's the one which
unifies all forces. So I guess, yes, grand unified theory. That last one sounds familiar. It sounds
familiar, right? I mean, so, but I have to say, GUT, grand unified theory, usually references kind
of a better understanding of the standard model. So it's still three forces. So TOE means that you
include gravity. I think that's the nomenclature. Okay. Yes. And so now this is a beautiful quote
from Einstein, which is something he said during his Nobel lecture, when he received the Nobel Prize
in 1923. He said, the intellect seeking after an integrated theory cannot rest content with the
assumption that there exist two distinct fields totally independent from each other by their
nature. So that's the impulse, which is a very natural human impulse. You want to simplify
things. You want to reduce things to something, to believe that at a deeper level, there is only one
phenomenon that manifests itself in many different ways, right? Well, to be fair, he does say,
if you're seeking after an integrated theory, so by saying integrated theory, he already has the
assumption that you can't have two distinct parts. That's right. So you could say that you could be
like, because there's a there's a philosopher named Nancy Cartwright who says there are different
models of the world and one is the integrated approach. Another one's a patchwork approach
where it's akin to open sets that overlap and in the overlapping region, you just have to have
compatibility, but they could be incompatible outside of that. And then furthermore, you could
have regions where there is no law. No, I agree. I agree. Absolutely agree. And in fact, in mathematics,
it's more like that. In mathematics, we do not seek. So that was my next point. In mathematics,
we do not seek to have an integrated theory of everything. We do not. I didn't mean to preempt
your point. So yes. So in the sense, what you described is more like how mathematicians approach
it. But you see a lot of it also has a social element. So when we brought up and I can speak
for myself, because I studied mathematics since I was a kid, and I went through school,
graduate school, and so on. And so I can say that never, ever at any moment were my teachers telling
me, Edward, find the grand unified theory of mathematics. It was never an issue. First of all,
I think it's impossible. Mathematics is just so diverse. There's just so many different subjects.
It's like, I like to talk about them. There's another analogy I used in love and math, the
continents of mathematics. So there is number theory. There is harmonic analysis. There's
functional analysis. There's geometry. There is algebra and so on. And they are all connected
somehow. But it's not like one field will subsume all other fields. We don't have that idea.
But physicists, I've spoken to a lot of my colleagues, physicists. Oh, yes, when they are
studying, there is a lot of premium on this idea that maybe I'll be the one to come up with the
theory of everything. So I'm actually, I'm hopeful that the next generation of physicists will see
through this and understand that in some ways it is, it gives you kind of a kick. It gives you
kind of, it makes it more fun, it's more competitive. But also there is a great downside. And quite
honestly, I think that the debacle with string theory is in many ways the result of, of this sort
of attempt to subjugate everything to what you already know, you see, and then discard all other
ideas and say that they are, they are not serious. They are, their ideas are propagated by amateurs
and stuff like that. Instead of looking in the mirror and kind of like understanding what am,
what am I doing here? And on the ground, am I to claim that the theory I'm working on is the
only game in town, which was an expression used by many string theorists for a long time.
Still is. So, um, well, you know, one day, you know, it's like reality intrudes. So like you can
pretend that it's not there, but reality will look at you in the face every day and will say,
okay, Edward, when are you going to accept reality? And one day you will have to, or you
will die, not accepting it and other people will come and do it for you. You see what I mean?
Just a moment. Why do you think, because the string theorists will say that, look, in the past
in physics, when we've been onto something, it did produce mathematical results as well.
Now look, in string theory, while it's not producing physical results, at least not experimentally
testable in our range currently, it's producing plenty of mathematical results. And we could use
that as some proxy indication that we're onto the right physics. What do you say to that?
I disagree. I just explained the difference between mathematics and physics. So what they're,
what string theory does is it, where the string theory has been positive is in the area of mathematical
physics, because it points us to some very interesting phenomena in a whole range of theories
which have nothing to do with our universe, you see. And that's useful for many reasons. Number one,
it helps pure mathematics. And the string theory has been tremendously helpful to mathematicians,
has led us to some, onto some paths which we probably would not have discovered in the 21st
century. So in other words, it was some kind of mathematics just fell on mathematicians' lab
in the 20th, 21st century, because it was inspired by string theory. Yes. Also, this,
these ideas, these theories, 10 dimensional, with 10 dimensional space time, they are not useless
at all. They are useful because studying those theories, you are, you observe some phenomena
which can help you eventually to come up with realistic theory of this universe. There are
these things like electromagnetic duality, which we're going to talk about, which is connected
to the Langland's program. There are things like ADS CFT, which are absolutely beautiful
mathematically, but not only mathematically, because they are the phenomena in theories
which are in the same class as quantum field theories describing this universe. You see,
they're different because they are different dimensions, they are supersymmetric and so on. So
they are not, they're not quite fitting the, the clothes that you have to put on,
but you have to put on the clothes of your universe. Otherwise, it's, it's, it's not physics. You
see, that's, that's, that's a very simple thing. Yes, it's true that you could say that in the first
10 years of development of string theory, that its success in mathematics gives you a kind of
confidence that you should keep going and working on it because there must be something there.
But after 40 years, after 40, actually more than 40 now, because we're talking, yeah, about 40,
I would say, yeah, 85 would be the first thing. The first super string. And then they saw the
constellation, the Green-Schwarz constellation of anomalies. That was brilliant, brilliant work
that gave people, and I understand the human element of it. Of course, you get carried away. Of
course, you get excited. Of course, you want to run around like, who was it? Archimedes who jumped
out of a bathtub when they understood how the bodies float? Of course, you want to jump and run
around naked and say, guys, it's amazing. I have come up with this incredible discovery. I understand
it. And of course, please do that, but not for 40 years. I mean, after 10, 20 years. And I think
the crucial moment was about 2012, when LHC was fully online, and it was clear that there's no
site of supersymmetric, super partners. That was the time for reckoning in the field. That was
a time for kind of a serious conversation where the adults, the elders of the theory,
should have talked, should have come out and said, look, you know, it's not working out.
And allow other ideas to come in. That's the problem. The problem is not just,
yeah, please, of course, keep working on it. But when you deny resources to everybody else,
then it becomes a bigger issue. Now, I don't want to spend the whole conversation talking about
string theory. I think it's important to talk about it because I am on record on your podcast.
A year ago, on the heels of my keynote lecture, or it's called challenge talk,
at the big string theory conference at the Printer Institute near Toronto, I guess near
where you are, in July of last year, where I saw up close this community and I saw up close what's
going on. And I was very disturbed by it. So then I went on your podcast and I spoke about
the failure, what I call the failure of the original promise of string theory.
So in today's conversation, I would like to bring up the connection between the language
correspondence, which is the main or language program, which is the main topic of our conversation,
and electromagnetic duality is in supersymmetric young mills theories,
four-dimensional supermeans theories. So some people, some viewers may be puzzled by this.
So how can this guy be criticizing string theory? And at the same time,
he's saying that, you know, that it's very interesting to study this supersymmetric theories.
So that's why I took some time to explain this major difference in approaches of mathematicians
and physicists, as well as mathematical physicists, what is appropriate, what's not appropriate,
and where you have responsibility as a physicist to make sure that your results actually apply to
this universe and not claim something that is not there. Because a lot of, you know,
I'm not going to call names, but you can easily find quotes where people saying string theory has
unified Einstein's theory of gravity with quantum field theory. Yes, it has in ten dimensions.
And even then it's still incomplete because of various issues which have not been addressed,
because it's only defined alternatively, and so on. But let's just say that, yes, in ten dimensions,
they have combined, but they don't put that in the sentence. They say we have combined, you see.
And it's a lie if you just say it this way, quite frankly. And like the first time you say it,
it's kind of cute, but like after 40 years, after 40 years, it's a lie if you keep saying that.
And if you keep giving yourself A+++, as one of the major figures in string theory did in the
recent public event, A+++, is how he is a great. Oh, I don't know about that.
Is a great. Yeah. Wow. Interesting. Wow, A+++. You know, I usually, when I teach, I give A++,
I kind of like, okay, let's be realistic, like I never give A++, especially for someone who
actually couldn't solve any problem exam, you know. But that's just me. So I wanted to explain
this difference. It's important. In mathematics, we don't have this issue. Any consistent mathematical
theory is valid. It doesn't have to be in four-dimensional space time. It can be ten-dimensional
space time. That's why mathematicians love string theory, but it doesn't mean that physicists should
love it. Understood. Okay. All right. Let's move on. So there is another aspect of it,
which is that physical theories get updated. And mathematical theories appear to be objective,
necessary and timeless. How do you explain that? That's a mystery to me. So what does
mathematics actually describe? And the point is that there are a lot of concepts and ideas in
mathematics, which are priori, have nothing to do with the physical universe, with nature.
In other words, they don't fit into the four-dimensional space time, you see. So, for
instance, in this geometric line of correspondence, we talk about sheaves, not even functions, which
are kind of like, okay, a function is something that is rooted deeply in the physical reality.
For instance, think about temperature. At every point in the room, there is a certain number,
which is a temperature at that room, or barometric pressure. And so to every point,
you assign a number, and that's what mathematicians call a function. So functions are very much,
you know, bread and butter of physics. But sheaves, like, when was the last time you saw a
sheave on the street? So that's just one example, or infinite dimensional hybrid spaces,
or periodic numbers, like these numerical systems, these isoteric numerical systems,
that are bread and butter of mathematics, and yet we don't observe them in the physical reality.
So then, if so, what could unification mean for mathematics, you see? And so my favorite example
is that I say, you know, if Leo Tolstoy did not write Anna Karenina, nobody else would have written
exactly the same novel. But if Pythagoras did not live or did not discover his theorem, we would
still have Pythagoras' theorem. It would still be a squared plus b squared equals c squared,
and not equal c cube. And it stays the same for the last 2,500 years. And by the way,
it was actually, as it turns out, was discovered by others in other places, like in Babylon,
in Mesopotamia, in China, even before Pythagoras. So, and it hasn't changed. Whereas, for instance,
our theory of gravity got updated 100 years ago, from going from Newtonian theory of gravity to
Einstein theory of gravity. So there's something very special about mathematics.
Some mathematicians believe that there is this platonic world of mathematical ideas
named after the Greek philosopher Plato, who, I must say, was really following in the footsteps
of Pythagoras. These ideas really go back to Pythagoras, in my opinion. And so the question,
then, is usually posed as, do we discover mathematics or do we invent it? And I used to be
squarely on the side of, like, it is discovered. In other words, there is this
ideal world of mathematical objects and concepts. And we just go there somehow,
almost like ESP, like extra sensory perception, like mathematicians go there,
and to this ideal world, and discover and bring back the fruits of those from that world.
Mind you, a no smaller figure than Charles Darwin actually wrote that mathematicians are
in doubt with an extra sense. He actually wrote that closer to the end of his life. He wrote
that he regretted not to have studied mathematics more as a young adult or as a child,
because he wrote, and I think it's a direct quote, mathematicians are in doubt with an extra sense.
So there is this perception, and I have to say, as a working mathematician, you do feel it.
So a friend of mine recently asked me, like, how do you experience it? How do you experience
mathematical discovery? And so the best I could come up with is that, you know, I can imagine,
like, there is this deep fog. So you know, there's something there, but you don't know what. And
then occasionally, some part of it, the mist kind of starts dissolving. And you see the contours,
the contours of the trees, or a or a castle, or some exotic animals. And then maybe it will
close again. But those, that's the sense that you have. You don't feel that you invent something.
You don't feel that you come up with something just on your own. You feel like it's always
been there, but obscured by our inability to see it was invisible. So there is this sense.
But now I kind of also feel that mathematics is a human activity. So, and therefore, I kind of,
like, I'm reluctant these days to just say, yeah, it's discovered, it's just out there.
Because who discovers this mathematical ideas? Human mathematicians, right?
And so, as far as we know, maybe some other animals too, and apparently some animals can count
up to certain numbers, some can't and so on. But for now, all the mathematics that we know
came from human beings. So there's something to be said about that. And so I'm kind of like,
now I feel it's a mystery. It's one of those questions where it's neither and both,
like an electron is both a particle and a wave, neither and both, kind of like that. But it's
a very interesting thing to think about and contemplate. So, Kurt Gödel, actually, the great
logician, the greatest logician of all time, as far as I'm concerned, wrote that mathematical
ideas form an objective reality of their own, which we cannot create or change, but only perceive
and describe. Of course, this is very close to the conversation about artificial intelligence and so
on. But I'm not going to go there because we want to get to the language program. So, well,
I have this one example of the universality of mathematics. I don't know if we should go there
or should move more faster to the... Do you want to say it quickly? Yeah, so there is this idea
about numbers. So, just to give you a sense of how weird mathematics is, weird in a good way.
I want to pose this question. Is there only one mathematics or there are like different,
imagine there is another universe, not another universe, like another exoplanet, like there is
another civilization, and they have their own mathematics? What if we meet and we start comparing
our notes? Is it possible that their mathematics is totally different? And so, the traditional argument
that it may be so goes like this. Imagine that this new civilization has like many different
aliens. And then you can imagine all kinds of pictures of these aliens. So, then they are like us
because we see ourselves, we see other people kind of like similar to us. So, naturally, we start
counting things. So, numbers arise from the idea that there are many things which are kind of similar
to each other, right? But what if you have like a Solaris-type intelligence? Solaris was a novel
by Stanislav Lehm, a great Polish science fiction writer, and it's been made into a film by
Andrei Tarkovsky, and then also was a Hollywood remake of this movie. I highly recommend the
Tarkovsky version, where the intelligence was, this is one thing, was this whole planet was
intelligent. So, then the argument goes, okay, for that intelligence, there is no reason to
come up with numbers because it's only one of it, they only absorb one of it.
There's no need for it to develop the idea of numbers because it cannot count. There are no
essential things to count. So, right? But I have an answer to that, and I want to explain how Solaris,
like intelligence, would actually discover numbers. Not by counting the way we usually do or the way
we teach our kids, which by the way, I think it's a very, there are some subtle points there that we
are not properly teaching additional multiplication, but that's another story.
Let me not go there at the moment, I can talk about it later. So, here is an alternative way
to discover numbers, which is more clean in some sense, and kind of devoid of the deficiencies
of the traditional way of teaching kids numbers through counting. Namely, we can discover them
through winding. You see, so this is, this comes from what's called topology. So, this,
I have a floss here to demonstrate. So, the point is that I can take, I put it on my finger,
and then I can go around. I can go once, I can go twice, I can go three times, four times, and so on.
So, if it's an infinitely long floss, in principle, I can wind this string
any number of times. But so, this way I represent all natural numbers, one, two, three, four, and so
on, but also absorb that I can represent negative numbers if I go in the opposite direction.
You see, instead of going this way, I can go this way. And so, this way I can actually
introduce all integers without counting, just as a, by realizing that the topological structure,
that if I cannot unwind things, like, because to unwind, I would have to move the strings
through my finger. So, if I, if I'm not allowed to move my strings through my finger, then there is
a distinction between winding the string once or twice, three times, or a negative number.
In the Solaris case, what would be the analogy, the solar prominence?
So, the analogy in the Solaris case is that instead of wrapping a circle onto itself,
you can think of my finger, first of all, you don't need the whole finger, you can just look at
the section of the finger, right? So, kind of the intersection of my finger with a plane.
And then you can, you can look at this picture that I put out on the slide, where basically the
circle is just, it's just wrapping onto, onto itself like many times, right? And so,
but likewise, the sphere can wrap onto itself many times. This is, this is much harder to imagine,
because you see, you can easily see it in four-dimensional, from the four-dimensional
perspective, but in 3D, it's very hard to imagine a sphere wrapping onto itself, but you kind of
can grasp it by analogy, that just like a circle wrapping on itself
gives us an invariant, what might be called an invariant, topological invariant,
which is the winding number. Likewise, there is an invariant of a map between a sphere,
from a sphere to a sphere. And the coverings of sphere by sphere is also labeled by all integers,
because also there are two orientations possible, so you get both positive numbers,
negative numbers. This is a rough rendering of what this might look like. This is an example
was called a homotopy group. So, in fact, here, this corresponds to the Pi 1, the fundamental
group, the first homotopy group. And here, we're talking about Pi 2. Every time you have a sphere,
you're talking about Pi 2, the second homotopy group. When you have a circle, you talk about Pi 1,
and that's the first homotopy group, also known as a fundamental group. Anyway, this is just a kind
of a, something to realize how many interesting aspects of mathematics there are, which go far
beyond what we use ordinarily, like counting. So, what it shows is that the same concept can
actually arise from different continents of mathematics. In the first approach, you get
two numbers through counting, so kind of from the point of view of number theory, right?
But in the second approach... This seems to be evidence for the discovery of mathematics.
Right. Discovery, but this is a baby version of unification. That's what I mean by
unification of mathematics, that numbers, natural numbers or whole numbers actually live on the
intersection of two fields, number theory and topology, you see. You can discover the same numbers
from these two different points of view. And to me, that's an example of unification. In
other words, you're not trying to say that topology is subsumed by number theory or the other way
around, but you observe that there are certain phenomena which are reflected in both fields,
or which are manifested in both fields. And that's why it's prized in mathematics to have this type
of situation, because it gives you a different perspective. It's like you're looking at the
same object, but from a different angle. And this is where a lot of great discoveries are made,
when you're able to realize the same thing from these two different angles, or more,
two, three or more different angles. So, for me, mathematics is like a giant jigsaw puzzle,
where you're kind of trying to build this picture from the small pieces without really
knowing what this final picture is going to look like. And so, when you solve a jigsaw puzzle
with your friends, usually the strategy is to try to build small islands. So, you find a few
pieces of it together, and you try to enlarge them, and your friends do the same. And so then,
at some point, you kind of build several islands in this picture, which kind of looks consistent.
But the greatest advance happens when you know how to fit different islands together,
when you play jigsaw puzzle. And it is like that. That's what the Languages program comes in. So,
Languages program is like this, is one, is a set of ideas which suggest how different continents
could fit together. That's kind of like a brief summary of what it's about. Great. So, that's
like, so then what are the continents that we're talking about? And so, you have number theory,
which is obvious. You have harmonic analysis, which is this very important idea in mathematics,
which is that you can decompose different signals as a superposition, a signal, you can decompose
a signal as a superposition of some basic signals. And basic signals are given by what's called
harmonics, that they have frequencies which are multiples of each other.
Oh, okay. So, for people who are familiar with the terms Fourier series, this would be an example
of that. Fourier series. What I'm referencing right now is the idea of Fourier series,
where you can write a given function as a combination, sometimes infinite, of sine and cosine
functions, but not just to sine x, cosine x, but sine nx and cosine nx, where n is a whole
number, is an integer. So, different sine functions have graphs which look like this,
but if you, as you increase n, it becomes more and more squished. And so, that corresponds to
a higher and higher pitch in the sum. Right? And so, we know that in the
chromatic scale, essentially, the frequencies are differed by rational numbers,
not quite. There is a gap. There is this wolf tone and so on. But roughly speaking, you can
generate them from going up an octave, where the frequency doubles and going to the Pythagorean
fifth, where the frequency gets multiplied by approximately three halves. And by using this,
you can then realize other nodes with a small gap at the end, somewhere, by rational number. But
if it's by rational, it means you can always find kind of a smallest denominator frequency,
so that every other frequency is a multiple of it. So, that brings you into that framework that I
was talking about, where you consider nodes with frequencies which are multiples of each other,
integer multiples of each other. And then, if you think about an orchestra playing,
then the sound of an orchestra is a combination of sounds of different instruments. And each sound
of an instrument at any moment is a note, a particular note, and that note has a frequency.
And so, you can think of this decomposition of breaking into pieces of a sound. As the
decomposition of a signal into a combination of different nodes, each of them with its own
intensity. And that's the idea for your analysis or for your series. So, that's the subject which
studies this type of decomposition. So, what do you need here? You need a particular space of
functions, and you need some preferred functions, some special functions, a collection of functions
like sine nx and cosine nx. And then, they should be rich enough to give you every function
as a superposition. It also has a continuous analog, which is called the Fourier integral,
as opposed to Fourier series. These bubbles appear, by the way.
It liked what you were saying.
These bubbles, it means that the AI overlords are liking what I'm saying, which is great.
It did some harmonic analysis on that. I think they're like a meta-level realizing.
It's harmonic, right?
That you're in sync with it, yes.
That's good.
Okay, so you're outlining, there's a harmonic analysis, there's topology,
there's number theory or numbers.
Geometry. So, you have this Riemann surface we talked about earlier when I talked about string
theory, for example. And so, what is the Langland's program? The Langland's program is this giant
project aimed at finding common patterns in different fields of mathematics. And so, the original
formulation by Langland's in the 1960s, in 1967, in that letter to Andre Wei, which I mentioned,
was actually about connecting two specific fields. Number theory on one side and harmonic analysis
on the other side. But not harmonic analysis in the naive sense of just Fourier series on the
circle, so to speak, or on the line. You see, that's just the kind of a baby version of harmonic
analysis. You can have harmonic analysis for other spaces, multi-dimensional spaces,
instead of the real line, where the role of the sine functions and cosine functions will be played
by some other functions. And the example which is relevant to this is the example of what's called
modular forms, modular forms on the upper half plane or on the complex disk. We'll talk about
this in a moment. So, now, if it were just that, the Langland's program was just that, connecting
questions in number theory to questions in harmonic analysis, probably wouldn't get as much attention.
But what happened is that over the years, people in other fields of mathematics
started discovering very similar patterns as well. And so, therefore, we actually have
Langland's program developing not only in the original formulation, but also in these other
fields, which I'm going to talk about. And so, now, to circle back to this recent achievement
in the geometrical Langland's correspondence. What's the geometrical Langland's correspondence?
The geometrical Langland's correspondence appeared as a particular way of generalizing these ideas,
of original ideas of Langland's, of connecting number theory and harmonic analysis,
and adopting them in the world of Riemann surfaces. Riemann surfaces like this. And the reason why
it's connected to physics is because, as I explained, so there are these models of quantum
physics where you also have Riemann surfaces, you see. So, that's two-dimensional. And then,
you have to make a leap, you have to, there is a way to connect four-dimensional young
mills to the theories defined on these Riemann surfaces. So, that's another step. But that's
roughly why. So, why the geometrical Langland's is relevant to physics and not the original one.
The original one has to do with number theory, whereas the geometric one has to do with geometrical
Riemann surfaces. And that's much closer to the kind of stuff that physicists, high-energy physicists
are studying, or quantum physicists are studying, you see. All right. So, that's the picture of
Langland's that I already showed before. So, I would say that Langland's program is kind of
about building bridges between different continents of mathematics. And as a baby version of it,
think about the example I gave with numbers. Natural numbers or whole numbers appear both
from counting and from homotopy groups, the winding in topology. So, that's a bridge between
the two fields, right? It's a kind of a rudimentary version of unification in mathematics. Langland's
program is much more sophisticated program or set of ideas for connecting fields at a much more
abstract level. And so, unification, therefore, consists of finding hidden connections, kind of
invisible connections between areas of mathematics, which seem to be far apart. That's what unification
is about in mathematics, not about finding one overarching theory, which substitutes everything.
It's bridge making. It's bridge making. So, if you're into building bridges,
the mathematics is for you. Great. All right. So, now, I wanted to, I can't resist showing this.
So, remember I mentioned how Langland's first summarized his ideas in a letter to Andrei
Vey. And Andrei Vey will play an important part later on in the story. It was a great mathematician,
a French born, who moved to the United States during the war and has been a professor at the
Institute for Advanced Studying, where Einstein was a professor as well as Langland's, Whitton,
and so on. So, he gave, so he was the luminary in this field. And so, therefore, Langland's
felt that he should run these ideas by him, by Andrei Vey. W-E-I-L is how we spell his name.
It's very confusing because there is also Herman Weyl, another great mathematician who was also
the Institute for Advanced Study at the same time. His name is spelled W-E-Y-L and is pronounced
Weyl, whereas Andrei... How is it? It's not Weyl? So, Andrei Vey that we're talking about right now,
to whom Langland wrote his letter. His last name is pronounced... Like Weyl spinners.
Like Weyl spinners, W-E-Y-L, spinners. Isn't that Herman? No, no. The Weyl spinners go...
is due to... is in honor of Herman Weyl, W-E-Y-L. Yeah. That's right. But here we are talking about
someone whose last name is spelled W-E-I-L. Right, right, right. And it's pronounced very
differently because he is from France. So, it's pronounced in a distinctly French way without
pronouncing the last letter, the last consonant. You say Wey, Andrei Wey. Yes. Whereas Herman Weyl
was German. So, his name is pronounced in a German fashion, Weyl. Or Weyl. I'm not quite sure.
More like Weyl. I think it's Weyl for him. Weyl, Weyl. Right, Weyl. So, but not to be confused also
with Andrei Weyls, W-I-L-E-S. Or you see. So, as if Mathemise was not already confusing,
these people then come up with these names that are really hard to tell apart, you know.
Yeah. And so for people like myself and yourself, we see these all the time,
it never even occurred to me that there was also Andrei Weyls
that would be confused with Andrei Weyl. And Andrei Weyls is very close to the subject. It's not
like the, if they all worked in areas which were far away from each other, that would be one thing.
But actually their works are overlapped considerably. Like Herman Weyls definitely
works like, actually he was a kind of a polymath. He worked in so many different areas. Andrei Weyl,
Algebra Geometry Number Theory and so on. So, it's very close to Andrei Weyls. And for example,
the proof of Fermat's last theorem was actually based on the proof of what was called Shimura
Tanyama Wey conjecture, where Wey actually is involved. So, you have both Wey and Weyls
in the same sentence, you see. So, but you know, it's okay, bear with us.
So, in the meanwhile.
Yes, in the meanwhile, meanwhile, we have this letter, we have this letter from Robert Langlands.
So, Robert Langlands, imagine, he is 30 or 31, I think he's 30 years old. So, this is like January
of 67. He was born in 1936, like in October, I think. So, he's a 30-year-old man, very ambitious.
You know, he's a kind of a really tough guy, very full of energy. And he meets Andrei Weyl
in the corridor before some seminar. And he hands him this letter. And this letter is not
just like one page, it's like 30 pages. Okay, handwritten. And what you're looking at right now
is a cover page, which was preserved in the archive of the Institute for Advanced Study,
where Langlands worked for many years, not yet. At the time, Andrei Weyl was a professor at the
Institute for Advanced Study. I think Langlands was not yet, he was a professor at Princeton University.
And what does it say? So, it's hard to make out, so I will read it for you.
He says, Professor Bey, in response to your invitation to come and talk,
I wrote the enclosed letter. After I wrote it, I realized there was hardly a statement in it
of which I was certain. If you're willing to read it as pure speculation, I would appreciate that.
If not, I am sure you have a waste basket handy. That's what it says.
I'm kind of a showman a little bit, you know.
Yes. Also 30 pages, I would have so much anxiety sending that and thinking it may get lost in the
mail. And then what happened, my understanding is I haven't looked into this in a while. I mean,
I looked at it a lot when I was writing my book, and it's quoted in the book.
But my collection is that actually Andrei Weyl, there was like silence, and after a week,
he sent a message through his secretary saying that, could you please type the letter because I
cannot understand your handwriting. Yeah, if you look at the handwriting, it's not exactly
the easiest one to decipher. Anyway, so here's where we are. So we are now in January of 1967,
and we have Robert Langlands, one of the greatest mathematicians of the 20th century. He doesn't
know it yet. He's 30 years old. Andrei Weyl was not really his mentor, but he was a towering figure
in the field. And Langlands felt that he should be the first judge, the first one to judge his new
ideas, right? So he, these days, he would send an email to, with an attachment, you know, the
PDF file to Andrei Weyl. But in those days, he actually wrote the letter by hand. And so
another story went stratospheric. And so, but there are several steps that we have to,
to get to the recent work by Gates-Gurir Raskin and others about the proof of the
geometric language conjecture. We have to make a number of steps. And as we make those steps,
the story becomes more and more abstract and more and more sophisticated.
So I feel that I have to give an example at the outset of what this is about. Because otherwise,
it feels like, kind of like, why are we doing this? You see, I want to give an example of what
kind of questions Langlands actually was trying to solve. And in what way his ideas were so powerful
in solving them. What do you think? Yeah. And the link to the recent work will be put on screen
and in the description. Okay. And so to explain this, we have to recall what's called the clock
arithmetic. Okay. So to explain this, we have to recall what's called the clock arithmetic. And the
clock arithmetic is a, is a, an arithmetic like on a clock where, let's say, in North America,
as we go beyond 12, we don't, 12 o'clock, we don't say it's 13 o'clock, but we say one,
one p.m. We don't say 14, but we say two, right? So we identify the numbers
which differ by multiple of 12. And we can do the same for a clock with any number of hours.
But it's especially nice to do it when the clock has P, P hours where P is a prime number.
Uh, because this, then the addition and multiplication of numbers
with this identification satisfies all the usual rules of what we call a field.
So for instance, on this picture, you have a clock with seven hours, seven is a prime number.
So effectively, the only numbers you're focusing on are zero, one, two, three, four, five, six,
because seven is back, brings you back to zero. You can add two numbers like this.
If the result is in the same range, then that's your answer. If the result
is out of this range, you replace it by a number in this range, which differs from it by seven,
right? And likewise, with multiplication. So that's what we call arithmetic modulo,
a prime number. In this case, modulo, number seven. And so the next notion we have to introduce
is the notion of an elliptic curve. So an elliptic curve for this, for our purposes right now,
is an equation of the kind, the cubic equation of the kind that is written on the slide.
Namely, you have basically two variables, y and x, and the highest power that you raise y to
is two, and the highest power you raise x to is three. And so that's, that's a kind of normal
equation. If you think about it, so what is the solution of this equation? Solution is a pair
of numbers x and y, such that the left hand side, when you substitute that number y, will be equal
to the, what you get from the right hand side by substituting number x, right?
But the question is, what do you mean by number? And so typically we could say, okay, well real
numbers, right? That's a good choice. Or it could be complex numbers. If we do, to kind of jump
ahead, if we do that, if we consider solutions in complex numbers, what we're going to get is
precisely a Riemann surface. The set of solutions is more or less the surface of a donut, surface
of a donut. It's an elliptic. So a particular genus, not a stunning genus. It's a curve of
genus one, specifically. I see. And this curve of genus one is called elliptic curve.
Is there a straightforward way of seeing that? Or is that some result that will take us off course?
Not immediately. Yeah, you have to do a little work. And honestly, you have to get the entire
torus. You have to also allow solutions at infinity. So without that, it will be the torus without a
point, actually. But this is what gives the name elliptic curve is traditionally was used as a
name for this complex torus. But since we look at this is the same equation, and we look at solutions
in another numerical system, we also call it an elliptic curve within that context you see.
Over a certain field. Over a certain field. Exactly. It's the nomenclature's over a field.
That's right. So in other words, let's say you have a basket. You have a basket here. It has
tiny balls inside. You pull out one of the balls. It's ball number two. Pull out another one. It's
ball number 10. And another one is ball number 12. You're like, okay, this is you look at the label.
It says this is the integer basket. That's right. So now you're thinking, okay, so if I was to take
one of these integers, put it into my equation and it comes out with a solution. That's like saying
this is the elliptic curve over the integers in that case. Now, if you have another basket
and it's modulo primes. Yes. You pull it out. It's zero, one, two, three, four. And then goes back
to zero, one, two, three, four over and over. And you have the modulo prime five and that's
solutions over that finite field. That's the term. The phrase theology is you have solutions over a
field. Meaning what are the people, what are the balls that I'm putting into my equation? What basket
are they coming from? That's the field that it's over. Exactly. Or we now have our new numerical
system, right? This modulo p. So we can actually look at this equation because it has coefficients
which are one and minus one. One and minus one makes sense modulo p as well. So therefore,
the equation also makes sense modulo p where p is a prime. So now what would be a solution,
say modulo seven or modulo five? It would be a solution in which the left hand side is not
necessarily equal to the right hand side on the nose, but they differ by a multiple of p.
Like if p seven is multiple of seven, if p is five by multiple of five, you see? And so here is a
problem. Find the number of solutions modulo prime p for every prime. And so here is an example.
If you take p equals, so that's the equation, right? And so take p equal five. So what are the
solutions? For example, x equals zero, y equals zero is a solution. It's actually solution on the
nose. Left hand side is zero. Right hand side is zero. Or x equals one, y equals zero. Also on the
nose because this is zero and this is zero. But there are two more solutions.
What do you mean on the nose? Do you mean like it's quite obvious that it's zero?
No, they're actually equal to each other. Not only modulo five, but just as.
Oh, I see what you're saying. Okay.
As integers, you see? But here's an example of something which is not on the nose,
which is x equals zero and y equals four. Let's calculate y squared is going to be 16, right?
Plus four, 20. Left hand side is 20 for this choice, right?
And the right hand side is going to be zero still. So the left hand side is zero and the right hand
side is zero. If we wanted to come to consider solutions in real numbers or in integers,
then this would not be a solution because they don't agree with each other. Left hand side and
right hand side. But in our new world of clock arithmetic modulo five, they do agree with each
other because in this new numerical system, number 20 is the same as number zero.
But modulo seven, it would not be because modulo seven, 21 is zero, but 20 is not zero. It's minus
one. So that's how you see that it is very subtle question because let's suppose you calculate how
many solutions you get modulo five. In fact, it's easy by inspection to just plug in all possible
values for x and y, namely zero, one, two, three, four into the left hand side and right hand side
and see when the results differ by multiple of five. If you do that, you will find that these
are the only solutions. There are four solutions. But when you move from five to seven, which is
the next prime number, and you address the same question, find the solutions modulo seven, you
see that all the previous calculations are completely useless. Well, except maybe this first two will
still give you solutions modulo every prime. But like last two solutions, they're not going to be
helpful because the fact that the left hand side and the right hand side differ by multiple of five
is not going to help you to find a solution where they differ by multiple seven. You see,
it's a very strange kind of question where for every prime number, every prime number has its
own quirks. And for every prime number, you get a particular number of solutions. And so the question
is, can you actually describe all of them in one stroke somehow? Obviously, for the small piece,
you can just do it on a calculator. And for large piece, you can easily write a computer program,
say to do it up to 2000, 10,000 and so on, but try to do it for all p. And so this is where
a language program comes in. Language program gives you a solution to a completely unexpected
solution to this problem, all in one stroke. And that's a really good example because it shows
you the power of these ideas because absolutely out of the blue, out of the left field, you get
this solution. So what is it? What is the solution? So let's arrange this as a table. So for every
prime number, right? So for every prime number, like two, three, five, seven, 11, 13, we have the
number of solutions. And I've calculated them for you. For five, we found them on the previous slide,
four. And these are the numbers for other primes between two and 13. But it turns out that it's
better to consider not the number of solutions itself, but rather this number, which is kind of
the difference between the number of solutions and the prime itself. So p minus the number of
solutions. And the thing is that the house wants to get this idea. If you look at these numbers,
you will see that these numbers grow almost linearly with p. So let's just put it this way.
It's a kind of an error because naively you could say, okay, it's probably about p solutions because
after all, think about this way. You have two free variables, right? And each of them takes p
values. For example, if p is five, you have zero, one, two, three, four. And then five is not an
extra element because five is zero. So you have five values for x and you have five values for y.
So altogether, you have five times five, 25. But you have one equation, which means one degree of
freedom drops. So you have five squared because there are two degrees of freedom, x and y. But
there is one equation. So kind of like as a rough estimate, you could say the number of solutions
should be close to five. And number of solutions grows to dimension drops by one if you have an
equation, right? So for instance, if you have a circle is defined by one equation or a line,
let's say a line on the plane, the plane has x and y two coordinates. So it's two dimensional.
But if you write the equation x equals y, you get a diagonal. So the equation drops the dimension
by one, one equation drops dimension by one, two equations usually dropped by two and so on. That's
kind of like a rough back of the envelope calculation. But one dimensional in this
new world means P possibilities, like for five, it means five possibilities. Two dimensional
means 25. Three dimensional means 125. So that's how you come up with this rough estimate that
two variables with one equation should give you approximately P solutions.
And then you say, okay, well, let's calculate what is what is the error?
So the actual numbers, the P minus the actual number of solutions. Then of course,
once you understand the Langland's program, there is another explanation why this is a
good number to consider. There is there is another way to explain it. But let's see,
let's just stick with that. Okay, so now, so here's a miracle. This number is AP. So AP is
what's in the right column. So it's not exactly the number of solutions. But it's, it's the, it's
the difference between P and the number of solutions. But of course, if you know AP,
then you know the number of solutions because, because you simply take, you know, the number
of solutions can be found as P minus AP. So the two problems are equivalent to each other, right?
So what we're going to describe is not numbers of solutions for every prime,
but we're going to describe these numbers AP, but that's equivalent to the original problem.
And so it turns out that these numbers can be described all at all at once in the language
of harmonic analysis. So remember, I said the original formulation of the Langland's program
was in relating or connecting number theory and harmonic analysis. The problem we have
discussed with counting numbers of solutions is squarely in the field of number theory, right?
Because we are, well, all we are doing is arithmetic with numbers, right? And comparing
like left-hand side, right-hand side, modular prime and so on. And harmonic analysis is about
functions of some special kind. And so here's how the two fields come together,
number theory and harmonic analysis. Consider the following infinite product.
And at first it looks intimidating, but if you look closely, you will see that there is a system
here. So Q is a variable. In high school, we usually denote variable by X. That's the traditional
notation. But in this subject, this particular variable is traditionally denoted by Q. Don't
ask why. Nobody knows. It's just like the name. In every field.
It's like position is usually X and then it gets mapped to Q in Hamiltonian mechanics.
It's, I don't know why. It's weird because Q is also, Q is also used in the field which is called
quantum groups, you know, quantum algebra, so for quantum. And interestingly enough, there are many
results which were obtained in arithmetic a long time ago or in a series of modular forms where
for some reason people chose the variable Q. They connect to results in quantum groups,
for example, in quantum algebra. And this is like, how did they know? Because
when you translate them, you don't even have to make a change of variables.
So it's a mystery. But anyway, somehow people did it with Q and it caught on. And it's a
traditional notation in this theory for this variable. It's Q. It's called Q not X.
Just for the sake of explaining or perhaps not explaining, this function here, Q times
one minus Q squared times one, blah, blah, blah. That also looks like it's dropped from the sky.
So are we going to explain that or are you just going to say that this is okay?
Yes, I will explain. By first I give, I want to give the answer. Okay. So first I have to explain
what it is so that you're not intimidated by it. So first of all, there is this Q. You just write
it once and you forget about it. Then you have this guy, this guy, this guy, and this guy, and it
goes on. What do they look like? It's one minus Q squared, right? This is Q to the first power,
basically, but then squared. This is one minus Q squared, squared, right? This is one minus Q
to the third power squared. So each of these terms is a square of something which looks like one minus
Q, one minus Q squared, one minus Q cubed, one minus Q to the fourth. So you can easily guess
the next one will be one minus Q to the fifth squared and so on, right? That's clear. Then
in addition, you have these guys, Q to the 11 squared, Q to the 22 squared, Q to the 33 squared.
So what are these numbers? 11, 22, 33, right? These are multiples of 11. So you have one
progression where you have Q, Q squared, Q cubed, and Q to the fourth. And every time you put a
square. And then you have a second progression. The first one is underlined with red. The second
one is underlined with blue. And you got here Q to the 11, Q to the 22, Q to the 33. And each
time you square it. So you can see what the next two terms are. First, you will have one minus Q
to the 44 squared, and then you have one minus Q to the five squared. So after that, we open the
brackets. Now, in principle, you could say, okay, well, how can we possibly open the brackets? There
are infinitely many terms here. So this dot, dot, dot means that we continue adding an infinitum.
But the point is that the degrees grow, these powers grow. So if you're interested in just the
coefficients in front of Q or Q squared and so on, there will only be finitely many terms which
will contribute. For example, Q is already there. So Q times one in each of these factors will give
you Q. But there is no other way to get Q because every other term will have Q times Q to some other
power, some positive power, right? So that's how you know for sure that Q will appear with
coefficient one. What about Q squared? So for Q squared, we write actually, this is
one minus two Q plus Q squared. That's this term, right? So you see there is minus two Q.
And this minus two Q will conspire with Q to produce minus two Q squared.
This. And there is no other way in which you can get Q squared out of this product and so on. So
what I'm trying to say is that this is well defined. The coefficient in front of every finite power,
like Q to six and so on, is well defined, is a combination of things that come from just finite
sums and products, even though the whole thing is infinite, you see? In other words, only finitely
many terms will affect a particular power of Q when we open the brackets. And so now we get this
expression where you have each power of Q has a particular coefficient. Like we have just calculated
that in front of Q, you have one. In front of Q squared, you have minus two. And then if you
continue along this path, you will see that the coefficient in front of Q to Q cubed is minus one.
In front of Q to the fourth is two and so on, right? So what does this have to do with that
original problem? And the amazing thing is that you recover all these numbers
as the coefficient in front of Q to the P. Can you believe this? So for example,
in front of Q cubed, you have minus one, right? Okay. And so this doesn't work for the non-prime
numbers because there's no data for what? Well, for the non-prime numbers, it doesn't work.
So in fact, this series has more information that we needed, right? Because it also has
coefficients in front of non-prime powers. And it's an interesting question of what that
corresponds to, which can be answered as well. But let's just focus.
Is that information about what it corresponds to? New work that should be covered today or no?
Intricate properties of these equations. But it's not really relevant. It's not really necessary
to understand the original question. So that's why we'll ignore it. We will just take the coefficients
in front of prime powers. And I claim that in fact, they match perfectly. There's numbers AP
that we have in this. Let's do it. So for P equal two is minus two. And that's the
coefficient in front of Q squared, right? Yes. For P equals three is minus one.
And that's the coefficient in front of Q cubed. For Q equals five, remember, we're not considering
four because we only want prime powers. So we don't care about the coefficient in
front of Q to the fourth. But we do care about the coefficient in front of Q to the fifth,
right? And this coefficient is one, which is the number AP for P equal five.
Which, by the way, is what we found, because we found four solutions. But remember, AP is not
the number of solutions. It's P minus the number of solutions. So P here is five. And so P minus four
is one. And that's exactly the coefficient in front of Q to the five. In front of Q to the seven,
we have minus two. And that's exactly what we have here. In front of for P equal 11,
we should get one. And that's exactly what we get. And for 13, we should get four. And that's
what we get. And it is a theorem. It is a mathematical theorem. No human being can ever
go through the entire sequence, right? Which is infinite because there are infinitely many prime
numbers. This is a well-known fact. It's a well-known theorem, right? So no human being can actually
behold all these numbers at once, in some sense. However, they are all defined. And you can check
for any finite element of this infinite sequence, right? You can check that the left-hand side
corresponds to the right-hand side. But imagine how much stronger this result is. It doesn't tell you
that it works for P from 2 to 13, or from 2 to the smallest prime, less than 10,000. It actually
tells you that it's true for every P. And that statement contains within an infinite sequence
of statements. It's amazing if you think about it. So one formula rules them all, right? And so
we call it finding order in seeming chaos. If you take the coefficient of the power of Q
in this infinite series, then it will give you exactly this AP, which is P minus number of
solutions for all primes, for all primes. And so what happens is a kind of a colossal compression
of information, because just think about just one line of code. And I explained how to produce
this code, right? So there's some regularity here. You don't need infinite amount of information,
finite amount of information. You just say 1 minus Q to the i, where i is equal to 1. And then repeat
for i plus 1. So Q squared times Q squared, and each time square it, right? So this term,
this term, this term, this term. And then do the same with Q to the 11 instead of Q. So Q to the
11, Q to the 22, Q to the 33. It's extremely easy to program it on the computer in such a way that
for any prime number that you have access to on your computer, on your hard drive, on your memory
that you can actually store it, you can find in finite amount of time the coefficient in front
of Q to the P. And guess what? It's going to be exactly the number of solutions, well, more precisely
it's going to be P minus number of solutions for that cubic equation. That's an example of the
language program. And that's the most beautiful, it's the simplest, most beautiful example. I have
to say, I learned it from Richard Taylor. He's a great mathematician, is at the Institute for Advanced
Study. He was a co-author of Andrew Wiles in their famous paper, Solving Fermat's Last Name.
So I learned an example from him actually. And it's in my book as well. It's in Love and Math
in chapter seven, I think. So if you want to know more, to learn more about this kind of
slower reading, that's where you can find it. I also recommend that book just for people who are
listening or read it approximately a year ago or so. And in one of the early chapters, you cover
braid groups and not theory, which is something you learn in third year in university. But
it's covered in one of the early chapters. That was my first mathematical work. That's why I talk
about it, right? So that was my first excitement of solving something which nobody knew, making
discovery. We talked about whether the mathematics discovered or invented. Certainly in that moment,
I felt like I discovered something about braid groups. But anyway, so what I'm trying to say
is that this just one line of code kind of gives us a simple rule for solving this infinite counting
problem for all prime numbers at once. That's what I mean by finding hidden connections. Remember,
I said, to me, unification in mathematics is about finding hidden connections between different
fields which seem to be far apart. Here, it's between the field of number theory and the field
of harmonic analysis. All right, so now let's talk about what is this product? In what sense does
it reside in harmonic analysis? And so the point is that when we talked about it first,
we talked about is it kind of a formal expression, right? So it's like product Q. So Q was just a
variable. But actually, it turns out that we can assign a numerical value to Q and this product
will converge. So even though it is a product of infinitely many numbers, it turns out that
this product actually makes sense. And not in a kind of esoteric sense is like 1 plus 2 plus
3 plus 4, but actually like the rigid precise rigorous sense of limits that we study in calculus.
The product of finitely many terms of this from the first to the nth of this expression is actually
going to have a limit as n goes to infinity. And that therefore, but only if Q is a number
between minus one and one, a real number between minus one and one, or we could also work with a
complex unit disk. You know, the complex numbers live on a plane because they have both real and
imaginary part. And every complex number has a norm, which is the distance from this from a
geometric representation of this number as a point on a complex plane and the point zero.
So for example, number i has has normal one, because that's the distance from i to zero.
If you take all numbers whose norm is less than one, you obtain the interior of a disk of a unit
disk, right? And for every point in that disk, if you view it as a complex number and substitute
in this infinite expression, we will get a well defined number, it will have a limit, this product
will have a limit, you see. So therefore, we get a function on the unit disk for every Q,
we get a specific value, which is encoded by this internet product. So we get a function on a unit
disk and it is called a modular form. And the point is that it has very special transformation
properties under the group of symmetries of the unit disk, which is denoted PSL2Z.
So instead of explaining exactly how this group acts on the unit disk, I'm going to show you
how a similar group acts by showing you what's called the fundamental domains. So the action of
this group like this, it's actually going to be a subgroup of PSL2Z.
And this is not exactly the same subgroup, but it will do as an illustration.
So here's what I'm talking about. Remember our harmonic analysis on the circle.
Can you go back just a moment? Can you go back to slide 40?
Okay, so this function is defined on the complex unit disk.
Yes, which is, think about this. It's like this, right? So two complex numbers.
To all of complex numbers. That's right. So look, here's a complex, so here's a complex plane,
which has two axes, x and y, where if you have a point here, a point with coordinates x, y,
we assign to it number x plus yi. That's a complex number assigned to a point, right?
And so you have number one here, you have number i here, you have number minus one here,
you have number minus i here. And then you can draw this circle of radius one.
And so your number q is going to be some number inside this circle, you see. So that's your q.
The condition is that q is less than one, which means that x squared plus y squared is less than one.
Does it make sense? My question is, where is it going to? What's the target space?
So for every q, which is like this, this function has a value, which is a complex number without
any restrictions. Okay. Some complex number. And it's unique? It's unique. Yes, it's unique.
Absolutely. Yes. Otherwise, it's not a function, right? So when we say function, we mean single
value function, which means a rule which assigns to every q some complex number. But every q,
not everywhere, q is constrained by the property that it is within the unit disk.
The value is, the only constraint is that it's uniquely, it's finite, it's well defined,
and it's uniquely defined. So now explain where SL2Z comes in. So SL2Z, yes. So there is a SL2Z.
Before I explain this, let's look at a simpler situation. Okay. So at a simpler example, namely
the harmonic analysis that we discussed earlier when we talked about sounds of music, right? So we
have these basic harmonics, sine, nx and cosine nx, where n is an integer. And we discuss the fact
that every function on the circle, so they are periodic functions, because if you send x plus x
2 pi, this value will be the same. So they're periodic with period 2 pi, right? And the point is,
so they're invariant under the shift x plus 2 pi. And the point is that harmonic analysis
allows us to write any function on the circle, essentially, any continuous function, let's say,
as a linear combination of these guys. That's called Fourier series. And you can think about it
as decomposing the sound of a symphony of an orchestra into the notes of different instruments
in time, so that in this case, the x is a time, because it plays music in time. And each note,
roughly speaking, is a wave like sine of nx or cosine of nx. And as I said, we can arrange things
in such a way that these notes have approximately proportional to a specific note, to a specific
frequency. The frequencies of these notes are proportional to a specific frequency with integer
multiple, with rational multiples more precisely, but we can always find a kind of a common denominator
so that they will be just integer multiples. So that's the setup of harmonic analysis.
But what I want to focus our attention on is the fact that actually, there is this invariance,
what's special about these functions, sine nx and cosine nx, is that they are invariant under the
shift x goes to x plus 2 pi. But if so, it's also invariant under the shift x plus 2 pi times some
integer, for example, 4 pi, 6 pi, 8 pi minus 2 pi and so on. So you see what happens that actually
there is a group of symmetries that is lurking in the background when you talk about these functions.
This function really is defined. Think about it. This function is defined on a real line. So that's
your real line, right? And so your function is going to be a cosine function or sine function.
So it's going to look something like this, right? It's a wave like this. But now the point is that
if you shift it, you see if you shift it by this amount, if you shift it by this amount,
it will stay the same, right? So if you imagine shifting this whole curve from here to here,
so this point goes to here, this point goes to here, so it will go to itself. That's what I mean
by being invariant, right? I think that's the best approach for this part. And then in part two,
we can go to the graduate student level. Yeah, I do. I want people to understand it because it's
really basic and beautiful stuff. So what I'm trying to say is that there is a shift under which
the whole thing goes to itself. And so this shift is a shift by two pi. Let's say that I'm writing
the basic one, which corresponds to n equal one. And then the sine two xa, they will have, they will
oscillate more frequently, but they will still be invariant under this shift. But it's also
invariant under the shift by four pi. It's also invariant under the shift by four pi,
which would be like twice this, twice. This and one more time, right? So as a result,
it's invariant under all of the shifts. And all of the shifts gives you an action of the group of
integers on the real line. And what I would like to focus on is what's called the fundamental
domain of this action. And the fundamental domain of this action is just this interval.
Because it's like, remember, like when we talked about arithmetic module of five,
then we identify things which are related by multiple of five. So the fundamental domain
consists of just zero, one, two, three, four. Every other thing you can get by adding to one of those
a multiple of five. And likewise now, on this picture, every real number can be obtained from
a number on just on this interval, plus a multiple of two pi. So that's called the fundamental domain.
Fundamental domain. But actually, it's not the only fundamental domain. The whole real
line breaks into fundamental domains, which are going to be from this point to this point,
for this point to the next and so on. They all have lengths to pi. And now let's go back to this.
So here on the unit disk, there is another group, which is called PSL2C, which plays the role
of Z, two pi Z in our baby version, which is here. Right. Two pi M. And the analogs of these
intervals are precisely this kind of hyperbolic triangles, both both red and white. So this gives
you a sense of how this group acts. It acts by hyperbolic transformations. And this visualizes
how what it does, it exchanges different triangles, it exchanges points in red triangles
with points in other red triangles or white triangles, you see. So this gives you a rough idea
of the special properties of this function that we are considering. This function,
which is obtained from our infinite series that has solved for us all the counting problems for
all prime numbers, all at once. This function that we obtained from this series by evaluating
it at points in the unit disk actually has special symmetry properties with respect to the group
which acts like so, which is similar to how sine and cosine functions act with respect to the
action of this much simpler group, namely the group two pi Z, Z being the integers, you see.
So that's a rough explanation. And again, if you want to know more, for instance, you can read
about this in chapter seven of Love and Math and so on. But that's a kind of a rough explanation
of what is so special about this function. Now, the weight in this one is what? Is two,
you said here, or is it one? The weight, because modular forms have a weight.
Weight is two. Weight is two, because roughly speaking, because, well, it's elliptical, so it's
like two, it has to do something two dimensional is in the background. Sure. Now, this is actually,
so now this is one example. Remember, what we're considering is just one example. There is one
counting problem. There is a specific cubic equation, right? It was y squared plus y equals x
cube minus x. And we are looking for every prime number, we get a number of solutions,
and then we slightly modify it by subtracting it from P. Those are coefficients in front of prime
powers of Q in this infinite series. Can we generalize it? It turns out that this has a
vast generalization. In other words, you were just given an elliptic equation so that y cube
minus y squared equals x cubed or whatever it was before. That's right. Okay, so you were given an
equation. Then you from that asked, well, what are the number of solutions in modulo prime or the
clock arithmetic prime number? That's right. And then actually you took a modified form of that
with some error term, but it doesn't matter. That's right. Found a correspondence between that
and a modular form. That's right. Now you're wondering a specific modular form, a specific
modular form, right? Which we could actually write out explicitly. Right. And now you're wondering,
okay, well, that was for one elliptic curve. Can I be greedy? Is there a class of elliptic curves
that this bay work on? Does it work for every single type of elliptic curve? Exactly. Was this
just a coincidence? Is there something special here? It actually works for all
smooth elliptic curves. So there is some kind of condition, not the generic kind of equations.
Okay. So there are lots of equations you can write of this nature that we wrote,
right, infinitely many, in fact. And for all of them, there will be its own, for each of them,
there will be its own modular form, which will encode numbers of solutions for all primes. Save
may be finitely many. In this case, we lucked out actually every single prime. For every single
prime, we got matching, perfect matching with the coefficients. In general, there will be finitely
many prime numbers for which it will not work. But okay, so the big deal compared to infinity
of other primes for which it will work, you see. So, and that is called the Shimura Tanyama
Way Conjecture. And it's a beautiful story. So this is the 1950s. There were two Japanese
mathematicians, Yutaka Tanyama, and Goro Shimura, and Andre Wei, the recipient of that infamous
letter from Robert Langland. They were actually at a conference in Japan. It was a famous Tokyo
Niko Symposium in 1955. Remember, this is after World War II. And obviously, Japanese mathematicians
were isolated from American mathematicians. This was essentially the first meeting of the
mathematicians from the two nations. And it was extremely influential. So there's a picture.
The talks were held in two cities in Tokyo and Niko. And they are on the train here going from
Tokyo to Niko, or maybe the other way around. And who do you see here? So you have this is
Andre Wei. This is Yutaka Tanyama, who is this brilliant Japanese mathematician committed suicide
at the age of 31. I talk about this more in Love and Math. And so if you're interested,
it's a very interesting story. This is Goro Shimura, another Japanese mathematician who
actually worked most of his life at Princeton University. And this is Jean-Pierre Serre,
a legend from Paris. You see a beautiful picture. And so the Shimura Tanyama Way Conjecture is,
what is it again? Let me say it one more time. So it's a statement that for every
cubic equation, what we call the elliptic curve over finite fields, or elliptic curve of the
rationals. And then we specialize modular prime numbers. Every cubic equation of the kind we
considered will have its partner in a different world in the world of modular forms.
So they're going to be of weight too, and also satisfy some additional condition. They're going
to be what's called a new form, which I'm not going to get into it. It's a technical but not
very complicated condition. And it turns out that there's a bijection. And it goes in both directions.
One-to-one correspondence. Isn't it amazing? One-to-one correspondence. That for every modular
form, there is its own cubic equation waiting in the wings whose counting problem will be given
by the coefficients of this modular form at prime powers, save maybe for finitely many of those.
And conversely, for every cubic equation, there is a modular form waiting to give the solution to
the counting problem. So that's the kind of things we're talking about. It's really mind-boggling.
And how do they come up with this is absolutely genius. Like now we look back after so many years,
like what, 70 years? It looks kind of, yeah, sure, it makes sense. But it absolutely did not fall
from anything. Just the fact that there were several examples known, it doesn't mean that there
should be really one-to-one correspondence. And yet there is. You see, that's how ground-breaking
this is. And to add to the kind of the glory of this result, I want to mention that Fermat's last
theorem actually follows from it. In 1986, my colleague here at UC Berkeley, Ken Ribbitt,
proved that if you can show some more time of a conjecture, then you get Fermat's last theorem.
And Fermat's last theorem, of course, I imagine most of the viewers have heard about. It's a
impossibility of solving this equation with positive integer numbers. You see, so Ken Ribbitt comes in
so that Fermat's last theorem was proposed by Pierre Fermat on the margin of Geophantus' book
on arithmetic 350 years ago. And he wrote famously on the margin that he found a beautiful proof of
it, but the margin is too small to contain it. So for the next 350 years, people tried to prove it,
professionals and amateurs, only to have their hopes dashed that people found would find mistakes
and so on. Until finally, in 1986, Ken Ribbitt, my colleague here at UC Berkeley, was able to relate
it to something, to a different conjecture, which is the Schmurt-Anemovic conjecture we just talked
about. In fact, we talked about one specific example of this conjecture, but the Schmurt-Anemovic
conjecture is much faster than that. It services every cubic equation and every modular form,
which is of way two and a new form. So finally, what remains to prove is the Schmurt-Anemovic
conjecture, and that was done by Andrew Wiles and Richard Taylor in 1995, I believe. In other words,
Fermat's last term follows from Schmurt-Anemovic. But Schmurt-Anemovic is a special case of the
Langlands program. So now, the Schmurt-Anemovic is a vast generalization of this one example we
considered, because our one example referenced specifically a particular cubic equation and
a particular modular form, which was given by the infant product. So Schmurt-Anemovic conjecture
is a vast generalization of that to arbitrary cubic equations, satisfying some conditions,
and modular forms. And that's just a very special case of the Langlands program. So now,
Langlands program is a vast even, you see, that's what it's about. Now, the original program,
Langlands program, was about this type of questions in number theory, and a possibility of solving them
in terms of much more easily tractable questions in harmonic analysis.
Now, I have a feeling that this we're approaching kind of a nice middle point
in this conversation. I feel like we won't be able to get to the end of it today
unless we talk all day, you know. So, do you think it would make sense to have a second installment
where I will pick up on this? We have now a very nice kind of like we build a foundation. We see now
an example of what this is about, a very concrete example of what this is about. So this will give
us motivation to study this further and to think about generalizations of this Langlands program,
moving it away from questions in number theory to the questions in geometry that are related to
remote surfaces and things like that. And that will bring us to up to date to the most recent
achievement of these recent papers that we talked about. Sure. So here's what we'll do,
people who are watching, if you have any questions, leave them in the comments below,
because then this way we can pull from them to ask next time if you're confused at any point.
And a quick question I have is the Langlands program is usually formulated as if I have a question
in number theory, I can more easily answer it in harmonic analysis. But I don't hear the opposite
that if there's a question in harmonic analysis, can I throw it over to number theory? It's much
more easily solved there and throw it back to harmonic analysis. Interesting enough, such questions
did emerge, because obviously if you have a bijection, then initially it looked like harmonic
analysis is much simpler. And so this is kind of an advantageous approach is to reformulate
number theoretic questions. Not all number theoretic questions, mind you, I want to make
sure that there is no misunderstanding. I'm not saying every single question in number theory
can be formulated in these terms. No, very specific questions, like the questions that we discussed.
So it's less like a bridge between two continents and more like a bridge between
a city in one continent to a city in another one? But it's not a city, it's more than a city.
It's more like a state, like a big state, like California, state of California. It's like a big
state in the country. Well, if we talk about continents, the point of it be it's a subset,
proper subset, it's a proper subset, but it's a very big subset. And the question is,
and one could hope that maybe for now we think it's a subset, but maybe eventually we'll see
in a sense it is, it is much more than just a subset because let me comment on this because
it's important. So the proper formulation of this correspondence is not in terms of equations that
we did on the side of number theory. It's in terms of the Galois group. It's in terms of the Galois
group. So Galois group is a very important concept in mathematics. It's and Galois group is roughly
speaking is a described symmetries of numerical systems that you can get out of rational numbers.
By rational numbers, I mean fractions, a divided by b, like one-half or three-fifths.
They form a field of its own and we can throw in solutions of various polynomial equations into it
like square root of two or i. As a result, we get what's called algebraic closure,
a much faster field. And what could argue, and I think this is a very good argument,
that every problem in number theory boils down to a problem about Galois group, this Galois group.
Now, if you accept that, Langland's program actually gives you
something more or less gives you an answer to most reasonable questions about Galois groups
because it describes n-dimensional representations of the Galois group for all dimensions.
What we are discussing now has to do with two-dimensional representations
that have to do with these elliptic curves. But in fact, the conjectures cover much
faster spectrum of questions about Galois groups. So, in some sense, it's not a big
exaggeration is that we are actually covering a very big territory. It's not a city for sure.
It's not even like a state. It's much more. It's like a coast. It's a coast. It's a big
half of the country, maybe. At least half of the country, let's just say. So, it is really
serious. It's not like a small province. Understood. I didn't mean to... No, no, I'm not trying to.
But it's not really my field, so I'm not... I don't have a horse in this.
So, because people are going to be chanting at the bit thinking like, I wish that I had
more to chew on when it comes to what are the recent results about, why don't you just give a
teaser for what's coming next? So, first of all, well, that's the kind of a summary of what we
talked about. The cubic equations are connected to module forms and the general correspondence is
about the representation of Galois group is what's called automorphic functions, which generalize
these and these generalize these. So, when I say it's not really my field, I mean I come into
Langlands program more from the side of geometry. So, this is something that I don't necessarily work
on on a daily basis. So, it's kind of like a more of a hobby, this area of the Langlands program
for me. But now, we're going to move closer to what my field is, the field in which I have worked
for the last 40 years. So, and if you'd like to save time, address a graduate student audience
in math or physics. Okay. So, first there is one twist, which I haven't mentioned, which is what's
called the Langlands dual group, because in fact, there is a Lee group, what's called a Lee group
appearing on both sides, but these two groups are not the same. One of them is a dual, so-called
dual. And why it is so is a big mystery, but it's one of the indications that it's something very
non-trivial. The Lee groups are described in terms of the Inkin diagram. So, there's some beautiful
beautiful combinatorics. There's a beautiful story underneath. And so, finally, we get to the crucial
point, which is that, in fact, we talked about number theory and about how the questions in number
theory can be related to some questions in harmonic analysis, right? But there's a separate idea in
mathematics, which is called the Rosetta Stone of Math, which is due to Andre Wey. That's the guy
to whom Robert Langlands wrote his initial letter in 1967. Andre Wey, in turn, wrote
a letter, his sister Simone Wey, who was a great philosopher and a mystic and a humanist,
from jail, from prison in 1940. He was jailed because he refused to serve in the army during the
war. And Andre Wey, in this letter, formulated an analogy between three different areas of mathematics.
Number theory, curves over finite fields and human surfaces. So, that's not the same kind of
list as what we have here. So, Langlands' correspondence is from number theory to
harmonic analysis. But number theory has analogues to other fields, this and this. And so, the
question arose as to whether there are analogues of harmonic analysis for this guy and for this guy.
Did we not just do curves over finite fields?
That's right. So, curves over finite fields have already occurred. But in fact, for a different
reason. And this is a bit confusing, but bear with me. The reason why, what occurred here is not
really a curve over a specific finite field. But remember, we had one equation which actually
made sense modular every prime. So, in fact, it was an equation over the integers because the
coefficients were integers. That's what enabled us to relate it to an equation over modular prime.
So, in other words, here, you actually have, the truth is that what we have here is an elliptic curve,
elliptic curve over the integers or the field of rational numbers. And if you have such a curve,
you can consider, you attach to it a curve over all primes, for modular all primes. You see?
All primes. But here, we consider finite field with a specific, with a fixed prime.
So, it's a different setup. Even though the same objects appear here and here, but they appear in
a different way, in a different, they have different meanings. So, even though they appear in both,
they actually kind of have different interpretation. With respect to this.
So, there are three relationships here. There's number theory to harmonic and back, and then there's
curves over finite field to something else, not to find yet, and Riemann surfaces to something else.
So, we have to find, and this is a question, what are these connections in these two other
realms? Okay, so, it's a conjecture about conjectures. That's right. Interesting.
And so, you see, the point is, actually, to be honest, this connection was kind of obvious,
because these two areas are so close to each other that it was very easy to find an analog
of the harmonic analysis that is necessary for these guys. There are already connections going
downward from number theory to curves over finite fields and then from number theory to
Riemann surfaces. So, these are not connections. So, you see, horizontally, it's really like a
correspondence, right? Because we saw that for that cubic equation, to that cubic equation,
that corresponds a particular modular form, right? So, that numbers of solutions of the
equation modular primes can be expressed as coefficients of this modular form, right?
So, it is not just an analogy, it's actually bona fide one-to-one correspondence.
So, horizontal is a correspondence, where one thing on the left,
object on the left corresponds to object on the right. But the vertical is not a
correspondence, it's an analogy. You're saying whatever happens for number theory questions,
like that, should also be true for questions, similar questions for curves over finite field.
And something like that should also be true for Riemann surfaces. This is much more vague,
much less defined. You see? Andrei Vague.
Way vague. Oh, vague. I got you. That's a good one, yes. Andrei Vague. That's it. So, Andrei Vague's
genius was to see the analogy between these three fields and not just to see them kind of like as
a dream, but in fact come up with some tangible conjectures, the so-called, you know, the vague
conjectures, which is very closely related to this stuff, which is kind of Riemann hypothesis
for this middle field, which was eventually proved by various people, including Alexander
Grottendike and Pierre Deline. But here we're not talking about that. We are talking about now a
hypothetical generalization of this one-to-one correspondence called Langland's correspondence
in the original setup to a similar correspondence for this field and for this field. You see?
That's the idea. And the point is that go from here to here is relatively easy and it was actually
clear from the outset. But to go here is complicated. Okay. Okay. So, we've lingered on slide 50 for
too long. So, for the synoptical glimpse that we want to give rapidly, can you go over just for
the graduate students as a tease? Yeah. Okay. So, look, Rosetta Stone is going like this.
A knowledge is between these three fields. Number theory. Yes. Here I have a nice picture of a
various Galois because it's all about Galois groups, like I said, curves over finite fields,
equations like this, but for a fixed prime. And we don't care about, and it's not just about
solutions of this, but about some more complicated questions and only for a fixed prime. And then
there is a theory of Riemann surfaces and kind of geometric objects that are associated to them.
So, here I want to, and perhaps that this was, this is where we'll stop. So, because I think that
otherwise it's kind of going to be a little bit overwhelming. But I want to, I want to quote
Andreve from that letter. Andreve wrote, my work consists in deciphering and trilingual text.
I remember the actual Rosetta Stone. Rosetta Stone was a stone with three texts,
texts in three different languages about the same thing. And archaeologists were able to decipher
them because they knew that these three texts referenced the same thing. So, that's an apt
analogy that he was talking about this trilingual text, trilingual because of these three fields
that he's discussing. Number theory, curves over finite fields, and Riemann surfaces.
And of each of the three columns, I only have disparate fragments. I have some ideas about
each of the three languages. But I also know that there are great differences in meaning from one
column to another. In the several years I have worked at it, I have found little pieces of the
dictionary. And I want to quote another place from that letter where he talks about how the process
of mathematicians, how at first you come up with some conjectures, with some analogies. And it's
all very vague at that point. It's all like a dream. But eventually some of it may work out
and kind of solidify and crystallize into something which is a rigorous bona fide theory.
And in this passage, Andre Wei talks about not only what is gained when you go from this kind of,
from this dream to its realization, but also what is lost. He says, when this happens,
gone are the two theories, the two theories that you tried to, that you saw, of which you saw some
kind of nebulous analogies, but which you have now connected to each other. Gone are
the troubles and delicious reflections in one another. They are furtive caresses. Remember
his French. They are inexplicable quarrels. Alas, we have but one theory whose majestic beauty can no
longer excite us. Nothing is more fertile than this illicit liaisons. Nothing gives more pleasure
to the connoisseur. The pleasure comes from the illusion and the kindling of the senses.
Once the illusion disappears and knowledge is acquired, we attain indifference.
In the Gita, he's referencing Pha Gavad Gita, the sacred text of Hinduism. He actually spent a lot
of time in India. He learned Sanskrit. He met personally Gandhi. He was a very deep guy.
And he's referencing Gita here. In Gita, there are some lucid verses to that effect.
And then he goes, that's my favorite part. But let's go back to algebraic functions.
So I think it's a good place to take a break. And given all the knowledge we have acquired,
I think this will be a good stepping stone for us to explore the language correspondence
in these two other columns of the Rosetta Stone until eventually we'll arrive at the
Geometric Languages Correspondence and some other versions which I will also talk about,
the so-called Analytical Languages Correspondence, which are the versions of the Languages program
for human surfaces. Wonderful. I have to get you to expand on the pleasure comes from the illusion.
So that to me sounds like a difference between Buddhism and Hinduism. Because in Buddhism,
they would say that the suffering comes from the illusion or more specifically attachment,
though still there's a heavy emphasis on removing an illusion. And here it says the pleasure comes
from it. Well, suffering comes from attachment, I would say, in Buddhism. That's the Buddhist
idea, from attachment. So the question is, can you have an illusion without an attachment?
I think so. I think so. In illusion, something, you know, how in both of these traditions and
other Eastern traditions, there is this concept of Maya. The world is an illusion, is a play of Maya.
And so in a sense, we have our own Maya in mathematics as well. So I think that I kind of see
it a little bit as a comment on that. In other words, there is a play, there is a play. And
it's important, I think, also, by the way, in terms of this discussion about what is creativity
and what is the difference between the human consciousness and artificial intelligence,
human intelligence and artificial intelligence. And so there is a temptation, given how powerful
our current models, large language models and so on, of artificial intelligence,
it's very tempting to say that they can do everything human beings can do. And I disagree.
I think that the work of the great mathematicians, such as Andreve, Robert Langlands,
Alexander Grozendick and others, shows that true discoveries in mathematics are really
points of departure from what is known. It's very hard to imagine that these discoveries
can be made by simply reshuffling and correlating and interpolating known data. It comes from
somewhere else. It comes from this inspiration, which is very hard to quantify. But all of us,
mathematicians, scientists in general, in fact, all of us, I think, who do what we love, we all
know this feeling of inspiration, this feeling when you start flying, when you are not in control
anymore, when you are propelled. It's almost like you're possessed by something, by an idea,
perhaps, by beauty, by love. And so, to me, the story, that's what it's all about. It's about
human creativity and how much we can do as humans when we let ourselves to do it and not to block
ourselves. Thank you, Professor. I'm glad I what's that message to you? Okay, well, I'm enjoying it,
as you can see. It's my favorite subject, honestly. I can talk about this all day,
but I also feel that at some point, it becomes a little bit too much overwhelming. And so,
I think that it's a good place to break, but I'm looking forward to the continuation.
with you. Plus, soon I'll be releasing a one page PDF of my top 10 toes. It's not as
Quentin Tarantino as it sounds like. Secondly, if you haven't subscribed or clicked that like button,
now is the time to do so. Why? Because each subscribe, each like helps YouTube push this
content to more people like yourself. Plus, it helps out Kurt directly, aka me. I also found
out last year that external links count plenty toward the algorithm, which means that whenever
you share on Twitter, say on Facebook, or even on Reddit, etc. It shows YouTube, hey, people are
talking about this content outside of YouTube, which in turn greatly aids the distribution on
YouTube. Thirdly, there's a remarkably active discord and subreddit for theories of everything
where people explicate toes, they disagree respectfully about theories and build as a
community our own toe. Links to both are in the description. Fourthly, you should know this podcast
is on iTunes, it's on Spotify, it's on all of the audio platforms. All you have to do is type in
theories of everything and you'll find it. Personally, I gain from rewatching lectures and
podcasts. I also read in the comments that hey, toll listeners also gain from replaying. So how
about instead you re listen on those platforms like iTunes, Spotify, Google podcasts, whichever
podcast catcher you use. And finally, if you'd like to support more conversations like this,
more content like this, then do consider visiting patreon.com slash Curt Jaimungal
and donating with whatever you like. There's also PayPal, there's also crypto,
there's also just joining on YouTube. Again, keep in mind it's support from the sponsors and you
that allow me to work on toe full time. You also get early access to ad free episodes,
whether it's audio or video, it's audio in the case of Patreon, video in the case of YouTube.
For instance, this episode that you're listening to right now was released a few days earlier.
Every dollar helps far more than you think. Either way, your viewership is generosity enough.
Thank you so much.
