Today's guest is Professor Michael Levin, a developmental biologist and synthetic biologist
at Tufts University. In my opinion, his work is worthy of a Nobel Prize being the equivalent
of discovering DNA as the basis of genetic memory, though instead of a biochemical code,
he found a bioelectric one. And instead of genetic memory, at the low level, it's large-scale anatomical
structures at the high level. Click on the timestamp in the description if you'd like to skip this
Michael Levin's work has direct implications for cancer research, the regeneration of limbs,
the possible regeneration of tissue in general and thus may aid with Alzheimer's research,
the creation of engineered life that can scour areas for toxins and remove them,
the creation of an entirely new drug market based on non-neuro bioelectric manipulation,
and even recovering traits that have been in species that have went extinct millions of years
ago that live in us via mechanisms we're only now beginning to understand because of Michael
and his teams and his collaborators' teams work. Truly, truly groundbreaking.
For those new to this channel, my name is Kurt Jaimungle. I'm a filmmaker with a background
in mathematical physics dedicated to the explication of what are called theories of everything
from a theoretical physics perspective, but as well as delineating the possible connection
consciousness has to the fundamental laws of nature provided these laws exist at all and are
knowable to us. If you enjoy witnessing and or engaging in real-time conversation with others
on the topics of psychology, neurobiology, physics, consciousness, free will, God, and so on,
then do visit the Discord and the subreddit. The links for those are in the description.
There's also a link to the Patreon in the description that is patreon.com slash
Kurt Jaimungle as the patrons and the sponsors are the only reason I'm able to do this full time.
It would be near impossible for me to have conversations like this with any fidelity,
with any depth on topics like consciousness, loop quantum gravity, geometric unity that's
coming up, string theory, non-neuro bioelectric manipulation, and so on, if not for the patrons
and the sponsors. Thank you. And again, that link is patreon.com slash Kurt Jaimungle.
Speaking of sponsors, there are two. The first sponsor is Algo. Algo is an end-to-end supply
chain optimization software company with software that helps business users optimize sales and
operations, planning to avoid stockouts, reduce returns and inventory write downs while reducing
inventory investment. It's a supply chain AI that drives smart ROI headed by Omjad Hussein,
who's been a huge supporter of this podcast since near its inception. Now Omjad has a podcast on AI
and consciousness. And if you'd like to support this channel, that is the toe channel, then please
visit the description and support his channel as doing so supports this indirectly. The second
sponsor is Brilliant. Brilliant illuminates the soul of mathematics, science and engineering through
these bite-sized interactive learning experiences. Brilliant's courses explore the laws that shape
our world. It elevates math and science from something to be feared to a delightful experience
of guided discovery. You can even learn group theory, which is what's being referenced when you
hear that the standard model is contingent on U1 cross SU2 cross SU3. Those are technically called
league groups and those are local symmetries. Visit brilliant.org slash toe that is TOE. And I think
you'll be greatly surprised at the ease at which you can comprehend subjects you had previously
had a difficult time grokking. Don't stop before four lessons. Thank you and enjoy this non-plossing
and wondrously eye-opening conversation with Professor Michael Levin. I think what you're
doing is Nobel Prize winning work. Well, thank you so much. That's very kind. Thank you. I'm extremely
very much looking forward to this. Thank you. When I was researching you about every 10 minutes or so,
you would say this some offhand comment that would floor me because of its consequences and then you'd
move on and then you'd say what Trump's what came before and this happened over and over. So why don't
you start with what non-neuro bioelectric states are their relationship to anatomical results and
then later we can compare in contrast to standard developmental biology for decades, which is the
genome that instructs constructs perhaps what's epigenetic. So we'll start with what are bioelectric
non-neuro bioelectric states and their relationship to anatomical results. Sure. Okay. Well, so
non-neural bioelectric states are simply the fact that all cells in your body, not just neurons,
have the same machinery that's normally associated with neural cells. So ion channels,
electrical synapses, neurotransmitter pathways, all of these things are way older than nervous
systems and all every cell in your body is creating an electrical potential across its membrane.
Most cells in your body are communicating those states to their neighbors via these electrical
synapses. And on the one hand, people are often surprised to hear this. On the other hand, if you
ask yourself where did neurons and brains come from, they didn't just spring up out of nowhere.
Evolution basically speed optimized processes that were already here around the time of bacterial
biofilms. They're ancient. These things are ancient. And so if you just sort of track back
the phylogeny of nervous systems and neural cells, you find out that all cells have these.
And in fact, we've had discussions, very lengthy discussions at some of these basal cognition
meetings in terms of what is a neuron. People will say, well, here are neurons. And I'll say,
by the way, what's a neuron? And so they'll write on the board four or five criteria for what they
think is a neuron. And then they say, well, every cell does this. And so there are a couple of
differences. But but but most things are fairly universal. And so then the question becomes,
we'll find what are they used? What is this used for? So in the brain, what you have is a system
where an electrical network is processing information to direct muscles that move your body
through three dimensional space, that's behavior, nervous system control of behavior.
In prior to that, what these systems were used for were to generate signals that control cell
behavior to move your body configuration through anatomical space, that is the space of possible
anatomical configurations. So I think, and I'm working on some more stuff on this now in terms of
really broadening this idea. But but I think what evolution did was pivot some of the same tricks
across different spaces. So electrical electrical networks were used to control to traverse
first in evolution, probably first metabolic spaces, and then physiological spaces and then
transcriptional spaces and then morpha spaces and eventually three dimensional space, when muscles
came on the scene, and animals could run around and do things like that. But that's that's what
electrical networks used to think about before they thought about behavior in three dimensional
space, they thought about navigating other types of space. Now, how does this compare to
the standard view, which is just, it's our DNA that programs us. The standard view is correct in
the following sense. What the DNA specifies is the structure of the micro hardware of your cells.
So the DNA gives you the protein level sequence, meaning the structure of the proteins that every
cell has. That's the hardware. So the DNA, the DNA is what specifies the hardware of the cells.
Now, it turns out that that hardware is awesome. It's amazing in the following way. When you put
that hardware together, it not only has specific sort of default behaviors, but it also has
it has computational capacity and it's reprogrammable. That's that's that's actually one of the most
exciting parts about it. But the standard view is that you should be able to very directly go from
what's in the genome to the anatomical structures. And I think what that view is missing is a very
important middle layer that sits between the hardware and the of the anatomy of the hardware
of the genome, rather, and the final outcome, this the Sanatomical homeostasis that we see
in regeneration and development and so on. And that layer is the software is the physiological
software that that that links those two things together. Can you tell me some of the experiments
that you've done? Take the audience through a couple of the experiments. So one of you amputate
a frog's leg and then you're able to regenerate it. So on and so on. Maybe outline three that you
find most flabbergasting. Sure, sure. Okay, let's see. So so so here's one. If you use a voltage
sensitive fluorescent dye, which basically just reports, you flood your your tissue with it,
and it just reports with different types of fluorescence, it reports where the different
voltage values are. If you look at the early embryo as it's putting its face together, for
example, you will see something we call the electric face. And this was discovered in work
with my colleague Danny Adams, where we found this thing called the electric face, which is
basically that prior to all the genes being turned on that required to make different face
components and so on. And certainly prior to the anatomy, there is an electrical pre pattern
that you see in that region that basically looks like a face, you can see where the eyes are going
to be because that's where the voltage is different, you can see where the mouth is going to be,
you can see where the placodes on the side of the head are going to be. And so you see this
electrical face. And it and it raised the obvious, the obvious question, which is that if that pattern
is instructive, then you ought to be able to do two things, you ought to be able to mess it up,
and thus disrupt an electrical pattern and thus get defects in craniofacial
patterning. And certainly you can do that. And in fact, there are even human channel
apathies where humans have mutations and ion channels that give them craniofacial birth defects
and defects of limb and brain and other things. So that, so that's, that's true. But the other
thing, the more exciting thing you might be able to do is to take some of those electrical patterns
and move them somewhere else. And you could say, okay, if this is the type of pattern that says
to the cells, build an eye here, could we move that electrical state to somewhere else, not move
the cells, but move the electrical pattern, re, reintroduce that electrical pattern somewhere
else, and, and get it to build an eye. And so this is actually, we did this, this is some of our,
some of our earlier work, you know, around 2007 or so, we discovered this. Basically,
you take one ion channel that's able to induce a particular electrical pattern in, in the,
in a region of cells, and you inject RNA and coding that ion channel in some other part
of the embryo that's going to be gut, let's say, okay, it's going to make endodermis to make gut
cells. And sure enough, and so, and so three things are significant about what happens. The first is
that you get an eye, and you get an eye in the middle of the gut, you get an eye constructed
from cells that were going to be gut. So this is remarkable because if you look at the
developmental biology textbooks, what you will see is that they say that cells outside of the
anterior and erected are not competent to become eyes, they're not supposed to be able to make
eyes. And that's true if you use the, the biochemical master i gene pack six, if you, if you try to
induce eyes with pack six, that's true, it doesn't form any, you can't get ectopic eyes anywhere
outside the head. But by introducing this bioelectric pattern, you can. And so that's,
so that's the first thing that you can, you can go beyond the known competency limits by using
this very upstream sort of master regulator, this electrical pattern. The second thing that's
interesting about it is that the information content that we provide by putting in this channel
is extremely low. We don't micro specify the details of how to make an eye, you know, eye has
a dozen cell types all arranged in a particular way. We don't know how to do that. We couldn't
possibly do, you know, we couldn't possibly do that. In fact, what, what we do instead is provide
a very simple signal that to a programmer basically looks like a sub routine call, right? It's a
trigger, it's a trigger for a cascade that should that the animal already knows how to do it already
knows how to make eyes. We're not saying how to make an eye. What we're saying is make an eye here
by triggering that that eye building module, which includes all the gene expression,
everything else that's downstream. So that modularity that, that, that incredible engineering
trick that, that, that says that you can call up once you know how to do something, you can reuse
it in other places. The fact that these bio electrical states are triggers of developmental
sub routines. Okay, so that's, that's kind of the second cool thing about it. The third cool
thing about it is that if you label the cells that you are injecting the channel RNA into
with some with a color, so you can, so you can tell which cells actually got the, the, the
extra channel. And then you, and then you look at that eye that you've created, what you will see
is that often, for example, half the eye will have the channel you put in, the other half the eye
doesn't have it. That means that what the cells that you affected, what they did was they recruited
their normal neighbors, right, which by themselves were never modified by you, they were completely
wild type. And, and yet they got recruited by their neighbors to be part of this thing. So
there's two levels of instruction here, there's instruction by us, saying to a region, you make
an eye. And then there's a secondary instruction by those cells that say, Oh, and by the way,
I'm going to need more cells, say you guys over here, you're going to be part of this lens. And
they all come and they even the ones that we never directly affected. And so this third part is cool
because well, the second part is cool, the fact that it's modular, and a trigger is
cool, because that means that you can achieve regenerative medicine outcomes, things that are
way too complex for us to micromanage by using triggers. If we can identify the triggers of
the subroutines that we want, make an eye, make a limb, make a liver, then we can trigger those
things long before we actually know all the details about how to micromanage it. Right. So part of
part of reverse engineering, and I very much see this as a reverse engineering task, part of reverse
engineering is finding out all the cool hooks in the system that are already there for you,
not that you have to put them together from scratch, but they're already there for you.
We have what is the trigger that that's the build an eye subroutine, what other subroutines are
there, right? That's that's that's part of our job. The other the thing that's cool about that
third part is that it's non cell autonomous, meaning you can exert effects on cells without
touching them directly, because cells communicate to each other. So by convincing a bunch of cells
over here that they should make an eye, you in effect affect a bunch of other cells and cause
them to be part of that eye without having to touch them directly. And that comes up.
Sorry, that's what you meant when you were talking about recruiting earlier?
Exactly. Exactly. Right. Exactly. Right. Yeah. So that's so that's kind of the first is that's
the first example that that that I would I would talk about. The second example I would talk about
has to do with has to do with cancer. And so Michael, is it okay if we hold on that cancer
result? Because what you said was so profound, and I want to unpack it. Okay, sure. Sure. Yeah,
we'll hold on. Tell me if this is broadly correct. Let's imagine I'm a frog. The frog is developing
before an eye or a stomach or a throat or whatever it is is made. You see some adabration,
some adabration, some electrical adabration, like a hint of it. And then what you could do is you
can say, Well, there's some pattern. Let's imagine it's a circle to be simplistic. There's some
circular voltage gradient. And that means I. So what if I induce that? What if I induce a
voltage gradient over here near the heart? I know you said something, but whatever, over here.
Then what will happen is instead, ordinarily, we would think, Well, you need to microtune
that I each molecule. It's extremely difficult to make an eye. We don't actually know how to
from the bottom up molecularly make an eye. But we see this pattern. What if we put that pattern
on the heart or the stomach? Oh, lo and behold, some time amount later, then an eye is born. Is
that correct? Yeah, that's that's that's that's correct. And the only thing I would add to that
first of all is that the reason I was I was telling you about that electric face pattern
is because it's kind of the most obvious one in the sense that the electric face pattern
actually looks like a face. You can't miss it. It just it just looks like a face. But not all of
them are that simple. Some of them are really kind of they're encoded more deeply such that
by by staring at it, you can't tell what it's going to be, right? So so for example, there are
there are other patterns that we've seen where the only way we know what they are is by watching
what they make we couldn't have guessed, you know, the so some some of them are very direct,
almost a paint by numbers, you can sort of see what's going to happen. And others are really
complicated and you need computational tools to deconvolve what you're looking at to figure out
what it's going to be. So so not all of them are as obvious as the electric face pattern, right?
Yeah, one of the questions I had was why hasn't this been found out before? Was there a technological
limit? Or did they just not look at cells with the dye that give an indication of
voltage gradients or optogenetic technologies and so on? Yeah, so so that so so that's an
interesting question. Why why why not before? I mean, on the one hand, everything has to have
a beginning at some point, right? So so whenever it was, it would have, you know, you could have
asked more like why not before, right? But hindsight is always obvious. You can always you can always
say but but let's but let's kind of dig into that. On the one hand, there was a conceptual
leap that kept this pretty much under I mean, let's be clear. I am not the first person to
talk about the importance of bioelectric signals. People have been studying endogenous
bioelectricity since before 1900. So so it certainly has occurred to people that maybe
electrical signals are important in development regeneration. All of my work, I was I was
incredibly heavily inspired by by work that was done in this in the 60s, 70s and 80s by
by a bunch of people that work really hard on this stuff. The reason that it hadn't gone far
enough was two reasons. Number one, the tools weren't there. So these dyes didn't exist. All
they had was traditional electrophysiology. And traditional electrophysiology, you have one
electrode and you're poking it into cells. And if you want to have a picture of what's going on,
you got to poke all the cells. And that's just completely impractical, right? These these dyes
didn't exist. The conceptual thing was that around the time that this stuff was was taking off
using using electrodes and things like that, biochemistry and molecular biology took off.
And the thing that the reason molecular biology drew all the attention is because
you could do molecular biology and biochemistry in dead fixed tissue. So you can you can kill and
fix your cells. And you can sequence the DNA, you can sequence the RNA, you can get a proteome,
you can get a, you know, all of these all of these kinds of things you can do. None of that is
possible with bioelectrics. So the miniature cell is dead, all of it goes away. So none of the typical
omics approaches work. So it's it's it's it's it's that much harder. And so it really lagged behind
because all the interest went into the molecular, you know, kind of molecular biochemistry. And and
it had to wait for some of these tools to to come up. The third thing the third thing is is that
I think while, while people did think about the the importance of these bioelectric gradients,
nobody to my knowledge, before we did it really thought about it as the beginnings
of the nervous system. And to really put that computational spin on it, the fact that this
thing really is like a neural network doing computations about development, I think that's
new. I will say, Harold Burr, who was this guy was working in the 30s, 1930s, 40s and 50s. Okay,
he had one of the first good volt meters around. And he went around measuring things, you know,
elm trees and rabbits and tumors and embryos and all kinds of stuff. On the basis of this,
he wrote an amazing book that basically said most of the things that we're discovering now,
the guy had a crystal ball, it's incredible. It's absolutely incredible. So he could clearly
see a lot of this stuff. The thing the one thing he did not see, because at the time it didn't exist
was the computational aspects, and the and the really the link to, you know, to this as a kind
of neuroscience done in another space and morpho space, that I think is new. But but people had
already had these ideas, and it needed the technology to really make it to really prove them out and
to really see how it works. I'll be showing people some overlays of some of the cells with the
blue and green and red voltage colors. Now, voltage is actually fairly abstract for most people.
But what's not abstract is something like an electron, people can fathom that that has a certain
charge. So when someone is looking at these videos of voltage gradients and they're colored,
what is one seeing? Essentially, I'm asking you to explain what voltage is simply, but in terms
of electrons, in terms of something that people can understand, in order to understand voltage,
you have to understand potential, and you also have to understand fields technically,
if you want to understand that correctly. Yeah, it's not so bad. You don't need to really do
much with fields in this one. Oh, because because all of the things that I'm talking about are really
not fundamentally fields, per se. They're just spatial distributions of voltage gradients. And
to understand a voltage gradients, it's pretty simple. Instead of electrons, life, I mean, life
uses electron stupid, mostly the kinds of that stuff that we're talking about, uses a different
charge particle, they use potassium, chloride, sodium, and protons, okay, but otherwise same
same deal. And so any cell has a cell membrane around it, the outer surface, and it has these
ion channels, which are these little portals, these little proteins that can open and close and let
specific ions like potassium or sodium in and out, these potassium, so potassium and sodium
are both positively charged. So you can imagine that if you if you're a cell, and you let a bunch
of your positively charged potassiums out, you can have an imbalance more positives out here,
less positives inside. So now there's going to be a voltage gradient, basically a battery in effect.
I mean, that's basically what a battery is, right? It's a membrane with a with a charge
disbalance on across it. That's that's all this is. So every cell is a battery, it achieves that by
using energy to pump ions in a particular direction. And as a result, you if you were to take a tiny
little voltmeter and put it across and people that's exactly what our electrophysiologists do,
you put it across that cell membrane, you're going to read a voltage of some sort, you know,
it's usually somewhere between, I don't know, between 20 millivolts and in and 70 millivolts,
something like that. Right, that's all it is. And so now you imagine doing that for every cell in
the tissue that you're looking at. And you're just going to color every cell, depending on how big
that voltage difference is. It's you're going to color it red if the voltage difference is quite
small. That's called being depolarized, meaning there's just not that much imbalance. It's pretty
much quite similar, you know, the ions inside and outside are pretty similar. So you're going to
color those red. And then the ones that are really different where there's a ton of positive charges
that have been kicked out. So the cell is really pretty negative that compared to the outside
space that you're going to color those you're going to color those blue.
And that's, and that's what, and that's what you're looking at.
Great. Okay. So now we have some background as to what, so DNA calls for proteins. And you can
think of that as low level. And then what you're discovering and you and your teams and their
teams that you collaborate with are discovering is that there's these non neuro bio electric
signals and those are somewhat like large scale code. Some of the implications are regeneration
of limbs barely touched on. That's okay. We touched on generation of actual, so generation of eyes,
not regeneration of eyes. And then you were about to get into cancer. So do you mind?
Yeah. So, so, so the, just, just real quick to say the analogy is that I think a good analogy is
this, the DNA is what encodes the hardware. Okay. And the electrical dynamics are the software.
Now, a lot of people get upset at this because they say, Oh, living things are not like a computer.
So I am certainly not claiming that living things are like the kind of computers that you and I
use on a daily basis. These, right? This architecture is not what life is using. However,
the deeper concept from computer science, which is the idea of reprogrammable hardware and the
idea of software, multi layer software, where you could be programming at the end in machine
code, or you could be looking for higher level sub routines and higher level languages that I
think is quite, quite realistic. And I think what we're looking for here is to understand basically
to find the best, the best representation of that software so that we can manipulate it
as, as, you know, to advantage basically, and to understand how evolution manipulates it.
And so, and so the other, you know, you had asked for three examples. So there are three basic
examples I wanted to give. So the electric phase was one, there's a cancer example, and then there's
a planarian flatworm regeneration example. So the cancer, the cancer example would look like this.
One of the things about cancer, the one way to think about cancer is to ask the question,
why is there ever anything but cancer? In other words, individual cells like amoebas are extremely
competent on their own. They handle single cell level goals quite well. Why do they ever get together
to form something like a kidney or a liver? Because when you have, when there's a cancer,
what you're seeing is a defection from that process. You're seeing cells that normally
should be working on making a nice organ in store, upkeeping a nice organ in an adult.
Instead of that, they go off and they basically revert to a single cell kind of existence. They,
they basically become like an amoeba, they treat the rest of the body as just environment,
it's like external environment. So you can think of that that computational boundary between,
between self and world can shrink. It can grow when a bunch of amoebas, a bunch of amoeba like
cells get together and they build something like an organ or a whole body that that computational
boundary grows, but can also shrink because an individual cell can say, I'm not working on this
anymore. I'm just an amoeba and I'm going to do what amoebas do. What do they do? They, they become
two amoebas and two amoebas become four and so on. They over proliferate and they go where life is
good. So they metastasize to wherever they, wherever they want to go. So that's, so that's
cancer. So, so if you think about it that way, that that cancer is this, is this like defection
from multicellular cooperation, you can, you ask yourself, okay, so what is the process that
normally keeps them harnessed towards specific goals? And, and so if you ask yourself, what,
what, what, what do we know that's a process that harnesses individual competent subunits
towards larger scale goals, that's very clear. That's, that's the neural like processing,
because you have individual neurons, which are cells, but you connect them together into a network
and this amazing computation starts to take place that can do things like
plan for the future and have memories and have preferences and goals on a large scale.
You know, you as an organism can have goals and memories that your individual cells don't have.
So, so we know that electrical networks are really good at binding small competent subunits
into larger scale computational agents. We do, we take advantage of that in computer science,
we take evolution takes advantage of it in, in making neurons. So, so we asked the following
question, okay, could that be the basis of cancer? And now I must say that we're not the first to
have this idea. Okay, again, Harold Burr had this said this in the 30s. And so we did, we did three
things we said, okay, first of all, when this process happens, can you see using the voltage
dies? Can you see the cells defecting from the electrical network? And in fact, that's the
end of the fact you can. So what you can, what you can do is you, before it happens, so you can
inject a human oncogene, which is going to form a tumor in a tadpole, you inject that into,
you inject that into a, into a tadpole, they make a, they make a, they make a, you know,
it makes a tumor. And even before that tumor becomes, becomes apparent, you can, you can see
with a voltage die, you can see that those cells become, become highly depolarized,
they electrically uncoupled from the rest of the tissue, and they go on their way. And they just
treat to them, the rest of the animal is just external environment at that point. So they become
electrically uncoupled. And that's, that's the first thing that, that oncogenes do is electrically
isolate the cell from its neighbors, from that collection of, of signals that normally tell
the cell what to do in a larger context. So that's the first thing we did. The second thing we did,
we said, well, if that, if that's a potential cause of cancer, could we, could we, could we cause
cancer, but just by disrupting the electrical communication directly, no onc, no oncogenes,
no carcinogens, no DNA damage, no mutations, nothing wrong with the cells that any molecular
biology test could see. And could we still, could we cause cancer? Because, because remember the
standard model in the field for years has been that cancer is the cause of a genetic damage,
basically, right? That it's, that it's a genetic disruption that makes a rogue cell that has other
mutations and so on. So we said, fine, no, we're going to take completely normal cells, nothing
wrong with them. And we're going to simply prevent them from talking to other cells electrically.
Okay, we're just going to manipulate that. And so we did that. And sure enough, we made
metastatic metastatic melanoma in tadpoles. So, so that tells you that you do, there doesn't have
to be anything wrong with the hardware in order to have cancer, it can be a purely physiological
phenomenon. It can be caused at the software level, which a lot of people who study stress-induced
cancers and things like this, they kind of already knew. But, but, but really the paradigm has been
that there has to be a genetic defect at the root of this somewhere. Okay. And then the third thing
we found, which is of course the most exciting thing, which is you can go in the opposite direction.
You can, you can inject a really powerful human oncogene, like a p53 mutation.
Oncogene for those who are listening is just a gene that causes cancer.
Yeah. And oncogene is a, is a, is a mutation in a, in the normal gene that causes that, that,
that is, that is thought to cause a cancer transformation to cancer. Yeah. So, so you
can inject that. And then if you do that into, into a tadpole, if you at the same time inject an
ion channel that forces the cell to remain in an electrical state where it's connected to its
neighbors and it doesn't depolarize, then even though that oncogene is blazingly strongly expressed,
there's no, you won't, you won't have a, you won't have a tumor because you're overriding that
there's a hardware problem, but it doesn't matter because you're overriding it and saying, yeah,
I know you want to depolarize, but you can't, you have to stay connected to these neighbors and
you're just going to be part of this. And, and, and, and we can override that way of variety of,
of different, different types of oncogenes.
Okay. So I was just having an analogy in my head. It's almost like,
imagine you have these kids and they're misbehaved. So you can say, well, it's the kids who are the
problem and they cause havoc in the house. But if you have an adult who's stern enough,
they can override the misbehaved kids. If you leave the kids without the adult in the household
bean shambles. In this analogy, the adult is like the electrical communication. So you can force
that electrical communication, that standard adaptive electrical communication.
Yeah, yeah, you can, you can think of it that way. I mean, the, the, the thing where I think it,
it, it breaks down a little bit is that, is that you, we're not introducing an extra
element that keeps everybody else in line, right? We're, we're in effect, it's like,
you know, it's like, it's like, it's like, you have a bunch of kids that know what to do and
you've got one that's wearing, you know, dark glasses and you can't see and he's causing all
kinds of trouble because you can't see what he's doing. Well, you can, you can sort of,
you can put a camera on him or take the glasses off or something so that he just goes right back
into the, into the interactions with, with the, you know, in the, in the, with the rest of the,
you know, the rest of the group, it's about, it's about communication. It's about
binding the individual competence subunits towards a larger goal. Your goal is not simply to grow
as much as you can. The way an amoeba is your goal is to build a hand or a liver or, or an eye
or something else. It's really about the scale up of goals and electrical networks are great for
this. Does your work have any implications for what it means to have an identity? So right now,
you were talking about cancer as if it's dissociating from the larger cells and their gap junctions,
which you've referenced in your other work, and they, they effectively make an equivalence
class between signals that I generate as a cell or my environment or signals from connected cells.
I'm unable to tell the difference between them. Because I'm unable to tell the difference between
myself and my neighbor. It's as if I'm identified with them. So it has plenty of bearing. At least
I see it has plenty of bearing is for what it means for the eye or the ego in a non-pejorative
manner. So what are the implications of your work for the concept of identity?
Yeah, yeah, no, you've put your finger exactly on it. So, so, so two, two years ago, I wrote this
paper called on the boundary of the self. And it's exactly this idea. It's the way to, to, to define
what is a self at different scales? And how does the boundary, the size of that self change over time?
And that's exactly the kind of thing that you're talking about. It's having, having communication
channels that partially wipe the metadata on information so that I no longer know whether
it came from you or, or whether it came from me, right, gives us a partial mind melt, because now
it's really hard to keep an identity. If I can't tell which are my memories and which are your
memories, it's really hard for us to keep, to keep distinct identities. We become partially
unified. And that's, that's exactly the sort of process that evolution exploits to build larger
selves out of small, competent ones. Another astounding experiment of yours. I'm not sure if
I should be calling it an experiment was where you took skin cells of a frog and then it has
locomotion. Can you outline what the heck did you do there and why is that important?
Yeah, yeah, no, it's definitely an experiment. So you're talking about our Xenobots, I think. And
the question was the question that we're interested in addressing is basically this.
Where do anatomical goals come from? And in order to illustrate why that's even a good question,
I want to talk about planaria for just a moment and then you'll see why this is important for
the Xenobots. We are used to the fact that each species has a specific shape that is associated
with it and that frog eggs make frogs and zebrafish eggs make zebrafish and so on. So we're kind of
used to that. But the actual question of how do cellular collectives decide what they're going
to build and when do they stop building, that's very much an open question. And so one way you
can see how far we are away from a good understanding of this is in a very simple experiment.
So planaria are these flatworms that regenerate when you cut them into pieces, every piece builds
whatever is missing and they regenerate. That's planaria. You can cut them into pieces and every
piece regenerates to a normal planaria. So there are species of planaria that have round heads
and those cells are really good at building a round head and then stopping. So they stop
when a round head is complete. Then you've got another species of planaria that has a very
pointy head, kind of a triangular head. And those cells are very good at making a triangular head.
When you cut it off, it makes a triangular head and then it stops. So I have a simple question.
If I take a bunch of the cells from the round headed guy and I stick them into the body of the
triangular guy and I let them sort of get comfortable and sit around for a little while,
then I cut the head off. What head shape are we going to have? Is one of the head shapes dominant
to the other? Are we going to have an intermediate shape or are we going to have a planaria that
never stops regenerating because neither set of cells is ever happy about the shape. That
stop condition is never set. So now look, the important thing is not the answer. The important
thing is, despite all of the papers in nature and science about the molecular pathways of control
of stem cells and planaria and all these kinds of high resolution transcriptomics and all this
stuff, there is not a single model in the field that makes a prediction on this experiment.
Why? Because every piece of data out there now addresses the hardware that enables individual
cells to do cell things. Fine. But we have no understanding of what happens when the cells
join together into a larger scale self that makes large scale decisions about head shape,
head number, things like that in morpho space that navigates morpho space by making these large
scale decisions. We have absolutely no idea how those algorithms work and the fact that we know
how the stem cells work and have lots of molecular biology about that really hasn't affected this
other question much at all. We just have no models for this. Because it's too computationally complex
or some other in principle reason. I don't think it's, well, no, I don't think it's because it's
too complex all the way. It is too complex to calculate out directly. I think it's because
conceptually we haven't found the right way to think about how cellular collectives make decisions.
This is a collective intelligence problem. This is not a molecular biology problem.
We've been thinking about this as a molecular biology problem. That's not what this is.
This is trying to read the mind of a collective intelligence. Now, people think of collective
intelligences as exotic things like ant hills and bee colonies and things like this. These are
collective intelligences. I want to remind everybody that we are all collective intelligences.
We are all bags of cells. There is no cognitive agent that is like this single diamond that's
not made of parts. That's usually sort of unchanging. We're all made of parts. Any cognitive agent
is made of parts. Your goal is to ask how do those parts bind together to make decisions as a
collective? Individual cells don't know what a head is. They don't know what round means. They
don't know what triangular means. The collective sure does. The collective is able to navigate
morphospace in this way that we don't understand the algorithm. We don't even know how to think
about this. This is very isomorphic to problems in neuroscience, to problems in artificial
intelligence. It's trying to understand the scaling of minds. In trying to do that, we pose
the following problem. Standard tadpoles, standard frog eggs make frog embryos, and everybody's
kind of used to that. Even though I always remind my students, did you realize that if I gave you
the frog genome, you couldn't tell me what a frog looked like. You could compare it to other
genomes that you did know, but that's cheating. We asked a simple question. Where does the goal
of making a frog or tadpole really come from? How hard-wired is that? What we did was we took some
skin that we scraped off of an early frog embryo. We set it aside in a different environment and
we said, okay, now you're free to reboot your multicellularity. You're here. We've relieved
all of the constraints of the rest of the embryo. You're no longer getting instructive
signals from endodermin, from mesodermin, from all these other things. You're no longer subject
to all these other signals. What are you going to do? What do you want to do?
And there's a couple of different options that could have happened. The cells could have died.
They could have wandered off and went each cell go its own way. They could have made a monolayer
of cells in a dish the way you get in cell culture, all kinds of things they could have done.
They didn't do any of that. What they did instead was to combine together and to form a little ball
that grew cilia, these little motile hairs on the outer surface. Now, cilia are normally sitting
on the outside of embryos and they're there to redistribute the mucus around and to make the
pathogens keep moving and not stick to the skin. They're used to keep the surface of the
tadpole clean, but instead these cells basically repurposed that genetically encoded hardware.
The cilia themselves are genetically encoded. All the proteins necessary to make a cilium
are in the genome. So they have that already. But what they did was they assembled themselves
into a new kind of architecture, this spherical thing, and then they used the cilia to propel
themselves. So they started running around. They started moving around. And so we have these amazing
videos of them moving around singly, moving around in groups, interacting, going through a maze,
going back and forth in various configurations. They have all kinds of behaviors. They can
regenerate. If you cut them almost entirely in half, they will join back and make a xenobot
again. And so the coolest thing about them is, and by the way, we don't know their cognitive
capacities yet. We're only beginning now to start to see, can they learn? Do they have
preferences? All these kinds of things. We don't know yet. But the coolest thing about them is that,
to my knowledge, they're the only creature on the planet that doesn't really have an evolutionary
backstory. The individual cells do. The cells have a long evolutionary history on earth,
but that genome was selected for the ability of these cells to sit quietly on the outside of
the frog and keep out the pathogens. They were not selected specifically to be able to get
together and run around in a separate configuration away from the embryo. Where did that all come
from? And in fact, one of the things about it is people often say, well, when are you going to
engineer these things? Knock in various synthetic biology circuits, make them do things. We absolutely
will do that. But my goal before we do any of that, my goal was to show people what can happen
while the diversity of the king happened from the exact same genome with no manipulations
whatsoever. Because the thing about these xenobots is they just have a normal frog
genome. They have no other. They have no trans genes, no genomic editing. There's nothing different
about them. What we're seeing is the plasticity of this collective intelligence that is able to
make a new functional proto organism in a novel way out of the exact same parts.
So there's no genomic editing there. Did you manipulate its morphogenetic code,
the electrical signals at all? Not yet. No, we're going to. We're certainly going to. That's all to
come. No, at this point, we haven't done that. This is purely native plasticity. This is what
these cells already know how to do. We scrape them off of the frog and we put them in little holes,
little sort of depressions. And I should back up. There are two types of xenobots. The one I'm
describing now, we literally did almost nothing. You scrape them off the embryo, you set them aside,
and you say, fine. Now, liberated from all the signals that would have turned you into
various things, what do you want to do? And this is what they do on their own.
There's another type of xenobot, which is actually the one we started with, where we
sculpted them a little bit. And this is, by the way, this is all work done in collaboration with
Bond Guard Lab at University of Vermont, and Sam Kriegman did all the computational modeling
for this, and then Doug Blackiston did all the microsurgery and everything. We sculpted them
a bit to give them legs. So you basically just, it's subtractive, like subtractive sculpting,
you just cut away some stuff so that you're left with kind of an ottoman that has like four legs,
you know? And we put in a little bit of muscle, and then it learned to walk. So the muscle would
contract, and the thing would basically walk along. That's the first set of xenobots we made.
The second one has no muscle, it has no nerve, it's only skin. And those can get around perfectly
well on their own using the cilia. And there, our interventions are extremely minimal.
It's important that it was taken off of embryos, or it doesn't matter if you took it off of a frog
much later in development? We haven't taken it off a frog later in development, but we
have other evidence that I can't really talk about yet that suggests that it doesn't matter,
that it's a frog, and it doesn't matter that it's an embryo. We have data on adult cells now.
What occurs to me is, I'm wondering if this has implications for what it means to be alive in
the colloquial sense. So forget about in the biological sense. So we think of our skin as dead,
and our bones are dead, and perhaps dead isn't the right term. But let's say animated, animated with
life with Vim, with Brio, yet you've showed that somehow you can still trigger Vim and Brio
not via this electrical manipulation. I thought it was that. But does this have any bearing as to
what we consider to be alive, or it's unrelated? I'll tell you that one of the things that this
kind of work does is really illustrate the insufficiency of our vocabulary. So people often
argue, for example, I mean, alive is a funny thing. I don't actually know what alive really,
I don't have a good definition. These cells and these organisms are for sure alive in the
traditional sense. I mean, the cells are alive. There's no getting around that. But people will
often argue, for example, are they robots? Are they organisms? Are they machines, these kinds of
things? And Josh Bongard and I wrote a paper addressing this question, basically pointing
out that though that terminology is almost useless now. It was it was great 50 years ago
when you could, when it was really easy to tell apart machines that were that were that were
boring, predictable, they were they were designed, right, and living things which were surprising
and interesting and warm and wet and and evolved. Those things are now so intermixed that with
modern with modern techniques of a digital evolution and bioengineering and synthetic
morphology, that distinction does not exist anymore. And so it used to be that you can
sort of like you could knock on something and if you hear a hollow metallic sound and you say,
ah, yeah, that that came off a factory, that's a machine and I'm, you know, morally okay with
taking it apart and doing whatever I want with it. And if you were to do this and it was sort of
soft and squishy, then you would say, that's evolved and it's living and I better I better
be nice to it. That right though, that easy distinction is just that doesn't exist anymore.
So we need we need a better vocabulary. I mean, they're they're alive for sure. But if you want
to ask questions about whether they are machines or robots or living organisms, or that that all
that stretches the vocabulary, which is no longer up to the task. Is there a relationship between
perception and this morphogenetic code? And I know I keep using the word morphogenetic code and
yeah, forgive me if I'm abusing the terminology. But is there a relationship between perception
and morphogenetic code? I'll give you my reasoning behind it. Right now what I see is I recognize
a monitor, I see a microphone, I see you, you have eyebrows, I see large scale structures.
Then the question is, well, is there anything special about your eyebrows? Well,
other than you're an attractive man, let's say, physically speaking, physics would say there's
nothing special about this microphone or 10% of the microphone or 10% of the microphone plus
the air slightly around it. It's more a pragmatic matter that it's a practical that it matters that
I can use this. However, when you're talking about this non neural bio electric code, it's as if
these large scale structures that we recognize as salient and significant, such as a low resolution
facet like a child's drawings of eyebrows nose head placement and so on, that those are there in
the code. So somehow, what we perceive is also what is encoded. And I'm curious, well, is that is
there a confounding factor that influences both? Does the morphogenetic code influence our perceptions?
Perhaps I can give a better analogy by a computer science analogy where we have machine code,
and then you have like, you've built a top that builds a top libraries jQuery and on HTML five
and so on. So we have a function bounce, which takes an image and bounces it or text and bounces it,
or one that plays MPEG. So question is, well, what makes bounce or MPEG playing more fundamental?
Well, to me, I would say nothing. It's us. It's what we use. However, it's strange that
objectively, there's this code for it. Yeah. Yeah. Well, there's there's a lot there. And what you
just said is certainly perception is a part of this whole process because in order to have this kind
of anatomical homeostasis, where you you you you you damage an organism like a salamander,
which can regenerate most of its organs, or a planarian, which can regenerate all of its organs,
you you damage it, and then it grows over the right thing. And then it stops when it's done.
That loop, that homeostatic loop has to have a perception component, because it has to be able
to recognize when it's done. So it has to be able to perceive, am I a correct planarian or not?
And if I'm not, I'm going to keep remodeling until I am. And at that point, so it's an error
minimization scheme. And in order to achieve that error minimization, you have to be able
to perceive around you in anatomical space. And to say, am I in the right region of space here
is my head and the right sizes? Do I have the right number of eyes? All of that, you need to
perceive that. And people, people like Grossberg and at BU had written years ago about the
relationship between retinal information processing and development. And I actually
think he was he was really onto something in the sense that I think most epithelia are basically
like a big retina. And that what they're doing is they're they're they're constantly surveilling
the rest of the animal, the rest of the body, and making decisions about large scale features.
So not just individual pixels, but things like in the in the retina, you would be talking about
edge detection, motion, things like that. And that's what they're doing. They're looking at
large scale features that individual cells cannot detect. So one way to look at this is that we
have a precedent for this from neuroscience and from visual from the science of visual processing.
The probably the more accurate way to look at it is, yeah, that guess where the retina learned its
tricks, right? And guess where where brains learn their visual processing tricks, by far more ancient
mechanisms of cellular groups navigating morpheus space, that that's what it used to be before it
became the before it became vision, basically. Do you believe that the problem of senescence
to the degree it can be called a problem is largely a disruption of this electrical blueprint
rather than oxidative stress and damage to DNA and so on that are telemyric length that people think?
I don't have any evidence yet that there's a bioelectric component to this. I mean, I suspect
there is but but we don't have any evidence on it. We haven't really worked on aging per se.
I will say that I don't think it's anything as fundamental as this kind of like thermodynamic
decay or anything like that, because the planaria are immortal. They don't have a life span limit,
they live forever. And so they are telling us that it's possible to be a complex regenerative
organism with learning capacity and so on and not age. So it's clearly possible. So the rest is
details, right? The rest is, I don't think it's anything as fundamental as the theories that say,
well, look, when you copy things, you inevitably make mistakes. So eventually stuff wears out.
If that were true, you wouldn't have planaria. So I don't think I don't think it's anything like
that. I think it's something much more contingent, much more specific. And thus, I'm optimistic
that we can overcome it. So there was some work you were outlining in a previous talk with,
as I think it was a couple of years ago, at the time it was an undergraduate, her name was Maya,
though I don't recall her last name. And she changed between three types of planaria head,
like I think it was Felina, Mediterranean, Doral, I don't recall how to pronounce it.
But there were about tens of millions of years apart, evolutionarily. And then that to me implies
that there perhaps are structures that are unfathomably submerged in us from our past.
And then I'm curious if there's a relationship between that, between these, let's say these
electric blueprints, even though whatever these electric blueprints and Jungian archetypes,
to go off on a huge speculative jump, is there a relationship between them?
Boy, that's a good, that's a great question. I think that if one were to,
if let's run it backwards, let's say that we have a conception of Jungian archetypes for
neuroscience and psychology. And now somebody could say, yeah, but you're saying that all of,
all of, you know, neuro, neuropsychology comes from earlier somatic bioelectrics,
what would the Jungian, what would that look like then in that, right? In that case,
what would the Jungian archetypes look like in this other preneural type of bioelectrics?
Because we do this all the time, we ask things like, what does memory look like before it was
brain memory? What does bistable visual illusions look like before they were, before there were
brains? All of these things that we see in neuroscience, you can ask what the, what the
older somatic equivalent look like. So you can do the same thing here. I mean, it's an interesting
question. I've never thought about it that way, but you can, you can ask that question. If you
ask that question, you get to exactly the kind of thing you're talking about. And what I would say is,
well, probably in morpheus space, there are these stable attractors corresponding to different types
of shapes of heads, different numbers of eyes, different planarian body plans, different, all
different kinds of things. And what you can do is you can dial in those different stable attractors
by, in the state space of the electric circuit, by shifting that electric circuit states.
So, yeah, I think that's a fair, I think that's a totally fair way to think about it.
Your work is so, it's like, to me, it's like the discovery of DNA. And maybe you're too modest
to accept that as a compliment, but I see it as, as that seminal. And I want to, well, I'm going to
put this out there and I'm going to say in the beginning, I think this guy's going to win a
Nobel Prize. He has not said that, like, there's not him saying that I'm saying that.
Well, thank you so much. Yeah, that's, that's, that's very kind. There are lots of people. I mean,
I think it's important to say that. Yeah, it's keen to effort. Right. Well, it's on two levels.
So, so, so first of all, none of this came out of thin air. I didn't think of any of this stuff,
just, you know, from nothing. I built these ideas on many other ideas of really kind of
really pioneering folks that work for years. And many of them didn't really get, you know,
didn't get a lot of acceptance from the community. So that's, that's important to say is that there's
a lot of that out there. And, and of course, the people in our lab, right, the postdocs and,
and, and for PhD students and techs who do the work, I mean, it's certainly not, not just me
doing all this work. There are a lot of people in this field and a lot of people in my group. So
lots of people contribute to push this all forward. We'll get to the audience questions.
Okay, so this one comes from Rupert Sheldrake. How does he think,
how does he think his conception of morphogenetic fields relates to mine?
Preferring to Rupert.
Yeah, interesting question. So basically, our morphogenetic fields that we work on
are completely physical. In other words, they take place entirely within the body of the organism,
they're generated by the cells, we can measure them using current technology. I don't know if
that's true of the kinds of things that Rupert is talking about. I kind of suspect that those would
have to have quite a bit different properties. But just to be clear, our fields are, and in fact,
in fact, the things that we deal with are strictly speaking, not even fields, right? So,
so we work with spatial distributions of resting potentials. So it's not clear to me that these
are really fields in the mathematical sense of the word field. But these are distributions of
electrical potentials of living cells in a particular body. So they're very physical, they're
local, they're kind of quite traditional distributions of voltage. Another application
that I've heard you mention, though it was, I don't know if it was more on the speculative side,
or if you've developed this, it was some organism or the potential of creating some organism that
spontaneously and temperamentally goes out and cleans up the environment, it's engineered to remove
certain toxins. Can you speak more about that? Yeah, that's probably was referring to our xenobots.
So we have this, this technology where we're, we're creating synthetic living proto-organisms
made in this, in this case, made of frog skin. So these are frog skin cells that in different
environments, self-organized to be these, these little motile creatures. And at least one of
many possible applications in the future is to program them for some sort of collection
tasks so that they would go out and maybe collect useful, useful molecules, or maybe they would
clean up toxins, maybe they would detect various, various other chemicals in the environment that
you would want to know about. So these are all potential applications of the practical sort of
use of these kinds of synthetic living machines. You mentioned quite a few times that it's important
when you're dealing with the manipulation of this electric field or voltage gradient, that you
don't use external electric fields, you actually manipulate the cellular ion channels directly.
Yeah. Okay. So then I was wondering, does this mean, you know how some people say 5G,
that we should be scared of 5G? Because, well, for various reasons. But then other people say
it's non-ionizing and that's, and that's all that matters. Well, is that all that matters? Is there
some validity to being concerned about 5G? So I think both of those viewpoints are a little bit
off and the truth is somewhere in the middle. So let's just start with the ionizing business.
So I think the evidence is quite clear that electromagnetic radiation does not need to
be ionizing. And in fact, it does not to be particularly strong in order to in some way
affect living cells. So living things. So living things are sensitive to all sorts of
electromagnetic radiation in many ways that do not require ionization or heat or anything like that.
At the same time, I think I don't have any reason to be concerned about 5G. First of all,
the kinds of things that we study. So these bioelectric signaling pathways are not particularly
affected by external electromagnetic fields. If they were, we would be using these kinds of
things in the lab to manipulate the electrical, the electrical signaling. It's just not,
it's not a great way to control bioelectric signaling within tissue. It just doesn't do a
very good job of it. So I don't have any particular reason to be worried about 5G. I have a feeling
that for most people that are worried about it, you have far bigger dangers and stressors in your
life. You know, if you eat certain things, if you engage in certain behaviors, this is far more
of an issue for you statistically than 5G ever will be. So I'm not particularly worried about
5G on a practical level, in the grand scheme of things that I worry about and the things that
we all do in our life that are sort of not optimal for health. I think 5G is probably way down on
the list of things for you to worry about. However, I think it's not true to say that
because it's non-ionizing, we don't need to worry about it. I think that's actually false.
Okay. Speaking about diet, you mentioned eating. And then, and one of your talks,
you also mentioned there's a connection between the microbiome and this morphogenetic field,
but I didn't hear more elaboration on that. So if you don't mind elaborating, that'd be great.
Yeah. Well, the general point is that any sort of modality that controls the behavior of cells
in an organism automatically becomes the target of an evolutionary arms race of other organisms
that live near you, on you, within you, and so on, because they can potentially manipulate
those controls to make specific things happen in the body. So anything, including chemical
signaling, neurotransmitters, we already know that the microbiome is affecting mood and behavior and
things like that by plugging into the neurotransmitter pathways. So there's this gut brain axis and so
on. So the same is true of bioelectric. So in general, we could certainly assume that various
microbes that live in the body and various other kinds of parasites would have ways of
tweaking ion channel activities, meaning probably using some sort of chemicals that they would
be putting out to manipulate your tissues in ways that would be evolutionarily advantageous to them.
Now, it just so happens we have a practical example of this that we studied a couple of years ago
in Plenaria, where, and this was done in collaboration with Ben Wolf's lab at Tufts,
where we showed that there are bacteria that live on these Plenaria, and these bacteria are
actually able to manipulate the worms to, for example, alter the structure of their visual
system to have multiple heads and so on. And that is because these bacteria are able to tweak the
same kinds of controls that the worm tissues are using in the first place to make decisions about
how many heads you're supposed to have, what your visual system should look like.
So it's on the one hand kind of amazing that these microbes have a say in the structure of this
kind of organism that they live in. On the other hand, from an evolutionary point of view,
is completely expected that they would have discovered ways to do that.
Earlier in our talk, you mentioned that when you were looking for these voltage gradients,
when you did this dye, the voltage dye, you saw something that was a conspicuous face on the
frog. And then you also mentioned, well, you don't imagine that the code will be that obvious for
the majority of what we care about, especially for humans. How is it that you go about finding out
or decoding this code? And also, what other factors matter? Do they pulse the voltage pulses?
And then so the frequency of pulsing matters? What are the factors that go in to determining
the code? And then how do you decode it? Yeah, we don't know many of the things about it. So,
for example, at the moment, it doesn't look like there's pulsing and that the temporal
aspects of it are particularly critical. But that's probably more a function of the fact that we
haven't really dug into it yet. It's entirely possible that when we dig into the temporal
aspects, we will find out that the time dependent changes are really important. It's possible.
At the moment, we've been completely occupied with the spatial aspects, and it doesn't look,
at least to our technology, doesn't look like it's pulsing in that particular way. But we may
have simply not found it yet. In terms of how do you crack the code? So, there's a few pieces
to this. One piece is simply observation. So almost everything in science starts with some
sort of observation. And really just getting a database or a profile of different tissues under
different conditions, a bioelectric profile of different tissues under different conditions
will be absolutely crucial to decoding this because we need the same way that we currently have
databases of gene expression, of proteomics, of all these kind of biochemical and genetic
profilings of tissues and health and disease and different cells of the body and so on.
We need the exact same thing for bioelectric. So we need a kind of physiomic profiling where
there ought to be a database where we can go and say, this particular tissue under these conditions
should have this bioelectric pattern, and here are the sort of range of normal, and here's how
a difference between people and between organisms in different states and so on. So that's the
first thing. And so we only have that for a very small number of cases. We certainly don't have
anything like a full physiomic profiling yet. Then what you need to do is you need to build
computational models that help you explain why the electrical pattern is the way it is,
given the various channels and pumps that are expressed in that tissue. And then you begin the
hard work of functional experiments. So you open and close some channels, you observe what happens,
and you build up a theory based on an improved computational model of how that particular
bioelectric pattern triggers the downstream effects that it has. So for example, we know now
there's a pattern that corresponds to make an eye, there's another pattern that corresponds to
build whatever goes at this location of a wound. We have a pattern that says build a nice, sharp
brain, the edge of a brain. And so we have a pattern that says don't be a tumor, be normal tissue,
and so on. These kinds of patterns need to be identified, and that can only be done with
this kind of mapping of pattern to the particular outcome. And then there's a lot of
computational work that goes in between. Do you think psychedelics have any role to play
in changing or altering the morphogenetic morphological code? What I mean is after a
single initial dose, there's markedly increased openness. And I'm wondering, well,
is that because there's a change in some non-neural bioelectric activity?
I have no idea. I have no expertise in psychedelics whatsoever. I can tell you that
much like in the brain, there's a really nice connection between neurotransmitter activity
in the rest of the body and the electrical signals that move these neurotransmitters around.
So I would not be at all shocked if there was some connection. And in fact, we've certainly used
various compounds that are normally utilized to target the brains. And so things like anxiolytics
and SSRIs and various kinds of drugs that are normally used in the nervous system. We've used
them in embryogenesis in regeneration to try to tweak some of these pathways outside the nervous
system. So that's for sure a thing you can do, whether or not it has anything to do with the
mental states induced by these kinds of compounds in humans. I have no idea.
I know these questions are desultory. They keep going from subject to subject. It's just how
my notes are. But well, regardless, you mentioned one time, I think it was to Sean Carroll,
that you can use Daniel Dennett's way of speaking of intention. That is, I believe it was give as
much intention as you like to a system in order to explain what's happening. And when I say intention,
I mean act as if it's willing to do something. And then you also mentioned that when one scales
down, one's teological projection to smaller particles like panpsychics might do, then it
leads naturally to quantum indeterminacy and the least action principle.
Okay, so let's start from the beginning. Dan Dennett's intentional stance is basically the
following idea, that the real answer to how much intentionality, he usually talks about
consciousness, but intentionality, cognition, intelligence, whatever you're interested in,
the real question of how much of that some particular system has is not to be found by
sort of armchair philosophy, right, to just assume, and people say this all the time,
they say things like, well, thermostance can't possibly have any intention. So this is a decision
that somebody has made just by fiat, basically. And Dan's point is very important. It's that
it's an empirical question. You can't just decide. And the way that you discover this
is simply this, you take a particular stance, and you say, here's my system, I think it has this
much intelligence, or I think it's capable of learning, or I think it's able to have preferences,
and you know, or I think it's a goal directed system, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever
you choose to, to start on that continuum. And using that stance, you do empirical experiments
to see how well that stance helps you to understand what and control whatever you're dealing with.
And so the point being that we can't simply assume that something is a nonintelligent system
because of what it's how it's made, or because of how it looks, you have to actually ask, does
what is the optimal way of looking at that system. So just to give you a simple, a simple analogy,
if you have a ball on top of a hill, you are pretty well, you're going to do pretty well
using the Newton's laws to ask how it's going to roll down the hill. And if you have additional
theories about the hopes and dreams of this ball as it rolls down the hill, they're not going to
do you much good, right? They're not going to give you any improved ability to, to, to understand
and control what's going to happen. On the other hand, if you start off with a, with a live mouse
at the top of a hill, and you think you're going to apply Newton's laws, you're not going to do
very well, because you're going to need some other laws. And so you might decide that the system is,
minimally intelligent, and see how you do, you might decide that the system is very intelligent,
and it has memories of, of what happened when you put it on the hill last week, and it might do
something different. The point is, it's an empirical experiment, you can't just decide what it's going
to be, you have to, you have to choose a level of abstraction of some type of learning agent,
maybe, maybe, or maybe very little, maybe quite a lot, and see how you do. So that's, so that's,
that's the intentional stance is that, that everything is to be decided by the quality of
the predictions and the amount of control you gain by viewing your system in a particular light,
right? So, so, so everything is, is in a way observer dependent, and it's dependent on the,
on the experimental context in which you want to examine the system, you know, a human brain is
very intelligent in a certain context, it also makes a great paperweight. And if, and if that's
the, how you choose to look at it, then you're, you don't need to understand, to attribute much
intelligence to it, if you're examining the problem space of keeping down some papers and a wind,
then it doesn't come up. So, so that's, so that's, so that's that. And so my, where, where I intersect
with this is that I basically point out that this is a really essential, this is a really essential
way of looking at things when traditional phylogenetics is, is not a great guide. And this
is meaning that when we are confronted with novel creatures, they might be novel, novel
bioengineered creatures, they might be chimeras, they might be something that you find in space
somewhere, some exobiological agent, they might be artificial intelligences that we create,
whatever it is, when you are confronted with something that you cannot simply place on the
familiar evolutionary tree of life and on earth and say, Oh yeah, this thing is really closely
related to a fish. Therefore, I'm going to, I'm going to assume it has roughly the cognition of
other fish that I've known. So when you are either creating or reverse engineering novel
creatures, the intentional stance becomes completely essential, because you can't know a
priori what the cognitive capacities of this thing are going to be. And they might be, it might be
who of you to really attribute quite a lot of cognition to it, or maybe not at all, depending
on how, how, how that does for you in terms of empirical success. So having said that,
then the natural question might come up, is there a zero on the scale? So if you've got a scale,
a continuum of cognition or of intelligence, that, that is a smooth gradient where different
types of systems might, might land, right? And so the question is, is there in fact a zero? And so
what I was saying is simply this, that if you, if, if somebody, if somebody had said to me,
what would the absolute minimum, what would you have to have an absolute minimum in order to be
on this scale at all, right? So, so to be somewhere on the scale of cognitive creatures, what's the,
what's the basement, right? What's, what's the minimum, minimal version that you would have to
have? I would say probably the minimum you would have to have two things. You would have to have
some ability to do goal directed behavior. So you would have to have some kind of ability to,
to pursue goal states. And you would have, you would have to have some kind of internal control
such that your, your, your behavior and the things you do are not perfectly described by all the
external influences around you at a given time, right? In other words, in other words, if I can,
if I can look at all of the forces impinging on you and know exactly what's going to happen,
then you're probably a marble running down, you know, there's some kind of an inclined plane.
Otherwise, otherwise, if you're, if you're more complex than that, then I would have to take
into account things that happened before, things that might happen in the future, all kinds of
things that are not immediately what's, what's, what's there. So what that boils down to is some
sort of internally, internally initiated action, some, some, some quote unquote freedom. And that's,
you know, that, that's a whole other story to really dig into that. But this idea that, that
you would be able to initiate things on your own, you're not just a responding, you're not,
you're not just a passive responder to forces around you at that time. And so having said that,
having said those two things, you realize that already particles already have those two things,
because, because particles already exhibit quantum indeterminacy, where they do things that are,
that are fundamentally not caused by any of the things around them, right? That it's, it's
completely sort of indeterminate. And they have the ability to pursue goals in a very,
sort of, very primitive manner, which is, which are these least action principles. And so
one of the benefits of people, people often say that, that, that panpsychism is, it's,
it's a bad theory because, because it doesn't lead anywhere, it doesn't give you anything.
And I think certainly there's, there's, there's a little bit of truth to that, but
there's, there's also the fact that if you were to ask the question, I think that even part,
if you were to say that I think even particles should have some degree of goal directed activity,
you might make a prediction of something like least action principles existing. And then you
would be right, you would find, you know, they, that, that, that model actually makes a prediction
that's completely not obvious. It is, it isn't obvious that, that, that when you have a beam
of light passing through a bunch of lenses, it's not obvious that you can actually
forego the calculations of how the light will interact at the, with the glass at every point
along the way and simply say, you know what, I think, I think it wants to get where it's
going with the least amount of action, right? And so, and so you can, you can make the correct
prediction of where it's going to go simply by assuming that the light likes to get where it's
going by minimizing and maximizing certain things. And you could predict something like that if you
had this idea that even at the very bottom, there would be some type of, some type of goal
directed activity. So if we ask, what does that look like? What does agency and intelligence
look like in the very minimal, the most minimal version possible, I think what you get is something
like, like particles. So from that perspective, I suspect there is no zero on this scale,
because, because even particles are already on the scale. Okay, this zero was that the way that I
understand that is that that's like an intelligence scale. Do you synonymize that with consciousness?
Right, that's, that's a good question. I will say that in my writing on all of this stuff,
I've almost completely avoided consciousness. Okay, I almost never talk about consciousness,
I talk about cognition. And, and that's, that's kind of on purpose. I don't have my views on
consciousness are not fleshed out to the point where I'd be interested in talking about them,
because I don't think I can add anything yet that a lot of other smart people haven't already chewed
over. What I think I have took something to contribute is to the to the questions of cognition
and intelligence, because those things are empirically measurable, they're observed publicly
observable behaviors. And we can we can have a research program focused around them that I think
is is different than what other people have been doing. So that's what I've been talking about.
Consciousness is different. In the sense that I think many of the people who study who who say
they study consciousness, in fact, do not study consciousness, what they study at best are correlates
of consciousness, or oftentimes behaviors and properties that may or may not have anything
to do with actual consciousness. And so I think it's very difficult to study actual consciousness.
If you have to study consciousness is a first person activity, it's not a third person activity
the way that you would study anything in the external world, meaning studying it externally,
outside of yourself, I think fundamentally studying consciousness requires the subject of
meaning you or whoever is studying it to actually change during during that that that process.
It's a it's a completely different thing. So so I'm working on some things along those lines.
It's a little early. It's a little early to talk about it.
Faraz Hanarvar asks, could the mapping and thereby the treatment of the signaling that is this
electric signaling differ between individuals when we're talking about humans? So does the code
is the code species dependent? Or can it actually differ based upon people?
Yeah, I don't think it's even species dependent, because we've seen that we can induce,
let's say one species of flatworm to form a head that belongs to a completely different species,
simply by by by changing the distribution of a gap junctional connections. I suspect there are
massive conservations in the same way that that the biochemical and genetic codes are
highly, highly conserved. Are there going to be individual differences among patients?
For sure. And we need to understand what those are. We do not yet know what those are. That's a
major area for future research. But I think it's going to be conserved sufficiently that we will
be able to have general purpose electroseuticals. However, I think that there will have to be some
very serious computational modeling that is going to likely be personalized. That is,
we're going to have to take into account the various physiological and genetic states of
the patient in terms of do they have any ion channel mutations, what other kinds of physiological
things are going on in their blood in terms of ion content and so on, in order to perfect some of
some of these treatments, I think it will be very much personalized. But underneath it all,
it's going to be a highly conserved bioelectric code. You mentioned electroseuticals,
which reminds me of your company Morphoseuticals. So if you're allowed to talk about that,
what's the state of it? What's the goal of it? Yeah, the goal of the goal is so Morphoseuticals,
Inc. is a it's a new company that I co-founded with David Kaplan, who's head of biomedical
engineering at Tufts. He and I are partners in this work. We work very closely together.
And the right now, the mission of Morphoseuticals is focused around limb regeneration. So we are
taking the things we learned in the frog in terms of how to induce the regeneration of appendages
in the frog and trying to move it to mammals so that someday towards humans. And so, you know,
I can't really go into details of how it's going, but it's in its very early days. But I'm very
optimistic that we will actually have something useful. And so that's what we're doing.
Are you seeing more progress than you had hoped? Or are you seeing less? Or
is it going pretty much how you expected? Basically, going the way I thought it would.
We're on track. We're on track, given the timeline that we've envisioned and the basic
science that has to be done. I mean, this is, it lets it to be clear. And I receive all kinds of
emails and phone calls from people with really desperate medical conditions. And it's just
it's an amazing, the need is incredible. And unfortunately, I have to say to all these people
every day that we're working as fast as we can, but it's still a basic science project is we are
not in clinical trials. We are not dealing with human patients. It is still very basic science.
However, it is now to the point where we have commercial investment, and it's obvious that
it's going to at some point, it's going to be real for patients. So it's pretty much on track.
The idea is quite simple. David's group makes these wearable bioreactors, and
you wear them on a limb amputation site, and they basically produce a kind of
protective aqueous environment around the wound. And then my group comes up with the payload,
which are the drugs. These are the electrosodicles, which are different types of ion channel
drugs and other types of drugs that are going to set the wound cells towards a decision of,
let's rebuild a limb. Okay, Nadia wants to know, would be very interested in learning
how the actual algorithm works if he's even allowed to share that information? I guess
it's some form of pattern recognition, but the details will be cool to learn.
I'm not sure which algorithm are you talking about. I think she means the algorithm of when
we talked about decoding. So like frog's face means frog's face. And then she has a sub question,
which may be related. Also, how do we know that we are actually learning the cell's language,
and not just observing the cause and effect, because we only see their behavior on the outside?
Well, I guess to go in order. The algorithm is still very much under development. Part of the
problem is that traditional machine learning algorithms require incredible amounts of data,
meaning huge numbers of examples to learn from. We don't have those data. So it's very expensive
and time consuming to get these images of the electric pattern. So we can't deploy the typical
types of algorithms that are used. So we're still, a lot of the early work was basically done by hand.
And we're at the moment, we're still working on these algorithms. So that's still very much
a kind of a story in progress. With respect to the second question, I guess I'm not sure
what the distinction would be. So if we understand the bioelectric signals sufficiently that we can
put out whatever signal we want and get the cells to do what we want, I think by definition that
means we've communicated correctly to the cells, which means by definition we've learned their
appropriate language. I'm not sure what it would mean to be able to do that and yet not really
have the language of the cells. Sam Thompson wants to know, do you think biological self-organization
and emergence might be proto algorithmic? And then what would the implications of
for that? What would the implications be for science? I don't know what proto algorithmic
means in this context. I can take a stab at I think what might be an interesting sense of it,
but I'm not sure that captures what he was asking. The kind of thing that I think is important sort
of foundationally to think about is where do the set points of various homeostatic systems come
from. So whether you have physiological homeostasis or anatomical homeostasis, the ability of a system
to get back to the same state even though it's perturbed, right? One might ask, where is that
information? And an easy thing to say is that, well, it's evolution provides it because certain
types of set points are adaptive and other types will not let you survive. And that's okay, except
that now what we see with these synthetic organisms is that, for example, with the xenobots, we can
take these frog skin cells and put them in a new environment. And within 48 hours or so, they
self assemble into a new organism with a new anatomy, a new behavior, and various new capabilities,
they never existed before. They have no lengthy history of selection on earth, right? The cells
themselves evolved for being really good at sitting on the outside of a frog or a tadpole and keeping
out the bacteria. They did not evolve for the ability to get together and run around by themselves
and do various things. So that raises the interesting question of where does that actually
come from? It's clear that there's incredible plasticity of the hardware that's encoded by the
genome. It can do all sorts of novel things. But where does the specific things come from?
And I don't know if this is what he meant by proto algorithmic, but you can sort of think
about it. One of my favorite analogies is this thing called a Galton board. I don't know if
everybody knows what that is, but imagine a vertical piece of wood like this. It's a vertical
piece of wood. And then you bang a bunch of nails into it at regularly spaced intervals,
just bang a bunch of nails into it. You take a bucket of marbles and you dump it into the top
and they go boom, boom, boom, boom, they all go and every marble just sort of bounces stochastically
back and forth. If you've got enough marbles, the outcome is always going to be exactly the
same. You're going to get this beautiful bell curve, right? If you just visualize and actually
have toys of this, you can actually buy one on Amazon. It's like clinical from prices, right?
Yeah, very similar, very similar. But you dump a whole, you see, if you dump one marble,
you have no idea where it's going to end up. But if you dump a bunch of marbles in,
then on average, you're going to get this beautiful bell curve. And so you can ask a
simple question. Where is the shape of this bell curve encoded? Was it in the description of the
wood? No. Was it in the layout of the nails? No, you could put the nails almost any which way
you want. Was it in the recipe of making this thing? No. Where was it? And so you end up with
this idea that much like, and this is certainly, I'm not the first person by far to say this,
this is a very old, you know, maybe, maybe Pythagoras or Plato had similar ideas where
you would say that somewhere in an important sense, there are laws, laws of mathematics,
laws of computation that exist independent of, they have an independent existence.
And what happens is that when we build specific kinds of machines,
we couple to those laws and we take advantage of them. So for example, if you build a machine
that looks like a Galton board, you get to couple to the rules of mathematics that give you
this beautiful shape, you didn't have to specify the shape ahead of time, you get the shape for free
by building a device that can couple to those laws. If you discover a transistor, which is
basically just a voltage gated current conductance, right, it's like a little tiny synapse, you know,
it's the same as a gap juncture and ion channel. As soon as you've made that little machine,
you can couple to these amazing laws of computation that tell you, for example,
that if you have a bunch of NAND gates, you can build anything. Well, where did that fact come
from? You know, these truth tables, or if you know two angles of a triangle, you automatically know
the third. Where did that come from? So where is that? So maybe that's what he meant by proto
algorithmic, but it's the idea that there are these rules and some of the some of them are physics,
some of them are mathematics and some of them are computation. You can if you make the right kind of
device, you can reap the benefits of some of those laws and evolution does this all the time.
Evolution discovers certain pieces of hardware that then let you do amazing, amazing things
because you're leveraging these laws that are out there that are invisible to you until you've
built the right hardware. Great, we'll just get to four more questions and hopefully they're quick.
Fane, is the evolutionary suppression of regeneration in mammals an advantageous trait
for the accumulation of memory? Wow, I'm not sure about for the accumulation of memory. I doubt it
because there are plenty of creatures that can do perfectly well with memory that that are highly
regenerative. So I don't think it's impossible to have a regenerative capacity and memory in
the same animal. However, we can think about why aren't humans, for example, regenerating their
limbs. So nobody knows, but I'll tell you a plausible story that may or may not be correct.
Imagine that you are the ancestor of mammals, you're the tiny thing that looks a little bit
like a mouse and you're running around the forest and somebody bites your leg off. So the problem is
that unlike a salamander, which can hang out in water and take a long time to heal, you have a
rapid metabolism, you have a rapid heartbeat and blood pressure, and you're going to bleed out
long before you get a chance to regenerate. So your job, if you want to survive, is to form a scar
and to have inflammatory response that's going to kill off some of the bacteria.
You need to not bleed out. So you need to seal the wound immediately. You need to make a scar.
And by the way, you are going to try to put weight on it because you're walking on it.
Unlike a salamander, which has the buoyancy of water to hold you up, you're going to try to put
weight on it, which means that as soon as some kind of delicate blastema is formed and these cells
are starting to grow, you're going to grind it into the forest floor. So that's not particularly
conducive. Also, because you're in dry air instead of water, all of the electrical currents that
need to come out of that wound epithelium to drive the electric states, they can't work because the
dry air is an insulator. So you might imagine that at that point, you might as well just shift
a scarring because the regeneration now that story has pros and cons. One nice thing about
that story is that, for example, it fits with this really weird fact. Why are deer regenerative
on their antlers? Why can deer regenerate massive amounts of bone and vasculature and
innervation every year? I mean, what's interesting about the deer is they're not putting weight on
it. They're carrying it around and it never has to worry that it's going to be disrupted while
it's trying to grow. So that fits. What doesn't fit is questions like, okay, that explains why
the limbs don't regenerate. How about internal organs? Why don't they regenerate? And we don't
know. So no one knows and we can come up with some ideas that have pros and cons.
Tom Karak asks, well, it says, fascinating. Are there overlaps with the field of quantum biology?
What about ORC ORR? That is, I'm sure you've heard of Stuart Hamarovs and Penrose's
orchestrated objective production. Yeah. I can't say too many useful things about that,
but I will say sort of one thing. I do agree with Hamarov and Penrose on the idea that
anesthesia in general is one of the most profound, maybe the only profound tool we have to study
actual consciousness. We don't have a lot of other tools to study consciousness, but anesthesia is a
pretty good one. And the interesting thing about anesthesia is that in general, most general
anesthetics are gap-junctional disruptors. Now, like many facts, this has things that are easy
to understand and some things that are deeply puzzling. The kind of thing that makes perfect
sense is that these electrical networks in the body manifest the various cognitive abilities
long before they were brained. So these gap-junctions that enable body cells to form networks
are critical for these networks to have memories, memories of body shape,
to make decisions about what they're going to grow and so on. So the use of gap-junctions to
make networks that can follow large-scale goals like make a limb and make an organ and so on,
that's evolutionarily ancient. And it's not surprising at all that what evolution did when
the nervous systems developed was to use that same trick to create another type of cognitive agent
which lives basically centered in the brain and reuse the exact same hardware for that.
So that makes sense. And so it makes total sense that that goes away when those gap-junctors are
disrupted by a general anesthetic. It also makes total sense that if we want to turn a planarian
into the head of, make its head turn its head into the head of a different species of planarian,
guess what we use? A general anesthetic called octenol. It's the exact same thing. It's a gap
junctional disruptor. So what you're doing is you're basically disrupting that protocognitive
agent, the collective intelligence of the body that normally remembers how to make a
particular kind of head. You're basically disrupting that with this general anesthetic.
Now, the amazing thing about general anesthetic is that any of us ever come back from it being
the same person. Think about it. You have this brain, you have right, it supports the cognitive
structures of a very complex creature. And then for some number of hours, you simply disconnect
most of the cells from being electrically in communication with each other. And then
you let the connections reform and you just sort of hope that everything comes back to how it was.
If we didn't know that general anesthetics work, somebody were to tell me that that's their plan,
I would say, well, you might get a living human out of it at the end, but it's certainly not
going to be the patient that walked in. You're going to completely wreck their mental state.
And so one thing that's amazing is that actually most people come out of it being more or less
the same person as they went in. But the other interesting thing is not everybody. So in fact,
this is why they don't like to give general anesthetic if they can help it because some
people have permanent psychosis. In fact, many people have hallucinations on their way out
out of it that eventually resolve as the brain sort of finds its attractors that were there before.
But if you watch, you can go to YouTube and you can watch some really sort of funny videos of
people coming out of general anesthesia, right? And you know, people think they're pirates and
they're gangsters and they don't understand where they've been and they have all these crazy stories
about who they think they are. And eventually that sort of resolves. Not really, that part's not
really surprising. I'm shocked anybody ever comes out of it properly. It's amazing. So the plan area
is exactly the same thing. So when you disrupt their gap junctions, the first thing they do is
they regenerate random heads that belong possibly to other species, right? And then after about
30 days, those heads actually remodel back to the correct species, the species specific shape.
So they're not permanent. So to me, this looks exactly like what happens when you come out of
general anesthesia. Okay, MoFlo wants to know, how does he see his work relating to David Sinclair's
biological clock? Yeah, yeah, interesting. It's funny. I've been talking a lot. I talked to David
recently and I've been thinking a lot about people have been asking me a lot about aging,
bioelectrics of aging. I don't know. I don't know what the relationship between bioelectrics and aging
really is. I can tell you that plan area, as far as we can tell, don't age. There's no such thing as
an old planarian. They live forever, if you know, if they're not injured. And so I think what that
tells us is that aging would be resolved if we could crank up regenerative capacity to the point
where we would constantly be regenerating any cells that aged, right? Senescing cells would
just be regenerated the way planaria do. So my strong suspicion is that aging is a
consequence of our poor ability to stay with the appropriate anatomical structure through long
periods of time. And then if we cracked that problem, we would simultaneously get the answer to aging,
cancer, degenerative disease, and traumatic injury. I think it all comes down to the ability to defend
a particular body plan over time. I know many people say that telomere length has to do with
aging, well, the shortened telomere length. And you're suggesting, well, it could be that, but
it's also related to this morphogenetic code that you're referring to. And are they interrelated
somehow? Probably. I mean, I am not an expert on telomeres. I have no idea what's going on with
telomeres in planaria, assuming somebody's studying it, we certainly happened. I'm assuming
somebody must be. All I know is this story of inevitable aging, because you keep making copies
of things, and fundamentally things, the information is degrading, and eventually,
you don't have it anymore. And it's degrading at the ends, because that's where you're reading.
That clearly cannot be the whole story, because planaria avoided permanently. So whatever they're
doing is the way to get around aging. And I think it's more than a coincidence that the species that
is immortal is also the species with the greatest regenerative capacity, or let's say the set of
species. So I don't think that's a crazy coincidence. I think there's a reason for that.
Okay, the last question. Nate Grundman, can you imagine, referring to you, Michael, can you imagine
a mental practice by which a person can influence the goal state of the body? For example, Joe
Dispenza has made some claims that he's healed his body in a way that doctors say are impossible.
It also a question I had for you earlier, which relates to this is how your work is related to
the placebo effect. So whether or not you see the connection there, I'm interested in the
placebo effect too. I'm trying to sneak in two questions for the pressure one.
Yeah. Okay, so I don't know anything about Joe Dispenza. I don't know anything about the claims
that he's made or any specific kind of healing event. But I'll give you a general thought about
this. It is uncontroversial that your thoughts, whatever they may be, whether or not whatever
you think thinking is, it is pretty uncontroversial that your thoughts affect the physiological
functioning of your body. I mean, that's obvious. If you want to get up and walk around, your thoughts
have now activated various electrical pathways. They've triggered a bunch of muscle motion.
If you have a tendency to mentally work yourself up into an anxious state, you can certainly,
by your thinking, crank up various stress enzyme production in your body. We all know that.
You can do the opposite if you've trained in techniques to calm yourself down under various
circumstances. You can reduce the level of cortisol in your blood. You can reduce various
fire and flight responses. So it's not some weird voodoo kind of claim to say that your
thoughts absolutely affect the biophysical processes of your body. We do it every day.
If that wasn't true, you couldn't get up in the morning when you wanted to get up and go to work.
So that part's completely obvious. So from there, it's a very short hop, skip, and a jump to the
idea that not only can you give commands to your muscles and your glands to produce various
hormones, neurotransmitters, and muscle motion, but you might be able to exert some influence over
other cells, for example, skin cells at wounds and your liver and the way that it processes
information. I don't find it implausible whatsoever. So again, I'm not commenting on any particular
instance of anybody having healed themselves of anything. I'm just saying that it is not
a stretch to think that not only can you talk to your, when I say talk, I mean,
you know, exert influence on your various glands that put out cortisol and adrenaline and various
other things. Why can't you send commands to other cells? That seems silly to think that
that's impossible. So having said all that, I think that the placebo effect is extremely profound.
I think that what it's telling us is that there is a communication across levels. So you have
meaning that you have a level of organization that consists of your body cells, and that has a
degree of cognition and a degree of intelligence, but your body is also home to an additional
intelligence, which lives probably largely in the brain. And it appears that those two can
communicate in various ways. And I can imagine that there are lots of things to be discovered
about ways to improve that communication. And we know there are certain practices where
people extend the amount of time they can sit underwater and change their body temperature
and change their pulse rate and things like that. I find it completely plausible that there are ways
to communicate in that way to other cells in the body. Also, there is the field of hypnodormatology
where people by hypnosis try to treat various skin diseases, some of which have a neuroimmune
component, some of which may not have a neuroimmune component. So the activity of the mind, which is
simply the execution of the physiological computations that happen in the brain,
affect physiological computations that happen outside the brain. I don't think that's particularly
a stretch at all. One of your goals is the anatomical compiler. And then what you just said
made me think, well, some of these people who are meditating or on the more meditative side
tend to work with thoughts to heal oneself. And then I was wondering, hmm, I wonder if your
anatomical compiler can advise some of the more thought based healing practices. Here's an example
you say, well, if you were to think of this image, it's more likely to heal you than if you were to
think of this other image. Do you think that's at all possible? Or that's way too high level?
I don't think it's impossible. No. Again, I'm not suggesting that there's, I'm not supporting any
particular image of us being a healing one. But I don't think it's impossible at all. I mean,
and there's been work recently on various types of pulsed light stimuli into the retina having
some interesting neuroprotective effects in the brain and so on. Yeah, all of this, it's a giant
electrical network. All of the cells are communicating with each other. There's absolutely no reason why
that couldn't work. But I think that to be clear, this anatomical compiler isn't just us. The anatomical
compiler is a sort of practical personification of the goal that all of us in the community are
going for, which is the ability to control growth and form. And when we have that ability, that's
when the anatomical compiler becomes possible. So it's not just something that we in particular
are working on. But I think that this is part of all the things you're discussing now are part of
the deep reason why cognitive science and consciousness and all of those kinds of things
are deeply related to developmental biology and physiology. They're absolutely interrelated
because they are two sides of the same coin, information processing in goal directed hierarchical
systems. And the more you understand about one, the better you are at managing the others. This
is two sides of the same question. Where can people find out more about you and what's next for you?
Well, they can find out. I have a website at drmike11.org. We have a center website, which is
alancenter.tufts.edu. I have a Twitter feed, which is at drmike11. And what's next? It's a
good question. I don't, you know, I can't tell you exactly what's going to happen next, but I
certainly know the things that we are trying to do and that we're working on. And you can go to our
website and see all kinds of projects that we're working on in the areas of trying to lay a better
foundation for understanding basal cognition and understanding morphogenesis and developing
applications and birth defects and regeneration and cancer. We're doing some work in machine
learning and trying to sort of close that loop and understand how we can use the principles that we
learn in biology to make better cognitive, to make novel and better cognitive systems that are
going to help us in various ways. And the links to everything that Michael just mentioned will
be in the description. So please check that out. You mentioned two sides of the same coin, but I
didn't quite understand that. How is it that developmental biology and consciousness may
be two sides? Because you mentioned one is first and third person is the other. So how are they
two sides of the same coin? Well, in many ways. First of all, the fact that we all start life as
a single cell and that cell self assembles into a creature that can later say, I am a centralized
intelligence. I'm a single eye a self. Yeah, that may be, but you're made of a bunch of cells. And
in fact, you used to be one cell and then a ball of cells. And so that whole process of how that
unified self is arranged and supported by a collection of competent agencies being cells
is very similar to how the body is in the pattern of the body is is arranged by the
collective intelligence of cells. Morphogenesis is a collective intelligence problem. It is not
a chemistry problem or a genetics problem. It's a problem of collective intelligence. And
those same kinds of issues arise when you're trying to understand any kind of a human or any
other centralized intelligence. How does the information processing and the capacities
of lots of independent subunits in the in the case of brains, those will be neurons.
But in the case of the body, there'll be other other types of cells. How do they work together to
pursue goals and plans and have preferences that don't belong to any of the individual subunits
themselves? Right, that making a limb is a goal that no individual cell can can know no no individual
cell knows what a limb is, or I can can answer the question of well, how many fingers are we
supposed to have or how long is the finger supposed to be? That is a piece of information
that only the cellular collective has, right? So this ability of pursuing large scale goals of
having and having collective information that's more than the sum of its parts is exactly the same
question of where does intelligence and the sort of cognitive capacity come from? Those are all
those problems will be answered together. They will not be answered. If either one of these
things remains mysterious, we won't have an answer to the other. Thank you, sir. Thank you so much
for spending so much time. Thank you very much. Yeah, thank you for your questions. I want to
let everyone know that this, I think, is Nobel Prize winning work. So I will do my best to promote
this and get you some more attention, man. I hope so. Thank you. Thank you very much. That's very
kind. Thank you. I appreciate it. The podcast is now finished. If you'd like to support conversations
like this, then do consider going to patreon.com slash c-u-r-t-j-a-i-m-u-n-g-a-l. That is Kurt
Jaimungal. It's support from the patrons and from the sponsors that allow me to do this full
time. Every dollar helps tremendously. Thank you.
