I'm no saint, but I generally try to do the right thing.
Are you sincerely trying to save the world?
I'm trying to do good things.
Good idea for an electric jet.
Impossible, no middle name.
Elon Musk has a pretty big pitch.
He's the good billionaire using his wealth
to protect the future of humanity.
It's gotten him something most billionaires don't have,
a fan base.
I've never signed a big, a life-sized version of it.
First, I want to say I love you.
A 2021 poll showed Musk with a 50% approval rating,
way higher than his fellow billionaires.
This popularity has done very well for him.
Musk is now the seventh richest man in the world.
Musk is now the fourth richest man in the world.
Elon Musk is now the world's richest person
again, according to Forbes.
We took a deep look into Musk's entire career,
court documents, SEC filings, and interviews
to break down the story Elon tells about himself
and how he leveraged it to accumulate wealth and power.
This is the classroom from More Perfect Union,
and today we're going to look at how Elon Musk got rich.
Let's skip Musk's South Africa childhood.
Critics say he inherited his money
from his father's emerald mine,
and Elon says that's not true.
He claims he rejected his abusive father's
ill-begotten wealth and came to North America as a teen
with $2,000 to put himself through college.
He knew he wanted to work with the internet.
The only way to get involved with the internet in 95
that I could think of was to start a company,
because they weren't a lot of companies to go and work for.
So I thought, well, we've got to make something
that's going to return money very, very quickly.
Elon joined forces and funds with his brother Kimball.
They drummed up some cash from investors,
including $20K from their father,
and started Zip2, a map and local listing company.
Zip2 eventually planned to merge with CitySearch,
but Elon wouldn't have been in charge.
That did not sit well with him.
At the time, a CitySearch executive said
CitySearch wanted to focus on customers and financiers,
while Musk wanted to focus on general visibility.
Visibility for him.
I'd like to be on the cover of Rolling Stone.
That'd be cool.
These disagreements led to the deal falling apart.
This is a pattern for Elon,
a need for sole credit and control.
It's a huge part of his story.
Zip2 sold and Elon made $22 million,
which he invested in his next project.
I've sunk the great majority of my net worth
into Axe.com,
which is the new banking and mutual funds company.
So this is an ATM.
And what we're going to do
is transform the traditional banking industry.
That quote defines Musk's strategy,
promise revolutionary technology
and highlight how he's risking his own money.
And he also points out a key element of his success,
wooing investors.
Raising $50 million is a matter
of making a series of phone calls.
As Axe.com took shape,
investors and the board didn't think Musk
had the experience to be CEO.
So they brought in Bill Harris.
Elon's co-founders were also unhappy.
One accused him of promising the sun,
moon and the stars to the media
when there was nothing there.
Future SEC filings for the company
even mentioned a lack of proprietary technology
as a corporate risk.
The tech they did have was problematic.
For example, there was a bug allowing bad actors
to transfer funds from any account
in the nation's banking system
with just an account number,
a major security flaw.
A co-founder was so displeased with Musk,
he left and took many employees with him.
Musk's reaction, we'll hire more people.
Eventually Musk pushed out CEO Bill Harris
and replaced him with himself
to centralize authority.
X.com merged with a competitor,
Peter Teal's Confinity.
Confinity owned a piece of technology called PayPal.
Musk and Teal got glowing press coverage,
but because PayPal came out of Confinity,
a lot of the coverage centered Teal.
According to Ashley Vance's 2015 biography,
Musk kept championing the X.com brand
while most everyone else favored PayPal.
Eventually the company scrapped X.com to focus on PayPal,
a decision the press gave Musk credit for.
But mutiny was brewing.
Executive Rolof Botha alleged Musk was hiding
serious financial issues from the board.
Employees put together a coup.
They petitioned the board to fire Musk and it worked.
Musk was fired and replaced with Teal.
Botha said it was just in time.
It would have killed the company
if Elon had stayed on as CEO for six more months.
Regardless, Musk hits it big
when PayPal eventually sells, $180 million.
He had been laying the path for his next move since college.
When I was in college, there were three areas
that I thought would most affect the future of humanity.
The internet, the transition to a sustainable energy
and transportation sector, and space exploration,
and particularly the extension of life to multiple planets.
With the capital that I got from the sale of PayPal,
I was able to go into both those areas.
Enter SpaceX and Tesla.
Musk wasn't with Tesla at the start.
He invested in a company that already existed,
but most media calls him a founder.
What happened?
We spoke with Edward Niedermeyer,
author of Ludacris,
an in-depth examination of Tesla Motors.
Elon Musk was not one of the original founders of Tesla,
right?
There was these two guys, Martin Neighborhart
and Mark Tarpening, who had actually incorporated
the company.
Musk came in because he wanted to do the same thing.
But like with his previous companies,
Elon was focused on publicity,
specifically public perception of himself
as the visionary founder.
Part and parcel of being a hot startup, right?
Is you have to have that sort of charismatic
visionary founder, but it wasn't Elon Musk.
It was Martin Neighborhart.
Neighborhart even had a BlackBerry ad
where he's being presented just like Steve Jobs
as this visionary tech guy.
And I think that was exactly the kind of thing
that Elon Musk really wanted out of Tesla
as much as anything else.
He sent an email saying, like, this is embarrassing.
You know, I'm an important part of this company
and I want to make sure that I'm included in the coverage.
And in these emails that leaked it, it makes it very clear
that being that guy,
being the visionary figurehead of this company
was really, really important to him.
So shortly after this whole exchange
and Musk getting really angry about his lack of prominence
in the media coverage,
he went and wrote the top secret master plan blog post.
And this was really Musk's coming out party,
positioning himself as really that visionary founder
for Tesla.
One of the really interesting things is that,
you know, there's really not a lot
in the top secret master plan strategically anyway,
that Tesla wasn't kind of already planning on doing.
It all culminated in Aberhard's ouster
and a series of lawsuits leading to a settlement
with an important stipulation.
Musk could legally call himself a co-founder of the company.
Musk knew that to acquire more power,
he needed to be called co-founder on paper.
Musk has long insisted he never wanted to be CEO of Tesla.
But after Aberhard's ouster,
they brought in, you know, two different new CEOs
before Musk himself eventually took over.
Musk took over at a rough time,
the 2008 financial crisis.
Tesla needed an influx of capital.
Musk's usual strategies wouldn't work.
The sources of capital that would normally provide that,
such as the public markets, the debt markets,
they're in shambles.
But a year earlier,
Congress passed a $25 billion loan program
for the Department of Energy,
part of which would go to developing low-emission cars.
Musk went on a media blitz trying to convince the public
that Tesla deserved the loan.
It's helpful to let your congressman center know
that you think companies like Tesla
should get a portion of the ATVM program.
But public approval wouldn't be enough.
At the time, Tesla only had 1,500 cars on the road
and hadn't truly proven that they could produce cars on mass
or significantly reduce emissions.
Tesla was stuck in a catch-22.
They needed to show they had the support
of other corporate investors,
specifically traditional automakers like Daimler,
the makers of Mercedes and other cars,
but Daimler wouldn't be interested in investing
if they didn't get the loan.
He'd announced that the loan was approved
before Tesla had even submitted
a complete application for the loan,
let alone received any kind of actual approval for it.
By saying that this was a done deal,
that gave Daimler the confidence to partner with them.
And having that partnership with a century old,
one of the biggest names in the car business,
in turn gave the government the confidence
in Tesla's viability to then ultimately give them the loan.
And so it's this circular trick that Elon plays.
It was more than the money.
It was a boost for public and investor relations.
Just a few months later, Tesla registered for an IPO.
Their SEC filing even admits the loan
was essential to the business.
In 2013, Tesla paid off the loan in full
to huge fanfare from the media.
CNN literally just copied their press release,
but Tesla still isn't profitable.
Their stated goal is to accelerate the world's transition
to sustainable energy,
but Tesla's actual strategy is exploiting
well-meaning government climate programs.
Look at carbon credits.
Government permits to emit a certain quantity
of greenhouse gases.
Companies earn carbon credits for reducing emissions
and have to spend them when they emit too much.
Tesla earns a lot, then sells them to other companies,
erasing whatever progress Tesla made.
The boost from selling carbon credits
led to some of the only profitable quarters
Tesla had ever had.
They even used to list regulatory credits
and automobile sales in the same line in some SEC filings.
It allowed Tesla to announce better financials
and pull in more investors, retail and institutional.
Musk gets paid almost entirely in stock
and he's really good at manipulating the stock's value.
He uses the same strategy he used with Daimler
and the Department of Energy,
announcing funding that might not exist.
Like when he tweeted,
I'm considering taking Tesla private at 420,
funding secured.
You can't just do that.
A federal judge determined Elon's tweet
had falsely inflated Tesla stock
and caused billions in damages.
The COVID pandemic also helped Musk.
When the Federal Reserve
executed recession-stalling fixes on Wall Street,
bankers invested in Tesla.
Despite Musk's derision of COVID stimulus checks,
Tesla received stimulus money from the government.
At the beginning of the pandemic,
Tesla stock hovered around $120 a share.
In late 2021, a year and a half into COVID,
it was worth 10 times that,
all of which greatly increased the net worth
of the top shareholder, Elon.
But to maintain the world-saving myth,
he has to look like he doesn't make any money.
My cash balances are very, very low.
I simply had loans against my stock,
so if Tesla's SpaceX went bankrupt,
I would go bankrupt too.
Most U.S. companies don't allow their executives
to take out loans against their stock,
but Tesla does, and Musk has taken advantage,
borrowing millions of dollars for his personal coffers,
using his Tesla stock as collateral.
Loans don't count as income
in the eyes of the IRS or the public.
But even without the loans,
in 2021, Musk made 18,043 times the average Tesla employee.
Tesla justifies that wild ratio to investors in SEC filings
by arguing Elon's worth it.
Elon Musk has contributed significantly
and actively to us since our earliest days,
raising capital, bringing investors,
and raising public awareness.
Yeah, Tesla's own SEC filings admit
that the myth of Elon is inherently tied
to the value of the company.
If people stop believing in Elon, Tesla loses value,
and Elon knows that.
He even admits much of Tesla's value
is based on a promise.
The overwhelming focus is solving full self-driving.
That's really the difference between Tesla
being worth a lot of money and being worth basically zero.
But full self-driving has yet to be safely implemented,
and the latest data suggests it's incredibly unsafe.
Tesla's system is nowhere near ready.
Regardless, Musk is still wildly wealthy
from the promises he's made,
and that's also made him very powerful.
Elon says his goal is...
We want to maximize happiness to the population
and propagate into the future as far as possible.
But he's really using that wealth and power
as all billionaires do.
Not to save humanity, but to crush it.
He squashes worker power.
They fired me because I tried to improve the lives
of my coworkers and myself.
That's why they fired me,
because it wasn't a part of Elon's plan.
And now that he has both power and a soapbox,
his dangerous anti-government political beliefs
are even more important.
Previously, Elon was a liberal darling.
Obama's 2015 State of the Union
seemed to be written for Musk.
Solar power at Tesla.
Re-energized space program astronauts to Mars.
But as soon as Democrats questioned Musk, he changed,
lashing out and announcing support
for far-right figures and ideas.
He likes the politicians willing to support his myth
and let him continue building wealth
at the expense of the rest of us.
He isn't the only billionaire doing this,
but his skill at myth-building
and his massive popularity make him the most dangerous.
Musk tells a story of a self-made billionaire
using his money to save the world and enrich humanity.
But he really built his wealth
on the backs of others to enrich himself.
Thank you for watching
and don't forget to like and subscribe.
We'll be covering the stories of other billionaires
and multimillionaires to examine the policy failures
that made them rich,
as well as the worker-empowering stories
and explainers you're used to.
This has been The Classroom by More Perfect Union.
