These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university-level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
The lectures are catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled, Tocqueville and the American Experiment, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor William R. Cook of the State University of New York at Geneseo.
Professor Cook is a distinguished teaching professor of history at SUNY Geneseo where
he has been teaching for over 30 years.
He received his bachelor's degree cum laude from Wabash College and earned his PhD from
Cornell University.
Professor Cook teaches courses in medieval and ancient history, the Renaissance and
Reformation periods, and the Bible and Christian thought.
He is the co-author of The Medieval Worldview, now in its second edition.
Professor Cook, long an admirer of Tocqueville, began his study of Tocqueville's Democracy
in America in earnest in 1998 when he ran for U.S. Congress and has taught seminars
on Tocqueville since then.
Professor Cook is the recipient of the Chancellor's Award for Excellence in Teaching.
In 1992, the Council for the Advancement and Support of Education named him Professor of
the Year for New York State.
Professor Cook prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical
notes, and bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
Chapter 1, An Overview of Democracy in America
A recent book stated that probably the best book ever written about democracy is Elections
to Tocqueville's Democracy in America, and the greatest book ever written about America
is Elections to Tocqueville's Democracy in America.
When you think about that, that's quite a deal because there are a lot of books written
about democracy and a lot of books written about America.
This really is an extraordinary text since its publication in two pieces in 1835 and
1840.
And we're going to have the opportunity to spend some serious time looking at this text,
examining what Tocqueville saw, what he thought, what he predicted, and then to be able to
use this book as well to talk about some important issues that are still part of the
American experience and the Democratic experience.
You don't have to go far today to hear the name, Elections to Tocqueville.
If you are any kind of a political junkie, if you watch cable network news, if you read
editorials and political columns, you're bound to run into Tocqueville's name because
he's one of the most frequently cited authors.
Pick up any book in the bookstore about a modern American politics, open it up to the
index, and I can almost guarantee you a couple citations to Tocqueville.
One of the reasons this is so prominent is the fact that Tocqueville seems to be today
a darling of both the left and the right, of the liberals and the conservatives.
In the 1990s, in some of those knock-down drag-out struggles between Newt Gingrich and
Bill Clinton, they traded Tocqueville quotations at one another.
They both favored the writings of Tocqueville.
They both saw Tocqueville as basically on their side and helping to make their case.
Tocqueville is perhaps known more than for any other single phrase for this one.
America is great because America is good, and if America ceases to be good, it will cease
to be great.
Now, there's a good one-liner.
It's a wonderful statement in many ways.
One tiny problem, and that is Tocqueville, then write it or say it.
It was written about Tocqueville.
It was a sort of summary of Tocqueville done at the beginning of the 20th century and somehow
or other that summary ended up getting quotation marks around it, and it's his most off-quoted
one-liner.
We can decide after talking about this book and its author for a while whether it's a
good summary or not, but we at least ought to be aware of the fact that Tocqueville in
fact does not utter his most famous phrase as silly as that sounds.
A larger problem than this misquotation is the fact that because Tocqueville's democracy
in America is such a big, thick book, very few people read the whole thing.
It is very well known from quotations, from snippets.
It is often anthologized in books about America and books about democracy and books about
politics in general, but not very many people read the whole thing.
Even in college, where Tocqueville is often assigned in history and political science
courses, you get assigned a thin version of Tocqueville, for there are many, many severely
edited editions, 100, 150, 200 pages.
And the problem with that of course is you don't get the fullness of Tocqueville's thought
and you lose the context of all the pieces you are reading, and inevitably it will lead
to distortions of understanding Tocqueville.
So one of the things I'm most looking forward to in this course is the opportunity to spend
a good deal of time with this text.
We can't exhaust it because you can't exhaust a more or less 700-page book in 24 30-minute
lectures or a lot more than 24 for that matter.
But we can in some ways systematically and reasonably thoroughly look at all the contents
of this book.
It's a pleasure I get with my own undergraduates because I teach a course on Tocqueville, where
I have still more time than I have here with the teaching company.
But nevertheless, we're going to be able to do some very good things and to explore
this in a way very few college professors have the opportunity to, and explore it in
a way that, well, let's face it, most people don't go to the bookstore and say, here's
a nice 700-page book I think I'll buy and curl up with for most of the rest of my life.
Well, we're not going to quite do that.
But nevertheless, I think we're going to find this to be a valuable, useful, stimulating
experience.
There are a lot of profitable ways to read democracy in America.
One can simply read it historically.
That is to say, Tocqueville tells us some things about himself and his own French background,
but tells us a lot about America in the year that he came to visit, 1831 and the beginning
of 1832.
So anybody who's studying, for example, the era of Andrew Jackson, because Jackson was
president at that time, is probably going to read Alexis to Tocqueville's democracy
in America.
Nobody will deny he was a very careful observer of American life at his time.
Secondly, Tocqueville is often read as a kind of profit.
Tocqueville likes to make broad general predictions about the future.
And although when you do that very much, you always blow some, and Tocqueville does.
He's wrong about some things.
He never thought American literature would amount to much, for example.
Nevertheless, several of his prophetic statements have become true or have at least we've moved
in the direction that he suggested, even though they were counterintuitive at his own time,
to make him something of a prophetic figure in many people's minds.
I suppose most famously is his prediction outlandish when he made it, no doubt, that
eventually what would happen in the world would be the two big countries would come
to dominate, one dedicated to freedom, America, and one not dedicated to freedom, Russia.
That would have pretty much seemed wacky in 1835 to most people, and yet we sort of know
how the story turns out, and we know that that really was an extraordinarily interesting
and profound insight that Tocqueville had.
So we can read Tocqueville as profit.
Another way to read Tocqueville would be as a political theorist.
He himself sort of claims this.
This is a book with very little data in it, with very little narrative in it, although
it's based on a narrative experience, that is to say his 10 months of travel in America.
It is in some real ways a political theory book, and it was reviewed first in English
in fact by a pretty good political theorist, who liked it by the way, a guy named John
Stuart Mill, in England.
It can even be viewed as a work of travel literature, which was already a well-established genre.
Tocqueville was hardly the first European, or for that matter the first Frenchman, to
come to the United States and to write about his experience, some of which was quite exotic
for Europeans, going among the Indians, paddling a canoe, and all the other things that he
did.
However, let me suggest what my primary interest is in studying and teaching Alexis to Tocqueville's
democracy in America.
I'm interested in his insights that we can very carefully, to be sure, apply in the world
today.
Obviously, some of the things that Tocqueville says are no longer directly relevant about
how the United States works, because we've changed a lot of things.
Just to give one example, he comments a great deal on the fact the United States does not
directly elect its members of the United States Senate.
They were elected by state legislatures, but of course, since Tocqueville, our Constitution
has been amended and senators are directly elected.
What he says is of historical importance, but it's not very important in terms of understanding
how our senatorial elections or how our Senate works in 2004 or 2005 or 2006 or 2007.
And so, that's an important thing to note, but nevertheless, many of the things that
Tocqueville says about America have real application, provide real insights, help us
to frame really good questions as we try to look at and examine and understand the America
we live in in the 21st century.
And so, there are many different ways to read Tocqueville.
For me, democracy in America, this great book, is a living work that really challenges to
think not just about the 19th century, but challenges to think hard and think carefully
and think well and to sometimes use Tocquevillian categories to think about the 21st century.
Now, I want to come clean at the beginning and not only say that that's a perspective
I take on Tocqueville, but I want to tell you a little bit about how I came to be so
interested in and develop a course and do some research on Alexis to Tocqueville.
And let me start chronologically in my own life.
I must have been born a political junkie.
I watched political conventions from gavel to gavel when they were televised that way.
I remember the conventions of 52 in which Adlai Stevenson and Dwight Eisenhower were
nominated for president.
So, I've always been interested in politics, perhaps being raised by parents of that greatest
generation, parents who were interested in their country and its development and its
politics and who would never have thought of not voting was a good start in life.
In college, I read Tocqueville.
I was a history major.
I studied American history, among other things.
And again, Tocqueville is sort of natural or at least normal fare in many American history
courses.
However, I went to graduate school and got my advanced degrees in medieval European
history, a part of history that Tocqueville, in fact, was not an expert on and did not
write about except in the most brief sense.
And so, in some ways, it would seem that I'd be an odd person to be teaching a course
on elections to Tocqueville.
However, I was trained by a very fine medievalist at Cornell named Brian Tierney, one of the
great scholars in the century and the history of political institutions.
And I remember him once saying to our class, he was raised in Britain in the 30s.
And he said, what I learned in school was that there was this natural movement in the
world toward democracy that was obviously the best form of government and obviously
the world was going that way.
And then he said, I would read the newspapers and I would read about Hitler and Mussolini
and the fact that what was going on in the news didn't seem to fit with what I was learning
in school.
And so, he became passionate about learning about democracy, the conditions in which representative
democracy, since that's the modern kind, in which representative democracy could develop
and flourish.
And so, although the actual subject matter I studied in graduate school was medieval
history, nevertheless, I never lost this interest in bringing some of the story I studied
way back then up to the present.
I guess I would say I never forgot Alexis to Tocqueville.
And then, in 1998, I did something that was sort of weird, wacky, perhaps audacious, I
don't know, and that is, I took a semester off from teaching, this old medievalist who's
been teaching for almost 30 years, and I ran for the US Congress.
In what was then the 27th Congressional District in Western New York, a district that runs
from the city of Auburn, which is more or less in the center of New York, all the way
to the suburbs of Buffalo, about 120 miles along what's now the New York throughway,
and also paralleling the Erie Canal.
I didn't have much money as I ran for Congress, and therefore, I spent six months every day
on the campaign trail, listening to people, talking to people, reading local newspapers,
walking down main streets, stopping to read the historical markers, and so on.
And I got to know this chunk of America, a chunk still by and large of small cities and
small towns and some suburbs, pretty well.
And therefore, I had a kind of laboratory for looking at democracy in America right now.
This again was 1998.
And one of the first things I did when I decided to run for Congress was to get out a copy
of Elections to Tocqueville's Democracy in America.
Because I remembered from college that Tocqueville had a lot of smart things to say, not just
about then, but that could be applied to today.
And I thought, if I'm going to run for high office, and if by some chance I won, I'm actually
going to be part of the governing process of the United States, I probably ought to
read this book, this book that both President Clinton and Speaker Gingrich were quoting
right and left at the time.
And so I read Tocqueville very carefully, cover to cover, as part of my preparation
for running for Congress.
But there was even a deeper agenda here, because Tocqueville spent a lot of time in our Congressional
District, that is to say, in upstate New York.
As I will explain in more detail later on, in fact, Tocqueville came to the United States
to study prisons, and in particular, two prisons, one in Philadelphia and one in Auburn, New
York, which was the eastern most extent of our Congressional District.
And he spent time in Auburn.
He spent time in Canandaigua, New York, a very important time, as I will explain a
little bit later on, and also some interesting time in Buffalo.
So when I drove that line that went through our Congressional District, as I did literally
hundreds of times as I ran for Congress, I was to some extent following the path of
Alexis Tocqueville.
He was talking to the folks who were the predecessors on the land where I was campaigning for Congress.
I could point to buildings which he saw and buildings where he stayed, especially in Canandaigua,
the house he stayed in is still standing, is now, in fact, a nursing home.
And so I had this wonderful opportunity to connect with Tocqueville in three ways.
One to read the book, two to sort of walk in his footsteps, and three to really be doing
my own sort of interview with America in some ways, as Tocqueville did.
I came to respect Tocqueville more, I came to respect my fellow citizens more, as you
probably gathered by the fact that I'm here as Professor Cook.
I lost the election.
I want to come out of the closet on that.
I lost the election.
But I learned an extraordinary amount.
I'd sat down with a veteran member of Congress before I ever decided to run, and he looked
at me and said, Bill, you're probably going to lose.
And so let me tell you this.
This has got to be the attitude you take as you run for Congress.
You've got to say to yourself, if I win, it's the best experience of my life.
And if I lose, it's the best experience of my life.
I can't speak about the winning part, but I can tell you about the losing part.
It really was an extraordinary and wonderful six months in my life.
And I've been able to build on that experience now because since I lost my race for Congress,
I've been teaching every year a course for freshmen in college, a sort of intensive reading
and writing seminar on Elections to Tocqueville's Democracy in America.
And we read and we go into our own local communities and talk to people, and we go follow the footsteps
of Elections to Tocqueville.
And so I've been able to take what I did and allow my undergraduates to participate in
it.
And now I'm happy to bring, in some way, without the guided tour, of course, Elections to Tocqueville
to a different audience here through this opportunity with the teaching company.
I also found an interesting research project as I took on this course, Democracy in America.
When Tocqueville was in Canandaigua, a small town of about 15,000 people on one of the
Finger Lakes in upstate New York, he stayed with a fellow named John Canfield Spencer.
He wrote back home that of all the people I'd met, and he'd already been in New York
City and Albany and whatever, this is the smartest guy I've run into so far.
And by the way, he and Spencer maintained a correspondence for the rest of their lives.
The house where Tocqueville stayed was his first opportunity to live with a family rather
than in a hotel.
And Tocqueville wrote down verbatim some of the conversations he had with John C. Spencer,
probably on the porch of the house since it was, after all, in July when he was there.
And so I got very interested in our local connection.
I live about a 45-minute drive from Canandaigua.
I get very interested in this local connection.
And therefore, I began to ask more and more questions about Spencer and Tocqueville.
Well, it didn't take long to discover one thing that I guess should have been obvious,
and that is when Democracy in America was published in an English translation almost
simultaneously with his publication in France, the guy who carried that project forward, the
guy who wrote the introduction, and also wrote some corrective footnotes was, sure enough,
John C. Spencer.
And so I had been doing some research on Tocqueville and Spencer and have found that to be an extraordinarily
interesting activity.
So I'll be doing some writing soon about this.
So in addition to the sort of experiential opportunity to get to know America through
Tocqueville's eyes, I've also become something of a researcher on at least one little corner
of the experience that Tocqueville had in America and the book that came from it.
And I'm going to use a couple of the things that I've learned in my research to illustrate
in later lectures exactly how Tocqueville used his conversations with Spencer.
Because see, here's a problem.
When you read this book, although there are some footnotes, they're by and large not modern
kinds of footnotes.
He may wax eloquent for several pages about some theme, freedom of the press, bicameral
legislatures, whatever it is, and never say exactly where he learned what he said.
What was the basis of him coming to his own conclusions?
If you read the book, you will sometimes be frustrated by, I wonder where he got that
idea, wonder who put that B in his bonnet, and so forth.
Exactly for us, Tocqueville wrote letters and kept a journal.
And in this, which of course is some of his own source material for when he's back in
France writing democracy in America, we get a glimpse of some of that.
And in several instances, we see that there's certain things that he learned from John C.
Spencer in Canandaigua, New York, that in fact go not quite but almost verbatim into
democracy in America.
And therefore by using Spencer as our one window, our illustrative figure in this course,
we will be able to see something of Tocqueville's method of operation between the gathering
of what we might call his research and the creation of this wonderful book, Democracy
in America.
So I want to emphasize then that we're going to be looking at the democracy in America
from both an experiential and an academic side.
Now let me switch gears for a minute and go to the specific events that led to the publication
and of course before that the writing of this book.
In 1831, Alexis to Tocqueville and his buddy Gustave de Beaumont decided they wanted to
come to America and in a sense came up with a pretext that would allow them to take a
leave of absence from their jobs.
Again we'll go into more of this detail a little bit later on.
And so they made a proposal that they would come to America to study the penitentiary system,
a new kind of incarceration system that had developed in Philadelphia and Auburn, New
York and they would come back and write a report for the government which needed to
reform its prisons.
And so with that Tocqueville and de Beaumont took off to America.
They traveled throughout the United States for over 10 months.
They traveled more than 7,000 miles.
They were in New England.
They were in Wisconsin.
They were in New Orleans.
They were in Washington.
They were in Boston.
They were in Philadelphia.
They were in Buffalo.
They visited Niagara Falls.
And so it was an extraordinary journey that they made 7,000 miles in a little over 10 months
in 1831.
We need to think about that.
Then after the prison report, which by the way is available in English, Tocqueville set
down to write Democracy in America, publishing the first half of it in 1835 and the second
half in 1840.
Let me now try to provide some general statements about this book because almost always today
the two volumes are bound as one thick volume and we regard it as one work as Tocqueville
himself did.
Let me just make a few general statements about it.
Things to sort of cogitate about, things to let sort of rattle around in your head as
we go into more detail in the later lectures.
So this is, I suppose, I always say to my students, you know, cook list of over generalizations
number 702.
Okay, let's do some of those general statements.
First of all, before Tocqueville came to America, he came to the conclusion in his own studies
that the world was moving toward democracy and that that movement was not stoppable,
that the old aristocratic societies of nations like his own, France, were dead.
Secondly, he realized that America was the most advanced in that movement toward democracy.
It was happening more quickly here and in a different and somewhat purer form than it
was happening in England or France or other places in Europe.
And therefore, what he was interested in doing was coming to America, studying democracy,
seeing what the more advanced version is like, and seeing what that could teach him about
what might happen and what should happen in France.
After all, even if you concede that democracy is inevitable, we know that there are many,
many different forms that democracy can take.
Tocqueville was looking for lessons not about America ultimately, he was looking for lessons
about France that would make him a more effective thinker and later on in his life when he became
a member of what we would call the French Parliament today, he also became a legislator
and even briefly in the 1840s, a writer of the French Constitution.
And therefore, the book was written for a French audience and Tocqueville's interests
are primarily in France.
He makes many direct comparisons between the United States and France and he is very careful
to realize that you can't just take the American experience and plunk it into France, that
you have to look at factors like geography, you have to look at the historical development
of these two very different places.
At best, what France can do is learn from the American experience and adapt certain
elements of American society in ways that are compatible with French tradition, in ways
that will fit the particular needs of France.
This is a book that looks at, to some time, the distant past, that is to say he'll talk
about the Puritans and Plymouth Rock and all that sort of stuff, often the recent past,
wide journey to America a few years ago, but it's a book that's really designed to
be about the present, France at the time of publication, and the future, the France that's
going to become inevitably more democratic.
The book contains very little chronology.
There are not many stories he tells about his time in the United States and therefore
as I've said before, it's frustrating because you sort of want to know where did he learn
that?
We know that he sat down to have dinner with John Quincy Adams.
We know that he had an interview with President Andrew Jackson.
We know other famous and not so famous people that he met along the way.
What did they talk about and what ideas did they plant in his head?
And if you read this, you very rarely know that.
And so we need to realize that in some ways it's not a travel narrative and therefore
it's sometimes frustrating.
That's why I want to provide a more detailed lecture on Tocqueville's journey in America
after I do a biographical lecture on Tocqueville.
Those are the next two things coming up in this course.
The book also, as I said, not only contains very little narrative, it contains very little
information.
It's not a book of data.
You can't look up stuff.
Gee, I'm interested in doing research in Ohio in the 1830s.
We know Tocqueville was in Ohio.
What information does he provide you about Ohio?
Almost none.
There may be insights.
There may be glimpses of things, but he doesn't provide much information at all.
This is a book of analysis.
It's a book of generalizations, much more than a chronology or a collection of data.
Again, sometimes it is frustrating that there is so little data.
And yet, although sometimes it sounds daunting, it would not be much of an exaggeration to
call this book a 700-page book of insights, of generalizations.
We like our generalizations today, I think, to come after a long, long body of data and
reasoning has been presented.
Tocqueville just goes from one to the other to the other.
Sometimes in very, very short paragraphs, and we're almost sort of generalized to death
at times.
And yet, if we look at it carefully, if we realize what he's doing rather than trying
to make him do what we'd like him to do sometimes, the quality, the overall quality of hundreds
and hundreds of generalizations and insights is quite stunning.
Now, let me tell you just a couple of the themes that I would like you to look for if
you're reading the book on your own, and that we're going to come back to in this course.
As I've already said, democracy is the way of the future, not just in America, and in
fact, not just in France, but in all of what he would call the civilized world.
Secondly, the world is such a new place politically that the old books about politics, the old
political science won't do.
He proclaims there's a need for a new political science, and by golly, this is sort of the
urtext of that new political science.
He recognizes America's uniqueness, its geography, and its history.
And therefore, he's going to talk about what we today very often call American exceptionalism.
In what ways is America not like the rest of the world, and therefore the rest of the
world shouldn't because it can't try to imitate America, even if it admires and respects America
and the direction it is going.
A third very important thing, for Tocqueville, the essence of democracy, the numero uno, the
bottom line of democracy, is what he calls equality of conditions.
Even more than individual freedom, equality is the centerpiece and the central pillar
of democracy.
He believes that democracy to work depends on the broad and active participation of citizens.
That's hardly a shocking new insight.
But he argues that equality very often tends to take us away from the public square because
in the public square, we're treated exactly like everybody else, while in our homes and
in our private associations, we can be treated specially.
And so it's one of the paradoxes.
On the one hand, you need people in the public square, and on the other hand, one of the
very qualities of democracy draws people out of the public square.
And Tocqueville is going to offer up some very interesting insights as to how to keep
that tendency to withdraw under control so that democracy can be vigorous and exciting
and the public square will be full.
