In the previous lecture, we looked at the life of Alexis de Tocqueville minus his year
in America.
Now we're going to go back and fill in that most important gap for our concern, that is
to say a look at democracy in America based on that journey.
But first, there's always a but first at sea, but first let me give you what's not much
more than a laundry list of what was going on in America in 1831.
Who was in charge?
What were people talking about?
What were some of the events in American history that we look back on as being important
that took place while Tocqueville and Gustave de Beaumont were here?
Again, not much explanation, pretty much a laundry list, but an interesting one.
First of all, Andrew Jackson was in his first term as President of the United States.
In a very bitter election, Andrew Jackson had lost to John Quincy Adams in 1824, but
he turned the tides and defeated John Quincy Adams in 1828.
And so in fact, Tocqueville is going to meet both ex-President John Quincy Adams and also
President Andrew Jackson.
Secondly, 1831 was the year of the famous slave revolt in Virginia led by Nat Turner.
That took place in August, Tocqueville was around, read the newspapers.
In 1831, William Lloyd Garrison published his first issue of The Liberator, which really
brought a lot more fame to publicity for the abolitionist movement that he was already
an integral part of.
There is a religious revival going on in America, of course one could say isn't there always.
There's a religious revival in America led by people such as Charles Finney.
And Tocqueville will constantly note how religious the American people are.
There were several reform movements underway.
Again, Tocqueville will say there are always reform movements in America.
For example, he ran into groups that were trying to deal with prostitution.
He was told there were 2,000 prostitutes in Boston at that time, although he had a hard
time believing there were so many.
He ran into a group that was petitioning to get rid of imprisonment for debt in America.
And so he watched a lot of activities, public activities, by the citizens of the United
States.
Just before Tocqueville arrived, a guy who had been a member of the Masonic Lodge in
upstate New York left the lodge and proclaimed that he was going to divulge its secrets.
And he disappeared, presumably murdered, it was thought by masons.
And that led to what was going on right when Tocqueville arrived, the formation of an anti-Masonic
party in America.
Speaking of parties, this is the time when the Whig Party was really coming into being
as a kind of alternative to Andrew Jackson and Andrew Jackson style.
The old parties, and I use the word in quotation marks, and we'll talk about why a little bit
later on, of the Federalist and the Anti-Federalist, they're gone.
And so we're now seeing the formation of new political parties in America, especially
the Whigs at this time.
In 1831, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the Cherokees, but Andrew Jackson refused
to enforce the ruling, and short time afterwards that led to the famous Trail of Tears when
the Cherokees were moved west.
Tocqueville of course didn't witness that.
What Tocqueville did witness was another group of Indians being moved west, the Choctaws,
to Arkansas.
Andrew Jackson was trying to destroy the Bank of the United States, and that seems to have
been the big news of the day, the great debate over the Bank of the United States.
Tocqueville will comment on it in the book.
The nullification crisis, South Carolina's claim that they can choose which laws to obey
in South Carolina was underway and was really tearing the Jackson administration apart in
some ways.
And in fact, Tocqueville sat down with people and talked about this nullification crisis
that was focused in South Carolina.
At the time Tocqueville was here, there were some extraordinarily interesting new technological
developments.
Railroad mania was just beginning.
The McCormick Reaper was patented in 1831.
And at least from somebody who comes where I come from, in upstate New York, perhaps
most interestingly, there was this brand new artificial river that was called the Erie
Canal.
It was opened in 1825.
And by the way, Tocqueville traveled the entire length of the Erie Canal, paralleling it
from Albany to Buffalo, and in this book, he never mentions the Erie Canal.
In Democracy in America, he never mentions the Erie Canal.
He's not very attuned to the technological developments in America, although he does talk
about the Americans and their relationship to inventing things.
He has some interesting things to say.
I want to remind you, before we look at the narrative of Tocqueville's journey, again,
ostensibly, why he and Gustav de Beaumont came to America.
They came to study the prisons, and in particular, the penitentiary system.
This new idea of a way to incarcerate inmates so that they will become penitent for their
crimes.
And there were two basic kinds of penitentiaries in America.
We called them the Auburn, New York, system, and the Philadelphia system.
And they varied.
And I want to say a little bit about them, because Tocqueville wrote about prisons, and
he not only visited those prisons, he visited many, many others that were in some way or
other takeoffs of one or the other of those models.
For example, he visited Sing Sing Prison, which was a takeoff of the Auburn system.
Both of these systems involved isolating prisoners.
In other words, what you don't want is the prison to become a school for how to become
a better criminal.
And so the idea is you isolate inmates.
In the Auburn system, they had their own cells, small cells, and what they did asleep
in them.
In fact, the cell block is an invention of the Auburn system.
But during the day, the inmates had to work, and they worked together.
They worked in utter silence.
They weren't allowed to speak to one another, and there was corporal punishment if a word
was spoken.
That's the Auburn system.
By the way, Auburn prison still exists today.
It's a maximum security prison in New York, and a kind of footnote and an aside, it's
the place where the first electrocution took place in the United States.
The other system was the Philadelphia system.
There was a prison outside of Philadelphia called Eastern, the Eastern State Penitentiary.
And the system there was you build them with big cells and even a little backyard.
Each prisoner had a big cell and a little backyard for exercise, but they never left
their cells.
They did whatever work they were assigned in their cells, and therefore they lived in
isolation all the time.
And Tocqueville and Gustave de Beaumont sort of debated among themselves from time to time
which system they preferred, and ultimately I think it's fair to say for Tocqueville,
the Philadelphia system proved the better system.
But he did a lot of thinking before he really came out in favor of one side or the other.
So we do want to remember that among the many other things that I'm going to describe that
they do, they're always poking their heads inside a prison and very often interviewing
not only those who keep the prisons and in the case of the Auburn system, the one who
founded the prison, but they also interview inmates.
Well, Tocqueville and Beaumont arrived in Rhode Island, in Newport, but immediately
went to New York City and stayed a while there.
And in their letters back home, including letters to mom, and in the journal that Tocqueville
kept in particular, we get some of their first impressions of America, first impressions
that by and large are going to last, and therefore some of the things I'm going to list here
are things that are going to come back over and over and over in the book itself, and
in some of the subsequent discussions I'm going to present on parts of the book.
Let's start with something obvious.
So first of all, they struggled with English.
After all, they're native French speakers, and they struggled with their English.
But they did pretty well by and large, even though this was an era before the Burlitz
tapes and all that sort of stuff.
But we need to remember these are foreigners whose first language is a foreign language
in the United States.
Every now and then they found French speakers and they sort of enjoyed the freedom of easy
conversation and they did spend a brief amount of their time in French speaking Canada.
As I mentioned earlier, they observed many social movements in New York itself.
They observed abolition, temperance, movements to support schools through taxes, and lots
and lots of moral reform movements.
You name a sin, there was some organization, again it, in New York City that they observed
when they were there.
They observed that trade, business, if you will, was the national passion.
Maybe in a sense, Tocqueville anticipates good old Calvin Coolidge, the business of
America is business.
And in some ways, it seems that Tocqueville drew that conclusion about Americans early
on.
Americans, Tocqueville realized from the very beginning, are religious.
Although a couple things surprised him.
Of course, he's Catholic from a largely Catholic country.
A, he discovered that Catholicism is stronger than he imagined it being.
He was surprised how many Irishmen there were in New York City who were Catholics.
And overall, as he traveled around America, he met Catholic priest, he went to Mass, he
talked to people about Catholicism, and as we'll see later on, he draws a very interesting
conclusion about the future of Catholicism in America.
Well if A is Catholicism, obviously B is Protestantism.
And although again, he'll have many observations about Protestantism, one of his early observations
is that Protestants preach mostly morality from the pulpit, not doctrine.
After all, again, he'd been raised in a Catholic context.
So he's impressed that they preach morality because he will come to the conclusion that
if you have all the individual freedom and the need to participate in government that
exist in a democracy, you need to have a firm moral basis and the moral basis of American
democracy is religion.
And to a great extent, it's that Protestant morality that is preached from the pulpits
in Protestant churches throughout the United States.
He sees that America is largely a middle class nation.
He sees that lawyers are of the first rank of importance.
I guess that's what makes you feel good after all.
Tocqueville is a lawyer, as is Gustave de Beaumont.
But he discovers this role of lawyers being very important in a democracy.
Remember, America has a very different legal system than the French.
The French after all have ultimately a Roman law system, while we have a British common
law system.
And so he doesn't know a lot about American law and doesn't understand very well because
lawyers, among other things, had different roles in France than in America.
He's very impressed with the importance of lawyers for a democracy.
He discovers, he says, that Americans have the purest morals and the strongest families
of any nation he knows anything about or has ever heard of, and he's convinced that that's
vitally important for the health of the American democracy.
He thinks the fine arts in America are in their infancy.
He's not impressed by the concerts and the plays and the paintings and all the rest.
He's a cultured French person after all, and he's not very optimistic ultimately about
the future of the arts in America.
And the last thing I want to put on this list of first impressions is the Americans
have a national conceit.
They're just all braggarts about America.
They're constantly bragging about their country and its superiority to any place else on the
planet, including places, of course, that most Americans had not been.
And Tocqueville finds this annoying, and he will continue to find it annoying as he travels
around.
He sort of sees Americans as sort of flag waivers who just have got to start by telling you
that we got the best country on the Earth, period.
And he refers to that later on in the democracy in America as irritating patriotism.
What did he do in New York?
He was there several weeks.
For one thing, he visited almost every kind of institution that was an institution that
housed people.
After all, this is sort of related to his prison stuff.
He not only went to prisons and jails.
He went to institutions that cared for orphans, that took care of juvenile delinquents.
He went to a home for deaf people.
He was automatically invited to all these institutions because people knew what sorts
of things he was investigating.
He went up the river for a brief trip, that is to say up the Hudson River, to go to visit
Sing Sing Prison, which by the way, again, still exists as a prison.
I'm sure many of you remember that in the middle of the century, our century, it was
a federal prison.
Now it's again a state prison.
It's called Austin Inc. Correctional Facility.
But nevertheless, Sing Sing is still there.
Again, it was his first view of the Auburn system because it was modeled on that.
Well, after going back to New York, he went all the way up the Hudson, well, not quite
all the way, but he went all the way to Albany, which is of course the state capital of New
York, and he spent the 4th of July in Albany, New York.
Well, what did he observe on the 4th of July?
First of all, he observed how closely religion and politics.
Now, I'm not saying church and state, how closely religion and politics were intertwined.
He went to a reading of the Declaration of Independence on the 4th of July, for example.
Where was it?
In the Methodist Church.
So Tocqueville is taken not by intertwining of church and state.
He's got a lot to say about separation of church and state, but he is taken by the relationship,
the very close relationship between religion and politics in America.
The second thing he observed in Albany, you would not observe this in Albany today, by
the way, but the second thing he observed in Albany is he could hardly find the state
government.
Legislature wasn't meeting, not that time of the year.
And as it turns out, the governor whom he met up with in Auburn, because he was from
Auburn, said, you know, why would I be in Albany?
For most of the year, nothing happens there.
And so he doesn't find very much evidence the state governments do anything.
And one of the things that's interesting, therefore, is in his analysis of the various
levels of government in the United States, he will talk more about very local government,
even more about county government, and of course about the federal government than he
does about state government.
And it seems he perhaps got a misguided lesson in Albany.
He sort of trusted the absence of what he might have expected to see in a state capital
more perhaps than he should have.
And he didn't visit a lot of state capitals.
He didn't go to Harrisburg.
He went to Philadelphia.
He didn't go to Annapolis.
He went to Baltimore and so on.
So his example of what states do or don't do was Albany and it probably misled him.
Then he trekked off from Albany to Buffalo.
He had an interesting experience on an island in Oneida Lake near Syracuse.
He rode out by himself.
Beaumont didn't go with him because he had been told that it's a beautiful place.
It's called Franksman's Island.
And he wandered around.
It was nice.
And then he found evidence of a cabin.
Beaum's settler had lived here, built the cabin, abandoned it, and moved further west.
And that really impressed Tocqueville and he became more and more aware as he continued
to travel of this westward movement, of this impatient movement, of this itinerant people
of the Americans.
He got his first taste of that meditating on these ruins on an island in Oneida Lake near
Syracuse.
He went to Auburn to see the prison.
He went to Syracuse to meet the founder of the prison.
He spent some time in Auburn looking at the prison because, of course, that's what he
was there for.
Then, as I mentioned in an earlier lecture, he stayed for a while in Canandaigua, New York,
his first time in a private home with John C. Spencer and recorded some of his deliberations
with Spencer verbatim.
Talk about those more a little bit later and even quote from one of them.
By the way, it turns out that Mr. Spencer had a couple daughters and they must have
been very attractive women if we can take the letters back home of Alexis to Tocqueville
and Gustave de Boma seriously.
They were there to study democracy, but hey, they're also 25-year-old Frenchmen.
We perhaps don't want completely to forget that.
In upstate New York, Tocqueville and Boma first saw Indians in villages and especially
on the outskirts of and around offices in the city of Buffalo and they were shocked.
They were appalled at the rags they wore.
They were appalled by the drunkenness they saw of some of the Indians.
This affected them very greatly.
Now later on as they went west and they saw Indians not so much under the control of whites,
they began to get a broader understanding of Indians and when they traveled in the south
they had very interesting interviews with people regarding Indians.
And so later on they will come to see the Indians more in that sort of French romantic
idea of the noble savage, but their first encounters with Native Americans were really
quite shocking to them in upstate New York.
From Buffalo they traveled to Detroit by water, took a side trip to Saginaw, Michigan
and then went by boat, picture this, this is 1831, all the way to Green Bay, Wisconsin.
No packers, no cheeseheads.
This is really the frontiers.
We might say without being unkind, this is the real boonies of America.
Tocqueville visited various clergymen, he went into long cabins and he really got to
see people that we would call pioneers in 1831.
Again, this strengthened some of the ideas he was already developing about the mobility
of Americans and about the importance of the frontier in American history.
He will in some ways, in his book, anticipate Frederick Jackson Turner in talking about the
significance of the frontier in American history.
Well, he came all the way back, went up into French Canada for a while, went to Montreal
and Quebec, although he doesn't write much about that because obviously he's here to
see the United States because he's here to study its institutions and then he headed
to Boston.
He headed to New England and in Boston is where he came to appreciate the Puritan origins
of American democracy.
If you ask where does democracy flow from, the answer is not for Tocqueville, Jamestown.
The answer is from the Puritans and from those settlements in New England.
It's important to realize that.
Our history book usually starts the white settlements at 1607.
He never mentions Jamestown.
He thinks about 1620 as the time when democracy begins to develop in America.
He also, while he's in New England, learns a lot about the vitality of local government
and in particular the direct democracy of those town meetings that he's so interested
in.
He also has interesting talks with people about the role of the jury in America.
Again, he comes from a different legal system even though he's a lawyer and he comes to
understand that juries not only have judicial functions but that juries are important political
institutions in America.
They train people to certain habits.
They give people certain ways of understanding what their government does and how they should
act and we'll talk about that more a little bit later.
He saw in Boston indeed that fundamental quality of democracy, equality, but he also saw evidence
of great inequality, inequalities of riches, inequalities of education still existed and
were perhaps more pronounced in Boston than he would have seen them in the more egalitarian
frontier that he had just been in.
He met John Quincy Adams, former president of the United States and one of the things
he talked about John Quincy Adams, what he's talking about with John Quincy Adams is there
are obvious differences in parts of America.
The South where he had not yet been is clearly different than New England in some ways.
What's the big divide?
What's the big reason?
And of course John Quincy Adams' answer was simple, slavery.
Slavery made all the difference between the North and the South and that will be reinforced
as Tocqueville himself goes first to Baltimore, then down the Ohio and then down the Mississippi
all the way to New Orleans.
He then goes to Philadelphia and goes to Eastern State Penitentiary and then to Baltimore.
Finally he's entered the world of slavery, although slavery was declining in Maryland
at this time, nevertheless it existed.
Just a short time afterwards Frederick Douglass had escaped from slavery, from Maryland.
Douglass was born a slave in Maryland.
Tocqueville also took time in Maryland to look at the judicial system more carefully
and he met one of the most interesting characters of his entire journey.
He met a guy named Charles Carroll of Carrollton.
He was at that time 95 years old and the only surviving signer of the Declaration of Independence,
but of a grand old man.
He was by the way Catholic, which also of course was interesting to Tocqueville because
America was largely Protestant but Maryland had a large Catholic contingent because of
his history going back to Lord Baltimore.
But mostly what he talked about with Charles Carroll of Carrollton was the fact that universal
suffrage, the fact that there was no property qualification to vote, got rid of most of
the class hostility, which of course from Tocqueville's perspective was going to be
more pronounced in the South than in the North.
And so that was a very important insight he picked up from one of the grand old men,
the last survivor among those who signed the Declaration on July 4th, 1776.
Gustave de Beaumont, even more perhaps in Tocqueville, was taken with the evils of slavery
even though he didn't see it in his nastiest form in Baltimore.
And when later on Gustave de Beaumont wrote his novel, Marie, much of it is in fact set
in Baltimore.
Clearly those first images of slaves really engraved themselves into the mind and into
the heart of both of them, most especially of Gustave de Beaumont.
Then they headed south.
They went down the Ohio River on the coldest winter since 1776.
They had ice flows, ice blockages, shipwrecks, you name it.
It was awful.
But one of the things Tocqueville observes as he goes down the Ohio River, over here
is Kentucky, over here is Ohio, same kind of land, same kind of climate, same country.
Over here he says in Ohio white people work.
Over here white people reject work because they're slaves.
How different these two places are with just the river between them, slavery does, he seems
to think, make all the difference.
It's as degrading as to whites, to whites rather, as it is to blacks.
And again he will comment on that more in this book, Democracy in America.
As he headed down the Mississippi River, as I mentioned, he saw Choctaw Indians being
relocated into Arkansas.
He ran into, by accident, Sam Houston, of course, very famous American.
And he and Sam Houston talked about Indians primarily.
And he asked Sam Houston whether he thought the Indians were inferior to whites.
And Houston had a very interesting answer.
In intelligence they're not at all inferior nor are blacks.
It's all about education, Sam Houston said.
The Indians are better educated.
They will make the same kind of achievements.
They have the capability of making the same kind of achievements as whites.
It's an impressive thing.
They didn't meet, but they heard a lot about this funny congressman named Davy Crockett.
And they listened to the stories of how an uneducated man could be elected to Congress
and they learned about electioneering in America.
How votes were won, how people campaigned, how liquor was involved, and all the rest.
It seemed to them needless to say, somewhat bizarre.
They got to New Orleans, saw how badly women of mixed race were treated, spent new years
there, went to a farm with a lot of slaves, with 79 slaves, in fact.
And then they made a real quick trip from New Orleans to Virginia in 12 days.
They didn't spend much time in the South, but they did pause to talk to some people.
They talked to somebody about nullification, that great crisis in South Carolina.
More interestingly, perhaps, they talked to somebody, a white guy, who had had slaves
and had children by those slaves.
And of course those children were both his children and his property.
He owned his own children and could sell them off.
And again, this is sort of one of those mind-boggling things to Tocqueville, to Duboma, and probably
to us as well.
He arrived in Washington, visited the White House, paid a social call on Andrew Jackson.
They didn't talk about much, it was purely a social call, but Tocqueville was not impressed
by General Jackson.
He was surprised at the informality and he was surprised at the lack of security.
They visited both the Senate and the House of Representatives, and they had dinner with
John Quincy Adams again because by this time he was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives,
still to this day the only ex-president to serve in Congress.
Then they headed back to New York and back home.
An extraordinary trip.
But let me try, in a way of closing, to suggest it as brilliant as this book that's produced
Democracy in America is, based on this voyage, there's some things that Tocqueville either
didn't see or didn't see very well or underestimated or overestimated.
He didn't really see, for example, that America was becoming more urban and he almost always
talks about democracy in terms of small towns and villages.
He wrote that there really were no political parties in America, and yet the anti-masonic
party, which of course didn't last long, and the Whig party, which did last for a while,
were being formed in a sense almost under his nose.
He didn't take the economy of America into account.
He mentioned businessmen and merchants a lot, but he's always providing political rather
than economic explanations for things that he observes.
He didn't understand very well, as I suggested earlier, the role of states in the American
federal system.
Again, perhaps because he was misled by what he saw, or better, what he didn't see in Albany
when he was there around the Fourth of July.
He misunderstood some legal matters.
After all, although he's a lawyer, it's a very different system, and John C. Spencer
corrects most of those in his first edition in America of the English translation.
And let me finally say, he didn't understand inheritance laws very well.
He thinks that inheritance laws were largely responsible for the development of democracy
as it developed in America.
Based on one interview he did early in his trip, most scholars today would say that interview
led him astray.
So we're going to see the fruits of this journey, but we're also occasionally going
to have to say, oops, Tocqueville didn't get it, Tocqueville blew it, Tocqueville got
it wrong.
On balance, brilliant, occasionally wrong.
