In the previous lecture, I talked about some issues that Tocqueville lays out right at
the beginning of democracy in America in the introduction.
In fact, I read to you the first three paragraphs of democracy in America.
And now what we're going to do is move into the guts of the book itself and stay there
for the rest of the lectures.
And so we've talked about equality of conditions, the need for a new political science, and
now Tocqueville says, before I go on, I need to step back a little bit.
And he steps back in a couple ways to provide all the context that his readers need.
Now obviously his readers being French need certain kinds of context that perhaps Americans
would not have needed to such a great extent.
But nevertheless, the two basic categories of background that Tocqueville offers are
important for us as we read this book.
First of all, he gives us a geography lesson.
Now again, that's more important for the French than it is perhaps for Americans because
French would have known less about that geography than people who live here.
And then he talks about some history, in particular the history of New England with the arrival
of the pilgrims and the development of government and democratic habits, especially in New England.
So those are the two issues we're going to talk about primarily in this lecture.
First, Tocqueville's geography lesson and secondly, his history lesson.
He makes the obvious statement that when the white settlers arrived here, they came into
what was largely wilderness.
This of course is vitally important for a larger point that Tocqueville is making to
the French, which is we need to understand the particular history of the United States
because we need to understand that not all of its institutions and practices are able
to be copied in France because the origins of the two places are quite different.
And so he describes this wilderness and he talks about the native population that is
here.
He talks a little bit about the Indians.
He says some interesting things about the Indians at the time of the arrival of the
whites.
First of all, he speculates that there is archaeological evidence that there were more
advanced Indian civilizations long before the white men arrived than when they arrived.
And this was common speculation in America based on seeing mounds and whatever and also
their perceptions of what Indians were like at the time of their arrival and as they saw
Indians change because of the mixture of the Indians and the whites.
So let me give you just one example of where else this appears in American history about
the same time.
In 1830, the year before Tocqueville came to America, there was published in Palmyra,
New York, the Book of Mormon based on the works of Joseph Smith and Joseph Smith's discovery
of the golden tablets at Hill-Kamora.
Tocqueville passed within just a few miles of Palmyra and Hill-Kamora.
And of course, it talks about an earlier civilization that existed in the United States before the
coming of the whites.
And therefore, I think we would probably say that some of the ideas that Tocqueville gives
us are in the air at the time that he arrives in America.
As I mentioned earlier, and I will point out again when we talk about the Indians in
more detail, he had really conflicted ideas about Indians in America.
He saw poverty.
He saw drunkenness.
He saw what he regarded as real wretchedness among Indians, especially in upstate New York.
On the other hand, when he was further west, he saw more of what we might call the noble
savage.
That these were men and women of primitive virtues, but nevertheless virtues.
The idea of the noble savage not only goes back, of course, to 18th century France, but
it really goes back into antiquity when Tacitus in the second century AD wrote about those
that are primitive and barbaric, but nevertheless virtuous Germans.
So that this is an old theme, a theme he's probably predisposed to see in America because
of the literary tradition that exists in France and in Europe generally.
Another most important geographical point that Tocqueville makes is that America has
no enemies nearby.
He looks around and says, you got an ocean over here.
You got the Indians who, of course, are troublesome to whites, but nevertheless are not going
to threaten the nation, the United States.
And he says, you know, Canada, Canada is not a military problem for the United States.
And he says neither really is Mexico, although of course not long after Tocqueville was here,
we fought a war with Mexico.
And so Tocqueville says, one of the things that means is America really doesn't have
to worry much about security.
He was impressed by how small the American army was, how little it did, and how safe
it was from attack.
And therefore its resources could go to other places.
And that becomes important.
He says, you know, we'll never be able to duplicate that in Europe because obviously
France has traditional enemies surrounding it, and so do other European countries.
And so this is something that provides a special opportunity for the United States.
Its geographical situation gives it security, and that security gives the nation a certain
freedom to pursue kinds of actions without having to worry about, are we going to be
attacked a week from Thursday or the day after tomorrow?
So in several ways he wants to emphasize the beauty of the land, the natural resources,
the relative depopulation of the land, all the opportunities that geography gave for
a small group of white people to arrive from Europe and to build a civilization.
It's an interesting set of geographical points he makes.
And then he turns to the question of, well, how does geography continue to affect the
way the United States develops?
It affected clearly the way it was upon arrival and how the whites responded to the new setting.
He talks about the frontier.
Again, as I mentioned in a previous lecture, he sort of anticipates that Frederick Jackson
Turner thesis of the significance of the frontier in American history.
And he notices this in many different ways.
But in particular, his first real gut feeling for the frontier and its significance in American
history came when he was on Oneida Lake in upstate New York.
He rode out to an island by himself, Beaumont did not go with him, and he observed this
ruin cabin.
I want you to hear this passage because, first of all, it's one of those rare places where
Tocqueville stops and tells a story.
And I think the very language, not just the guts of the story, are important to get a
sense of how Tocqueville begins to regard the frontier.
I was far indeed from believing that this place had once been inhabited.
So much did nature still seem abandoned to itself.
But when I reached the center of the island, I suddenly believed I had encountered the
vestiges of man.
Then I carefully examined all the surrounding objects, and soon I no longer doubted that
a European had come to seek refuge in this place.
But how his work had changed face.
The wood that he had formerly cut in haste to make a shelter had since pushed up shoots.
Its fences had become live hedges, and his hut had been transformed into a grove.
In the midst of these shrubbed ones still perceived some stones blackened by fire around
a small heap of cinders.
Doubtless this place was the hearth.
The chimney, encrumbling, had covered it with debris.
For some time, I admired in silence the resources of nature and the weakness of man.
And when I finally had to leave these enchanted places, I kept repeating sadly, what?
Already in ruins.
This is his response before he really gets to the frontier.
Central New York's not really the frontier in 1831.
After all, again, he goes to Green Bay, Wisconsin.
That's the frontier in 1831.
But already he sees that Americans are a restless people.
That they keep moving to the west.
And of course, as they do so, they take with them values of where they came.
They set up new towns.
And then, a few years later, they'll move again.
And therefore, he draws a conclusion really the west is the future of America.
The center of America is going to move continuously west as he sees it toward the Mississippi
Valley, which certainly was the frontier when he came here.
Remember, he visited log cabins.
He talked to those pioneers.
He, if not literally met Davey Crockett, he met the folks whom Davey Crockett recommended
or rather represented in Congress.
And let's not forget, at least if you're my age, you know that Davey Crockett was the
king of the wild frontier.
He imagines a nation stretching from sea to shining sea.
He imagines the United States engulfing all the land between the Atlantic and the Pacific.
He imagines a population of perhaps 130 million people.
Now to us, we say, well, there are about 290 million of us in the first decade of the
21st century.
But to speculate on a nation that would go from sea to shining sea and to speculate
on a country becoming over 100 million people was, again, something that would have probably
seemed wild and audacious to many of his readers.
He makes a couple of specific points about this movement to the west.
The fact there's all this land to be gotten very cheaply.
He says, for example, there are still places in the United States that have primogeniture
laws.
That is to say that the oldest son inherits all the property.
Well, what happens to those younger sons?
That's always a social problem.
It was certainly a social problem in feudal Europe when, you know, son number two might
become a monk or a bishop and son number three might go off on a crusade or whatever because
son number one gets all the land.
He says here, even though there may be some places that have laws of primogeniture, they
don't really matter.
They don't change the fact that everybody in the family has an opportunity for a certain
amount of wealth and status because they can move west.
And so number one son takes the family farm and number two son moves west and number two
some will have a family farm, at least as big as number one son's family farm in a little
while and so on.
And so the west offers these ways of equalizing still some inequalities in the law.
The west, in a sense, therefore encourages democracy and fosters democracy.
One particular point he makes in talking about all the movement to the west is that, again,
people move one and two and three and four times.
And we see lots of evidence that today we can trace names of New England towns all the
way across through the Midwest and beyond.
For example, in my county, we have Lima, New York, which was named for Old Lime, Connecticut.
On the other hand, the town I come from, Geneseo, New York, well, there's actually a bigger
Geneseo than us and we're the original.
There's Geneseo, Illinois, and one can take just those names and trace them all the way
through and find those patterns.
In fact, we have a town in upstate New York called Penyan, New York, because it was Pennsylvanians
and Yankees who came there and they couldn't decide on one name or the other, so they simply
split the difference and became Penyan, New York.
Tocqueville's example is interesting.
He said today in the U.S. House of Representatives, there are five members from Connecticut.
This, of course, is 1831.
Five members from Connecticut.
However, 36 members of the House of Representatives were born in Connecticut, but of course they
represent many, many other states because all these Connecticut folks, Connecticut was
sort of getting crowded, and they moved west and represented places all the way along to
the western frontier.
In fact, my town, Geneseo, New York, was founded by people from Connecticut, the fairly typical
kind of pattern that we see.
Tocqueville looks at this expansive geography, this potential for growth from the Atlantic
to the Pacific, and he makes perhaps, again, his wildest and boldest prediction that in
the future, in the next century, the world's two superpowers will be the United States
and Russia.
He says America's struggle will be to subdue nature and it will be a free nation.
Russia's struggle will be to subdue people and it will be a nation in servitude.
And they will, he says, divide the world among them.
Now of course we live in a post-Bipolar U.S.-Soviet world, but we all remember a time when at
least that's the way it was perceived, that the world was really divided in two.
And the two superpowers were in fact Russia, that is to say the Soviet Union, and the United
States.
Again, a really little wild prediction on Tocqueville's part.
It's hard to imagine many people reading that book knowing what we know about the era in
which he wrote the book saying, well yeah, that makes sense, or why didn't I think of
that first?
I don't think that was very many people's reaction.
I think it was, is this guy nuts?
And yet he saw, especially using his geographical analysis, looking at Russia and the United
States, that those geographical factors, although played out very differently in political systems,
were nevertheless going to be important in determining where the great centers of power
were in the world.
Not Western Europe, but Russia and the United States.
Okay, that's our little geography lesson.
Let's now turn to some history.
And for Tocqueville, history means looking at New England, because again, New England
is par excellence, the place in which democracy was created in the United States.
First of all, he says, those settlers who came from England, the Puritans, brought with
them an idea of vibrant local government.
I mean, as a medieval historian, I can look back into the Anglo-Saxon period and the
early Norman period and talk about the development of the grand jury and local offices and whatever,
more than on the continent.
And what Tocqueville says is even during the great power of the Tudor monarchy, local
government remained vibrant in England.
And therefore, people were used to, although certainly under the watchful eye of the king
or the queen, people were used to in England having some responsibility for local affairs.
And that really becomes an important thing.
As he says, the institution of the township is central because from it arose the dogma,
that's the word he uses, of the sovereignty of the people.
You make your own way in doing things for yourself collectively.
And again, you take that idea and you plant it in a world where the king is several thousand
miles away and we can see where Tocqueville is going with that idea.
Furthermore, he says, the government in the colonies in Massachusetts Bay and all the
rest of them began with the township level.
In other words, it isn't that states were created or colonies were created and then
local governments were given certain responsibilities within that scheme.
It worked the other way.
Local government came first and then came larger political entities for specific reasons,
counties, states, and ultimately, of course, a federal government.
In other words, democracy was built from the bottom up, not from the top down.
And that's going to be extraordinarily influential in all of Tocqueville's thinking about how
democracy works.
A second point he makes about these English settlers in New England is that they came
out of the Reformation.
After all, Puritans are a kind of Protestant, Calvinist Protestants.
And it's important to say a couple things.
In the Protestant tradition in Europe that was developing, unlike the Catholic tradition,
everybody needed to read the Bible.
Everybody needed access to the Bible because the Bible was the source of truth.
Not a source of truth, along with tradition, as Catholics argue, but the source of truth.
Well, if you need to read the Bible for yourself, then you need to read.
And so, therefore, education among Protestants had grown a great deal because of the need
to read the Bible.
If that's the book that contains all the formulas for salvation, then you'd better be able to
have access to it because there is no formal priesthood or hierarchy simply to tell you
the important parts.
And so, we know that vernacular translations of the Bible, for example, were one of the
most important products of the Protestant Reformation.
Furthermore, he said that if you take a look at the Puritans, well, morals had been purified.
That is to say, as Tocqueville looks back on the 16th and early 17th century, he would
say the Catholics had become tolerant, the Catholic Church had become tolerant, maybe
not officially, but de facto, of a lot of immoral behavior.
And after all, what did the Puritans want to do?
They wanted to purify the Protestant Reformation, and that meant, among other things, purifying
morals.
These were a highly moral, disciplined people who came.
And another important point he makes, and that is that families came to New England.
This wasn't a bunch of guys who got in the boat, but families came to New England.
And from the very beginning, it was family structures.
Where people lived and spent their private moments with wives and children, that is an
important building block of democracy, too.
Again, Tocqueville will be very impressed about the fact.
He thinks it's no accident that Americans are the best family people in the world, and
they're the most advanced democratically.
And that goes back to the beginning, the origins of democracy in America.
Tocqueville looks at Puritan Christianity and also points out that Puritanism, he says,
is almost as much a political theory as it is a system of religious beliefs.
Overall, one of the things, especially Calvinism did as part of the Protestant Reformation,
was to get rid of hierarchy.
There is no priesthood.
Even Luther announced a priesthood of all believers, that we don't need a special cast
of people to be intermediaries between us and God.
We can all talk to God.
We can all communicate directly with God.
We don't need to confess our sins to a priest.
We can confess our sins to God.
We don't need that earthly hierarchy, that intermediary on earth.
We don't need a pope telling us what to believe.
We have the Bible that tells us what to believe.
So there's a kind of egalitarianism, he says, to Puritanism that is based on their religious
beliefs so that it becomes, in a sense, a kind of political philosophy as well as it
does a religion.
The Puritans clearly did have a providential view of things.
That is to say, God brought them to this incredibly wealthy land, although untamed, for a purpose.
This is not accident.
This is providence.
We have a job to do to set up, in a sense, God's place, God's kingdom, we'll use that
term, in America.
He also said the Puritans realized from the very beginning that they had to work together.
This is a big, untamed land, and there are Indians.
And we can't just do it on our own as individuals, which some people see as one of the tendencies
of Calvinism back in Europe.
That just wasn't an option in America to go off and everybody do his or her own thing.
And so the Puritans worked collectively.
They did that for very practical reasons, defense, planting crops, cutting down trees
to clear fields, and so on.
And so this is a collective Puritan enterprise, and there is no room for social distinctions.
You arrive here and you've got to cut down trees.
Everybody's got to cut down a tree.
If somebody says, well, I don't cut down trees, that just wasn't a possibility.
So if there were social distinctions, some of those social distinctions were challenged
if not erased by the very conditions in which the Puritans found themselves.
And Tocqueville also gives this sort of interesting way of summarizing this series of points about
Puritanism and about religion in general and democracy in America.
He says in Connecticut, this is a specific example he uses, in Connecticut, the laws,
the earliest laws were derived directly from the Pentateuch.
That is to say the first five books of the Old Testament, especially in Exodus and Leviticus
and Deuteronomy.
That's where the laws came from.
And so there is this religious basis to the early laws in Connecticut.
But he said they were also voted on.
So you have this sort of religious teaching, but people got together collectively to agree
to which parts of scripture became statute in Connecticut.
That's a pretty good way of thinking about, as Tocqueville understands it, our early history.
There's this very deep religious belief, a kind of egalitarian religious belief.
And so, yes indeed, the word of God needs to be enacted in the law.
Let's vote on how exactly we enact the Bible or parts of the Bible into law.
And that again helps him to see and helps us to see that connection between the religious
beliefs that come by boat to the United States, to the colonies in New England, and the laws
and the democracy that develops there.
And therefore he says, what we can say is democracy in America really sprang up full
blown.
It didn't develop real gradually.
This is not a matter of, here's a little chunk that makes democracy, and here's a little
chunk that makes democracy, and they begin to blend together, and over time the society
begins to take on some real democratic qualities.
That's not the model in America.
From the very beginning, when the Puritans arrived and other settlers arrived in New
England, what we have is democracy.
It comes out of European things, European forms of Christianity in particular, Calvinism,
and certain kinds of European, especially English practices of local government.
You put those two things together, and you put them together in a place that's several
thousand miles away from a king, and you put them together in a place where you got to
chop down a gazillion trees and plant crops and learn about new plants and animals and
deal with Indians and all the rest of what happened when the whites arrived in New England,
running in 1620, and democracy forms almost immediately, the most sort of primitive local
direct democracy forms immediately.
Now, we certainly would say today, from research that scholars have done, that Tocqueville
has a fairly accurate view, but in fact there were perhaps more distinctions, social distinctions
and whatever, even in the beginning, than he perhaps recognized.
But nevertheless, it's an interesting, large overview.
I think sometimes when scholars want to say, ah, but you got to look at this detail and
that detail and another detail over here, we sometimes do too much trees and not enough
forest.
Tocqueville is a forest guy, and it helped to listen to an unabashedly forest guy, a
guy who's constantly trying to give the big picture, even though we recognize today that
picture needs to be nuanced by a great deal of modern insight and research that has been
done.
Now, I also want to point out that Tocqueville says although we look to New England, we need
to realize that the states that were formed outside New England weren't quite as primitively
democratic from the beginning.
He lists, for example, states like New York and Pennsylvania and Ohio, primarily because
those states did not develop what we think of as today as the New England town meeting.
There wasn't as much direct local democracy, there weren't as many elected officials in
each little town as there were in New England.
And so the New England influence spread, and by the way, continues to spread in 1831, Tocqueville
argues, remember he sat down with President John Quincy Adams in Boston to talk about
this, so he's going to have something of a New England perspective on things, but despite
the fact that New England influence trickles down a great deal and trickles out, nevertheless,
he says, New England is still the essential place of American democracy.
And then he looks at the South, and he says the South simply is different, it's democracy
light in some very real way.
It is more aristocratic in its origins.
Although he points out, let's remember that almost all the great heroes of the revolution
came from the South, and four of America's first five presidents came from Virginia.
And so he's aware of the fact that New England isn't all dominant in its way of doing things.
But nevertheless, he says we need to appreciate that the South is somewhat different than
New England.
There's a certain kind of tension that exists.
And of course, the answer as to what's the biggest thing that separates New England from
the South in particular, the answer is slavery.
And although there are many places where he talks about slavery and the effects slavery
has, the most important passage is one he writes describing his trip down the Ohio River,
where on the left bank is Kentucky, and on the right bank is Ohio.
There's no difference in the land and whatever.
Of course, the difference is slavery, but it makes, as it turns out, all the difference
in the world.
Let me read you a couple passages about this.
From the right bank rises a confused noise that proclaims from afar the presence of industry,
rich harvest over the fields, elegant dwellings announce the taste and the care of the laborer.
On all sides, comfort reveals itself.
Man appears rich and content.
He works.
Now, let's look at Kentucky.
On the left bank, the Ohio of the Ohio, work is blended with the idea of slavery.
On the right bank, with that of well-being and progress, there it is degraded.
Here they honor it.
On the left bank of the river, one cannot find workers belonging to the white race, for
they would fear resembling slaves.
One must rely on the care of Negroes.
On the right bank, one would see in vain for an idle man.
The white extends his activity and his intelligence to all his works.
So therefore, the men in Kentucky who are charged with exploiting the natural riches
of the soil have neither zeal nor enlightenment, while those who could have had these two things
do nothing or cross over into Ohio in order to utilize their industry and to be able to
exercise it without shame.
Soil is just struck by how slavery is the big issue in all of America, becoming more
like those primitive democratic issues and elements and institutions and habits that
arose in New England.
And he's going to come back to slavery over and over and over, because although his book
is for the French and the French don't have slavery on French soil, he cannot resist saying,
I've got to talk about this because we can't understand America without understanding that
peculiar institution.
