Lecture 6 – Does America Have a Mixed Constitution?
Before I get too carried away in talking about democracy in America, perhaps we ought to ask
a very important question.
Did we ever have a democracy?
And do we have a democracy in America?
After all, if we go back and read what some of our founding fathers said, they were pretty
critical of democracy, at least the kind of democracy they read about in ancient sources,
meaning of course the democracy of ancient Athens.
Let me read you what James Madison in the Federalist Papers, number 10, writes about
democracy.
Hence, it is that such democracies, such as Athens, have ever been spectacles of turbulence
and contention, have ever been found incompatible with personal security or the rights of property,
and have in general been as short in their lives as they have been violent in their deaths.
Not exactly a ringing endorsement of democracy, after all, doesn't sound like a very good
form of government, at least in its Athenian form.
So it is worth asking, and Tocqueville stops to ask the question, especially because he's
read the Federalist Papers, he knows the positions of the various Constitution writers and makers
and so forth.
Did America set out to have a democracy as its federal form of government?
And does it?
Well, we listen to the language that's often used, and we think of America as a republic.
And in fact, if you think about the Pledge of Allegiance, we say, and to the republic
for which it stands when talking about the flag.
And so it is clear that people like Madison said, what we want to do is closer to what
in the ancient world was called a republic, as found in Rome, rather than the democracy
of Athens.
And it's worth, therefore, taking a look at a definition of what a republic meant in
that context.
Here's the way we start.
The Greeks wrote, several of them, that there are three ways you can be governed.
You can be governed by one, you can be governed by few, or you can be governed by many.
To put it in our language, you can be governed by a monarch, by an aristocracy, or by a democracy.
The problem is, in this way of looking at things, all of these forms of government have
flaws, and all of them are unstable.
Monarchy can easily become despotism.
For example, aristocracy can easily become not government by the excellent, which is
what aristocracy means, but government by the rich and oligarchy.
And democracy can move into mob rule.
So ancient Romans began to look at the government that developed there and said, you know, what
we have in a republic is elements of each with the flaws of none and stability.
And so in the Roman Republic, there were elements of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy.
And it's very clear that in our constitution, there are elements of monarchy, aristocracy,
and democracy.
Obviously in the presidency, but of course, the presidency is controlled, controlled in
the Senate every four years, at least indirectly, it has to face the electorate.
Then we have elements of aristocracy.
And in particular, we have a United States Senate, which remember, in the Constitution
that Tocqueville observed, was elected by state legislatures.
Only in the 20th century, do we get the direct election of senators.
Furthermore, all federal judges are appointed by a president who was indirectly elected
through the electoral college and confirmed by an indirectly elected Senate.
And so there are a number of elements of aristocracy, if you look at the Senate, as a kind of analog
to the old Roman Senate, the Council of Elders.
And then of course, we have the great institution of democracy, the House of Representatives,
which many representatives today still refer to as the People's House.
And so when we look at our constitution today, what we tend to see is a kind of mixed constitution.
It's certainly not a pure democracy.
And there are those who would say, it's such a mixed constitution, it really is better to
describe it as a republic than as a democracy.
Tocqueville takes on this issue directly and talks about the idea of a mixed constitution.
Let's hear what he has to say.
The government called mixed has always seemed to me to be a chimera.
There is, to tell the truth, no mixed government in the sense that one gives to this word because
in each society, one discovers in the end one principle of action that dominates all
others.
Okay, you can't build a government on three different principles.
One of them is bound to be the foundational principle, just as he talked about equality
being a foundational principle of the idea of democracy.
When you look at the institutions, even though some of them may have an aristocratic cast
to them or a democratic cast or a monarchical cast to them, ultimately somebody, some group
of people or some individual is in charge.
And in America, it's the people.
The sovereignty of the people is the bottom line.
America is a democracy.
It's a democracy not as direct as Athens.
It's a democracy with some mitigating factors, we might say today, but Tocqueville wants
to be very clear that America in its federal constitution is indeed a democracy.
In the bottom line, he says, in the final analysis, there is no mixed government.
A very interesting view in which he takes on a very powerful argument that's been around
again since the time of the Greeks and especially the Romans reflecting on the Roman Republic.
Tocqueville is not afraid to take on tradition.
After all, he is writing a new political science for a world that's altogether new.
Let's cut through the traditional ways of thinking about mixed government and recognize
that a government like the United States, which looks mixed on the surface, is in fact
a democracy because there is one principle of sovereignty and that is the sovereignty
of the people.
Let me take time out for a minute to point out that since Tocqueville's time, our constitution
has been altered in a number of ways to make perhaps the constitution a little bit less
mixed and more obviously democratic.
And let me just suggest what those are.
First of all, although we still have the Electoral College, it doesn't work in the way it did
in the early republic when people consciously chose individuals, distinguished individuals
to be the electors to choose the president.
We still have an Electoral College, but we don't have electors as individuals anymore
whom we choose.
Secondly, as I've already pointed out, we have the direct election of senators.
Third, we have the franchise expanded.
It was already much expanded in Tocqueville's time from the time, let's say, when George
Washington was elected president.
Andy Jackson's victory in 1828 was a good reflection of that, in fact.
But of course, we've expanded the franchise many times since to include ex-slaves, African
Americans, people of color.
We've done it to include women.
We've done it to include 18-year-olds rather than 21-year-olds.
And so the franchise has indeed expanded.
Furthermore, although not at the federal level, many states have taken on elements of much
more direct democracy, especially western states.
We read more about this in California than other states simply because of its size and
its impact on the nation.
But there are a number of states who have the initiative, the referendum, and the recall,
all elements of direct democracy that have been put into statewide levels so that individuals
in a state can go and vote directly on legislation under certain conditions in several states,
especially in the U.S. West.
And indeed, Tocqueville himself recognized what we might think of as different degrees
of democracy.
That is to say, he can imagine a democratic society that has somewhat different, maybe
even more limited institutions than the United States, or one that has more open and direct
involvement of people in government.
So we can, in a sense, talk about degrees of democracy.
But it is important to remember that whatever the rhetoric we use, whether it's Madison's
anti-democratic rhetoric, whether it is our rhetoric of to the republic for which our
flag stands, Tocqueville says, hey, America is a democracy.
Now he recognizes, again, that there are some holdovers of aristocracy in the United States.
The one example I've already given, I'll just simply mention again, and that is something
like having bail set for those who are accused of crimes is, Tocqueville says, a kind of
leftover from an aristocratic world because it gives certain people an advantage of being
able to get out of jail while others who are being accused of exactly the same thing
will languish in jail simply because their families don't have the money to post bail.
It is not exactly equality of conditions, he says.
But what Tocqueville wants to look at when he examines the institutions of American democracy
and talk about is America a democracy, is this.
When we look at the form of the American government, we need to appreciate it's not the only democratic
form, not even necessarily the most democratic form of government.
And therefore he says there's almost never any absolute good in laws.
What he means is you can't automatically say, ah, here in the United States we have a bicameral
legislature where one house is chosen directly by the people and another house is elected
on a different basis and therefore we are more or less good at democracy than some other
nation that say has the British parliamentary system or has a multi-party democracy, let's
say of modern Italy.
Tocqueville says there are no absolute good.
We don't say ah, democracy, if you're going to have the best one, these are the exact
institutions, these are the exact processes you need to have.
It just doesn't work that way.
What we need to look at is how the democracy functions in a particular society, how it
grows out of its history, how it's tailored to its particular needs and how it expands
as that society changes.
We don't want to get so embedded in particular institutional forms and definitions because
they won't last forever even though our constitution is very hard to amend.
We all know that it's been amended after all a number of times.
It's been either fixed or expanded or whatever over the course of our history and we know
no other country in the world has exactly our structure of government and I think most
of us realize probably shouldn't because among other things they're not us.
They don't have our history.
For example, the very fact that our nation is 13 sort of semi sovereign, not too sovereign
states originally, now of course the number that's expanded to 50.
A lot of other democracies in the world don't have that heritage of these independent colonies
that grew up that then became the union and so to duplicate our institutions there wouldn't
make any sense.
Not absolutizing, Tocqueville would say, something that is in fact relative.
It's not that Tocqueville is a relativist in all kinds of things but on the matters
of the institutions of democracy he is and that's an important point I think that we
need to consider.
It's also especially important it seems to me today for Americans because we are and
have been for a long time a nation that proclaims itself not just a democratic state but an
exporter of democracy.
We want all nations to be democratic wherever in the world they are and we do all kinds
of things to encourage that.
We have a kind of, what I want to say, carrot and stick plan to help other nations if you
move toward democratic institutions will provide some aid for you to do this and this and the
other thing.
Don't we all withdraw the aid we've given you?
We have all kinds of ways in which we encourage democracy around the world.
The question is what does it mean to encourage democracy?
Does it mean to say you've got to have this kind of institution, you've got to duplicate
our kind of presidency, our kind of executive leadership because that's what we have and
that's what democracy consists of.
Tocqueville would be very much against that notion of what it means to export democracy.
What Tocqueville would say I think is first of all you have to say what are the principles
of democracy, what are the very bottom line ideas like equality of conditions for example.
You need to start with what the foundations are, you need to look at a nation's geography
and its history as Tocqueville did as we saw in the last lecture and then you need to develop
a series of institutions and laws that make sense.
For example again to use the United States first we had these 13 states that had to come
together to form some sort of federal union and we'll see in the next lecture about the
Constitution that took some real compromises at the Constitutional Convention held in Philadelphia
in 1787.
On the other hand you might have another nation trying to move toward democracy that doesn't
have these segmented pieces or that maybe has different religious groups living in different
parts of the country or very different ethnic groups and languages.
We look at Canada for example and we recognize that Canada has a French speaking part and
an English speaking part.
That's not a situation in America.
We don't have a hunk of our union that has a different language and a different cultural
heritage even though it's within the European framework.
And so what we always need to do is be sensitive to, Tocqueville would argue, because he argues
this for France looking at America as a place to get lessons.
So Tocqueville is very explicit about this.
What we need to do if we're thinking about helping another nation to become democratic
or more democratic is to consider what democracy is in its essence.
We'll see later on when you talk about cultural and not just political elements of what it
means to be a democracy, the habits of the heart as well as the institutions of government.
And then we have to look at history and geography and see how those principles can best be adapted
and turned into institutions and laws in those individual societies.
There is no Xeroxing of democracy around the world.
It's adaptation, not copying that is central.
And I think it's a very important point that Tocqueville makes about our democratic mixed
constitution, how it works for us, even though again in the final analysis it is democratic.
Nevertheless, those various elements, those various trade-offs, those various negotiations,
those various mitigations of direct democracy work in America, Tocqueville says.
He thinks there's a great genius in our forefathers because they did take the principles and adapt
them so well to the needs and to the traditions of America.
Now Tocqueville recognizes that although the United States, federal government, is a democracy,
that the purest form of democratic government that is to say, obviously, exists in America
at the local level, especially in New England.
Just after all, there are, as we will see on news clips every now and then, there are
still town meetings in many areas of New England where there is direct voting not just on candidates
to hold office, but direct voting on policies affecting that town or village.
He also emphasizes that in these very local, very purely democratic institutions of New
England, they have a lot of elected officials.
In fact, Tocqueville estimates that a lot of the New England towns have about 19 different
elected officials, even though there are only 2,000 or 3,000 people in many of these jurisdictions.
He thinks that's important.
You have a lot of people elected for short terms, serving in government, even electing
at the local level judges or what are sometimes called justices of the peace.
Now this whole notion of democracy in local government and how it's necessary if we're
going to maintain democracy at the state and federal level, that's the subject of a lecture
that's coming up in the near future.
But I at least want to remind everyone now that Tocqueville is aware that even though
there is no direct democracy at the federal level, there still is some direct democracy
at the lower level.
And he looks then at the intermediaries, that is to say the county and the state government,
and says what's their role in this whole notion of a democratic America?
It's a very good question.
As I mentioned in an earlier lecture talking about Tocqueville's tour of the United States,
his experience in Albany, New York, the capital of the state of New York then and now, showed
him that state governments don't do very much.
And so he doesn't talk as much about state government as we might expect.
One of the reasons, in addition to this visit to Albany where he couldn't find a state government
very well, again not the case today if you go to Albany, where the state government dominates
that city, the thing that he also noticed about state governments is that they are weak
in part because the two houses of their state legislatures are elected by the same principle.
And therefore the same kind of people tend to be in both houses.
That is to say, and again I'll use New York as an example, but it's true for all 50 states,
okay?
All assembly seats are decided by districts of approximately the same number of people.
Similar to the way the House of Representatives works at the federal level.
But our state senate also is made up of people who represent districts of the same population.
In other words, the same principle is used except the districts are bigger because there
are fewer senators.
In some states senators serve longer terms than members of their state assemblies.
In New York, in fact, all senators as well as all assembly members serve two-year terms.
And so that's very different than the United States Senate, which is elected by a different
principle and where senators represent states, not groups of individuals, and of course every
state has the same number, whether it's Wyoming or California, the number of senators in the
federal government is two.
So because the state legislatures are not sort of, if you will, more local versions
of the federal bicameral legislative system, it takes away from Tocqueville's point of
view a lot of the great strengths of the bicameral legislature at the federal level.
So Tocqueville is by and large underestimating probably the importance of state government
in our whole system of levels of democratic government.
He just doesn't pay very much attention to it.
So it is important to realize that with counties, by the way, one of the things he says about
counties is, you know, they're really just made up because the problem is that there
are certain kinds of things that little villages and townships can't do for themselves.
If you've got only a couple thousand people, we actually have townships in my county that
have fewer than a thousand people.
There may not be a lawyer living in one of those townships, or if there is, he or she
might not want to run for a judicial office.
And therefore, although you can have justice as the piece, you also need some more professionalized
judiciary.
Also, most little towns and villages can't afford to have their own police forces and
jails and that sort of thing.
So there needs to be a level of government higher than local, lower than the state.
And counties are therefore sort of invented for that purpose.
And as Tocqueville looks around, he says, you know, people aren't very loyal to their
counties.
They don't say, gosh, good old, in my case, Livingston County, New York, hooray for us.
We're better than, you know, filling the blank to the counties around.
That's by and large not the way Americans think.
So Tocqueville doesn't spend a lot of time talking about county government or state government.
He recognizes they're there.
He recognizes they have certain functions.
But probably he underestimates both of those kinds of government between the federal and
the local.
Now, I want to read a passage from Tocqueville that deals with the majority and the power
of the majority in America.
It is of the very essence of democratic governments that the empire of the majority is absolute.
Or in democracies, outside the majority, there is nothing that resists it.
Again, there may be mitigating factors.
We'll talk about the role of the judiciary, the indirect election of senators, the election
of the president through the electoral college.
There are a number of mitigating factors, but the bottom line is that the majority is
absolute.
The majority can do what it wants, because it can't do what it wants on a day-to-day basis.
But ultimately, it can choose the president.
Every two years, it chooses all the members of the House of Representatives.
And it at least indirectly, or doubly indirectly, chooses the people who become judges.
And we know in our own modern political campaigns for the presidency and for U.S. Senate seats
that one of the issues very often introduced is, if I'm elected, I will support or fail
to support certain kinds of judges.
We know that that enters into a presidential and a senatorial race.
And it's quite importantly, not as a tertiary issue, but as a primary issue, because we
all know, and Tocqueville will talk about this later, and so will I, the power, let's
say, the Supreme Court has.
Bias power to declare laws unconstitutional is a very great power.
It matters for the democracy who sits on the Supreme Court, and that's somebody nominated
by the president and, of course, confirmed by a majority of the United States Senate.
Tocqueville points out also, there are some real problems with what he calls the empire
of the majority being absolute.
Again, not immediately, but eventually, the majority gets its way.
Here's some of those dangers that Tocqueville points out.
First of all, and this will be the subject of a later lecture, so I simply want to mention
it now, the majority can tyrannize the minority.
That is to say, if everything works by what the majority says, can't the majority sometimes
do things that are in its own interest that are really violently against the interest
of various minorities.
That doesn't just mean ethnic and racial minorities, it means any kind of minority, okay, a group
of people that does not have a majority on its side.
Interesting question.
He claims that democracies are relatively weak in times of crisis.
You really need to have somebody take charge, he says, and somebody to call all the shots.
And when there's a crisis, well, the very fact that we have certain powers in the Senate,
certain powers in the Congress as a whole, certain powers in the presidency, certain
powers in the judiciary, make it more difficult perhaps to act quickly to respond to crises.
Yet we can ponder that in light of recent American history and can think of a number
of examples.
He also argues that it's difficult for a democracy to have an effective foreign policy.
Perhaps in part because in general, citizens are more stirred up about, more aware of, see
the effects of domestic legislation and domestic policy more than they do, and more than they
have knowledge about what happens way overseas.
And so he worries that democracies are weaker in the area of foreign policy than other kinds
of government.
Another problem, laws don't have a long duration.
That is to say, after all, what does Congress do every year?
They enact new laws and change old laws and let some laws expire and expand some things
that the laws are always changing.
And Tocqueville would want to argue, as many have before him, that for laws to have all
the respect that they need, if they're going to be observed consistently, there needs to
be a certain kind of consistency to the laws themselves.
They need to, in the long run, be something, first of all, you understand.
You don't have to read tomorrow's paper to know what the laws are.
So he worries about the fact that laws change so often, and so many laws change, that that
is a potential problem for democracy.
And here's another one he points out.
He says, new ideas will spring up in a democracy and action will be taken with no follow-up.
And here's the example he gives.
You'll appreciate this because, after all, Tocqueville studies American prisons.
This is an example from prisons.
He says, this new penitentiary system, great idea, a lot of people got in the bandwagon,
and so it happened.
And they created new penitentiaries, let's say in New York, at Auburn.
And what happened?
Well, there's still a lot of other prisons in New York.
After all, Auburn was kind of an experiment, a special place, and they get sort of ignored.
The money and the attention shift to these new places, and most of the inmates are not
incarcerated.
In Auburn, they're incarcerated in other places, and he says those places ultimately
might deteriorate because of all the popular enthusiasm for this new prison.
Furthermore, he says, what's going to happen pretty soon is, people will get tired of prisons
as an issue, they'll move on to something else, and this work will be unfinished.
It's in the nature of democracy to be a little bit fickle.
And therefore, it's easier to start things because you get a lot of enthusiasm, a lot
of popular support.
It's very much harder to carry them through to their conclusions.
I think we might ponder this not only in terms of something like prison reform, ponder it
in terms of the work of the civil rights movement in America.
Remember the great age of legislation in 64 and 65 with the Voting Rights Act, the Civil
Rights Act, and so on.
Think about how we continued or failed to continue and carry out that process, fearing
perhaps it or thinking perhaps it simply having a new law will make all the difference.
Tocqueville also points out that democracies can, in fact, devolve into despotism.
They're not safe from despotism, even though they seem the farthest away from despotism.
First of all, he says, the principle of equality can lead to a kind of centralization of authority
in the federal government, because the easy answer to fixing things is, we've got to
treat everybody exactly the same, let's give more power to the central authority.
And secondly, Tocqueville says, if you have a lot of federal laws, if they're applied
exactly literally the same everywhere in the country, that too can lead to a kind of despotism
because different parts of the country have, in fact, different needs and different ways
the law should be applied.
It could become too unitary at the top.
We'll start there in the next lecture.
Thank you.
