Lecture 7, The American Constitution.
Tocqueville writes a great deal about the U.S. Constitution.
He's obviously read it carefully.
He's also read long commentaries on the Constitution.
What I want to do is not sort of go step-by-step through what Tocqueville has to say for a
couple reasons.
First of all, of course, he's writing for a French audience, and therefore there are
certain things he needs to say and reiterate to get them to understand this document.
And secondly, obviously our Constitution as a living document has changed some, and some
of the things that Tocqueville ponders for a while are no longer things that are particularly
ponderable in the modern version of our Constitution and as it exists in the 21st century.
So I'm going to select some themes that Tocqueville develops about the U.S. Constitution that I
think are useful, not only in understanding him and his general approach to democracy
in America, but also in having Tocqueville be a living document and be a kind of guide
or at least a good questioner of America and its Constitution today.
Let me read you a passage that on the surface might sound somewhat confused, but I think
is a very good way in getting into Tocqueville's understanding of the U.S. Constitution.
For my part, he writes, I cannot conceive that a nation can live or above all prosper
without strong governmental centralization.
But I think that administrative centralization is fit only to innervate the peoples who submit
to it because it constantly tends to diminish the spirit of the city in them.
This is an extraordinarily important distinction that Tocqueville wants to make.
After all, a great question of our Constitution is how it lays out a federal system.
We all know that the federal government is given certain powers to do things exclusively,
certain things it does along with state and local governments, and certain things that
are reserved to state and local governments.
So this federal system is important.
So Tocqueville makes this distinction.
Centralization of government is necessary.
But centralization of administration is a bad and dangerous thing for democracy.
We want to work on this now for a while.
I want to try to unpack this.
There are certain things Tocqueville says that have to be done by the federal government
if the whole notion of the United States being a nation rather than some sort of loose confederation
of 13 or at Tocqueville's time, 24 little nations makes any sense.
And of course, he's aware of the experiment of the Articles of Confederation after the
American Revolution.
Here are areas where the federal government, where centralization of authority, centralization
of government has to be, foreign affairs.
You can't have states negotiating directly with other governments.
That needs to be something that's done by the federal government.
Establishing currency and the value of money.
You can't have money changers at every state border.
Post and communications.
You've got to be able to get mail from here to there.
Here can be Indiana.
There can be Rhode Island.
And the roads that make that possible have to be dealt with by the federal government.
And the federal government has to be able to tax.
It has to be able to bring in money and not be dependent on states for its money.
And so these are things that affect all the nation, and these are things that have to
be centralized.
However, there's another whole category of governmental activity, which he calls administration.
And at various times, he speaks about this word somewhat differently.
But let me suggest what I think he wants to get at.
First of all, there are certain kinds of activities of government that affect one part of the
nation, but not another.
We all know that.
We can deal with it in terms of geography.
Flood control may be a big issue.
In some parts of the nation, may not be a big issue in other parts of the nation.
And we can name a number of these things.
Tocqueville things that by and large, those things ought to be dealt with at the local
level.
Local can mean state.
Doesn't just mean local, local.
Need to be dealt with at the local level rather than the federal level.
But more than that, I think Tocqueville means that even when you have a federal law properly
made that affects the whole country in some way, it needs to be administered locally.
In fact, he talks about the federal government borrowing state and local administration to
do a lot of its work.
And the reason Tocqueville gives is a fairly straightforward one.
The positive reason this needs to happen, the good is that, in fact, different geographical
areas need to carry out the same principles differently.
What works, if you will, in Alabama with regard to a particular issue may not work as well
in Maine.
And what he wants to argue is that those things that don't have to be uniform all over the
nation ought to be administered locally even if it's administering federal law, federal
policy.
There needs to be a lot of localization.
It has a couple values.
For one thing, it makes things more fair.
That Tocqueville doubts the value or the fairness of one size fits all, if you will.
Secondly, it keeps some power close to the people.
If you've got to have vibrant local government in order for democracy really to work, then
local governments can't be able to do something.
And in fact, Tocqueville looks around the United States, I say this with some degree
of fear perhaps given where I'm from.
He looks around the United States and he says, for example, of all the states I've looked
at, there's more centralization of administration in New York where I'm from than any other
state.
In other words, there are more things that seem to be dictated by a rigid formula from
our state, Capitol in Albany, than say that he found for all of Massachusetts in Boston
or all of Pennsylvania in Harrisburg or whatever.
And so he looks at states as well as the federal government here, but he doubts this centralization
of administration.
And in fact, he says not only are there some positive reasons to decentralize administration,
there are also other reasons perhaps even more important.
As I said at the end of the last lecture, he recognizes that it's possible that our
democracy could end up in a kind of despotism.
How are some of the ways that might happen?
Well one of the ways that might happen, Tocqueville says, is the fact that if you will let the
federal government administer everything, not set the tone, not set the policy, but
administer everything, if you will micromanage, you're going to maybe favor that because of
the kind of sameness that you think is the same thing as equality.
Sameness is not the same as equality.
Then what's going to happen is it's going to destroy that base of local activity in
government which is both good in and of itself and also a kind of training school for being
aware of how governments work that are more abstract to you, that are beyond geographically
where you live.
Then you're setting up a situation where despotism could more easily come to be the form of government
that America has.
And so this distinction between the centralization of government in issues like foreign affairs,
issue of money, posting communications and taxes, that's a good thing.
Centralization of administration, having everything done in Washington if you will or at the state
level in Albany or Boston or Springfield, Illinois, when those things begin to happen
then that is bad, it's not necessarily equitable and it's dangerous to democracy itself.
However, again, Tocqueville warns centralization of administration is easy to lapse into because
you're going to say let the federal government do it because if you let the states do this
and that and the other thing then the same situation or the same kind of people will
be treated differently in different states and that's not fair, that's not democracy,
that's not equality.
Tocqueville wants to argue that sameness and equality are not exactly the same thing and
the dangers of the centralization of administration are perhaps greater than the good that might
happen when there are in fact some real equity issues that the federal government tries to
deal with.
So this is an important set of issues that he looks at as he examines the American constitution.
As he looks at the constitutional convention and how we hammered out as our forefathers
did our form of government, he notes some things that are pretty obvious but I want
to tell you where he goes with these.
First of all he says if everything in the United States is done by the majority in the
United States then the small states lose out and will eventually disappear.
In other words what he's saying, I've emphasized this before is the United States doesn't start
with zero.
It starts with these 13 colonies that have their own history, their own pride, their
own this, their own that and it's just not going to be possible in the United States
to make a kind of unitary nation in which it doesn't matter whether those states survive.
That their survival of the states was essential and so a system had to be developed that was
simply beyond let's count all the votes.
Let's count all the hands and so he emphasizes that it was a very carefully, subtly crafted
document, not subtly crafted solely on the basis of brilliant political insight, understanding
of political theory and a knowledge of the great republics and democracies of the past
but also tailoring all that to the realities of America.
As Tocqueville put it the authors of the constitution bent the rules of logic to craft it.
You don't start and say well the logical thing to do is to divide up into 13 pieces and then
of course there's a great compromise in having the bicameral legislature where the house
contains many more people from the big states and the small states but the senate contains
equal number of people from every state.
That isn't obvious.
He's not suggesting that that kind of bicameralism will necessarily again be transferable although
he did argue for a bicameral legislature in France in 1848 when he was on a constitutional
committee although it wouldn't have been exactly based on our US house and senate.
But what a brilliant compromise he says because here we have a situation where you've got
one house in which the big states predominate and you've got one house where every state
is equal.
We know that today Wyoming and California have two senators each although Wyoming has
one member of the house of representatives and California has more than 50.
And so this is a brilliant compromise he says that first of all does many things it recognizes
our history it recognizes the values of democracy and it allows the United States to function
and prosper and allows the states to work cooperatively.
And he really admires our founding fathers for this compromise but again he says it's
not a purely logical compromise it's a compromise that's rooted in a lot of different things.
When Tocqueville looks at our three branches of government the executive the legislative
and the judicial he comes to the conclusion that the legislative Congress is the most
powerful of the three branches of government.
First of all he says remember the majority is sovereign this is a democracy and Congress
answers more directly to the majority than the other two branches of government.
The president's elected for four years by the electoral college all federal judges
are appointed of course the Senate's also elected indirectly but the house every two
years every seat is contested and that's done by the direct vote of people and you every
person has in a sense the same kind of representation because districts are approximately equal in
size.
Congress is the most powerful of the three branches of government because it answers
more directly to the majority therefore he says presidential power is inferior to legislative
power.
Now we may look at our nation today and wonder whether that is so anymore even though we
know that it's a legislature that makes laws and appropriates money but let me add one
caveat the Tocqueville ads he says in times of national crisis the power of the presidency
becomes enlarged.
Now of course since 1831 we've gone through a number of national crises whether it is
war whether it is depression whether it is 9-11 or many of the other things that have
been great crises for our nation and I think in all those situations we have seen that
the power of the presidency has indeed increased.
We see it certainly in the Roosevelt administration that is say Franklin Roosevelt where there's
both depression and then later on in his third and fourth terms war.
We've seen that in certain military crises it is relatively easy to get the Congress
to say to the president we give you authority to do what you need to do.
After all we look back and realize that Congress has the power to declare war and we've been
in several wars in the last 60 or 70 years and yet the last time Congress declared war
was in December of 1941.
And so what Tocqueville perhaps didn't have the possibility of seeing because America
was so young is not only is it true that in times of crisis the executive power grows
and expands vis-à-vis the legislative but that in some way some of that is retained after
every one of these crises.
And so probably today if you ask most Americans what's the most powerful branch of government
the answer I would guess of the majority would be the executive that is to say the presidency
of the United States.
Tocqueville said that's not so but Tocqueville understood situations in which the balance
that he sees as part of the constitutional framework would in fact change because of
experience.
One more point about the Congress Tocqueville has some funny things to say about the actual
makeup of the Congress.
He said the two houses are really quite different.
The house he says the House of Representatives is made up of what he calls vulgar and obscure
persons.
He's not very impressed by what he knows about the House of Representatives.
He's seen it operate, he's met some members of the House and as I mentioned earlier he's
heard the story of how an almost illiterate guy, Davey Crockett King of the Wild Frontier
was a member of Congress and how the election that led to Davey Crockett's victory took
place.
However he says the Senate has a large number of celebrities that's the term he uses.
So he recognizes not just that they're different in terms of how they're elected but because
of their differences, they attract if you will different kinds of candidates.
And I would guess again today that probably Americans in general could name more members
of the Senate, more of the 100 senators that they could members of the House of Representatives
of which there are 435.
So whether or not that's a generalization that still fits today, at least there are
certain elements of it that we want to think about.
The House is full he says of obscure and vulgar man, I can think of many people in the House
that wouldn't agree with that or wouldn't fit that description at all obviously, while
the Senate is made up of celebrities.
Clearly there are some back benchers senators as well as members of the House but it's an
interesting generalization worth thinking about I believe.
Well let me move on.
Tocqueville is concerned about the way we elect a president in the United States because
he says the time of a presidential election will always be a time of crisis.
And we know that, we see it in every presidential election.
For one thing one of the things we notice is the president doesn't seem to be around
doing presidential things as often during an election season as he would be during a
non-election year, as they out in the hustings campaigning and so on.
And of course the president seems to be focusing always in election time if indeed is an incumbent
president seeking reelection focusing on electoral victory.
Not that he is necessarily ignoring duties otherwise but nevertheless the focus changes.
And I think we can see that on our television shows on any presidential election year whether
or not there is an incumbent.
He says this is especially true if there is a presidential election at the time of
a foreign threat.
He's also concerned a little bit about the fact that the election of the president takes
place in two and occasionally he says three stages that is to say the vote for electors,
the vote of the electors and then this happened in 1824 not long before Tocqueville came a
third vote in the House of Representatives because there was no electoral college majority.
That problem has more or less been eliminated today by the fact we have a two-party system
but he was concerned about that.
He was also concerned about reelection of the president.
He thinks by and large that allowing the president to be reelected was a bad idea.
Let me read his own words.
But in introducing the principle of reelection they that is say the authors of the Constitution
destroyed their work in part.
They granted a great power to the president and then took away from him the will to make
use of it.
Tocqueville is very concerned that what happens during the reelection of a presidency is that
while the president should be in a sense administering the union and simply thinking of the good
of the union, inevitably he's thinking about reelection.
And inevitably Tocqueville believes that the president is going to play to the crowd
perhaps more than he should.
One of the reasons after all we have the indirect election of the president is that the president
unlike members of the House of Representatives don't have to play as much to the crowd.
They can challenge the majority of the moment.
They can stand apart from what the crowd says at any given time.
When you have an incumbent president, a sitting president who's running for reelection, inevitably
as part of the electoral strategy the president's going to play to the crowd.
It's going to be a more vulgar time if you will than otherwise.
And so Tocqueville is very concerned and thinks it was a mistake to allow in the Constitution
for the president to be reelected.
Now we know of course that in fact there was a tradition of a president serving only twice.
A tradition that remained in place until the 1940 election when Franklin Roosevelt won
his third term.
And we know there's a 22nd amendment today that limits the president to two terms.
Even there I don't think that would satisfy Tocqueville.
That particular correction to the Constitution.
One of his lines about the reelection of a president is at the time of the election cleverness
replaces patriotism he says.
Another thing Tocqueville notes although this is not specifically about the Constitution
is that although the Constitution doesn't talk about political parties, political parties
tend to clamp on to a candidate because of a candidate wins election what it says about
the party is we speak for the majority.
Now again parties are forming like the wigs and this very brief anti-masonic party at
the time that Tocqueville is in America and he doesn't notice it very much.
But I think he would agree with Madison and the sort of tradition of not just the founding
fathers but the tradition in the western political philosophical tradition to say political parties
are bad.
We're going to examine that later on but I simply wanted to add that very briefly at
this point.
I want to spend the rest of the time in this lecture talking about the Supreme Court which
is after all the only court provided in the Constitution.
It says that the legislature may make other courts but the Supreme Court is the only one
that's defined in the Constitution.
Now remember Tocqueville is a lawyer so he's going to be very interested in the court.
But let me just suggest some of the things he says about the Supreme Court because I
think today for most Americans I think most thinking Americans when you think about the
federal government you think either first about Congress and second about the presidency
or vice versa but in any case except at very particular moments in our history we tend
to think third about the judiciary, about the Supreme Court.
Tocqueville says it needs to be taken more seriously than perhaps sometimes people do.
First of all he says note that the court uses only moral not material force to enforce
justice.
In other words once the court makes a decision it can't carry it out.
It has nobody to do that, that's the executive function.
And again this was a real issue at the time that Tocqueville was in America because of
the Cherokee Indian decision by the Supreme Court that Andrew Jackson really refused
to carry out at all.
What's the purpose of a Supreme Court?
The purpose is to substitute the idea of right for the idea of violence, okay?
This is a place where right rather than violence rules and therefore it's essential that there
be a powerful court.
Notice that it has a great moral force, a great moral effect upon America.
It teaches America how to settle its problems without resorting to force and therefore it's
a model of conduct in a democracy as well as an important institution in its own way.
He also says there has to be a powerful federal court because of all these states that exist.
They're eventually going to come into conflict and there's no other way to solve conflicts
between states.
You can't say if New York and Pennsylvania are having a dispute we'll have a court in
New York settle it or a court in Pennsylvania settle it.
Nor should we have a court in Kentucky settle it.
There needs to be that federal jurisdiction because of the fact there will be clashes
between states as well as clashes between national and state sovereignty.
He also says because the court has the power to declare laws unconstitutional and we'll
talk more about that a little bit later, what it means is that almost every political question
in the United States he says becomes a judicial question.
Let me read you a passage in which Tocqueville talks about that.
Confined within his limits, the power granted to American courts to pronounce on the unconstitutionality
of laws still forms one of the most powerful barriers that has ever been raised against
the tyranny of political assemblies.
This power to declare laws unconstitutional really keeps balance because remember he says
it's the legislative branch that's most powerful.
What are the controls over the legislative branch?
This is one of them.
The federal government judges not by what the laws say but by what the Constitution says.
But in doing that it means that judicial questions are political questions and we see that in
modern America.
If we think about some of the most contentious issues in America in the last 50 or 60 years
ask where the significant actions have been taken by the federal government.
Civil rights, of course there's important federal legislation but I think most people
when they talk about civil rights they want to go back to 1954 and Brown versus Board
of Education of Topeka.
Another one abortion, it isn't the legislation of abortion it is Roe v. Wade a Supreme Court
decision of 1973 that sets the terms for the debate and is the place from which every piece
of legislation state or federal is judged.
So I think Topeka makes a very important point here that he helps us to see in our own society
that because of the kind of court the Supreme Court is almost all political questions end
up in the judiciary.
As he says never has such immense judicial power been bestowed upon a court and he draws
this conclusion about the Supreme Court in the United States he says peace, prosperity
and the nation's very existence rest with the Supreme Court.
Wow that's a very powerful statement.
Now again it's a statement of a lawyer and we want to remember that.
It's a statement made in light of the very powerful Chief Justice of John Marshall but
nevertheless it's one that I think at least helps us to ask better questions about the
separation of powers, the relation of powers and it helps us I think to perceive certain
things about the Supreme Court that only come along episodically in America.
Yeah 1954, yeah Roe v. Wade there's a landmark decision, yeah Bush versus Gore in 2000 but
he's not arguing for the episodic importance of the Supreme Court he's arguing for its
importance as a central maybe even the central institution established by our forefathers
and perhaps the most audacious one.
Again never has such immense judicial power been bestowed upon a court.
Now of course the court itself has limitations.
First of all it can only act in particular cases.
Supreme Court can't say we're going to talk about such and such.
They talk about a particular case and they are of course bound not by statues but by
the Constitution.
They can't change the Constitution.
They can say laws that don't fit with the Constitution aren't enforceable but they can't change the
Constitution itself that's done by another means.
Falkville also talks about the fact that this relationship between states and the federal
government is a very very delicate one.
For one thing as I've already mentioned states are not copies of the federal government because
their legislatures are elected by a different set of principles.
Two houses by the same principle rather than something like a Senate and a House of Representative.
Furthermore he says because the states are in some ways sovereign we hear that language
still somebody gets up and says I'm from the sovereign state of North Carolina or whatever.
Sovereignty to the state and the nation he said will work together only with daily enlightenment.
It not only takes a Constitution that defines things carefully it takes smart sensible people
working together but he says he thinks that's going to happen because he says all states
have nearly the same interest and nearly the same origins.
They all have the same language and therefore general agreement among the states is a relatively
easy matter.
A question to ask is whether that's so now that we have 50 states the stretch from the
illusions to the Florida Keys and obviously we have a much more diverse society than Tocqueville
imagined.
Finally I want to point out that Tocqueville emphasizes differences between the American
Constitution and the French Constitution and the British Constitution because the British
have an unwritten Constitution and it changes all the time.
The French have a Constitution that's written that can never change.
America has a written but flexible and living Constitution.
