Lecture 8 The Judiciary and Lawyers in America
I want to begin by reiterating what Tocqueville says about the federal judiciary, that is
to say in particular the Supreme Court, but the bulk of this lecture is going to be concerned
with other courts, with the role of juries in a democracy, and with the role of lawyers
in democracy.
It's important to remember it doesn't say explicitly in the Constitution that the Supreme
Court has the power to declare laws passed by Congress and signed by the President unconstitutional.
And in fact, one of the things we always learn in school is that was established in
a very famous Supreme Court case at the beginning of the 19th century called Marbury v. Madison,
and that of course was while John Marshall was Chief Justice of the United States Supreme
Court.
Tocqueville never mentions Marbury v. Madison, but what he clearly sees is that the principle
annunciated there, we call it sometimes judicial review, is in fact in the Constitution.
Let it say it is part of what the Supreme Court is all about and it's part therefore
of what makes it play the role it does in democracy.
So I did want to reiterate that because it is so important and we perhaps take it for
granted sometimes that it's part of the Constitution rather than as a constitutional principle that
was enunciated early in our Republic's history by the Supreme Court.
I want to turn now briefly to other courts that exist in the United States.
Tocqueville says relatively little about state courts and about county courts, although today
when we think of the courtroom on a day by day basis dealing with mostly criminal cases,
that's what we think about.
However, he does make some interesting points.
One is he says, perhaps the most important single reason that the level of county government
exists is because of the need to have qualified judges.
For example, in New York, where I live in Livingston County in Western New York, each
of our 17 towns or townships has its justices, we would call them perhaps justices of the
peace.
That's not the term we use in New York, but it's the equivalent.
Each village in our county also has a judge, but you're not required to be a lawyer to
serve as a judge in one of those courts.
And as I pointed out earlier, some of the towns in rural Western New York are so small
there may not be any judges living there or any who would want to run for office.
And yet you need to deal with certain kinds of cases in a professional manner where judges
are in fact trained in the law and therefore counties are needed.
Our county court in Livingston County, New York, we have two county judges, perhaps the
most important institutions we have of county government.
And Tocqueville makes that point.
The very existence of counties may very well have more to do with the need for qualified
judges than anything else, that once again, the shaping of our judicial system has in
some ways shaped our society in more ways than we sometimes realize.
He does make one point about county and indeed state judges.
He says, I look at several state constitutions and what I discover is that in several states
judges are elected.
And in fact, again, in New York state, they're not only elected, but they are elected partisanly,
that is to say, Republicans and Democrats run candidates for county judge or for what's
called a state Supreme Court judge, which is really a regional judge in New York state.
Tocqueville thinks that's a mistake.
Tocqueville believes that the election of judges will diminish the importance of those
magistrates.
It will not corrupt, but it will lower the level of respect and therefore the effectiveness
of those judges.
He doesn't think the election of judges, except as we'll see, justices of the peace at a very
local level.
He doesn't think the election of what we might call professional judges, full time judges,
is a very good idea.
Again, some states do, some states don't have that.
My state happened to be one that does.
Tocqueville, although he spent little time talking about state and county judges, talks
a lot about the very most local judges, because again, this is part of Tocqueville's general
scheme.
The democracy starts from the bottom up and doesn't trickle down from the top.
And therefore, just as we will look later on at how the government in general works
in a locality, we also need to look at the most local kind of judging.
He says several very interesting things.
He says, first of all, because we have this very local level of, again, I'm using this
in a very certain way, amateur judges, judges who are not necessarily trained in the law.
What we do then is say that judicial penalties become a primary means of administration.
One of the things I discovered a couple of summers ago, I was stopped by the police in
Italy for speeding, allegedly, I want to point out.
And I was curious how this all worked, because I must admit, I've been stopped for speeding
in the United States as well.
Very, very different.
In the United States, you get a ticket, you have a right to your day in court, you complete
innocent or guilty, you can show up, you can have a trial, all the rest of it.
In Italy, that's not so.
It's an administrative matter, not a judicial matter.
You don't get to plead innocent.
You don't get to confess your guilt, you simply pay the fine.
And it's done administratively.
So what Americans have done in having such local judges is to say that the judiciary
handles certain kinds of what we might call local administration.
Speeding is something that's dealt with by the judicial branch of government, rather
than by the executive branch of government, and he thinks that's important.
He comments on these so-called justices of the peace, or town or village justices that
we call them in New York.
He says they're halfway between men of the world and magistrates.
They're not formally trained judges, but they are, generally speaking, well-respected people
who in a sense take a middle place between private citizen and magistrate and judge.
And of course, they hear many of the cases that still take place.
They're enlightened citizens, but they're not necessarily versed in law.
And the justices of the peace really are that.
They're the justices of the peace.
They are a major part of the keeping of order in communities.
You know, when we say who keeps order in your local town, the answer probably is, well,
the police force does.
Tocqueville wants to make the point that justices of the peace, because they deal with, well,
today, anyway, stuff like speeding, and minor crimes, minor accusations, we might say, they
are important parts of the keeping of order in communities.
There's a functioning judicial system.
Everybody in our town can say, well, if you speed on this particular part of road, let
me tell you what the judge is going to do to you.
Let me tell you how much that's going to cost you, because I know, or because my next-door
neighbor got caught, or whatever it was.
There isn't anybody, I think, in my village who either hasn't been part of the judicial
system at the local level, or doesn't know somebody who hasn't had to pay a fine or appear
before a villager town justice, or whatever it might be.
Tocqueville thinks that's a good thing.
It's, again, government close to people, in this case, the judicial system close to the
people.
I now want to turn to one of the most important issues, and I think one of the most penetrating
analyses that Tocqueville offers in all of democracy in America.
He talks about the jury.
When we talk about America being a democracy, when we talk about the sovereignty of the
people, we usually think of that in terms of electing executive officials and electing
legislators.
Tocqueville wants to say, and does say, in a democracy, what actually happens is that
citizens judge citizens, that the jury system is an integral part of democracy for a number
of reasons.
He says, let's start with this principle.
The sanctions of the law are based in penal law.
In other words, why do I obey any law that's passed by the government that I may think
at a particular moment might not be in my interest to obey?
Well, the answer is because there are penalties to pay that are carried out not by the executive
branch or by the legislative branch, but carried out by the judicial branch.
I can be thrown in jail, I can be fined, or I certainly at least can receive, even if
I don't get much of a penalty, a lot of bad publicity because, of course, trials are public
in the United States.
So if indeed the sanctions of political law are based in penal law, then whoever judges
criminals, Tocqueville says, is the master of society.
And in our society, it's juries who do that.
Of course, now we can sometimes watch them live on TV, and everybody can remember a few
famous trials in recent years that were all or partially televised where we got to see
the jury come in and give its verdict and whatever.
And that's good, it seems to me, because it does remind us of the importance of the jury
system.
The jury system, Tocqueville says, is a key element of a democratic society.
Again, what I would stress is here, we tend almost to ignore the judiciary when we're
talking about institutions of democracy and how our system works.
We focus on the Congress or our state legislator, our county government, our village board,
or whatever it might be, or our mayor, or our governor, or our president.
Tocqueville says, look at the judicial system.
We saw in the last lecture, look at the Supreme Court.
Here look at the jury, 12 citizens empowered to decide innocence or guilt in criminal cases
and to make awards in civil cases.
And so if we ignore the jury, and if we ignore the judiciary, then we are not going to understand
fully how the government works, and we're not going to understand how citizens are and
can become good small D Democrats.
As much as Tocqueville is interested in criminal juries, he's even more interested in civil
juries.
He's called to decide civil cases.
Because he says, being in a civil jury teaches people equity.
After all, we know how the law works, and we know that if you do murder, here are some
penalties.
But one of the things, of course, juries very often do in civil cases, especially, is not
just to say, yeah, you know, this side's right, this side's wrong, but this side's wrong and
has to pay this much.
You've done this much damage to this person.
And so in the jury making those kinds of decisions, as it does in civil matters, what the jury
does is teach people equity.
That is to say a principle that goes beyond some of the letter of the law, because these
juries have choices in exactly how much they assign, sometimes much more choice in a civil
jury than in a criminal case, where the judge will say, if you bring back a verdict of guilty,
here are one of two penalties.
Or sometimes the jury decides guilt or innocence, and then the judge decides the penalty.
But in the civil jury, the jury has to make more decisions than where the weight of the
evidence is.
They very often have to decide, how do you get out of this situation equitably?
How do you resolve the problem that's been solved so that things are treated fairly?
And that is, he says, a very important thing to learn.
The other thing about a civil jury that he says is so important is everybody pays attention.
He says, you know, most people don't really imagine that they can ever end up in front
of a criminal jury.
You know, I say to myself, I don't commit any crimes, I'm not going to pay attention
to how criminal juries work, because I'm never going to have to face one.
I don't have to get inside the head of a criminal jury or the heads collectively, but because
I'm not ever going to deal with that.
But everybody knows, or should know anyway, Tocqueville says, that he or she can be sued.
And therefore, the experience of being on a civil jury is a very important part of the
education of citizenry.
It makes you aware.
It makes you sensitive to the situation.
It teaches you very important lessons.
Because once you've served on a civil jury and you've seen the deliberation, you've seen
how the evidentiary system works, you've listened to the lawyers, you've heard the stories
and all the rest, maybe Tocqueville thinks you're going to be very, very careful not
to put yourself in a situation where you may be sued.
You're going to try to avoid perhaps certain kinds of behaviors.
Now, I got to tell you, a few years ago, I was sued in a Justice of the Peace Court.
And I confess this now to all of you, I lost over a very modest amount of money, and that
doesn't matter what the details are.
But the point is, it really was an extraordinary education to be part of the system rather
than observe it from the outside.
I mean, I come from a town where the local newspaper every week publishes the court results
of everything done in the county courts and who gets arrested for drunk driving.
We get to read all that stuff.
That's quite external to my experience, however.
But having been in a civil trial where I was sued for an amount of money was really a very
important experience.
And Tocqueville says, serving on that kind of jury is a very important part of being
a citizen, a good citizen, an active citizen, an intelligent citizen.
And then, taking these two kinds of juries, civil and criminal, especially civil, let
me read you what Tocqueville says as a kind of conclusion.
One ought to consider the jury as a school, free of charge and always open, where each
juror comes to be instructed in his rights, where he enters into the daily communication
with the most instructed and most enlightened members of the elevated class, meaning lawyers,
where the laws are taught to him in a practical manner and are put within reach of his intelligence
by the efforts of the attorneys, the advice of the judge and the very passion of the parties.
I think that the practical intelligence and good political sense of the Americans must
principally be attributed to the long use that they have made of the jury in civil matters.
It's an extraordinary statement when we think about it.
Think about some of the implications of this.
Who can read the laws that our state or federal government passes?
If you've ever looked at a statute, you know how difficult the language is to penetrate.
Exactly what it all means.
It's sort of eternally reading the fine print on contracts, in a sense.
Tocqueville says that, of course, what happens if you're on a jury is you have law explained
to you by the lawyers who are trying to persuade you, and by the judge who's trying to instruct
you and guide you, you have laws explained so you can understand them.
You figure out how laws work when you're on a jury, because you're the audience.
You're the one that gets to be persuaded.
You're the one that has the power, and therefore the lawyers are going to talk to you in your
language, not their language, not the judge's language, not the language of the legislators,
but in your language.
And therefore one learns a great deal about law.
This concept of the jury as a school is one, I think, in America we've largely lost.
First of all, think of it this way.
How many people, especially people who are powerful, wealthy, well-educated, busy, will
do anything if they can to get out of jury duty, and will moan and groan if they're called
for a jury, and will sit there if they're called for a jury and keep their fingers crossed
that it won't be their day, that they won't be chosen to be a jury.
It's something that in many ways the most educated classes seek to try to avoid.
And I think Tocqueville's point is very well taken.
This is a school that's always open and always free, and there are a lot of people who desperately
don't want to go to school.
And secondly, it seems to me that what we've done is reduced, if not in absolute numbers
at least by percent, we've reduced how many jury trials there are.
We know that a lot of times that plea bargaining involves saying, well, we'll plea bargain,
and then there won't really be a trial, and of course there won't be a jury.
And of course people are allowed to, and sometimes perhaps even encouraged, to waive
their right to trial by jury.
And so if you get a group of people together and say, how many of you have actually served
on a jury, as I sometimes ask people, very few hands go up.
That not very many people, if you will, attend that school, because it isn't always open
as it turns out.
Now obviously this sort of speeds up our judicial system.
It makes it more efficient.
It makes it cheaper.
It makes it less inconvenient for citizens if fewer by percentage have to serve on juries.
Tocqueville, I think, would argue, however, that those tendencies in our society do damage
to democracy.
Again, where does democracy start?
It starts at the bottom.
It starts locally.
How do you learn about law, and the making of law, and the application of law?
What better place in a courtroom?
There was a time in my life when I thought I wanted to be a lawyer.
And what I used to do after school some days, in high school, because my bus route took
me near the county courthouse, I'd get off the bus and go up and watch trials for a while.
Now I didn't become a lawyer ultimately, but I must say it was extraordinarily educational
for me to have watched a number of trials, even though I can sort of sit there and pretend
to be a juror even though I wasn't.
I've never been on a jury.
I've never been called.
But I think I do appreciate how important Tocqueville's insight is about the jury as
a school for democracy.
And if we want our citizens to have all the opportunities to understand what it means
to be a self-governing people in a participatory democracy, haven't we perhaps closed one of
those doors?
Haven't we dismissed one institution or at least relegated it to a more peripheral role
in our society than Tocqueville says the jury has had in America and should have in America?
I think this is one of the most interesting and powerful points that I find in all of
this great big thick book, Democracy in America.
I want to now turn to a discussion of lawyers because Tocqueville, again a lawyer himself,
says a lot of interesting things about lawyers in America.
First of all he says lawyers are a powerful barrier against the lapses of democracy.
Democracy can get sort of wild, sort of crazy, sort of unstable, up and down because majorities
can be fickle.
We all know that.
That's always been pointed out as a potential danger of democracy all the way back to the
ancient Greeks.
But let me tell you about lawyers, Tocqueville says.
Lawyers learn the habits of order, what they study when they study the law.
Lawyers have a taste for procedure.
They know that you not only do things, you do things in certain ways by certain steps
in a certain order.
Lawyers love to learn the sequence of ideas.
They put together logical arguments.
They go from A to B to C to D. That's sort of what lawyers are trained to do, Tocqueville
says.
With this education, Tocqueville says, lawyers therefore are generally opposed to the revolutionary
spirit and to the unreflective passions of democracy.
Lawyer stability and logic work against the instabilities that often exist or even intrinsically
exist in a democracy.
Lawyers are important for that reason.
Today we hear lots about lawyers and the training of lawyers and how many lawyers the United
States has.
I don't know what Tocqueville would think of all of these things in the 21st century.
But Tocqueville is convinced that in general, those who are lawyers by profession serve
valuable roles beyond simply their standing up for people in court and defending people's
rights, simply the way they're educated, added to their prominence.
Teach people certain habits.
You don't find a lot of revolutionary lawyers because lawyers like order and procedure and
logic.
You don't find a lot of unreflective, passionate people in the law.
They may be passionate, but they're not unreflective.
Their passion is leading toward something.
It has a plan to it in a sense.
And I think if we watch many of the sort of show trials that have been on television in
the last few years, we've seen something of that.
You say, boy, that lawyer just waving his arms and doing all this sort of stuff.
And then after a while you say, wow, to quote Shakespeare, there seems to be a method to
his madness.
This is not just some guy running and raving in front of the jury.
This is a piece and this particular emotional outburst is a piece of a plan.
And if you sit in a jury, among other things, you would see that whole plan unfolding, Tocqueville
would argue.
He says that in their origins and in their tastes and in their personal habits, lawyers
are, of course, as democratic as the next people.
But he says their elevated position in society will show them sometimes to have a conservative,
meaning in the sense of wanting to keep things stable, a conservative and undemocratic spirit.
They sort of are on the border between being great small D Democrats themselves.
And he will argue, and I'll talk about this in a couple of minutes, almost forming a kind
of informal aristocracy in the United States.
Lawyers have a particular role in terms of the social structure of the United States.
Now why do lawyers have the role they have in the United States?
Tocqueville says, let's remember, he's speaking to Frenchman, let's not forget, this is a
common law country.
This is a country that's got its law from England.
Let me, Tocqueville says, tell you a little bit, dear readers, why lawyers play a somewhat
different role in a common law country than in our Roman law country.
First of all, he says, lawyers recognize that common law is a law of precedence.
I mean, we all know that.
You walk into a lawyer's office today and what do you find?
All these damn law books all over the walls.
Why?
Because you want to say, well, here's a situation now that I'm dealing with in court.
I want to find some precedent where some judge ruled in a similar case the way I want the
judge to rule in this case, and that precedent and those arguments will impress the judge
and or the jury.
And so we know that it is indeed this common law, a law of precedence.
Or as Tocqueville puts it, in England and America, the first question lawyers ask is
about the past, what has been done?
While he says what a French lawyer asked first, remember Tocqueville is one, is what one ought
to wish to do.
The first question American lawyers ask is, what has been done?
Law founded on precedence, he says, is obscure.
After all, again, how many law books are there in a law office?
Walls and walls and walls and federal statutes and state statutes and so on.
So the law is obscure.
You can't just say to your average citizen, you understand all the law about about taxes
or corporations, don't you?
Well we all know we've seen demonstrations by various politicians who put the tax code
on the floor and it reaches up to about their waist.
So what does that mean?
It means that lawyers are in some ways really only the ones, the only ones who understand
the laws.
Because of the kind of legal system we are based on precedent, it's important therefore
to have a command of all those laws and all those walls.
It's not to know every law individually, at least know how to find it and apply it.
That's something that really citizens can't do for themselves.
They really need lawyers to do that.
And therefore, because of the nature of the law in a common law country, lawyers in America
love subtlety.
It's finding this similar case that sort of turns out the way you want your case to
turn out and very carefully explaining and shaping how this is indeed the correct precedent
because there are lots of possible precedents in all those law books in the old law office
where the lawyer has been sitting.
And he says lawyers are by their definition in a common law country conservative in the
sense they don't want to be thought of as innovators.
By and large lawyers don't go to a court saying your honor, this has never been said or done
before, but let me tell you how I want things to be decided in this case.
You don't say that, you say your honor.
If you go back to that case of somebody v somebody in 1937 in Michigan, you will see
that as a way lawyers operate.
And Tocqueville says that is a kind of conservative way of operating and it leads to order, stability,
respect for laws, all of those things being often weaknesses in democracy because laws
change because of instability in the law and so on.
So Tocqueville concludes that if there is an American aristocracy or if one develops,
again not in the formal sense of having legal privileges, but if there is an aristocracy
isn't in America, it is an aristocracy of lawyers.
Very interesting conclusions.
Given that one thing that follows is Americans like to elect lawyers to public office.
And although probably the percentage is not as great as it was when Tocqueville was in
America, still if you go to Congress or a state legislature today and say what's the
most common profession of our legislators, the answer clearly is lawyer.
We like to send lawyers to public office because we think they understand the law because they're
the only ones who can understand the law because of the nature of the common law that's used
in America.
And Tocqueville concludes his discussion about the judiciary in America at all levels, from
the Supreme Court to the very bottom level of the justice of the peace, that along with
the freedom of the press, about which we'll have more to say later, along with the freedom
of the press, listen to this language, the judicial system is the greatest instrument
of democracy in America.
And since freedom of the press is not government, it is the most important governmental instrument
of democracy.
Judges must listen to everyone.
And the courts are the greatest guarantors of individual independence.
More than anything else, if you want to ask, what keeps America democratic?
The answer is the judges all the way from the local insurance agent who's a justice
of the peace, that's a situation in my town, to the Chief Justice of the United States
Supreme Court.
We need to keep focus on our judicial system, to take care of it, to recognize its value,
and when we can participate in it, because that is to maintain and expand a healthy democracy.
