I've already mentioned several times that for Tocqueville, what's central about the
democratic experience is not what happens, we might say, in Washington or if you're from
New York in Albany, it's what happens at home.
That is to say, democracy doesn't start with something big and far away and abstract and
trickle down.
Democracy is really practiced most clearly and directly at home in very local settings
and those practices and habits that are formed in that democratic life at home are what give
meaning and substance and strength to the democratic experience when we have to deal
with it more abstractly by understanding what people are doing that are affecting our lives
far away from our homes, whether for me it's in Albany, a four-hour drive, or for me it's
in Washington, D.C.
So what we're going to look at in this lecture is what Tocqueville focuses in on when he
talks about local government and the fact that democracy starts at home and close to
home.
First of all, he said simply historically, let's remember that in the United States,
local government came first.
That is to say, there's town X and there's town Y before there is county X and county
Y before there is Massachusetts or Connecticut or Virginia and all of those before there
is the United States of America.
So we're not just talking about a theory of democracy starting at home and building
up to the larger and more abstract units of government.
We're also talking about history in the United States when we talk about democracy really
beginning in very local settings.
And yet Tocqueville points out a local democracy, let's say a village or a town is a very fragile
and rare thing, Tocqueville says.
Because obviously we know today, we see it all the time, those local governments have
to deal with governments that are larger that include it, county, estate or whatever, and
those larger jurisdictions also in a sense dictate many of the rules, whether it's the
unfunded mandates we hear about today or whatever it might be.
So it's hard in a nation like the United States for local government to remain vibrant,
for it to mean anything, for it to do important things, which of course keep people interested
and participating.
Sometimes I know local government officials will say to me, guys, you know, we had a town
board meeting last night and it's a chance for people to come and give their opinions
and whatever.
And there were two people there and one of them is the local town crank.
Well, you say, you know, what are the possible reasons therefore that we have that kind
of situation?
Well, it's easy to write it off and say, ah, people just aren't interested in anymore anymore.
But the other thing to say is, well, what did you discuss last night?
Does it matter?
Do village and town governments still have the authority to make certain kinds of decisions
on their own for its local citizens?
Because I've witnessed in my own town in Geneseo and upstate New York, we had a deal
about are we going to allow Walmart to come into the town?
Are we going to rezone some land so that a big car dealership could grow?
We don't have any trouble getting people out to talk about that.
The last time I went to one of those meetings, there were more than 100 people there and
it lasted four hours.
So one of the questions is, does local government still have the jurisdiction to do the things
that keep people interested and excited because they do things that matter in people's lives?
Again, Tocqueville says a township is a rare and a fragile thing because it's difficult
to struggle against other higher levels of government having all the authority, making
all the difference.
A typical township, as it's called in some states, towns in New York, so I'll probably
use those two terms interchangeably, even if I don't mean to.
But for Tocqueville, in his day, typically a town or a township will have two or three
thousand people.
It's a very small unit of government.
And again, I can't speak for urban America, but at least where I live, there are towns
of fewer than a thousand people that have their own jurisdiction.
And so it's hard for two or three thousand people to retain even some of their independence
against the power of a county or a state, let alone the federal government.
And yet, this is a very telling phrase, I think, Tocqueville says, the township is to
freedom as a school is to science.
Isn't that interesting?
Because he says the second won't exist without the first.
You're not going to have great science if you don't have schools.
You're not going to have freedom, Tocqueville says, if you don't have vibrant local governments.
Now of course, in some ways, this is the purest form of democracy, because at least in some
New England town, still to this day, you have direct democracy.
You don't meet every week to make new rules and regulations, but you still have perhaps
that once a year town meeting where there is direct democracy.
And therefore it is the most pure form of democracy at all.
And you can't practice that at any other level.
You can't sit the people of the state of New York down for a meeting, no matter how big
a tent you've got, or no matter how good the weather happens to be that day.
He also points out that in addition to the fact you've got representative democracy,
you are a rather direct democracy.
You also have a situation in the villages and towns where you elect a lot of people.
He's amazed by how many people hold office in these little bitty, jurisdiction, little
bitty in terms of population, not necessarily in terms of geography.
He'll go into some very tiny town or village in New England or other parts of the nation,
and he will find there's an elected assessor, an elected tax collector, an elected constable,
an elected clerk, an elected overseer of the poor, several elected school commissioners,
elected highway inspectors, elected fire inspectors, even an elected supervisor of
weights and measures.
And all of these people are elected, and they're elected for very short terms of office, one
year normally.
So even those things that are administered by elected officials, the elections come very,
very often.
You don't wait four years if you don't like your village clerk, you can get rid of your
village clerk next year, Tocqueville says, because the person's only holding a one year
term.
There's an elected judge, what we talked about in an earlier lecture, the Justices of the
Peace.
There's usually an elected town board of some sort, and New England often called a group
of select men, and they also hold very short terms of office, usually a year.
In fact, Tocqueville says, I added it all up, and I found that in the tiniest jurisdictions,
you had maybe 19, that's his number, 19 elected officials.
Now I want you to think about what that means, and why Tocqueville sees it as so important.
First of all, it means that in any given time, nobody has very much power.
Nobody has a very large job to do, and of course these are all either amateur jobs or
they're paid very little.
In my town, for example, both my town supervisor and my mayor are elected, they also both
have jobs.
That is to say they're part-time positions.
And so we're looking at government by people who do something else for a living.
Our village justice sells insurance in my town.
So in many ways, where I live is much like what Tocqueville is describing in 1831.
What are the benefits of this?
Well, first of all, again, a lot of people are directly involved.
It means that, A, they've had the practice of being office holders.
And therefore, when they're looking at jobs farther away, state legislature, Congress
and whatever, they sort of understand how government works because they've done it from
the inside.
And therefore they can make better, more realistic assessments and proposals because they are
in some ways experienced in holding government offices.
I've taken surveys of students of mine.
I'll ask a fairly big class how many of your parents have ever been elected to any office
or run for any office.
And usually the answer I get is zero.
That wouldn't have happened in the kind of world that Tocqueville is talking about in
1831.
You would have a lot of veterans, people who had served in government.
A second thing, you learn certain skills in government that you, therefore, at the very
local level, might say, you know, if I can be a select man here, why don't I run for
the state legislature?
I've had some experience working in a legislative job.
Or if you are the town assessor, you might say, gee whiz, I might run for county clerk
or county treasurer or state treasurer because I have some experience.
I know what the job is all about.
I can offer some experience to the electorate when I stand for office and so on.
There's a training ground for people who hold higher offices.
It's very interesting to think about how, therefore, we have sort of local government
as breeding ground.
And indeed, the person who represents me in Congress right now in upstate New York began
on a village board, served on a county council, served as a state legislator, and now is a
member of the U.S. House of Representatives.
I think although perhaps Tocqueville didn't picture people holding office many, many
consecutive years, I think he would see that local government experience as breeding ground.
I've heard people say in my part of New York state, people who belong to the minority
of the two major parties say, you know, here's the problem.
We can't get our folks elected at the most local level, and therefore, we can't offer
experienced candidates for things like state legislature, because we can't get them elected
to town and village boards.
So it's very interesting to see how important for Tocqueville it is that local government
be vibrant and exist because of the benefit it has for the citizenry, so many of whom
are in fact or have at least been office holders.
Now let me take up things a little bit more theoretically with regard to local government.
Let me read you a passage from Democracy in America.
In nations where the dogma of the sovereignty of the people reigns, each individual forms
an equal portion of the sovereign and participates equally in the government of the state.
Each individual is therefore supposed to be as enlightened, as virtuous, as strong as
any other of those like him.
It's a very interesting point that I am, at least in theory, I have the same percentage
of the vote in any jurisdiction of which I'm apart, from local all the way up to the United
States, as any other person.
I'm equally sovereign with every other citizen in the jurisdiction.
I'm talking about it at any given time, county, state of New York, whatever it might be.
Therefore what we all need, since we're all stakeholders, since we're all equally sovereign,
if you will, is to be informed and to be virtuous.
And virtuous not just in our personal lives, but to live virtuous lives as citizens, to
live virtuously, if you will, outdoors in the public square.
Well, where do we get those habits?
Where do we learn to live virtuously?
Where do we get the experience to exercise our sovereignty intelligently?
And of course, Tocqueville's answer is close to home, as an elected official, as the person
who put up his hand at a local meeting and spoke for 30 seconds on why Walmart should
or shouldn't come.
That's how we learn those habits that make us good exercisers of the franchise, good
petitioners of our government, and all the other things that are the parts of a citizen
in a free and participatory society.
A second thing he points out, and I want to read you another passage, is that after all,
in a freedom-loving, freedom-giving democracy, people follow their own interests.
People are independent.
They get to make lots of choices in their lives.
Let me read you this passage.
In all the concerns and duties of citizens among themselves, he, an individual, has therefore
become a subject.
In all the regards only himself, he has remained master.
He is free and owes an account of his actions only to God.
Hence this maxim, that the individual is the best as well as the only judge of his particular
interest, and that society has the right to direct his actions only when it feels itself
injured by his deed, or when it needs to demand his cooperation.
People are free and independent, and operate in a sense in their own interest, because
they have the freedom to do that.
Question, how does any citizen learn what his or her best interest is?
How do you both live cooperatively with other people in your best interest, and act as an
individual for your best interest?
How do you learn what that balance is, or to use a phrase that I'll introduce later
that Tocqueville will talk about, how do you learn what it is to have a well-understood
self-interest?
Not just immediate self-interest, but a well-understood self-interest.
The answer is, again, you gain that experience by participating at local government.
You practice democracy.
You don't just practice it at the ballot box once every two years, when we vote for members
of Congress, or our governors, or every four years when we vote for our president.
You practice it much more often at home, and if those governments at home aren't vibrant,
they don't do anything, they don't attract interest, you can't get people to run for
the offices that exist, then it does damage to the democracy at every level.
It teaches citizens the wrong habits.
When you get out and have to work with other people, you find out that your self-interest
is bound up with their self-interest, and with the collective self-interest.
If you sort of stay at home, and come out every two years and pull a lever, you may not
know that, because you haven't experienced it as you work to fight for or against Walmart,
for or against a car agency coming in, for or against a new sewer that goes down Main
Street, for or against how big the, you have to have big lots for the new houses that are
built, for or against subsidized housing in your town.
It's when you've participated in those activities that you come to understand a broader sense
of your self-interest, and therefore that will show up in the way you exercise, for example,
the franchise.
It'll show up when you have your one minute to sit down with your state legislator and
advocate for or against something.
It is very important for all of democracy at every level to democracy be vibrant at home.
Another important point that Tocqueville makes about local government is that, of course,
local governments have to obey higher governments.
If the state of New York says that this is a curriculum for all the schools of New York
state to be, otherwise you don't get a diploma, then it is the job of the local school board
in part to put that in place in, in my case, Geneseo, New York.
And so what happens is we find that sometimes rules and regulations come from higher levels
of government, but it's at the local level that those are incarnated.
It's at the local level that those are made real to the citizens whom they're intended
to help.
And so it's one thing to have a curriculum drawn up in Albany.
It's quite another thing to look at what your local school board does in terms of hiring,
in terms of buying school supplies, in terms of drawing up day-to-day curricula, in terms
of all sorts of things.
And so once again, even when the local government is limited by some rules it has to play by
from a higher level of government, it is the local administration of those mandates, of
those rules, of those curricula, in the case of education, that still are important and
vibrant at the local level.
My school doesn't do things quite the way the next school over does.
Classes aren't the same length, for example.
Because the very next school district, because they've made different decisions about how
they think students in their district can learn best.
And so those are the sorts of things, even when governments order from up above what
towns must do, nevertheless, how those towns administer them.
And Tocqueville says, we'll talk about this a lot and I've already mentioned it, whoa,
if all that's administered at the highest level.
The rules may come down from on high, but the administration has to be local for democracy
to work, for a lot of reasons, one of which is, again, it will take away that vibrancy.
It will take away those buildings of democratic habits that are so essential that Tocqueville
talks about.
Now let me suggest that Tocqueville is clear that he understands local government can't
do everything.
It's just defense or whatever, but local government, for example, he says, very often
can't provide a police force or a jail or a professional judge and so forth.
So he understands there needs to be some activities that are carried out by a level of government
like the county.
In fact, that's why counties were created.
You can't have, we have 17 towns in my county, each one really can't have its own police
force or its jail, but we can't have a jail in our, in our county seat.
We can have a sheriff.
We have two elected judges who must be lawyers and so on.
So Tocqueville understands that there are limits to what the very most local part of
government can do.
And there needs to be, in a sense, some professionalized government, preferably not too far away
from home.
This is the county, not the state or the federal government.
So again, Tocqueville understands there need to be various levels with various responsibilities.
But as far as Tocqueville is concerned, the closer we can keep government close to home
on the most issues, the better off we are because it allows us to be better small D Democrats,
even in dealing with those issues, which must be handled by governments that are far away
and may seem to be abstract.
Tocqueville also mentions for the umpteenth time in this connection that administrative
centralization, something I've just been talking about, administrative centralization is a dangerous
thing for democracy.
And here are some of the reasons.
First of all, he says, freedom will be vanished if central government is involved in the details
of the application of the law.
OK, we're going to have some sort of huge bureaucracy in our case in Albany and for
everybody's case in Washington, D.C. and if they try to handle every detail of government,
if they tell local governments exactly in detail what they have to do and give them
no leverage, freedom will be vanished.
We're talking about the highest consequences.
If we are going to have a free society, it must mean that people can make decisions about
themselves close to home that matter.
Secondly, he says, if Congress or state legislature passes oppressive laws, their impact is lessened
if the laws are administered locally so that if you get bad laws and they're all administered
centrally, the badness of those laws shows up everywhere equally.
On the other hand, if they're administered locally, then in places where they aren't
administered so rigidly, it shows everybody else that gee whiz, where those are not administered
so rigidly, those folks are better off than we are, where we're going to the letter of
the law.
Maybe there's something wrong with that law.
Because when it isn't administered very well, as it turns out, people seem to be better
off.
So oppressive laws will be less oppressive, are more likely to be changed if in fact
we have local administration.
I've mentioned this once before, but I can't resist mentioning again that Tocqueville actually
stops and pauses and says, by the way, of all the states I have observed, New York state
has gone the farthest of all the states towards centralization of administration.
He clearly does not mean that as a compliment.
The reason I have to stop is because I can obviously give you illustrations.
We have had debates, I have been involved in debate, my mother was involved in two minor
traffic accidents at the same intersection in my village and I'm convinced there needs
to be a stoplight or at least some sort of warning or flashing light there.
And so you go to your local government and say, hey, why don't we have a stoplight there?
Why don't we put up something there?
Well the answer always is because it all has to be studied by people in Albany.
We don't have the local authority to put a flashing light up.
So that this is going to take a lot of time, it's going to take money, Albany has to prioritize
its resources before it can even do the investigation and then that decision will essentially be
made with some local consultation in Albany.
And of course, you know, you stand there and say, but nobody in Albany's ever had his mother
drive through that intersection before.
And the answer you usually get is sort of an answer that goes like this, well, what can
we do?
That's the way the game is played.
So I live in a state where even in 1831 it was ahead of the rest, although Tocqueville
would say ahead, ironically, ahead of the rest in centralizing administration.
Tocqueville didn't think it was a good thing.
Then my guess is he would sort of laugh at some of the silliness of it now as he would
understand it.
Tocqueville also here in this issue looks at Europe, France in particular, but he's
also aware of how other governments in Europe work and says that this vibrant local government
that the Americans have is very different than anything in France.
That you don't have that from the ground up democracy.
And that's a real issue for Tocqueville because again, he wants there to be because he know
inevitably is going to be democracy.
He wants there to be a good democracy, a vibrant democracy in France.
He knows it can't be like American democracy.
But here's a question.
I'm not sure Tocqueville ever solves it.
If you come to America and you look around and you say you've got to build democracy
from the ground up and you're in an old country like France has been around for hundreds of
years and has traditions and institutions.
If that isn't there, how do you how do you establish that?
How do you get people in small groups meeting in the town square to decide certain things
when that's just not part of their tradition?
I'm not sure Tocqueville has an answer for that.
And I'm not sure today when the United States or other Western democracies hope to encourage
and help other nations to build democracy.
How often we even ask the question, do we build it from the Constitution on down or
do we need to build some very local institutions and teach some very important practices before
people will really be committed to and practitioners of democracy in the way that we think of democracy
in America.
He also says, as you would expect, one of the great ways to deal with the problem of
centralization of administration is to maintain vibrant local government.
There need to be lots of opportunities for people to get together, to talk, to argue
and to learn about their dependence on one another.
Because he says freedom brings that sense of independence.
I'm me, you know, I have my own house, I have my own car, I'm independent.
What happens to me is relatively independent of what happens to other people.
Tocqueville thinks that's wrong.
And Tocqueville says the way you learn that's wrong is participating with people in common
enterprises.
You can't get your road fixed, but a group of you might be able to get your road fixed.
And that's another point that Tocqueville makes, it's very, very powerful.
That is, you may not understand what the big debates are in Washington or in Albany.
You know, today when people talk about trillions of dollars and so on, it sort of boggles the
mind.
What is a trillion, we might ask?
Or what is three or four billion here and there, which sometimes seem to be talked about
as if it were pocket change, which I suppose in some ways it is, in the federal budget.
But when you're dealing with local issues, people can understand those issues.
As Tocqueville might say, I'm sort of paraphrasing very loosely, you might not be able very well
to understand the idea of an interstate highway system.
That may be a very difficult debate to be a part of when you're talking about something
so broad, so complex, but you understand the need to fill the pothole in the street in
your house.
And it's starting there that's so important.
That's an issue that government does that you can understand.
You can understand how much it costs, you see the practical benefits of it, and you
know that if you go to the town hall and say, fix that damn pothole in front of my house,
it may not get fixed.
But if 50 of you sign a petition to say, fix that damn pothole in front of Bill's house,
it might very well get fixed.
Those are the habits of democracy.
Local freedoms bring people closer together.
And that's important because we may think we're independent, but in our own independence
we're also fairly weak.
I'm one five thousandth of the population of a very small town in upstate New York,
and that's not a very big percentage of the vote that I personally carry.
I want to take up two other issues while we're here.
One is, Tocqueville looks at Europe, and he says, you know, one of the problems in
Europe is that if we look at the governments there, they do a lot of things at the highest
level that either governments in the United States don't do or don't do locally.
And he says the result of that is, let me just read this, for himself, the individual,
he enjoys these goods as a tenant.
In other words, in France what you do is you look around and say, well, you know, somebody
in Paris has made a decision to do something here in our town.
It doesn't have anything to do with me, I'm not part of the decision making process, I
don't know what the arguments are, I don't quite know even where all the money is coming
from, and therefore you treat your own town, your own location as if you were a tenant.
He says that tenant is without a spirit of ownership and without ideas of any improvement
whatsoever.
However, in America, people feel ownership for where they live.
Their citizenship and their participation make them feel like owners.
Another point Tocqueville makes is that in France, in particular, the government, again,
the government, the sovereign, the monarchy, has taken over a lot of things that even
private folks used to do when there was a more vibrant aristocracy in France.
Things that we would call welfare matters, even charity matters are done by the government.
Tocqueville thinks as much as possible those things are better done at the local level.
You're better off to have not a secretary of dog welfare in Washington D.C., you're
better off having a local group of people, or at least a local government, caring with
your wandering dog problem.
That's a good metaphor perhaps for things.
You don't want a secretary of dog, you want either a local group taking care of it, or
if not, you want local government building a local dog pound.
Thank you.
