Lecture 11, Freedom of the Press
This lecture has several purposes.
One is to talk about an extraordinarily important issue, another one of these First Amendment
issues that Tocqueville takes up.
That is to say, freedom of the press.
But also I'm going to do two other things that I've really not yet done in this course
that I think I can do effectively because of some of the materials I can bring in to
analyze not just what Tocqueville says about freedom of the press, but sort of how he got
to that place.
That is to say, we know that Tocqueville learned a great deal about freedom of the press from
one particular person he met in America, a guy that I've introduced to you before.
I'll introduce to you again in a few minutes, named John C. Spencer.
And since Tocqueville wrote down, verbatim, a conversation he had with Spencer about freedom
of the press, we can look at that text and we can begin to get some insight into how
Tocqueville interviewed people and how some of those ideas then became very, very central
to his own conception of democracy and how he will even borrow almost verbatim the words
of somebody else and incorporate them into his book.
We'll be able to see a little bit, I apologize for this term, but I grew up watching cop shows
in the 50s.
We'll see his MO, which I think in cop talk is his method of operation.
There's another thing I want to emphasize at least briefly in this lecture that I've
not dealt with before.
As we know, Tocqueville wrote this book in two basic parts, a part published in 1835
and a part published in 1840.
And a question the scholars often ask that I've really not dealt with is, is there anything
he changes mind about?
Is there a different perspective?
Are there some different nuances in the second half than in the first half?
After all, five years is a long time, he was still a young man thinking about these issues.
Well, needless to say, scholars have dealt with this in extraordinary detail and there
are a variety of opinions about exactly how much he changes mind.
But he did clearly change his mind at least some on the importance and role of the freedom
of the press in a democracy.
And therefore, I will try to explain and illustrate that.
And even though I will not systematically carry out that kind of analysis, V1 versus
V2 all the way through the course, I will use this particular topic as an illustration.
Now, when Tocqueville came to the United States, obviously he was familiar with how things
were to this extent that he'd read certain things and he knew there was freedom of the
press in America and he was not sold on the idea.
He was nervous about this whole concept of freedom of the press.
And so while he was in America, he immediately almost came to realize freedom of the press
was indeed something that was here to stay, it was a part of democracy and it was valuable.
Although the longer he pondered it, again, that time from volume one to volume two, he
came to appreciate it even more over time.
Now, he says, let's face it.
If you have a nation that holds the dogma of the sovereignty of the people, censorship
is an absurdity.
Freedom of the press simply is a reality of democracy.
Now, the question is, what exactly is its role?
What does it do?
And if there are harms that are caused by freedom of the press, how can they meet mitigated
without taking away the freedom of the press?
These were his questions because, again, it was something he really wasn't sold on.
He come to the conclusion early on, and he expresses this in volume one, that in fact
a free press prevents evils rather than does positive goods.
In other words, if you didn't have it, things would be worse.
Not that it necessarily makes things better.
So he has kind of a negative value that he attaches to the freedom of the press.
It's good for what it prevents, not for what it actually does.
But as he gets to know the American press, he comes to realize that the press is less
powerful in America than it is in France, and after all, that's been his basis of comparison.
First of all, he says, there is no one place in the United States that dominates the nation
the way Paris does in France.
In other words, if you will, the press was much more centralized in France as so many
other things were, and therefore what the Parisian press said seemed to Tocqueville
to carry a kind of undue weight in France.
But what he discovered is there is no equivalent in America, not New York, not Washington.
It doesn't dominate the press the way that Paris dominated the press in France.
A second thing he says, and this is a little bit coy on his part perhaps, most of what
is in French newspapers is news.
But he says, I look at American newspapers, and I discover the three-fourths of what's
in American newspapers is advertisements.
And in fact, he says a lot of people read newspapers more for the ads than for the news.
They know that in a sense he seems to suggest newspapers play a bigger role or has a wider
range of roles, and it's not so narrowly political and newsy as newspapers are in France, and
therefore in a sense the power of the press is somewhat diluted.
Now Tocqueville also notes that there are a number of reasons beyond these that he makes
in comparative terms as to why the press is not so powerful as to be damaging to democracy
in the United States.
He says, let's look at how newspapers are founded.
Let's look at how they're made, what the business of the newspaper business is.
First of all, he says it's rather inexpensive to create a newspaper.
You don't need a lot of stuff.
Again, if you look back at one of these reconstructed 19th century villages like the one that's
near me, it's the Genesee Country Village, you go into the newspaper office and it's
not a very big building, and ultimately the equipment isn't very sophisticated or expensive,
and therefore it was not expensive to start a newspaper.
Hence, just about all small towns have newspapers and many small towns have many newspapers.
Again, I come from a town that even today has between 5,000 and 6,000 permanent residents,
not counting our students, and a century ago it had three newspapers.
Oddly enough, the Republican, the Democrat, and the Independent.
So newspapers are inexpensive to start and therefore lots of people start newspapers.
I'm amazed when I do research in our own local history how many places that today are even
not technically and legally in New York villages, but Hamlets once had newspapers even if they
were no bigger than they are today.
Another point he makes, newspapers, he says, don't make a great deal of profit.
They're not big money makers, by and large, and therefore great industrialists, the big
magnates and captains of industry, if you will, don't get into the newspaper business.
It's a small to middling business, it's a local business, it's the one where you publish
a successful newspaper and you can build yourself a nice house, not an empire.
And so it tends to be widespread, local, and small.
That's what most newspapers are in America.
And therefore, after looking at this, he draws this conclusion.
The most enlightened Americans attribute the lack of power of the press to this incredible
scattering of its strength.
It is an axiom of political science in the United States that the sole means of neutralizing
the effects of newspapers is to multiply their numbers.
His fear of a dominant press, a press that sort of trumps other factors in a democracy,
he finds not to be valid in America because there's so much press.
In a sense, in a village or a town with several newspapers, everybody can have a voice.
Even today, we have two weekly newspapers that come out of my village that really are
for the whole county, and I'm a columnist for one of them, so I know something about
local newspapers today.
And one of the things I know is the editors are dying for letters to the editor.
Unless you do something that violates their editorial policy or unusually profane, I guarantee
you your letter will get into the newspaper.
And in fact, one of the things happens is a couple of people have figured this out and
send letters all the time and they always get published.
That's not true in a big city newspaper.
The Rochester paper has a policy that you can't publish a letter there more than once every
so many months.
But you may do week after week after week in the Livingston County News, which is a paper
for which I write in upstate New York.
So how do you make sure that the press isn't too powerful?
How do you make sure the press does something positive rather than negative?
In a democracy, the answer is you have lots of it.
Different voices, different political positions.
If this newspaper makes this claim, that will not go unchallenged in another newspaper.
And so what the freedom of the press needs for it to be vibrant and positive in America
is lots and lots and lots of press.
And I think we ought to consider that.
The city of Rochester is in a county with three-quarters of a million people in upstate
New York.
In that county, there is one, count them one, daily newspaper.
And I might add, it's also the only daily newspaper that serves some of the rural counties
around it, including mine.
We have no daily newspaper.
But the point is, there is one.
I can remember when there were two, but now there is one.
And we also find that even among smaller cities and towns, the number of newspapers is getting
less.
Tocqueville would worry about that.
Now again, we can ask as a legitimate question, is the expansion of television cable?
And the internet taking the place of the necessity of having lots of newspapers.
In other words, counting that as the press too, are we in fact continuing to multiply
in healthy ways the way that Tocqueville would argue for?
I think that's an interesting and open question.
There are differences between cable news networks and websites and newspapers.
And we all know what some of those are.
So an interesting question is, is the press simply evolving and expanding into different
media, or is the shrinking of the number of newspapers in large cities, as well as in
rural and small town areas, something that we ought to be concerned about?
The fact that newspapers are often big businesses today, is that something we should be concerned
about?
The fact that we have now national newspapers, and that's not just a paper that's published
everywhere at the same time, but even something like the New York Times, or the Washington
Post, which have national edition, are these good things for the positive use of freedom
of the press in America?
These are good questions.
Everything I said up to here, we find in volume one of democracy in America.
But in volume two, Tocqueville comes back to issues of newspapers and freedom of the
press, and speaks of it much more positively, and I think also somewhat expands his definition
of the press.
Tocqueville has come to realize, and we will talk about this in subsequent lectures, that
political and civil associations are vital to democracy.
By political associations, we mean any organization with a kind of political, not necessarily
partisan, but political agenda.
That could be the ACLU, that could be the National Rifle Association, and so on.
We need these political associations, and we need what he calls civil associations.
That's everything from the Dog Lovers Club, to the Rotary, to the Church Altar Guild.
All of these things help make democracy stronger in America.
Again, these are the subjects of subsequent lectures.
Now, question.
If they're so vital, if they help to at least mitigate the power of the majority, for example,
how can they work?
How can they be effective?
Well, good question.
How can like-minded people act together since they are spread out and become lost in the
crowd?
After all, in any village or town or city, the number of people who belong to the ACLU
or the NRA or any other political association is small.
They are a small minority of the entire population.
You could go down a street for quite a while, knock on doors and never find anybody that
belongs to these organizations.
How do they communicate?
How do they work together?
The answer is, for Tocqueville, they need newspapers.
We might say newsletters, not necessarily things that focus on all sorts of news or are
published in a local newspaper office called the Republican or the Democrat or the Herald
or the Tribune, but rather they need their own newspapers for their organizations.
This is another part of the press that we have to consider when we talk about the role
of the press in America.
It's not just the newspaper that you buy at the corner store or have delivered to your
doorstep.
It's that newsletter you get from the organizations that you may belong to that's also a vital
part of the freedom of the press because these kinds of newspapers talk to people briefly
but regularly, sometimes every day or every week or every month.
It's important that these organizations communicate, pass on news, share ideas, point out how to
make the argument for your point of view to other people whom you meet in your daily discourse.
Furthermore he says, what happens is as equality of conditions continues to become greater,
we move toward greater equality, there's the tendency of people to withdraw into themselves.
Again I mentioned that before and I'm going to devote a lecture to it in the future, but
for right now let's just keep that in mind.
There's a tendency for people to withdraw because in the public square they're all treated
equally and we all at some level of our being like to be treated a little bit special.
We like to say either we're entitled to it because we've done certain things in our lives,
you know, I'm an old guy, I've been teaching for 35 years, every now and then I get mad
at those young whippersnapper professors who are my colleagues and who have equal votes
in the college senate, what in the hell do they know, they haven't been around very long.
You know we all know that I deserve some sort of special treatment, if they get to speak
for one minute I should be able to speak for two.
We all know that desire and yet equality of conditions works against that.
And so he says newspapers become even more important because even in a sense when you
are physically not in the presence of people with whom you agree, with whom you want to
work and with whom you should work, you keep it formed.
You have a kind of dialogue through newspaper or again I want to use the term newsletter.
He says also without newspapers there's very little chance for common action.
Because the people you're going to join with aren't necessarily like they might be in the
pothole issue of local government, they're not necessarily your next door neighbors.
They live in the other side of town or in the next town over or out in the farm or in
a different suburb or whatever it might be.
And therefore for them to act together effectively they need what we would perhaps call today
a kind of network and it's newspapers, newsletters that create that network that allows from time
to time for meetings and allows for common action.
Associations are also hard to create simply because there is a kind of physical isolation.
You don't see your fellow Rotarians every day.
You don't see the other people in the altar guild every day and that's because you're
busy they're busy.
That was true in 1831.
It's certainly true at the beginning of the 21st century and therefore there needs to
be some way of communicating and again newsletters or newspapers are a part of that.
Of course the other obvious thing to say is that in a newspaper you communicate with
a lot of people simultaneously.
It's one thing to have a discussion on the street.
It's another thing to even go to a town meeting and to stand up and get your two minutes in
about the new water system or whatever.
But when you write a letter to the editor even of a very small local weekly paper like
the Livingston County News what our research shows at the Livingston County News is first
of all we know it's circulation not everybody reads every word.
We know that several thousand people buy the newspaper every week.
We also know that some fairly high percentage of them go through it twice.
And of course the three thousand people to buy it some of those newspapers sit where several
family members read it or sit in a barbershop or whatever it might be.
I can speak with many more people simultaneously in a newspaper than I can in any kind of town
square situation whether it's just informally on the street or whether it's formally at
some sort of government meeting.
And after having thought about both the newspapers and the newsletters as part of the press Tocqueville
draws some rather interesting conclusions.
Democracy says do not just guarantee freedom.
They maintain civilization.
They're not something that boosts democracy a little bit or make it a little bit better.
They're vital and they maintain civilization because they help us stay connected in a world
where sometimes that's physically hard and in a world where sometimes it's psychologically
hard because we withdraw into our own little groups because again we like feeling special.
Newspapers are vital.
They're not icing on the cake.
They're not things that Jimmy democracy up a little bit.
They are vital.
They maintain civilization.
And therefore he says as associations multiply there are going to be more organizations rather
than fewer as the nation gets bigger and more complex and recognizing that there are more
important issues to deal with the number of newspapers needs to multiply.
Again on the one hand the multiplication of newspapers lessens the power of the press
to sort of stifle and dominate.
On the other hand the multiplication means that more people hear more voices more often
even when they are physically not out in public.
A second point he makes is that if administrative centralization occurs remember how much he's
opposed to this.
If administrative centralization occurs if everything the government does is run from
the top and is done uniformly all the way down the number of newspapers will diminish
because there isn't simply as much to talk about the local level.
If every detail of how a school is run is done in Albany or Washington if you're a New
Yorker then that's going to damage the freedom of the press because newspapers will not talk
about education and maybe newspapers will disappear and there's certainly not going
to be a new newsletter of concerned citizens about education because they have no local
opportunity to fix things to make things better for their children or their communities.
And so centralization of administration a bad thing leads to among other bad things the
diminishing of the number of newspapers.
On the other hand local administration even of federal and state policies and laws will
multiply the number of newspapers and that's a good thing for the reasons I've suggested.
And so if in fact New York state mandates a certain set of rules for schools but allows
individual school boards to apply those in ways that are appropriate to that community
serving that group of people then you will have education debated in the newspapers.
You will have letter to the editor.
Somebody will form a concerned citizens for education in Geneseo New York and somebody
will publish a newsletter about that therefore multiplying the press.
So Tocqueville feels very strongly about this because Tocqueville understands that for all
the freedom and all the valuable practices of democracy in the United States they don't
necessarily last forever.
Once you've got it established it doesn't mean it's there for all time.
Democracy have to be vigilant.
Tocqueville says one of the things Newspapers gives you the opportunity to do is to appeal
far beyond your own local voice.
You can appeal he says even to the nation even to all humanity if there are plenty of
newspapers.
Let me read you a very interesting passage.
It comes right from the end of the second volume of Democracy in America.
In our day a citizen who is oppressed has therefore only one means of defending himself.
It is to address the nation as a whole that nation here might refer simply to a larger
area than his local community.
It might mean a state not literally just the United States as a whole.
And if it the nation is deaf to him the human race that is to say in a newspaper you can
appeal to all human beings on the ground of some basic humanity that you all share.
He has only one means of doing it that is to say appealing to the nation or humanity
which is the press.
The freedom of the press is infinitely more precious in democratic nations than in all
others.
It alone cures most of the ills that equality can produce.
You take any good thing like equality of conditions or freedom of the press for that matter.
And Tocqueville says inevitably there can be some negative as well as positive results
from practicing it.
There are no perfect schemes where every result of some action is positive.
We all see that in individual legislation.
You pass a law and it fixes a lot of things but it makes a couple things a little bit
worse.
They need another law and it will do the same thing.
We should have learned that process.
Well Tocqueville says it's true about democracy, it's true about equality of conditions, it's
true with everything.
And so freedom of the press is the best cure for the ills of equality of conditions.
The press is the democratic instrument of freedom par excellence.
Tocqueville says that's a long way from his attitude when he came to the United States.
That's a pretty long way from some of his attitudes in volume one of democracy in America
where basically he saw the role of the press as preventing evils rather than moving things
forward positively.
Now the press is the democratic institution of freedom par excellence.
Now obviously this is an area in which Tocqueville changes mind a lot both in America and after
he got home and reflected more on it.
And I want to look at, as I promised you at the beginning of this lecture, a little bit
of how he came to change his mind.
In July of 1831, Tocqueville stayed for three days in Cannondale, New York, in upstate New
York, western New York and the Finger Lakes area with John Canfield Spencer.
Spencer already had had a distinguished career as a lawyer, as a member of Congress and a
member of the New York state legislature.
He would later on become a cabinet officer holding two posts in the Tyler administration,
Secretary of War, Secretary of the Treasury and was later nominated, although not confirmed,
to be a Supreme Court justice.
Spencer was the one who in 1838 and 1840 oversaw the publication of the first English translation
of Tocqueville in the United States.
The translation had been done in England.
We know from the letters and from the Journal of Tocqueville that both Tocqueville and Beaumont
really respected Tocqueville.
After he'd been to New York City, after he'd been to Albany, after he'd been to Auburn,
he writes home Tocqueville does and says it's the smartest guy we've met yet in America.
So smart that like he did with several other people, again, he recorded verbatim things
they talked about.
It reads like a platonic dialogue or a play script where it's got who said what and exactly
what those words are.
And since we have that, it exists, it's been published, it's been translated into English,
we can take a look at just one little hunk of it to illustrate.
Remember that there are really no footnotes of this sort in democracy in America.
We can't see that Tocqueville writes, here's some stuff about freedom of the press.
And footnote one came from conversation with John C. Spencer.
He simply doesn't do that.
In fact, Spencer's name is not mentioned in democracy in America.
If you just had that book, you'd never know that they even met or talked, let alone that
that talk was seminal on this and a couple other topics.
Let me suggest, first of all, three areas where Spencer influenced Tocqueville on this
issue.
One, Spencer explained that journalists were relatively unimportant in the United States
compared to in France.
Secondly, there's no city that dominates the press in the United States like Paris did
in France.
And third, well, third, I just want to read you one piece of this dialogue.
Question.
This is Alexis to Tocqueville speaking.
What in your view is the way to diminish the power of the press?
Answer.
These are the words of John C. Spencer.
I am completely convinced that the most effective way is to increase the number of newspapers
as much as possible and not to prosecute them except in extreme cases.
Their power gets less as their number gets more, a fact which experience has incontrovertibly
proved to us.
I have heard it said that in France, there were only two or three newspapers that carried
weight.
I should suppose that in that situation, the press is an agent of destruction.
Besides, I think your social situation will always make the action of the press more to
be feared with you than with us.
Paris will always exercise immense influence over the rest of the kingdom.
With us, there are an immense number of factors dividing our interests.
So first of all, here's this guy out on sort of the frontier, not quite, but sort of the
semi frontier.
He's well educated, he's smart, he knows about France.
And he said, let's talk about this.
And notice that I read something that almost exactly parallels the passage of Tocqueville
I read you, where Tocqueville in fact said, it's a part of American political science
to believe such and such things about the press.
It's all taken directly from that conversation with John C. Spencer.
This is a young man who asked good questions, who listened, who wrote down the answers,
who pondered them, who incorporated them into his basic ideas, and then as he thought about
them more and more, as we've seen in the changes from Volume 1 and 2, he continued to think
and his thought continued to evolve.
