Lecture 12 Political Parties
I'm going to talk about political parties in America today as Tocqueville describes them.
There are some problems in doing this because first of all the two-party system as we call it today
that we have and has been in place for quite a while in the United States was not yet in place.
And so it was a much more we would say fluid situation in 1831 than it is today to talk about parties.
It's going to take perhaps even more work than usual to adapt what Tocqueville says to see if he can provide us with some good questions
and good insights into our modern system of political parties.
In fact, when Tocqueville was here in 1831, political parties in the modern American sense were just beginning to form.
The Federalist and the Anti-Federalist, and I'll talk about them quite a bit because Tocqueville knows about them and comments about them.
Those are gone. That era is over with.
And yet, despite the fact that parties of the sort that we think of today were forming, the Whigs, for example, Tocqueville seems to have missed it.
It's important to say that because as careful as Tocqueville was in his observation, as thorough he was in his questioning,
there are just some things that were happening he didn't pick up on.
And one of them is forming the kinds of political parties that, again, we have today these large national parties that are fairly broad in their appeal and so on.
So I do want to note that. Let's start with a little bit of background.
Political parties are not mentioned in the Constitution.
There is no role in the Constitution for political parties.
We know how the electoral college works. We know how direct election works because at least elements of those things are described in the Constitution.
And yet, our forefathers are not describing or creating an electoral system based around political parties.
That's important to remember.
A second important thing to remember is the traditional view of political parties going all the way back to ancient Athens.
Looking at writers like Dante, for example, from Florence in the 14th century, all the way through our own forefathers.
When they talk about party, they don't distinguish perhaps as we would between party and faction, and they are virtually unanimous in saying parties are a bad thing.
They are an evil.
Let me suggest a text that we ought to look at, and I will read to you from the Federalist Papers.
Number 10, this is James Madison, the father of the Constitution speaking.
Because in many ways he expresses a view that Tocqueville is very much influenced by, and in many ways he's being very traditional in what he says about parties.
Complaints are everywhere heard from our most considerate and virtuous citizens.
Equally the friends of public and private faith, and of public and personal liberty, that our governments are too unstable, that the public good is disregarded in the conflicts of rival parties,
and that measures are too often decided not according to the rules of justice and the rights of the minor party, but by the superior force of an interested and overbearing majority.
After all, for him a party or faction can be a majority.
Let me read one more paragraph in which he continues this discussion.
By a faction or party, I understand a number of citizens, whether amounting to a majority or minority of the whole, who are united and actuated by some common impulse of passion or of interest,
adverse to the rights of other citizens or to the permanent and aggregate interest of the communities.
Even when a faction or a party is a majority, it works for its own interest and not the common good.
Whether parties are small or whether parties are huge, they are an evil.
And again, we can find that in ancient Greek thought, we can find that in Dante, and we find it in James Madison.
Now, let me remind you a little bit of the immediate background, political background, to Tocqueville's arrival in America.
The 1824 and 1828 presidential elections, and Tocqueville met the winner and the loser of both of those elections, the same two guys, John Quincy Adams beats Andrew Jackson in 1824, Andrew Jackson beats John Quincy Adams in 1828.
They were incredibly bitter and divisive elections.
In fact, I was listening the other day to a CD that contains campaign songs, and I listened to the campaign song of John Quincy Adams, this great statesman whom Tocqueville admired.
It was literally, literally apocalyptic.
If Andrew Jackson is elected, the world's going to come to an end.
The world's going to come to an end.
I mean, these were very bitterly fought battles.
And so Tocqueville arrives at a time when a new kind of leader has arisen in America, Andrew Jackson, this popular leader with the masses, if you will.
And therefore, this is a political talk.
Remember, he's there in 1831 and the beginning of 1832.
1832 is in fact the year in which Andrew Jackson will be reelected.
Another thing that Tocqueville didn't note was that Martin Van Buren, who had been briefly secretary of state in the first Jackson administration, was the vice president under Andrew Jackson in a second term and then elected in 1836 to succeed Andrew Jackson.
Martin Van Buren was a new kind of political figure in America because unlike a George Washington or a Thomas Jefferson or whatever, Martin Van Buren had basically been what we would call a politician.
Since he was a young man.
He held and ran for a series of offices and really his profession was politics in a way that was not true of the earlier generation of leaders.
So there are some changes going on in America.
And even if Tocqueville didn't quite get all those changes, he did sense the bitterness, the divisiveness, and very often the pettiness that went with the kind of politics.
They were in place when he arrived from France in 1831.
Let me read you just a very brief one liner essentially of Tocqueville on political parties.
Parties, he writes, are an evil inherent in free governments, but they do not have the same characteristics and the same instincts at all times.
Now, what I want to suggest is a very important statement because what he says is I'm in that tradition.
I agree with these great authors of the past that basically parties are evil.
But let's at least say this.
There are parties and then there are parties.
Let's make some distinctions.
And he begins to make interesting distinctions and he talks about two categories of political party.
What he calls great parties.
And I'll define them more carefully later.
Great parties are parties based on, if you will, sort of serious, thoughtful philosophies.
And there are small parties which are based more on trying to gain power.
They're less philosophical, more power oriented.
And here are a couple of his early generalizations about these.
He says great parties, remember all parties are not good for him.
Great parties overturn societies because they replace one whole system of thought with another.
Small parties agitate within society.
Another generalization, great parties tear society apart.
You have these great knock down, drag out philosophical battles.
Small parties degrade society.
There's a certain kind of pettiness about them.
Now the reason I want to make these distinctions is because if we go back to a statement Tocqueville makes in the introduction to democracy in America.
He says we need right now a new political science because we live in a world that is altogether new.
We really have to reconfigure the way we examine and talk about and conceptualize politics and government.
It's a new ball game.
And the old categories, the old questions won't do.
Well, in a sense what we see here is Tocqueville exercising that idea.
This book contains a great deal of a new political science.
And one of the things he's doing is saying this.
Okay, I think very traditionally, this is part of the old political science, if you will, that parties are an inherent evil.
However, what I see is that of course we have parties.
We've had them in the past in America.
We have them now of a different sort in America.
So what I've got to do is not just say parties are evil.
Next category please.
Parties tend to be evil.
Now let's talk about what kinds of parties there are and what the particular challenges are and dangers are of each of those kinds of parties.
Let's not just pass on to the next topic and dismiss party with evil and go on.
Let's get down and look at this because in a free and democratic society we're going to have to deal with parties.
We don't have to like them.
We don't have to think they are positive, but we have to deal with them.
And so in a sense what we see here is Tocqueville, a guy who in some ways subscribes to a very traditional view of parties.
Also saying it's time to talk about them some more and in somewhat different terms that we have up to this time.
Now Tocqueville says, I know some history and therefore let me tell you, great parties once existed in America.
By this, by the way, he means the Federalist and the Anti-Federalist and I'll talk about them in a minute.
Great parties once existed in America.
Okay, here is his definition now.
A little bit more detail than I gave you before of great parties.
Great parties are primarily concerned about principle.
In a sense they have a coherent philosophy, a way of approaching government that presumably is different than other great parties.
Great parties, he says, deal primarily with generalities.
Great parties don't sit around issuing statements about every detail of policy.
They deal with generalities.
These are parties that annunciate principles rather than apply principles to great, great, detailed matters.
Third, great parties are interested in ideas.
Again, you can see how all these are compatible.
I'm sort of giving you his definition by pulling out different phrases so that we can sort of, you know, come at the center, the core of how he's defining this.
Great parties are idea parties and therefore great parties have real convictions.
They really stand for some principles, some values, some ideas.
That's what great parties are like.
Now he says, let me give you some definitions or some ways of talking about small parties.
Small parties are interested in consequences rather than principles.
Okay, it's not about great big broad ideas.
It is about practical results of things.
It's much more oriented toward the present, toward the immediate, toward the details.
And consequently, small parties are concerned with particulars and not with generalities.
And following from that, and a very important distinction from great parties,
small parties focus more on people than on ideas.
They get personalized.
They're not so much about philosophy as they are about individuals.
And we associate individual with parties.
And finally, he says, small parties are interested in victory more than conviction.
Or I suppose to put it another way, maybe a bit cynically, but to put it another way,
small parties will sort of manipulate ideas because what they want is electoral victory.
They want to win. Winning is job one for these small parties.
And therefore, they will compromise on their ideas, on their values.
So they become personal, they become particular, and they become about counting votes and gaining power.
So again, Tocqueville draws these distinctions.
He writes very critically about small parties.
He says, first of all, they are without political faith.
They really don't have a doctrine of philosophy, a core set of values behind them.
That they really are without any kind of faith that in a particular set of values.
Secondly, he says, think about this, they use violent language, small parties do, but they act timidly.
They make a lot of noise. They point a lot of fingers.
They have a lot of inflated rhetoric, but ultimately they're pretty timid.
They don't have bold ideas, they have timid ideas, because of course they're trying to win.
And you win by getting 50% plus one of the people to agree with you if there are two parties in an election.
And so therefore what you try to do is have a set of principles that you define that really don't offend anybody.
Or at least don't offend very many people, because you've got to build, perhaps we would say today, a coalition.
Another way of saying this, I think that Tocqueville has, it's very clever, he says,
small parties always become heated in a cool way.
And a wonderful line, always become heated in a cool way.
There's always steam coming out of their ears, and sometimes venom coming out of their mouths,
but ultimately it's all sort of calculated.
And ultimately when you get behind it all, as he said in the previous point I made, it's kind of timid.
That these are big, bombastic organizations, that talk loud, that gesture dramatically, and ultimately are pretty wimpy.
That's my word, not Tocqueville's.
I don't think wimpy had been invented in 1835 when he wrote this section that I'm drawing from today.
So it's a very interesting view.
You know, I always ask my students, okay, folks, we have Republicans and Democrats today.
Are they great parties by Tocqueville's definition?
Or are they small parties by Tocqueville's definition?
And I'm not talking about Republicans will vote once and Democrats will vote once.
I'm talking about the two parties together. Let's put them in a category.
Are they small parties or great parties?
And my students virtually always unanimously say they're small parties by Tocqueville's definition.
And when we discuss it, they will always cite, even if they're not particularly well-informed in politics,
places where the party says, hey, this is about winning.
I heard a story once about a campaign school.
Both parties conduct these for potential candidates for office.
And I heard that a guy put up his hand during the discussion and said,
well, the party here, I know basically in their platform stand for this and this and this,
but I'm against those things. Is that okay?
Can I go out and say that on the stump?
And the answer from the political operative that was running this school was go out and say anything you want.
Our goal is to win the election.
We want you to win the election because this was to a congressional seat,
because what we want is to have enough votes to elect our leader as the speaker
and control the committees and control the deliberation and control the agenda of the House.
We don't care what you believe.
This person was told.
So in some ways, that is a great definition of a small party.
And certainly each party continues to invoke its heroes,
whether it's the party of FDR or the party of Lincoln or whatever, again, personalizing the party.
Not so much about ideas as about people, as about tactics, as about victory.
It sort of speak loudly and carry a little stick would be a way perhaps that Tocqueville could characterize
sort of playing off that Teddy Roosevelt line with regard to foreign policy,
is the way that Tocqueville could characterize the small party.
And Tocqueville says when I was in America, 1831, only small parties existed,
not necessarily two, like we think of having two parties today, but only small parties existed in America.
Now he said, let me go back and review how different that is from the parties that existed
when the Constitution was put in place.
The Federalist were a great party because the philosophical principle with which they operated
was the restriction of popular power.
They feared in a sense too much, at least too much, direct democracy.
Of course, we know the Federalist helped to create the Constitution and the argument for its ratification,
and we have the indirect election of senators and so on.
This is the Federalist party, if you will.
They were in the minority at the beginning of America's history under the Constitution,
Tocqueville says, but they had almost all the greatest heroes of the Revolution,
and therefore they were able to hold power in the earliest years of America's constitutional republic
established in 1787 with the signing and subsequent ratification of the Constitution,
and Tocqueville says this is a good thing because Tocqueville recognizes there are some dangers to a kind of unregulated democracy.
There are some problems.
It's good that you have one house in the U.S. Congress indirectly elected and one house directly elected.
Tocqueville sees those kinds of democratic safeguards as good because they help at least to mitigate some of the instability of democracy.
Thank goodness, Tocqueville says, at the beginning, in the very earliest years in which the Constitution was put into place
and all the practical details began to be worked out and how you actually run the country,
it's a good thing, he said, that the Federalists had the upper hand.
But he said in 1800, with the election of Thomas Jefferson, the so-called Republicans,
who were much more in favor of the extension of power directly to the people they took over,
and they too had a philosophical position.
In a sense, the cure for the ills of democracy was to some extent more democracy.
And so we had these two philosophical parties and they were the parties that were operating in the early years of the Republic.
Now, Tocqueville then goes on to say, you know, it sounds like this could have been a real bad thing.
You've got this big clash between these two parties.
But he said, first of all, the parties did agree on the most essential things.
And secondly, neither one was out to destroy the other.
And so this great party, this sort of two great parties system that existed briefly in America
with Washington and Adams and Jefferson and so on, really was pretty healthy.
Again, what he's saying is parties may ultimately be a kind of intrinsic evil,
but these great parties made some real contribution to the shaping of America.
And they didn't try to destroy each other.
They weren't petty. They stood on real principles.
Now he says, I look around and what I see is all these small parties, not just two, but several.
For example, John C. Spencer, whom I've mentioned several times, was in fact, although later on a wig,
they sort of flirted with this anti-Masonic party that was developing at the time Tocqueville was here.
So there were a number of small parties and Tocqueville looks at them and says they threaten the nation.
Someone to extend public authority, someone to shrink it.
You've got just all kinds of ideas.
Now it's not bad to have a party that wants to shrink the role of the government or a party that wants to expand the role of the government.
But he said we don't have any parties committed to those principles because they will compromise.
They will wheel and deal in those principles in order to get elected.
So we don't have great parties.
If we have great parties and that's the split between those who want to expand the role of government and those who want to constrict it,
no problem or at least relatively minor problem because that would be sort of the next generation of the federalist and the anti-federalist.
But that's not it.
These parties, although you hear the mouth of these sort of philosophical principles, don't stand on them.
They'll wheel and deal.
They'll compromise because what they're interested in ultimately is winning elections.
And Tocqueville says, you know, on the surface, this surprises me.
What would be the conditions where I would expect there to be a lot of small parties?
Okay.
Number one, religious hatred, he said, would create small parties.
But there really is very little, no, he says, religious hatred in America.
There really isn't any.
So, you know, that's not a cause of the small parties.
Secondly, he said, you might expect class hatred to create small parties.
You know, pitting this social group against that social group where each one is trying to win and beat up the other one.
There really isn't class hatred in America, Tocqueville says.
Then the third reason that you might get a lot of small parties is that there's a lot of public misery.
If you've got a lot of unemployment or agriculture is failing or whatever it might be, you might expect parties that grow up around those particular constituencies
and that they're going to battle in very mean spirited and partisan ways in order to get power, to fix the piece of the pie that they think is not doing very well
and to fix things that harm them directly.
But there really are no big public miseries in America.
So I think to some extent, Tocqueville is puzzled by why are there all these minor parties because there really aren't a lot of super big problem or obvious groups that are going to fight like hell to get power.
So I think Tocqueville doesn't really have a particularly good explanation for why there are so many small parties in America.
He might have expected it to be different.
He does look at one particular issue that was perhaps the biggest issue that was debated during the time that Tocqueville was in America.
And that was the position of the National Bank of the United States because there were many people for it and President Jackson was against it.
As Tocqueville sees it, the enlightened class generally favored the bank.
On the other hand, those who supported President Jackson opposed the bank.
And he said, let me just study this one a little bit and to see how parties, little parties, could form around this issue.
Why was this such a big deal?
Why were Jackson and his followers people that you could see as creating, in a sense, a small party?
Again, small doesn't mean size.
Small means that Tocquevillian definition of small.
First of all, Tocqueville says, the Bank of the United States had an independent existence.
It was set up that way by Congress and the people at least directly couldn't do anything about it.
That is to say it had a certain kind of quasi-independence where electing a different person to represent you in Congress
or perhaps even electing a different president wouldn't necessarily change the Bank of the United States.
Now he says, having noted that, what we find is there were a lot of people who wanted to see if they could shake the bank,
like they could shake other things.
In other words, this bank issue became a test of, are the people sovereign?
Or does our government contain something that it created that we can't get to?
We're going to bring the bank down, not so much because the bank's a bad idea.
We're going to bring it down to prove we can.
To prove that we, the people, are in charge.
And so it became not about an issue.
It wasn't about finance or economic policy, this battle over the bank.
It was a battle of politics.
It was, we're going to bring it down to see if we can do it.
Now that wasn't necessarily everybody's position.
But as Tocqueville saw it, that was the position of those who so vehemently opposed the Bank of the United States.
That this particular issue spun off a small party.
People who basically said, winning is what this is all about.
That doesn't even matter if the bank's really okay or really not okay.
It's winning this fight because this fight proves something about who we are.
It's a very interesting analysis he has.
Let me take up briefly a couple more points that I think are related to political parties and political factions in the United States.
One of the things Tocqueville noted is that the wealthiest citizens are almost not at all involved directly in political affairs in party identification.
Because wealth is a cause of disfavor.
A lot of common people don't want to vote for the richest people to represent them.
And therefore wealth is an obstacle to political power.
Now I think in one sense what Tocqueville is saying is, if you take out the wealthy who are also generally speaking well educated from the political system,
you're more likely to have small parties, bitter fighting, anger.
Again, speak loudly but act timidly.
So that Tocqueville I think is not happy with the idea that the wealthy have by and large to have dropped out or have been forced to drop out of politics.
A second point about political parties.
How do political parties operate?
In a day by day basis, how are they made effective?
Well, one answer to go back to something I talked about in the previous lecture is newspapers.
Again, my town, Geneseo, New York had a Livingston Republican and a Livingston Democrat at the beginning of the 20th century.
And therefore you had party organs that were either newspapers like that or newsletters.
The second is a lot of associations were created.
As we know today there are young Democrats and young Republicans and women's Democrats organization and gay Republican organization and blue dog Democrats
and all these other groups so that there were associations formed within these parties that strengthened the parties.
And so free association and the existence of newspapers are important for the functioning of political parties.
We've talked about newspapers and we're going to talk a great deal about political associations as fundamental to democracy, although also fundamental to parties which are a kind of necessary evil.
