These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by the teaching company.
These lectures are titled, Tocqueville and the American Experiment, Part 2.
Chapter 13, The Problem of the Tyranny of the Majority.
Democracy is government by the majority.
After all, presumably we would rather be governed by the majority than the minority.
And democracy is government by the majority.
However, having said that, Tocqueville says we need to understand exactly what that means
and what some of the implications are.
For example, he says really ultimately, not immediately like in a direct democracy such
as Athens, but ultimately the power of the majority is absolute.
And he says, let's go to the next stage, absolute power is always dangerous.
Omnipotence, to use his word, is dangerous.
And so whether that omnipotence lay in one person or in the majority, any entity that
has absolute power has the possibility of the abuse of that power without any real checks
on it.
And so Tocqueville worries about a great deal, this idea of the possibility of the tyranny
of the majority.
The idea, in a sense, is not original with Tocqueville.
It's certainly mentioned in the Federalist Papers, for example, which Tocqueville read
before he wrote Democracy in America.
Nevertheless, the length of the treatment and the thoughtful treatment and the number of
context in which he gives us a treatment of the idea of the tyranny of the majority
makes this not only an important book because of that issue alone, but in fact is one of
the reasons for the greatness of this book.
He really does explore what we might think of as, if not the downside, at least the dangers
of a majoritarian form of government.
He writes this, I regarded as impious and detestable the maxim that in matters of government,
the majority of a people has the right to do everything.
And nonetheless, I place the origin of all powers in the will of the majority.
Am I in contradiction with myself?
That's a very good question.
On the one hand, the majority can't just do anything, at least morally can't just do
anything.
On the other hand, the very foundational principle of democracy is a kind of majoritarian rule.
Can we have it both ways?
Can both of those things be true at the same time?
Can democracy be a good and just form of government given the fact that some entity is omnipotent
within that system of government?
So well, let's start with the most dangerous parts in a sense.
He says of all the parts of government, the legislature obeys the majority most willingly.
We have seen, after all, we all know that in our constitution, the president is indirectly
elected through the medium of the electoral college.
All federal judges are appointed.
And so we begin by looking at the legislature.
And of course, at the federal level, that means we look at the House of Representatives
because all 435 members as there are today, as we know, are elected every two years by
direct vote.
And of course, since the early part of the 20th century, senators are elected, although
to six-year terms, where they have more freedom from the majority sort of looking down on
them every second.
But we know that those six-year terms are, of course, by direct election.
I remember when I was running for the House and listening to other people, both members
and other candidates talking about the problems of running for election of the House of Representatives,
one of the things that all the veterans sort of sat around saying is, boy, we really envy
those senators.
Because the day after their election, they don't have to go to work on reelection.
And they would also say, you know, a senator can cast an unpopular vote that he or she
believes is right in the first or second years of a six-year term.
And by the time they're up for reelection, everybody's forgotten it.
It's likely to have been a non-issue by the time of their reelection.
But of course, the House is directly responsible to the people because of the short terms of
office.
So the legislature is the particular place to look for fear that the tyranny of the majority
will be operating.
And here, although Tocqueville doesn't talk a great deal about it, he turns especially
to look at state legislatures.
Because unlike the federal legislature, there is no Senate elected by a different principle,
both houses are directly elected in state legislatures, and both houses are elected for
short terms.
And so Tocqueville especially fears that one of the guards against the tyranny of the majority
in the federal system isn't there in state legislatures.
In fact, Tocqueville points out that in some states, I mentioned this before, including
my own state, New York, judges are elected, sometimes even in partisan elections rather
than nonpartisan elections.
Again, they are in New York today.
Tocqueville thinks this is a very bad idea because an independent judiciary is a check
on the majority.
But if judges are elected and have to campaign for office and run against opponents in the
same kind of electoral process as legislators, that is going to make them more immediately
beholden to the majority, and that takes away one of the checks on the tyranny of the
majority as Tocqueville understands it.
Tocqueville says that in some ways a premise of democracy is that many men united in their
opinion have more enlightenment and wisdom than any one man or any small group of men.
Tocqueville calls this taking the principle of equality.
The equality of conditions is principle number one of democracy for Tocqueville and applying
that to the intellects.
It is a sort of natural extension of the idea of the equality of conditions, that if everybody
is equal in mind from a certain perspective, then what you want to do is see what the most
minds agree on and that that is indeed the way for a government to act.
In fact, Tocqueville makes this interesting comparison.
He says in France before the French Revolution, in what we sometimes call the age of absolutism,
it was regarded as simply a basic fact that the king cannot fail.
In America, he says, it is regarded as a constant that the majority cannot fail.
In some ways, the majority is to a democracy what the king was to the pre-revolutionary
French monarchy.
So again, if you think about that, because I'm sure in school we've all learned about
Louis XIV and Versailles and running everything, if we think about that, what we would probably
assume is there's nothing even remotely like that in a democracy because what we would
probably say is, well, we have a chief executive too, we have a president, but hey, presidents
are in a system of checks and balances, they're elected, and they have four-year terms so
there can be no comparison even between a very strong president and a Louis XIV of France.
Well, Tocqueville would agree with that, but what Tocqueville would say is, you're doing
the analogy wrong.
The analogy is not between the king of France and the U.S. president, it's between the king
of France and the majority.
And again, he goes back to this principle, if the majority is omnipotent, then there's
bound to be a problem, there is certainly the potential for a problem.
One of the things he says about the majority, and again, this is hardly new in Tocqueville,
is that the majority leads to instability.
That is to say, laws, he says, have a shorter duration in the United States than any place
else on earth that I know of.
We are constantly changing our laws.
And again, I always remember that because when you go to your lawyer's office to update
your will or whatever, at least in my lawyer's office, I sit down and he's just always surrounded
by statutes.
And I notice one day that not every shelf is full.
That is to say, he knows there are a lot more volumes coming every year.
Federal legislation, state legislation, and so on.
So laws are not constant.
And Tocqueville thinks there's a downside to that.
If laws are not constant, A, people have the possibility of not knowing the law, or B,
not respecting it very much because, hey, it may not be here tomorrow.
We even know, in fact, that there are certain laws that have been passed in Congress or
in state legislatures that have a sunset date.
We passed this law, and it's going to be this way, but only for so many years unless the
legislature renews it, otherwise it will automatically run out.
We've done this in the United States with tax cuts.
We've done this in the United States with gun control legislation and so on.
And so Tocqueville worries about the instability that comes as part of a majoritarian society
because the majority changes its mind fairly often.
We all know that from public opinion polls.
And after all, the majority is ultimately absolute in America.
Tocqueville also has looked at a lot of individual state governments.
He doesn't talk a great deal about it, but he notes that almost all the state governments
have changed their constitution in some cases quite a bit.
Now, the federal constitution, when Tocqueville came here, had only been amended, well, really
three times.
The first 10 amendments together as a clump, and then he was here after the 11th and 12th
became part of the constitution.
But he notes that states are somewhat more fickle and that therefore once again, even
in what's sometimes called the supreme law of the land, we have more changes than Tocqueville
probably thinks are a good thing.
He says, have you just noticed the pace of the legislature?
The action of the legislatures never stops.
We know now, for example, there are still some states in the union where the state legislature
meets for a fairly short term, sometimes even every other year.
But in a lot of states, and again, I'll use my own New York as an example, state legislatures
are paid essentially a full-time salary and they are in session, although with it seems
long recesses, they're in session all year long.
And so Tocqueville fears this situation where legislatures sort of in a sense have to justify
their being there, justify their being paid, and proclaim their importance in the governance
by continuing to meet and continuing to change the laws, and Tocqueville worries about that.
I want to give one example, I've mentioned it briefly, but I want to spend a little bit
more time with it now in this context, and that is what Tocqueville observes about the
legislation involving prison reform in America.
This is a way he describes it, remember he's in the United States to study prison, so this
is something he pays especially close attention to.
He says the idea and the zeal for prison reform in the United States arose outside government.
It arose from groups of individuals who said, hey, prisoners are being treated badly, or
the social consequences of the prison system aren't very good, we want to change the prison
system, we have some better ideas.
And gradually these individuals built the majority to agree with them, and so the legislature
builds new prisons, in the cases that Tocqueville specifically talks about, penitentiaries in
New York and Pennsylvania.
In other words, the majority is absolute once the majority is on board with prison reform,
then by golly the state legislatures decree this, they appropriate the money, and they
build these prisons.
The problem is, and this is a problem when majorities are absolute, knowing that majorities
can be fickle, the problem is that overall the prison system doesn't get a lot better
real quickly.
For one thing, you build one or two penitentiaries in a big state, and you're only dealing
with a small percentage of inmates.
And secondly, it takes a long time before you see, we might say today in modern terms,
the recidivism rate fall.
That's not going to happen six months or a year after you build a new penitentiary.
Well, what happens?
In this zeal for building these new prisons, people are sort of clamoring to their state
legislators, build this new kind of prison because it's a better kind of prison, the
money that's appropriated for prisons easily can be diverted mostly to these new prisons,
leaving most of the prisoners in old prisons, which are worse off than before.
Whether it is in today's thought security, or food, or education, or whatever it is,
you cut here, here, here, here, and here in order to build a kind of model prison over
there.
And the majority is much more interested in that new model prison, that sexy new place,
if you will, than it is in simply what's happening in all the other now increasingly
backwater prisons.
Okay?
Now what happens next?
After a while, especially since there are no new dramatic results, the majority loses
interest in prison reform.
They take up something else.
All of a sudden, that's not what candidates you're talking about at the time of the election.
That's not what people are demanding of their state assemblymen and women, or their state
senators and so on.
And so the sort of special focus and attention on the penitentiaries disappears because other
things now take up the public fancy.
Final result.
Okay, final result, the prison system as a whole is perhaps no better than it was before
all this hoopla began, and it might be worse because if there are still a couple model
prisons like in New York with Auburn and Sing Sing, there are many more prisons with many
more prisoners that are even worse breeding grounds of criminals than they were before
because they've in a sense been ignored and their sort of standard budgets have perhaps
been cut so you can invest your money in prisons.
In New York a few years ago, we had a big movement toward building shock camps as a
kind of prison.
One at least, Tocqueville would say, should ask, as you build a couple of shock camps,
which may very well be a good idea, have you ultimately not improved the prison system
because you've allowed other prisons to get worse in the meantime because your resources
and your energy and your creativity go into these specific new prisons?
A good question that Tocqueville would raise and one that's emblematic of the problem of
the omnipotence of the majority, he says.
Now there are even greater problems with majoritarian government.
The majority often has interests in conflict with those of the minority.
Now of course here we're not talking about racial minority, any minority, whether that
minority is people who own guns or people who do this or people that do that, the danger
Tocqueville says is that since the majority, almost by definition, is in some ways against
the principles of the minority, otherwise they'd all be together and there wouldn't
be a majority and a minority, and the majority has all the power, minorities can easily be
treated very badly in a democracy.
And I've already mentioned one of the ways in which this can happen.
In talking about free speech, remember what Tocqueville says, when the majority is doubtful,
there is freedom to speak.
When the majority irrevocably pronounces, silence often follows.
And if you recall this point, the majority, he says, draws a circle outside which people
are penalized, not legally, but socially for speaking.
And so if the majority is in the process of forming an opinion, it's great, because
all the discussions take place, all the debates, all the attempts to persuade.
But once the majority is settled on something, that doesn't mean, for example, one particular
kind of social security cure or one particular kind of health care.
But let's say that the majority of Americans become convinced, really without any doubt,
that a certain kind of policy, let's say universal health care, is in fact what they want, then
what's going to happen to people who say government has no business in the health care industry?
Government ought to leave that to individuals, aren't those voices going to be in a sense
outside the circle at some time?
And Tocqueville thinks that's not a good thing for democracy.
But that would be an illustration of, again, this building a circle around free speech
once the majority has spoken.
Let me read you a passage that dramatizes how serious the problem is of the potential
for the tyranny of the majority in America.
The omnipotence of the majority, Tocqueville writes, appears to me such a great peril for
the American republics that the dangerous means used to limit it seem to me even a good.
That the danger to democracy of the tyranny of the majority is so great that governments
are going to have to employ even dangerous means to try to make sure that that omnipotence
of the majority doesn't become tyrannical, doesn't take away from freedom.
Now Tocqueville offers some specific, we might say, political thoughts.
Let me read you another passage where he describes the kind of government that he thinks is open
and democratic and yet is concerned with this problem of the tyranny of the majority.
On the contrary, a legislative body composed in such a manner that it represents the majority
without necessarily being the slave of its passions, an executive power with the force
that is its own and a judicial power independent of the other two powers.
You will still have democratic government, but there will be almost no more chance of
tyranny.
There needs to be in the constitution safeguards because there are ways of building institutions
that keep majoritarian rule that mitigate the danger of that majoritarian rule becoming
tyrannical.
The executive needs to be a force on its own.
The legislatures need to be representative of the majority but not slave to the majority
and the judiciary must be independent.
Well, as Tocqueville looks at the U.S. Constitution, he says, boy, these guys did a good job in
creating a federal constitution where we have, as we know, the separation of powers, where
we do have an independent judiciary, where we do have in the Senate a body not chosen
directly by citizens and chosen for long terms.
So as Tocqueville looks at the federal constitution, what he suggests is the folks who wrote it
understood this problem and they addressed it and, generally speaking, they addressed
it very, very well.
The American Constitution provides a significant number of elements for each of these, you
know, to make happen, each of these guards against the tyranny of the majority.
He's, of course, not so sure about states because, as I mentioned before, some states
elect judicial officials and all states have both houses of their legislatures elected by
the same principle, not two different principles like the U.S. Congress.
But Tocqueville, even recognizing the brilliance of the U.S. Constitution on this matter, nevertheless
remains afraid about the possibility of the tyranny of the majority.
If freedom is lost in America, he says, it will be because the majority has driven the
minority to using physical force.
That if you are in a minority, you've got to be able to speak, and there's a tendency
to draw a circle, and you've got to be able to have access to the government, and you've
got to have some influence even if you don't prevail.
We know, for example, how some European constitutions work, where any party, let's say, that gets
five percent of the vote nationally in parliamentary elections will be given some sort of proportional
representation in the state legislatures, or the national legislature rather, so that
you will find in many places in Germany and Italy and whatever that here is a party that
got five percent, six percent of the vote, it didn't win a majority in any single jurisdiction
where it ran, and yet it gets a seat at the table.
That would be, I think, an example of Tocqueville saying, here's another kind of guard against
the tyranny of the majority.
You give even fairly small political minorities a seat at the table and some sort of representation
so that their views are heard in the legislative assembly and so on.
Now, Tocqueville talks about ways beyond simply constitutional arrangements in which the tyranny
of the majority or its danger can be mitigated.
Number one, he says, if America and other democracies do not have administrative centralization,
here any of the majority is less dangerous.
In other words, remember we've seen more than once already in this course that Tocqueville
talks about not centralization of authority being a problem, but centralization of administration,
and part of that means making everything exactly the same everywhere.
Well, of course, today we talk about states as laboratories of democracy.
We can remember governors of various states saying to the federal government, hey, give
us a waiver on this provision and let us experiment with another way of reaching the same goal.
Let us try to do welfare reform differently than all the rules you're prescribed.
Give us a waiver, let us experiment, maybe it'll work, and then maybe this can become
a model for the federal government to adopt.
We've seen those kinds of experiments happen, and we sometimes, again, call our states,
for democracy.
I think that Tocqueville appreciates this notion, let centralization remain local.
More different things are tried, more different views are heard, because the majority over
here may be sort of silent since they're a small minority over here.
If you allow decentralized administration in places, groups that are overall minority
groups may in fact be able to express and live out some of the things they're proposing
because in a particular area, they may in fact be the majority.
Secondly, in terms of what mitigates the tyranny of the majority, the influence of lawyers
is important, he says, because lawyers have a democratic spirit.
Remember, they may be in some ways forming a certain kind of aristocracy, but ultimately
it says lawyers are themselves, after all, born in equality of conditions, and they understand
equality of conditions, they understand how things work, so it's good that lawyers are
prominent in a democracy because he says they have a democratic spirit.
Third, and this is, I guess, a constitutional principle, but I want to mention it here,
it is important that the judiciary be able to declare laws unconstitutional.
Again, as I've suggested, that's not stated in those words in the Constitution, although
that's the way the Constitution has been interpreted since 1803 with a handing down of Marbury
versus Madison.
This is important, Tocqueville says, because after all, there may be laws that are enacted
by a majority that really do squelch the freedom of a minority, that really do discriminate
against, take away equality of conditions from some minority group.
Having a court that can say that doesn't fit with our Constitution, the Constitution's
a supreme law of the land, and therefore this law is invalid, is an important check,
he says, against the tyranny of the majority.
He also says the jury system is an important check against the tyranny of the majority
because, as we've seen in an earlier lecture, the jury system is an educational system.
It educates people about their rights.
When you've been in a courtroom as a juror and had to pay attention and watched every
part of the trial from beginning to end and listened to the lawyers and received instructions
from the judges of what you can and cannot do as a juror, that is an important school
where people learn their rights in a way perhaps you don't learn them by memorizing them in
school and therefore the jury system also mitigates the danger of the tyranny of the
majority.
Bill then says, perhaps the number one buttress against the majority becoming tyrannical is
the creation of free and voluntary associations, political associations and civic associations.
I'm not going to say much more about them right now because those are in fact the subject
of the next two lectures.
And just in the very briefest sense, it's important for people to be able to associate
and to assemble.
It's not only important that they have those rights, it's important that citizens exercise
those rights because individuals coming together to form a group by definition a minority.
There's not any organization in America today to which the majority belong.
These organizations can in fact find very effective ways to unite their members around
a cause or an issue.
They do good things for the community and ultimately they don't allow the majority to
push them around.
Many of these groups as we'll see in the next two lectures are in fact about very consciously
a minority saying we're not going to let the majority push us around, we're going to put
our pressure on Congress or whatever it might be so the majority can't just shove things
down our throats.
I want to turn briefly to one last issue.
Tocqueville says the majority is not only omnipotent in political matters, it's to a
great extent omnipotent in cultural and social matters as well.
He says for example there's almost an unlimited trust in public opinion in America.
Right well we see the omniscience so it's often proclaimed in the United States of public
opinion polls for example and God knows Americans love public opinion polls I think more than
any other people in the world we sort of live on public opinion polls and the names of the
people who have those polls have become standard English words whether it's the Gallup poll
or the Zogby poll or whatever we know all those folks now.
He says the majority furnishes society with many ready-made opinions.
What am I supposed to think about something?
In America perhaps I will almost automatically say well what do most people think?
I guess that's what I should think because it's carrying that political habit of the
omnipotence of the majority into a non-political realm.
Finally he says the majority even decides the law of languages.
There's no academy that decides what English usage is proper or what words should be included
in the dictionary or whatever largely the way English language develops in the United
States is a matter for the majority to decide so that even in these non-political areas these
cultural and social areas there is the omnipotence of the majority.
And again let's go back to the basic premise that we began with whenever there's omnipotence
of any sort and any factor and any phase of human life there is a danger that that omnipotence
will be misused.
