Lecture 14 Political Associations
In the last lecture, I left you with the promise that I now want to fulfill in this and the succeeding lecture.
That is, to talk about the number one safeguard to the tyranny of the majority.
That is to say, free associations.
And in doing that, I want to divide things up, as Tocqueville does, into two kinds of associations.
Political associations and civil associations.
To make a real simple distinction for right now, all this will become, I think, obvious later on.
A political association has some sort of primary agenda to influence the government and legislation.
You want gun control laws, or you don't want gun control laws.
You want universal health care, or you don't want universal health care.
That it isn't necessarily always advocating for.
It can sometimes be advocating against certain things, but these are political associations.
Civil association, the Kiwanis Club, the Alter Guild at the church, the Humane Society, the I Love Marigolds League, or whatever it might be.
Those are civil associations.
Now, it might on the surface seem obvious why that first kind of association is so important to democracy in general,
and in particular to mitigating the possibility of the tyranny of the majority.
And that's what I'm going to focus on in this lecture.
But as we'll see in the next lecture, Tocqueville argues that it's equally important that these civic associations exist.
And I think he will make a good case for that.
Well, what do you need for free associations?
What are the premises?
What are the foundational principles on which these are built?
First of all, people need to have freedom of association.
You have to be guaranteed that people can associate with anybody they want to associate with.
Secondly, they need the freedom to assemble, because although, as we've already mentioned in the lecture on the freedom of the press,
they will have newsletters and other ways of communicating with one another.
First and foremost, they must be able to assemble, to be in the same room,
to work together, to plan together, to talk together, to see each other face to face, to get to know each other personally.
Another important thing to say is these have nothing to do with the government for their existence.
That is to say, associations are free and voluntary.
They owe their birth and their development to individual will.
Not to any desire of government.
These are not government-formed.
All government does is guarantee the premises of freedom of association and freedom of assembly,
and obviously implicitly in all this, freedom of speech.
These are private groups, and these private groups are central,
whether it is a group like the NRA, the National Rifle Association, a group like the ACLU, the American Civil Liberties Union.
I'll use both of them as examples.
We need these associations because of the fact that they seek to influence legislation and government policy,
and they are, by definition, minorities.
After all, if you look at the statistics that give the membership numbers of even the most powerful of these political associations in America,
they're tiny, tiny minorities of the population.
I believe I read recently that the number of members of the National Rifle Association is about three million.
That's just a little over one percent of the American population.
It may seem large, it may seem powerful, but it is a small minority in terms of formal membership.
And yet, as we know, from observing these organizations in our own society,
they are disproportionately effective in trying to say to the legislature or to the executive branch that administers the law,
here's something you can't trample on, here's something you aren't allowed to do,
or here's something you must do in order to guarantee equality of conditions.
We know how powerful these organizations can be.
And Tocqueville himself watched these organizations, no doubt many an evening after sitting in the inn and having dinner
if he was traveling and staying at a hotel, or after having visited somebody,
he went off to attend some of the meetings of these associations.
And he said, you know, I listened to associations and watched them that dealt with public security,
that dealt with commerce and industry, that dealt with morality and religion,
and one that's particularly interesting to him, that dealt with temperance.
And I'll have more to say about that a little bit later.
Now, how do these organizations work? How do they organize? How do they form?
And how do they become powerful mitigators of the omnipotence of the majority?
First of all, he says they gather people, and this may be counterintuitive to us,
they gather people of divergent minds, and they all have a single goal
and limit their work to that one goal.
This is a very important principle which the best of these associations today understand.
Again, we can use something like the National Rifle Association as an example.
People may in general think of the NRA as a fairly politically conservative band of people,
but there's some very liberal members of the NRA as well.
And if the NRA started discussing or taking policy positions on anything other than Second Amendment rights,
it would probably split apart because what you do, what the genius of these organizations is,
is sit down, you have this guy here and this guy here, and this guy may be vehemently pro-choice
and this guy may be vehemently pro-life, but they both believe in the same understanding
of the Second Amendment to the Constitution, and when you're in an NRA meeting,
that's what you talk about, and that's all you talk about.
Because what it does is bring together people of divergent minds.
Now, I want you to notice not only does this make the organization powerful,
but notice how it has another effect, which I'm going to talk about in more detail later,
but I want to mention now, okay?
What it does is say, here are two people who disagree on a lot of things.
What this organization teaches them to do is how to work together,
where there is common ground, how they can work together.
And in a democracy, you've got to be able to work with and form coalitions with people,
many of whose views are different than yours.
You have a very different idea of how a town should be run,
but you can get together on a view of where the sewer should go,
or in the case of my town recently, where the police station should be built.
There were people who got together to fight the relocation of our police station,
and they consisted of people who lived in the neighborhood
where the new police station was going to be built.
There were people who were more concerned with traffic patterns.
There were people who were downtown merchants who wanted it downtown,
rather than somewhere else.
These folks don't agree on much else, but they agreed and got together
and formed an association and defeated a referendum on moving the police station,
actually by defeating a referendum that put up money to move the police station.
It's exactly how these things are supposed to work.
It's exactly what their genius is.
They bring together not little robots,
all of whom line up on everything and who are carbon copies of one another.
Boy, is that an old metaphor, photocopies of one another.
It's not that at all, but rather you bring people around a cause who are different together,
and that's a vitally important way that Tocqueville helps us understand.
I think a lot of political associations that have faltered
have faltered because they tried to do so many things,
and therefore people who agree on the one thing that brought them together
disagree on issues two, three and four if they try to expand their influence.
So these are minorities, you know, the people who belong to the NRA,
not just have a certain view of the Second Amendment, but they're vehement about it.
There are a lot of people who agree with them that don't belong to the NRA,
but by having a group of people who are vehement about this one issue get together
despite differences on other issues,
they become a very effective tool in lobbying,
in affecting the electoral process,
in petitioning to the executive branch of government on how certain laws are administered,
sometimes in filing cases in the judicial system.
This is how all of this is supposed to work.
Tocqueville says that these organizations sometimes form what he calls almost a separate nation.
Because people get together, they form an intellectual bond,
then they gather together and get to know each other.
I'm going to go to this meeting because I care about the issue,
but while I'm at this meeting I meet other people who care about this issue,
and I learn to work with them, to respond to them,
to carry out some plan in concert with them,
even though these may be people I don't agree with on a lot of other things,
these may be people I wouldn't ever run into in any other situation in my life.
They're from a different place geographically,
that's why you have national conventions and regional conventions and so on.
As Tocqueville again emphasizes,
these political associations are unified in their public action.
He says, and the word he's going to use here is a metaphorical one,
although sometimes it's literal, they march at the same time,
they march toward the same goal, and they march on the same paths.
One of the assignments I give my students in the course I teach on democracy in America
is to choose a political association, go to its website,
read what it says about itself,
read what it advocates, how it advocates,
follow its newsletter over time, which is now almost always online,
look at its rules and regulations, read about its annual meetings,
read about its local chapters, because all on the website,
some of these organizations, they understand that one of the great tools they have is their website.
And I have students analyze the organization they've chosen
in terms of what Tocqueville says about what makes them effective.
And it is really interesting to see how good, how Tocquevillian,
whether unconsciously or not, many of these organizations are in the United States.
It's very impressive to see that.
One of the things Tocqueville emphasizes is the personal connections.
Political associations need local chapters, as well as a broad communications network.
People really do need physically to be in one another's presence,
to eyeball one another, to get to know one another,
to learn how to work well with other people.
Again, people who are very different in lots of other issues.
And several people have pointed out that many of the so-called large political associations today,
organizations like AARP, for example, fewer than 10% of the people who belong to AARP
have ever gone to any kind of AARP meeting.
Most don't even have local chapters in their areas.
Many others don't know there are local chapters in places where they do exist,
so that it is a place that you send money to, and indeed you get a newsletter
so it has some of the qualities of a political association that Tocqueville talks about.
And of course, its membership is huge.
The AARP Bulletin is the most copies of, I'm not saying this very well,
the most copies of magazine in the United States.
Nevertheless, it's a very loose association.
You don't walk down the street in your hometown and say,
hey, fellow AARP, and give them a high five.
But you might do that if you belong to the ACLU, or ban handguns incorporated,
or the NRA, or whatever.
So Tocqueville, I think, is perceptive here in emphasizing,
even though, of course, you can't anticipate our technological revolution,
nevertheless, perceptive in saying the personal quality of these associations is important.
Organization, focus.
When I was running for Congress, I got, I don't know, 40 or 50 questionnaires
from political associations that basically said,
we will think about endorsing you, hear the questions that we want to ask you,
and we'll decide who to endorse in this race based on your and your opponent's answers.
They were really interesting.
And what I found most fascinating about them is,
the questions were almost always phrased in such a way that you knew what answer they wanted to hear.
In other words, they didn't ask, are you in favor of only having free-range chickens?
I'm making up something silly, okay?
Because, you know, that's a question, I don't know what their position is
unless they're called the hooray for free-range chicken association.
But the question would always be, do you favor free-range chickens,
or are you the world's biggest bum and violator of animal rights?
Well, you know what the answer to that question is supposed to be.
This is not, in a sense, a trick question.
And so I would fill out many of these, a couple I didn't,
because I knew from the beginning this group would never endorse me.
And I didn't want to give them anything to say, you know, cooks against this and this and this.
But it was really interesting because, again, what I got to see is how focused they are.
You know, if this is a group that was asking about animal rights, they didn't ask about abortion.
They didn't ask about guns. They didn't ask about social security.
They asked about, what do you think of a bill in Congress to do this or that to porcupines?
That's the way they operated.
And again, I found them, in general, to be very effective.
It was a real lesson looking at the questionnaires of political associations
that are handed to those people running for legislative office.
Tocqueville also emphasizes that because there is the right to assemble
and the right of association in America, there really are no secret societies.
Even the groups that operate, perhaps, on the edge of that circle of thought,
they do it openly that the world is open.
For one thing, what you're trying to do, if you are one of these associations,
is convince the majority that you're right.
You may never get all the majority to join your organization or have your vehemence for this issue.
But what you want to do is convince them that your position is right
because, as we know, the legislature is dominated by majority opinion.
The majority is omnipotent.
And so you aren't trying to get everybody to sign up.
What you are trying to do is create a majority of people that side with you.
You can't do that if you operate in secret.
You operate as openly as possible.
Again, websites, they are really elaborate for the most effective of these organizations.
They want everybody to look inside them.
They want everybody to click every button that is on there.
You don't go to the website and have to punch in a secret code
to find out what these organizations are up to.
Interestingly enough, perhaps Tocqueville emphasizes this
because while he was in America, as I mentioned before,
a political party was forming called the Anti-Masonic Party.
Because not long before Tocqueville came, an ex-Mason, somebody who sort of quit the Masons,
turned up missing and presumed murdered.
Because of threats that he would divulge the secrets of the Masons.
And even though George Washington had been a Mason,
there came to be a real movement in America saying that kind of organization is un-American.
There's something un-American about a secret society.
Of course, we still do have secret societies, whether they are Masonic organizations,
whether they are college fraternities and sororities or whatever.
But at least for a while in America, there was an upsurge of movement
against any kind of organization that was secret because it just didn't seem to be American.
Of course, college fraternities and sororities are not political associations.
In the way that Tocqueville means them, they don't have political agendas.
There really are, Tocqueville, I think we want to argue, no political secret societies in America.
As Tocqueville says, there are people devoted to various factions in America,
but there are no conspirators.
Because of the freedom of assembly and the freedom of association,
associations are peaceful in their objectives and peaceful in their means.
They speak publicly and openly.
It's a really interesting point.
You have these very vehement organizations that are very personal with one-to-one contact
and real zeal around the subject, but they are ultimately peaceful and open.
And these organizations, and Tocqueville says, as society gets more complex, there need to be more of them,
these organizations are vital to mitigating the tyranny of the majority.
Now, I'm going to turn to another issue very briefly because we've talked about it in a different context.
In a previous lecture on freedom of the press, I talked about that not only did Tocqueville come to understand
the importance of newspapers, as we would say today, but also newsletters.
That is to say, after all, you may belong to your local chapter of the ACLU,
but the bottom line is you need to be in contact with ACLU members and chapters all over the country.
And you do that primarily by means of newsletter, whether it's put in the mail or now, more likely, that it's online.
And therefore, freedom of the press is a very important starting point.
Freedom of assembly and freedom of association would be much, much less valuable freedoms if there were not also freedom of the press.
And as I pointed out when we talked about that issue, Tocqueville didn't come to the United States as a great fan of,
or even understanding how it worked, the freedom of the press.
But as he was here, and especially when he went back home and thought about it more,
he began to realize how vital the freedom of the press is, especially when you include not just newspapers,
but also the newsletters, because they speak to people all over the country.
They speak often.
And sometimes that is the basic thing that holds people together.
What did William Lloyd Garrison, the great abolitionist, do in 1831, the very year Tocqueville was in America?
He began publishing a newsletter, a newspaper called The Liberator.
In the mid-1840s, when Frederick Douglass started to split with Garrison over issues of the tactics of ending slavery, what did he do?
He moved to another city, Rochester, New York, got himself a printing press and printed the North Star.
As a way of getting out news to abolitionists like thinking abolitionists all over the country.
So we can appreciate the importance of freedom of the press as a kind of basis for the functioning of these great political associations.
Now Tocqueville says also, in addition to their obvious mission, that is say influencing legislation, influencing administration of laws and the carrying out of laws,
there are other functions that these organizations do that are good for democracy.
First of all, he says, they help to develop and perfect civil associations.
In other words, although the Rotary Club is in some ways a different kind of beast than the ACLU, in terms of what its reason for existence is,
nevertheless in some way they reinforce one another.
People who belong to one kind of association are more likely to belong to another kind of association.
And insofar as political associations encourage people to join civil associations, that's a good thing,
because I'm going to argue in the next lecture that Tocqueville thinks civil associations are about as important as political associations for American democracy.
Secondly and more broadly, and related to what I just said, political associations develop the tastes and habits of association.
You learn the techniques, you learn the joys, you learn the frustrations, you learn the fellowship, you learn about working with other people.
And if you're doing that over gun control today, you may be doing it over, I don't want them to move the firehouse in my hometown tomorrow,
that you learn the process of association and it makes you in a sense a more effective citizen.
Third, he says, and I'm going to talk more about this in a subsequent lecture, there is a tendency in democracies
where you have a quality of conditions for people to sort of withdraw into very tight personal circles
to withdraw into themselves, into family and little bodies of friends.
And to give the very short versions I have once before, one of the reasons is that in the public square everybody is equal
while within your own little circle of friends, you know, people are special for different reasons.
Well, Tocqueville says, political associations draw people outside themselves and thus work against that tendency that exists in democracy to withdraw.
That political associations are a way to help people understand how to live in the public square, what their role is in the public square,
how to function in the public square and all that is important because, again, it works against that contending tendency to want to withdraw.
Let me read you a passage that I think is a very powerful one.
Political associations, Tocqueville writes, can therefore be considered great schools free of charge where all citizens come to learn the general theory of association.
Tocqueville doesn't use this kind of language a lot, but the great schools of democracy that Tocqueville has named are juries and political associations.
This is where Americans learn what democracy is all about.
We don't know what he would think today about C-SPAN, my guess is he would like it a lot, but ultimately, even if you are a great watcher of C-SPAN or whatever it might be,
the way you learn democracy is to participate.
You need to go to school and school needs to be, in a sense, interactive.
That can mean you being called to be a member of a jury and learning a lot about the judicial system and equity and rights and freedom and all the rest.
But these political associations are also schools of democracy. You learn how to live democratically in a democratic society.
Tocqueville also argues that only political associations can resist the centralization of administration, which I've now said about 87 times, is inimical to freedom and democracy.
Because political associations, even though they're minorities, small minorities in terms of formal membership, can nevertheless be very persuasive.
In legislatures, anything from the town council to the Congress, they can be very influential on the way laws are administered.
And therefore, what they do, because after all, although some of these political associations are national, some are also very local, they're the ones that try to say,
No, do things our way, or at least do things our way here. We've got a better plan.
And as long as they can be disproportionately influential to their numbers anyway, that is good in decentralizing the administration of government,
even the decentralizing of administration of those laws that are federal.
And that's a good thing for democracy because centralization of administration is one of the great dangers, one of the great threats to democracy.
Tocqueville introduces a very important theme with regard to political associations when he talks about what he calls self-interest well understood.
Let me read you this passage.
Americans, on the contrary, are pleased to explain almost all the actions of their life with the aid of self-interest well understood.
They complacently show how the enlightened love of themselves constantly brings them to aid each other and disposes them willingly to sacrifice a part of their time and a part of their wealth to the good of the state.
Okay, Tocqueville says, here's the way it is. We're all interested in ourselves, whether that is making money, whether that is many other different things, we all look at our own self-interest.
Political associations are a part of helping citizens to understand what their self-interest is well understood.
To understand that, in fact, my self-interest is bound up with the common good.
And so in a political association, I give up some of my free time. I give up some of my leisure.
But what I've come to realize is that in doing it, I am acting both for an interest larger than myself, which happens to coincide with my self-interest.
Okay, so I belong to a group that legislates for a certain kind of anti-crime legislation.
Well, I might be shocked by the statistics in my own town, but I also know, even if I've never been mugged or robbed, that ultimately I'm doing something that's both good for the community and good for myself.
It means that when I walk down the street, there's less likelihood that I'm going to be mugged.
So that what associations train people to understand and to practice is self-interest well understood.
You're not going to root out self-interest. What you want is self-interest well understood.
Or let me put it this way, as Tocqueville does.
I shall not fear to say that the doctrine of self-interest well understood seems to me of all philosophic theories the most appropriate to the needs of men in our time, meaning a democratic age.
And that I see in it the most powerful guarantee against themselves that remains to them.
The minds of the moralist of our day ought to turn, therefore, principally toward it.
Even should they judge it imperfect, they would still have to adopt it as necessary.
I do not believe that all in all there is more selfishness among us than in America.
The only difference is that there, in America, it is enlightened, and here it is not.
Each American knows how to sacrifice a part of his particular interest to save the rest.
We want to keep everything, and often everything eludes us.
Self-interest well understood. Understanding how I'm bound up with the community.
How I'm bound up with issues larger than my immediate well-being.
This is important because democracy is, of course, participatory.
Or using the sports metaphor, democracy is not a spectator sport.
How do we learn that? Especially if we're watching things that happen in Washington or Albany or whatever.
We learn it, at large part, in those political associations where we work for one thing we're passionate about.
And we believe more people ought to be passionate about.
And we believe that too many people don't understand the value and the importance of what we're saying.
And in doing that, you learn because you are practicing.
And therefore, going to an experiential school, the doctrine of self-interest well understood.
