I want to issue you all an invitation.
I would like you all to come to the village of Geneseo, New York, where I live, sometime
during the second weekend of July.
And you'll probably come in from the north, because you will have come in on the New
York State throughway.
And when you enter the village, one of the things you will see is a lot of flags put
along our main street.
By the way, if you came at Christmas time, you see beautiful lights in all the trees.
Those are put up by the Geneseo Downtown Merchants Association.
When you get to the center of town, you'll see we have a fountain.
And when you're there in July, one of the things you'll appreciate is that in addition
to the water, it is just bursting with flowers.
They're put there by the Geneseo Garden Club.
And when you get to the other end of Main Street, at our village park, in addition to
more flowers, what you'll see is the Geneseo Summer Festival, where there are concerts
and food booths and craftspeople and a hot air balloon launch and all the rest.
That's all organized and sponsored by the Geneseo Rotary Club.
And by the way, those food booths, we're not talking fast food.
We're talking about the Catholic Church's Strawberry Shortcake.
We're talking about the Episcopal Church's Steak.
We're talking about a student's group's pasta.
I want you to see, therefore, how especially on that weekend, but all year round, my village
is affected by what Tocqueville calls civil associations.
The government doesn't do any of those things.
These are organizations of citizens who have formed not for a particular political purpose.
They aren't lobbying their member of Congress.
They aren't going to the town board meetings and asking ordinances to be changed.
These are, again, what Tocqueville calls civil associations.
And it's clear in a village like mine, and I'm sure almost anywhere you go in America,
that we see the difference that civil associations make.
We can see it physically, and we can find it in other ways as well.
So I want us to be aware, just sort of have a picture of some of the things that civil
associations do.
Tocqueville, as he traveled around the country, not only attended meetings of political associations,
but he saw civil associations at work.
For example, he said he saw commercial and industrial organizations, you know, abandoning
together of people who sell widgets, for example, so that they can find ways to publicize the
value of widgetry.
He sees organizations that have religious and moral goals, some grave, he said, and some
completely futile.
He sees that some of these organizations have a very, very specific focus, not just save
the whales, but save some particular kind of whales in some particular place, while
others are very, very broad, trying to convince people to turn away from the evils of alcohol.
For example, some he said, give festivals, again, that happens in Geneseo.
They found schools, they build in, they raise churches, they distribute books, they send
out missionaries, and they even create sometimes prisons, he says.
Again, remember, he's interested in prison reform.
So he sees an extraordinary variety of civil associations in the America that he visited.
Let me read you a passage from Tocqueville.
A political, industrial, commercial, or even scientific and literary association is an
enlightened and powerful citizen, whom one can neither bend at will nor oppress in the
dark, and who, in defending its particular rights against the exigencies of power, saves
common freedoms.
It's not just the political associations, therefore, that save common freedoms.
Equally, in some ways, are the civil associations.
They too are bulwarks of democracy.
They're not options, they're requirements for a functioning democracy because a group
of citizens act as one.
And furthermore, he says, you can't oppress an organized group of people around an issue
or a thought in the dark.
You know, sometimes I suppose the government can oppress individuals, and nobody will notice.
Maybe that individual will not speak up.
Maybe the press doesn't picture it.
But try to tell the Geneseo Downtown Merchants Association, or the Rotary Club, or the Garden
Club, that they can't do things they're founded to do.
And I guarantee you, what Tocqueville says, it at least is going to make the papers.
It's a lot harder to oppress an organization than an individual, so that if a government
becomes oppressive, it's going to be perhaps easier to oppress individuals than groups
of individuals acting as one.
And therefore, political and civil associations are vital to the survival and functioning
and flourishing of democracy.
Talk about why.
Because he says, in a democracy are equal, but they're also weak and dependent.
After all, if it takes even in a village my size, a thousand people to elect the mayor,
my vote counts one-tenth of one percent.
I'm equal to the other 999 people, but nevertheless, I don't have a very big say in that formal
way of counting in a democracy.
But civil associations, as well as political associations, bring people out of themselves
and involve them in activities together, activities that are not at all necessarily political.
It's putting flags on Main Street, deciding what kind of flowers to put in the public
fountain in Geneseo, New York.
But again, we can see people begin to act together.
There's a communitarian element to these organizations by definition.
People learn in non-political ways in these associations to recognize self-interest well
understood.
Okay, I could stay home tonight and I could watch TV rather than go to the Garden Club
meeting.
But what I know is when I participate in the Garden Club, A, I get some benefits, right?
When we put in those flowers every spring, there I am.
I get my picture on the front page of the Livingston County News, putting the flowers
there.
That's nice.
It's sort of self-interest.
I'm known as a respected and prominent person in the community.
I also get to enjoy the flowers when I drive by that might not be there or might not be
so pretty or might not be out quite as early if I wasn't some of the manpower or personpower
to do that.
And well, you know, more people may come from Rochester and spend the day in the country
and drive through Geneseo.
And you know, if a few of them decide I might want to move there, it's going to raise my
property values.
And if some of them decide to stay and shop and have a meal, then the sales tax, some
of it, that they pay goes into our local coffers.
And so what I'm doing when I say I'm not going to watch Jeopardy tonight, but I'm going to
go to the Garden Club meeting, is I am practicing self-interest well understood.
I benefit from it personally, although perhaps not immediately, I can enjoy Jeopardy right
now and get the final Jeopardy question and feel superior.
But I'm giving that up because I'm participating in an activity in which I am indeed serving
my self-interest, but in a broader sense that also, of course, serves other people's interests,
not just mine alone.
Turning specifically now to civil associations, Tocqueville says that civil associations
do things in America that are done in Europe by either in England an aristocracy.
If you've ever watched the British Situation Comedy to the Manor-Born, you're discovering
that the family that owns the Manor is always expected to put on the horse display festival
or a Guy Fawkes Day event or whatever it might be.
In England, Tocqueville says, the aristocracy does a lot of things that civil associations
do in the United States.
In France, it's the government that does a lot of those things rather than the aristocracy.
So why for a democracy is it valuable and important and preferable for civic associations
to do this rather than the guy who is the richest guy in town or, for that matter, the
local government?
Why didn't the local government put on the Geneseo Summer Festival?
Why doesn't the rich founding family, which is still in our town of Geneseo, why don't
they put the flowers out in the village fountain?
They can afford to do that.
Tocqueville illustrates the point by giving a specific illustration.
He's in America at a time when the temperance movement is growing.
But one of the things he observed was there were a hundred thousand men in America who
came together, obviously not literally all physically together, but through civil associations
and local chapters and whatever, there were a hundred thousand men who came together to
pledge that they would not in the future drink alcohol.
We've got this alcohol problem, a hundred thousand guys, he says, form an association
not to drink alcohol.
And Tocqueville at first says, when I saw this, I thought this was a dumb, because I
observed this and what I thought was why don't these guys just stay at home and drink water?
Why all the hoopla?
Why the organization?
Why the newsletters?
Why the proclamations?
Why the o's?
All the rest that happens in this kind of temperance organization.
And then Tocqueville began to think about things.
He said, you know, in France, if it were agreed to, I don't think it's as easy for us to imagine,
that drinking alcohol was a problem, he said, let me tell you what a hundred thousand French
men would do.
They would all separately, he says, petition the government to regulate the taverns.
That's the way the French would handle it.
It wouldn't be an organized thing, it'd be every individual saying, OK, government, make
the taverns close earlier, or make them serve a maximum amount of alcohol, or have them
monitor everybody who's doing any drinking, or raise the drinking age, or whatever it
might be.
What we would see in France is a hundred thousand individuals saying, OK, government, it's up
to you, do something to stop me from drinking, or at least to control my drinking.
But Tocqueville came to understand that the American way, the way of an association was
a very important and valuable thing.
First of all, of course, one of the things it did was publicize temperance far beyond
that hundred thousand.
If each individual goes to the French government and says, close the taverns early, that may
not gain you any publicity.
When's the last time you heard about an individual going to lobby a member of Congress?
But you might have read about when another kind of organization, a political association,
went to lobby Congress.
But of course, this association of temperance is not a political association at all.
It's a civil association.
It doesn't have a legislative agenda.
The government's not going to stop me drinking, and I'm perhaps not able to do it very well
by myself, so let's band together.
And in doing that, we also publicize to many other people who haven't thought about the
evils of alcohol, then maybe they ought to stop drinking too.
And also what people learn in joining one of these associations, like being one of those
hundred thousand guys to sign the Temperance Pledge, is how powerful people can be when
they act collectively.
Because if a hundred thousand people do this, it's on the front page of newspapers.
People are talking about it in the streets, and therefore they raise the consciousness
of everybody that collective action is powerful.
It's powerful in helping weak individuals to do something that may be difficult to do
on their own, but it's also powerful because then the issue resonates throughout the society.
And people who haven't even thought about it begin to say, gosh, you know, if these
hundred thousand guys are signing this petition because they've come to realize that alcohol
is doing bad things in their lives, I wonder if alcohol is doing bad things to my life.
Because some of those guys, you know, I know a couple of them, they don't drink anymore
than I do, or they go home from the tavern the same time I do at night, gosh, and they
see that it's hurting their families or whatever it is, whatever is hurting my family.
This is the power of these civil societies, these civil organizations.
So in America, it's people, not government, that bring the problem under control in America.
And what does that do?
Tocqueville says, I'll tell you what that does.
That lessens the likelihood of the centralization of administration.
If you leave solving the alcohol problem to government, maybe you can build a situation
in which the government acts.
And then the government will have one more piece of thing to administer exactly the same
way everywhere.
And that's another piece of the centralization of administration and centralization of administration
is inimical to the freedom of democracy.
That even when people are doing non-political things, collectively signing statements say
I'm not going to drink anymore, they are strengthening democracy.
Let me give you a much more trivial example than Tocqueville does.
Again, I want to go back to my hometown, Geneseo, New York.
A few years ago, a group of women, I believe they were all women, found in an organization
called the Hearthside Cats.
These women like cats.
No, they love cats.
And so in the backyard of one of the women's houses, they set up little cages and let everybody
know if you find a stray cat, don't drown it, don't do anything bad with it, call us,
we'll come get it, we will put it in a cage, we will clean it up, we will have it neutered
and then we will offer it free of charge to people who want pet cats.
And I think by now everybody knows the Hearthside Cats in Geneseo, New York.
Now let me tell you what kind of women they were.
One was a nurse.
One is the wife of our town supervisor.
One is the daughter of one of the greatest New York Yankee pitchers of all times.
They were people of sort of different parts of the town.
They live very different lives, but they love cats.
Now let me tell you what they do.
That's how clever they are.
It takes a little bit of money to run Hearthside Cats and so they have fundraisers and they
get a hold of their friends and they say either contribute or won't you help us raise money.
Now I do a lot of cooking for charity events and I don't like cats very much to be real
honest, but they nail me and say would you do dessert for our annual Hearthside Cats
dinner where we raise money to take care of cute little furry things even if you don't
like them.
Well of course I do.
And so they get me involved.
By the way it's a really interesting crowd in the kitchen because they're all talking
about cats except me.
For one night I had at least have to be a cat lover and you can't even make jokes about
you know oh you're oh it's a dinner for cats are they the main course can't say that stuff
with this crowd okay.
But what they do is they take care of the cat problem.
They don't have a cat problem in Geneseo.
The cats are well taken care of they're humanely taken care of a lot of kids have gotten pets
for nothing from families that couldn't afford pets and it's all because a few people do
that.
What's going to happen if there is no Hearthside Cats?
Well my guess is that eventually our dog control officers would also become cat control
officers and that therefore our taxes would pay for taking care of the cats.
And so I would suggest as I look at Hearthside Cats in our local village a couple things.
One is as a taxpayer I'm relieved by the fact it's voluntary contributions that take care
of the cats and not my tax money and B I'll bet you the cats are better taken care of
in our county than the dogs which are taken care of by people hired by the government.
In fact our county just built a new I think it was seventy five thousand dollar dog pound
at public expense.
We have a zero dollar cat pound in our area and the cats are better taken care of.
This is what Tocqueville wants to say that civil associations do many of the little things
if you will that make life better and they do them better than government could do and
in doing them rather than having government do them Tocqueville says everybody's better
off including democracy itself being better off.
I think these are very important principles to think about when we look at civil associations
in America and then Tocqueville also says that there are other values to civil associations
when you belong to a civil association you'll learn how associations work and you're more
likely then to be involved in a political association Tocqueville says basically it's
sort of easier less controversial to be involved in a civic organization who's against the
Geneseo garden club after all who's against putting geraniums around our village fountain.
So you join an organization like that you learn how organizations work you learn how
to work with people who think about politics or other things differently than you but who
love geraniums and flowers and all the rest and then you're more likely Tocqueville believes
to join a political association whether it's very local you know move or don't move the
firehouse political association or whether it's a certain way of defending first amendment
rights the ACLU or second amendment rights the NRA or whatever that participating in
civil associations is easier it's sort of a good entree into the world of associations
because again remember what Tocqueville said that I talked about in the earlier lecture
there's a tendency in a democracy for people to withdraw into themselves I may not be able
to get you to come out and join the Geneseo citizens for better sewer pipes association
but I might get you to join the garden club I might get you to join the horse side cats
or for the fellowship of it I might get you to join the Kiwanis or the Rotary those are
easier entrees into in certain ways the public square and even those organizations are not
just if you will feeder organizations into political associations but they are valuable
in and of themselves as bullwarks against centralization of administration and tyranny
of the majority now Tocqueville even goes one step further in talking about both civil
and political associations if you belong to civil and political associations you're more
likely for example to run for office let's say for example that you have been the treasurer
of the horse side cats or the Rotary Club and well you know the village needs to elect
a tax collector those are elective offices in many towns you're sort of a natural because
you haven't collected taxes but you've collected money you've handled money you've recorded
money you've made banked upon you've done the sorts of things that are the skills that
you need in order to run for that office so the civil and political associations are also
breeding grounds for more direct public participation even to the extent of running for political
office and so what a way to think about good citizenship yes you need to vote yes you need
to do this yes you need to do that but you're being a good citizen when you belong to the
garden club even if you don't quite think about it even if the particular garden club meeting
you're attending is not about whether they're going to put geraniums around the fountain or not
but they're simply talking about you know the virtue of the marigold because you're working
with other like-minded people you've heard the minutes of the secretary the report of the treasurer
you are not alone in front of your television set but you're with other people face to face
and no doubt somebody's going to appoint you to if you aren't careful anyway the
hooray for the marigolds committee of the garden club and then you're working in a smaller group
in a more detailed function but you have to be active because instead of 20 of you in the garden
club there are only four of you in the marigold committee this is all good practice of democracy
now i want to turn to a contemporary question if political and civil associations are so vital
to democracy if they are not window dressing if they are not bonus points but essential
how are we doing at the beginning of the 21st century there has been of course in america a great
deal of debate about that and one of the foci of the debate has been a book published a few years ago
by a sociologist at harvard named robert putnam a book called bowling alone interesting title by
the way because think about this what putnam says is that if you look at the data as many people
bowl today percentage wise as bold 30 years ago 40 years ago but today you're much less likely to
bowl in a league and you're more likely to bowl alone by alone he doesn't mean literally
just you but you and your girlfriend you and your wife you and your kid not you and anybody
sort of not part of your most immediate personal circle i mean i remember i was in a bowling league
in graduate school and i remember the benefits of it very very much this is exactly what
putnam is talking about i belong to a bowling league of cornell graduate students fairly specialized
group but on the team were four of us and two of the guys were in the ag school at cornell
now i was in history we didn't hang out with the ag school guys the ag school guys didn't
hang out with us but we bowled together we got to know each other turned out we lived in the
same dorm our first year in graduate school we became friends as it turns out one of them lived
in illinois i lived in indiana i had a ride home for vacation because i didn't have a car
it's once again i participate in some civil activity had nothing to do with politics nothing
to do directly with democracy but it opened me up to more different people we had bowling in
common i didn't care what kind of research he was doing on sheep but i cared a lot that he could make
a split convert a split that's what mattered and so you are brought out of yourself i didn't get a
long very well with my roommate and so i was sort of a loner now i was no longer a loner i was then
more likely to go to lectures or to belong to other student organizations that's exactly how
putnam understands and tokeville understands things but statistics show that since the mid 1960s
participation in political and civil organization down about a third in the united states
again more same number of people bowl but more people bowl alone not as many people belong to
the pta or other organizations be they civil or political and putnam and others too have worried
about this because of the very tokevillian concerns that you need these organizations in a vibrant
democracy putnam even goes a little bit further and talks about a little bit more of that self
interest side and that is what he calls social capital you win social capital when you belong
to these organizations because well in some cases it might be you're ill and people from that
organization bring you casseroles for a week it might be that you belong to the rotary club
and your son is looking for a summer job so he isn't going to be a lazy bum in your opinion
between his freshman and sophomore year of college and you lean over to the guy next to you at the
rotary club dinner whom you don't see any place else and say got a job at the service station
need any help in the back room need somebody to deliver pizzas at your pizzeria and by golly a
lot of summer and not just summer jobs are earned that way so what putnam argues is even perhaps
going a bit beyond tokeville is how these organizations are just a vibrant part of our
basic social fabric and i think he would then argue in the largest sense all of that contributes
to a more vital democracy furthermore let's remember the civil organization let me tell you
a story of a student she was taking my tokeville course she said i never knew anything about this
stuff my dad always went to some sons of something or other meeting this is the way she described it
in the broncs and you know i didn't like it the fact he wasn't around as much as some other
dad gives me he was very active and you know ran the hamburger booth all the rest of it
when they went out and raised money she said guess what i'm now here on a scholarship from that
organization that's only available to the children of members i didn't realize that in many ways not
only was he doing good for the community he was doing good for our family i now got some economic
relief going to college because of these societies by the way putnam has now written an article called
bowling together after 2001 in which he asked whether are the events of september 11th going
to bring us together as a nation and reverse that trend the early numbers in the weeks and
months after 9 11 said yes he's not so sure of the long term what he is sure of is that political
and civil associations are important are integral to us having in the fullest sense of the word a
democratic society
