Lecture 16 Blacks and Indians
Elections to Tocqueville's single longest section of democracy in America is in some ways, at least on
the surface and aside from his main theme. After all, what Tocqueville is doing is writing
a book about America for the French. Things that the French need to consider as inevitably
France, like the rest of the civilized world, moves toward the equality of conditions. But he can't
help himself taking time out to talk about the issue of race in America. And as I said, his longest
single section deals with Indians and blacks. And it's not a happy, comfortable section. In fact, it's
interesting because most people today, when they read Tocqueville, read Tocqueville in an abridgment.
Because after all, the book is a great big, thick book. And yet the section on Indians and blacks is almost
never part of any one of these abridgments. Again, it's easy to do that simply because it seems that this is,
in Tocqueville's own eyes, a kind of aside. I can't help talking about this, even though there's no obvious
analog in France. But there's a recent book by a very famous political and social and religious commentator
named Cornell West. And in this book, Cornell West says, what a pity that this piece of Tocqueville isn't
reproduced more often and isn't read more often. Because although like any part of Tocqueville, you can say,
well, this doesn't quite apply directly now, or he missed this a little bit, or whatever as you can from any
commentator of a long time ago trying to apply him to now. Nevertheless, Cornell West argues he says pretty blunt
things in this section that need to be said and need to be heard and need to be repeated in America. So in this
lecture, we're going to talk about what Tocqueville has to say about blacks and Indians. Let me begin by a couple
things he says collectively about blacks and Indians, two of the three races in America, as he describes them.
And then we'll look at some of his comments on Indians and blacks separately. And then we'll come back in the
conclusion to see, once again, how some of the things he says about each group can also be combined into a more
general analysis. Tocqueville says that the combination of differences in law, education, origin, and physical
features makes the barriers between races in America almost insurmountable. That's a very depressing statement that he
makes here. In other words, he's not very hopeful that America can become simply what we would call a multiracial
society where distinctions based on rates are ignored or don't matter at all. He thinks the distinctions are great
enough, physical and otherwise, that that's not simply in the cards. It's almost insurmountable. That's, of course, not to
say that things can't change from Tocqueville's own day. He will, for example, predict that slavery will be eradicated in
America. It's not that things won't change and can't change. But ultimately what he's saying is, if the goal is a quality
of everybody's condition where race doesn't play a part, that's a very tough one to achieve, given the history, given the
differences in appearance. Secondly, he says, Europeans make other peoples serve them. And when Europeans can't bend other
people, Europeans destroy them. Now, this is a European talking. Let's not forget that. Tocqueville's white, Tocqueville's a
Frenchman. But he recognizes because he's also studied colonial French activities in North Africa. Later on, he will go to
Algeria. He has certainly studied enough to know some things about Latin America from the Mexican border all the way to the
very bottom of South America, where he has watched Europeans at work with other peoples in Africa and in the Americas in
particular. And he is quite blunt in saying how Europeans have responded to other races, blacks and Indians in particular.
Tocqueville does have one hopeful thing to say, and that is that obviously, despite the separations that exist in America, there are a
lot of what he calls, we wouldn't use this term obviously, half-breeds and mulattoes. That is to say people with one white parent, one
black parent, one white parent, one Indian parent, and whatever. And he thinks that as there is more racial mixing, as there are
more folks who are part one and part another, if you will, that they may serve as a kind of link. And therefore, that their very
existence might help to break down some of the barriers between the three races. Okay, let's turn now to Native Americans, to Indians.
Tocqueville had a number of impressions of Indians because of his travels in America. He saw Indians in the East, he saw Indians on the
frontier, he saw Indians in the South. The first Indians he saw in upstate New York, he described as being drunks and beggars. He was very
impressed because it was so different than the image of the Indian that he imagined from his upbringing in France. I, by the way, have had the same
experience. I brought European friends of mine to the United States and we traveled to Indian reservations and their first response is one of
shock. This is not the image of the Indian I learned in school or I learned through popular culture back in Europe. Tocqueville had that same
experience almost 175 years ago. In addition to the drunk and dependent Indians he says he saw in New York, he also saw a group of
Choctaws in the American South who were being deported, in quotation marks, to Arkansas. He certainly followed the story of the Cherokees
and was very interested in the Cherokees and had an interesting conversation with Sam Houston about the Cherokees who were about, not long after
Tocqueville went back to Europe, about to follow the Trail of Tears that took them to the West. He also observed Indians were mild and hospitable in
peace but pitiless in war. And he observed that like whites, very interestingly, Indians he says believe in another world and under another name worship God.
So he is an outsider, doesn't spend a lot of time, doesn't as far as we can tell as we talk to any Indians. But he tries to draw some conclusions based on a number of
individual experiences he has. As he moved further west, when he got closer to what we would think of as the frontiers in Wisconsin and Michigan, he does observe to some extent that the Indians
resemble what the French philosopher Jean Jacques Rousseau referred to as the noble savage. He said I saw no profound corruption in them and they did not display
rudeness. There was a kind of simple nobility of character. And if he sees that in the less white areas of the United States, obviously one of the things he can conclude is that those drunk and dirty
and almost naked Indians that I saw in New York are not that way because of the Indian culture, they're that way because of the whites. And he begins to say what have the whites done to Native Americans?
First of all he said they've introduced iron and liquor and made the Indians dependent on them because the Indians had no way of producing either iron or liquor.
Develop a habit of the Indians for certain things and then in a sense Tocqueville says you got them hooked because they want those things and they have no way to get them other than from you and therefore since you control access
you can get them to do some of the things you want them to do or stop them from doing things you don't want them to do. He also said the Americans are constantly, the white Americans are constantly pushing the Indians to the west.
And although they always keep saying well here we're going to move you from here to here and then we're going to stop moving you. Tocqueville doesn't believe that.
Tocqueville says the movement further and further west is going to continue. He sees a pattern evolving and he observes the way that the whites move the Indians to the west.
Sometimes he says they send them embassies and offer gifts in return for giving up their land. Again we know what kind of gifts some of those might be.
Secondly he says the whites take advantage of the fact there aren't always distinct boundaries of the Indians land because that's not the way the Indians operated before the coming of the whites.
And he noticed one particular technique that's used in some states. Some states subjected the Indians to state laws. That's still different by the way in different parts of the country today.
In some states for example on an Indian reservation you can drive without a license, a driver's license from that state because of the fact that those Indians are not required to obey that state law.
In other states that's not true. So there's still differing relationships between the states and Indians.
And he says what I observed is the states will, some states will, put Indians under state law knowing that the Indians refuse to be subject to the state law and therefore knowing that that has the effect of moving them out.
They'll leave rather than obey the laws of the state of blank and so the state of blank says you're going to be under all of our laws.
In his conversation with Sam Houston which was accidental happened to be in a riverboat.
He talks to Sam Houston about the Cherokees and he comes to study the Cherokees a little bit and what he learns is the Cherokees developed a written language.
The Cherokee language was put into written form in our alphabet.
Secondly he said the Cherokees had a newspaper before all of them had clothes that they very early established a newspaper.
Tocqueville's fascinated by the Cherokees petition to Congress that was sent to Congress while he was here and in fact he quotes it in its entirety in Democracy of America.
I believe it's the longest quotation in Democracy of America.
What does all this prove?
It proves the Cherokees have as much natural ability and therefore Indians have as much natural ability as whites.
That the differences you see are not because of differentiated abilities based on race.
It has to do with education and other conditions.
So he's very impressed by what he learns about the Cherokees.
In some way of course that makes him more frustrated as he sees the way the Cherokees are being treated at this time by President Jackson and others.
But he has a very sympathetic view of the Cherokees and of course knowing what Tocqueville has to say about newspapers and things he's very impressed.
Again, I think sort of a memorable line, they had a newspaper before all of them had clothes.
Tocqueville takes up the question, what options do the Indians in America have?
Given where we are right now, it's 1831 of course when Tocqueville is actually here, one of the options that the Indians have.
He says, well, the Indians could choose white civilization.
They could choose essentially to live pretty much like whites, to establish white law, to have boundaries, do the same kinds of jobs whites do.
And to a great extent he said they could mingle with whites, whites would allow that.
But the Indians don't want that.
He's going to make an observation later on that blacks largely he thinks want to mingle with whites but aren't allowed.
Indians could to a great extent mingle with whites, blend in with whites, they don't want to.
Very interesting juxtaposition he has here.
You know, they could settle down on the land, develop European ways, farm, after all, a lot of land.
But he notes that for Indians, farm work is regarded as ignoble.
Now again, Tocqueville's understanding of the Indians was from a little bit of conversation, not with Indians, and from some observations.
And obviously he doesn't know a great deal about all the diversity of tribal cultures and languages and so on.
We have to accept that.
But what he observes is essentially there is a European mold that's available to the Indians,
but to adopt that pattern to fit into that mold would mean radically changing fundamental values and they aren't ready to do that.
In other words, the question is, what's the alternative to becoming Americanized, to becoming more like white, to becoming Europeanized?
Tocqueville says their other option is war.
And of course there are, and will be long after 1831, Indian wars.
And Tocqueville looks around and says neither one of these is really a viable option that's good for the Indians.
They won't mingle with whites because to do so is radically to change the basis of what they value and they believe.
And on the other hand, Tocqueville says they're not going to win the wars.
They're going to be more wars and people on both sides are going to die, but in the long run they're not going to win the wars.
And therefore Tocqueville is, I think it's fair to say, pessimistic about the future of Indians in America.
He sees a problem, a problem that's at least as much white as Indian and doesn't see a solution.
And so his discussion of Indians, of Native Americans, is somewhat depressing.
Let's turn now to blacks.
Let's start right at the most obvious place. Tocqueville hates slavery.
He's appalled by slavery. He's appalled what slavery does to blacks. He's appalled what slavery does to whites.
He said the Greeks and Romans had slavery and defended it.
When Jesus came, he said, and in subsequent centuries of Christian civilization in Europe, slavery was brought to an end.
And then he says, a little bit historically and correctly, that it was Christians who reintroduced slavery in the 16th century.
Well, the part that's incorrect about that is, as a medievalist, I must intervene here with old Alexis, and that is, it really was in the 14th century.
Right after the Black Death, when there was a labor shortage, that slavery was reintroduced in Italian cities and other parts of Europe eventually.
So Tocqueville says, you know, as a European civilization, we had it wrong, then we had it right, then we had it wrong again.
We violated our own Christian principles because for him, Christianity is incompatible with slavery.
So let's start with, he hates slavery.
Now, let me sort of suggest, as I did with Indians, some of Tocqueville's observations of black slaves, and to some extent black freedmen and women in America.
First of all, he says, slaves have in general lost the memory of their origins, their language, and their religion.
The Indians still have those things, but Africans living in the United States don't because, of course, it's been forcibly taken away from them.
Perhaps even more importantly, blacks, he says, have no families.
I was recently rereading Frederick Douglass' narrative, written in 1845, so less than 15 years after Tocqueville was in America,
and Douglass talks about that lack of family, that lack of a last name, that lack of knowing who your dad is,
that selling of members of the family different directions, and sees it, of course, as deliberate policy of the slave owners.
But as we'll see later on in a lecture on the family, Tocqueville talks about how centrally important the family is to democracy in America.
This is an important thing to note that blacks have no families.
They have, in many cases, he said, even though there was a great slave rebellion in 1831 led by Nat Turner in Virginia,
slaves to a great extent, he said, have developed a habit of servitude, and some even admire rather than hate their masters.
And he notes that when some blacks in America have become free, their freedom, he says, has become burdensome to them.
They now no longer have somebody, if you will, to provide for their most essential needs, a little bit of food or a roof to sleep under,
however primitive it might be, and because of the habits that whites have forced blacks to adopt,
those blacks that are set free don't have a clue how to function in a world in which nothing like that is provided for them.
He observes also that in states where slavery has been abolished, most recently that would have been New York,
just a few years before Tocqueville arrived, that whites and blacks worship the same God, again, unlike the Indians,
most of whom worship different gods, they worship the same God, he said, but not at the same altar.
Again, a very powerful image. Blacks in the north worship the same God because of the mass conversion of slaves to Christianity,
but they don't worship at the same altar. Again, Frederick Douglass makes that same comment.
If you want to see who Frederick Douglass is really mad at, of course he's mad at slave owners,
he's really mad at white churches in the north that are segregated.
That is raised to a level of offense for Frederick Douglass and almost nothing else is,
and some of his most sarcastic and scathing prose is aimed at good old nice white Christians in the north.
Perhaps the most powerful thing that Tocqueville describes in his experience is meeting a man
in the south who had a black mistress with whom he had children and therefore his sons were also his property,
his sons were his slaves. This just, if you will, boggles the mind.
What kind of a world, what kind of a society, what kind of values allow that?
That by the laws this man is the owner of his own children. His own children have that subordinate status and he is perfectly free to sell them someplace.
I think this is sort of, you know, gets beyond Tocqueville's analysis. I just can't believe this is happening.
You know, at one point, for example, again, to use Frederick Douglass as a kind of parallel in a famous speech Douglass gave called the 5th of July speech.
He basically says, do you want me to get up here and give you a rational argument against slavery?
I'm not going to dignify slavery with a rational response. It doesn't deserve that. Isn't it obvious that people shouldn't own people?
Isn't it obvious that slavery makes other human beings worse? Why would I have to defend it? It doesn't need defense.
It needs sarcasm. It needs outrage, Douglass says. And I think Tocqueville agrees completely with that.
Tocqueville notes that unlike slavery in the ancient world to which sometimes American slavery was paralleled by slaveholders in America,
of course slavery in America is racial.
Greeks, by and large, enslaved other Greeks.
Who's it a look-to-like? Spoke the same language very often. But of course slavery in America is different. Slavery is racial.
And therefore, because it is racial, because you see the physical difference, the attitudes that people have toward blacks is going to be very hard to change,
even when, not if, when slavery is abolished.
He warns Americans, in a sense, slavery is going to end. It's just incompatible with Democratic freedom, incompatible with the age we live in.
And anyway, there's going to come a time when it's in whites' interest, majority of whites' interest to abolish slavery.
That's when it'll happen. It's going to happen.
But Tocqueville says, be very, very clear. When it happens, things are not going to be immediately better for blacks.
It's not the end of the problem that's caused by slavery in America.
You know, I think we can look back and say, well, there were all these passionate abolitionist groups in America.
We had one in our, in our village. Livingston County Anti-Slavery Society.
Well, in 1865, what happens to these anti-slavery societies? Because, well, there's no slavery anymore. Civil war's over.
That's been dealt with. That's history now.
And very often, I think, and people like W.E.B. Du Bois talk about this, there's that sense among some anyway that now that slavery's over,
the problem we addressed in being abolitionist is over. Tocqueville knows a lot better than that.
Even when blacks become free, he says, they will still be strangers.
Abolition will not get rid of prejudice of the master, the prejudice of whites in general, or any racial prejudice.
In fact, he says, abolition will actually increase the repugnance whites feel toward black.
These are very strong words.
Because, again, to summarize this particular piece, Tocqueville says, abolition's coming.
The abolitionists are going to win. Slavery's going to end. It's just all out of phase with, with everything else Americans believe and with, with democratic values.
And sooner or later, enough people are going to figure that out and it's going to go.
But don't think that's the end of the problem of race in America. And at least for a while, the problem of race will intensify.
Because of this, Tocqueville raises a question that was being asked in America.
Shouldn't we, whites in America, send all the blacks back to Africa?
Isn't that really the way to deal with the problem?
After all, this is about the time Liberia is set up in West Africa.
And of course, its capital is named for the fifth president of the United States, James Monroe, the city of Monrovia.
Isn't it time just to say, this whole slavery thing's been a mess. We never should have brought him here. Let's take him back.
Tocqueville says, in theory, that sounds great.
And there were movements to do this, but he said, let me tell you how few blacks have actually been sent back.
It's not a reversible problem in that way. It's just impractical. That's not a plate for you want to spend your energy.
It's not that he would oppose sending individual blacks back to Liberia if they wanted to go.
It's that it doesn't solve the problem because blacks are in America to stay.
And in a sense, the folks who are pushing, sending them back to Africa, are simply ignoring that reality.
They're not dealing with the real problem. They're trying to solve the problem in a totally, a totally impossible way.
And so Tocqueville takes that solution and says, that won't work.
I mentioned in a previous lecture, and even quoted briefly from Tocqueville, that Tocqueville perhaps has his starkest image of slavery
when he is on the Ohio River and looks at the left bank, which is Kentucky, and looks at the right bank, which is Ohio.
And in fact, I read you some passages from that section because what that illustrates is not just the way blacks are treated,
but what slavery does to whites and what slavery does to the economy.
Over here in Kentucky, not much is happening as slaves are running around willy-nilly.
Over here, he said, you hear the sounds of work and you see beautiful fields and the only difference is the same climate, same everything.
Only difference is it's slave over here and it's free over here.
Slavery degrades work and it degrades slave owners. Slavery, Tocqueville says, is bad for everybody.
Not only was Tocqueville struck by the evils of slavery, but even more so perhaps was his companion Gustave de Beaumont.
And as I mentioned in an earlier lecture, he wrote a novel called Marie or Slavery in the United States.
Other than the prison report, that was his major contribution to literature about America.
In the story, a white woman discovers she has just a bit of negro blood. She doesn't look black.
But once that's discovered, everything in her life has turned upside down.
And therefore the book deals in many ways with racial prejudice, even more than it does with slavery as an institution,
because although the book is set in Baltimore, people move around to places like New York where there was no slavery.
And in this novel, Beaumont makes an interesting move. He has Marie, the heroine, flee to live among the Indians.
And therefore what he does is link the Indian problem and the black problem.
In other words, it becomes the problem of race in America by having her among the Indians toward the end of the novel.
As I mentioned in an earlier lecture and as you will see in the written materials for the course, Marie has been translated into English and is available in paperback.
It's an interesting thing to read.
Tocqueville is shocked by in general the way whites treat blacks and Indians and how they justify it.
Let me read you a passage.
The conduct of the Americans of the United States toward the natives, on the contrary, breathes the purest love of forms and legality.
Or in another phrase, one cannot destroy men while being more respectful of the laws of humanity.
Americans, for all they've done to Indians and black, keep justifying it and saying what good things are, we're just being legal, we're following forms, we're following this tradition.
He is shocked by the way that Americans argue for their behavior.
He said even in Latin America where there's all kinds of cruelty against the natives, at least the Spanish are honest about it.
We're just out to get them.
He is shocked by the ways that whites justify their behavior toward black.
And Tocqueville concludes, if there is ever a revolution in America, it will be caused by the inequality of conditions between the other races and whites.
