Lecture 18 – Christianity and Democracy
Scholars have talked a great deal about Alexis de Tocqueville's own religious beliefs.
He was born, raised Catholic and died Catholic, and attended mass both in the United States
and during his life in Paris and the other parts of France where he lived.
In other words, he looks on the surface to be a conventional Catholic of the 19th century
in France.
However, biographers often say something like this.
At a fairly early age, Tocqueville lost his faith.
As I read Democracy in America anyway, I don't get a fair statement to make.
It may well be that a lot of his mass attendance was going through rituals about which he cared
very little.
He may have felt detached from the institutional Catholic churches and the dogma and all the
rest of it.
But it seems to me that it's fairly clear in reading Democracy in America that he was
a person of faith that he believed in God and also that he believed in the value of Christianity
and in their purest form Christian ideals.
And I think we'll see that as I talk about Tocqueville's look at religion in America.
Tocqueville believes that despite whatever corruption of both doctrine and institution
there is in Europe, that ultimately Christianity is compatible with democracy.
The reason for that from Tocqueville's point of view is rather simple.
Christ operated on the premise of the equality of conditions among humans.
Now obviously Christianity is more complicated than that and the Bible consists of more than
Jesus's sermons or the Gospels after all 80% of the Christian Bible almost is Hebrew
Scripture.
But Tocqueville basically just looks at this character of Jesus and says, not quite in
these words, Jesus, if he was not a small D Democrat, the premises of Jesus's moral
teachings are democratic premises.
And therefore Christianity is compatible with democracy.
Not only is it compatible, he says, it's necessary because democracy's inherent weakness, to
a great extent, is instability because as we all know, if the majority is absolute,
we know majority change their minds over and over and over again.
We know that from the last lecture in Tocqueville's opinion, Americans don't trust philosophical
systems.
So where is the underpinning?
Where is the ground?
Where is the unshakable base from which habits of the heart and then behaviors develop?
Equality, Tocqueville says, tends to isolate people and as we saw in the last lecture,
tends to stimulate the love of material well-being.
Religion counters these tendencies.
It's a very important principle.
Christianity can help to bring people together when the democratic tendency is to isolate.
We've talked about that and I will talk about it more lecture after next when I talk about
Tocqueville's ideas about individualism.
The tendency is to want to withdraw in a situation of equality of conditions, withdraw
into oneself.
What Christianity does is bring one out of oneself physically because you go to church
on Sunday and mingle with other people and obviously in terms of the teachings of Christianity
as well.
And if democracy encourages and leads to perhaps even too much love of material well-being,
well again the teachings of Jesus, the essence of Christianity as Tocqueville understands
it, are a real counter to that because you're reminded constantly in church that it's not
about material stuff, that material stuff doesn't last but immaterial things do and
that therefore the lessons of Christianity are a valuable corrective to some of the intrinsic
weaknesses of democracy.
Tocqueville is pretty concerned about that and pretty sure of what he says.
Christianity will not turn people away from for example the pursuit of wealth but it will
at least encourage them to pursue wealth honestly.
In other words it will bring a kind of moral structure to their desire for worldly things.
How you get worldly things matters.
What you're willing to do and not willing to do to acquire material well-being matters.
Just ask all those inside traders, some of whom are now in prison, that it matters how
one accumulates wealth.
Christianity will not sell most Americans on, bless it or the poor.
But it will convince them that it's better to be poor than to do certain kinds of things
to get out of poverty.
And that is again for Tocqueville of central importance.
Here's another danger of democracy Tocqueville says.
It's seeing things in the short term.
It's saying well this is what we should do because we see the benefit in doing this right
now whether it is a piece of legislation, whether it is a personal moral judgment.
I'm going to do this because right now it will make things better and make things better
for me.
We talked earlier in one of the lectures for example of why it's difficult for a democracy
to have a consistent foreign policy.
A policy that takes a very broad look and has it of a long plan to it.
Not just a plan to deal with this crisis and this problem and this nation.
So this tendency for the short run, remember Tocqueville says that laws have less long duration
in the United States than any place in the world.
Well basically religion points people toward a broader time frame and ultimately toward
eternity.
Okay you have to in your moral life, your personal moral life say well if I do this
now I'll get a little extra income but I also might end up in hell.
That's not a very good choice even though it's in my immediate self interest to make
it because Christianity gives you a view that's much longer and much broader and just as I
pointed out last time we will take political habits and apply them in our personal lives
so too do we take personal habits and apply them in our political lives.
If we are oriented toward that notion that we've got to look at the big picture in our
own personal lives and not just how this will benefit me tomorrow regardless of the long
run consequences that's a very good religious habit to carry into the political realm and
again helps to mitigate some of the weaknesses some of the dangers of democracy.
Governments he said should act as if they believed in the immortality of the soul because
this will force citizens to take a broader look.
In other words governments don't proclaim a theology but governments ought to have in
that sense the religious outlook the outlook that says you don't just look at immediate
consequences you don't just see what the value will be to this for me right now in
this second but you must put it into a much broader scale in time and you must put it
into a moral framework as well.
Governments need to operate that way.
This doesn't violate any notion of the separation of church and state something that Tocqueville
believes in very deeply and we'll talk about in a minute but it is saying that Christian
pattern of thought of analysis of behavior of action of seeing the future of considering
things from a long perspective is a habit that governments need because the tendency
in America especially the legislature as we know is to operate in the very short term
because the legislature most directly responds to the majority which again we know is fickle.
Governments should in that sense be Christian.
They should learn that lesson from the prophets from the Bible if you will and put that kind
of way of thinking, way of legislating, way of analyzing into practice.
I want to say basically without comment something that Tocqueville says about Islam because
obviously in the 21st century a lot of attention is focused on the Islamic world and the question
of whether the Islamic world is a fertile ground for democracy.
That's a question that's not going to go away or quite a while it seems to me.
This is Tocqueville's take.
Tocqueville says that since Islam's founder and since Islam's sacred text contain much
in it that is political and even scientific as opposed to purely moral principles he says
Islam cannot serve as the basis for a democratic and enlightened society.
Now let's just start by saying Tocqueville may very well be wrong about that and it's
interesting because when Tocqueville is comparing it to Christianity he seems to me to be more
or less ignoring the Old Testament which is filled full of political and scientific and
other kinds of stuff.
But let's for a second say that there's something to Tocqueville's argument.
If that is the case then it seems to me what we need to think about anyway is not that Islamic
nations can't have democracy, I don't know what Tocqueville says at all.
What he says is Islam, the religion of Islam and its sacred text, the Qur'an can't be
the basis for that.
Presumably what he means is in practical terms we need a more secular kind of democracy,
one that wouldn't be able to have as its base religious principles coming out of that religious
tradition.
So I'm not at all sure that Tocqueville knows anything significant about Islam and I don't
know enough about Islam to be able to say oh Tocqueville I think is right about that
or wrong about that.
He simply raised it as something he observes and raised the question if he is right what
do the consequences of that become in terms of Christian or Christian based democratic
societies helping societies in the non-Christian world move toward democracy.
I guess what I'm saying is if Tocqueville makes us think more complexly even if we reject
his analysis completely.
If we have to analyze these things carefully rather than mouth truisms about them probably
then Tocqueville has once again been valuable.
Again let me emphasize that Tocqueville says that there needs to be stability in democracy
because instability is one of its intrinsic defects since it is majoritarian.
And we saw in the last lecture that Tocqueville says philosophical systems can be the basis
of a stable set of ideas but can't be in America because Americans don't value these kinds
of systems.
So Christianity, religion in general, Christianity in particular needs to be that foundation.
Now Tocqueville says don't get me wrong.
Even though the basic fundamental principles of Christianity don't change from one country
to another, the same in France or in England or anywhere else in the world as they are
in the United States, nevertheless there is such a thing as American Christianity.
We might say that Christianity is enculturated in American democratic society just as it
is enculturated in other societies as well.
Tocqueville doesn't use that term.
But let me give you one example of what Tocqueville would mean by that.
He says this, but American preachers constantly come back to earth and only with great trouble
can they take their eyes off it.
To touch their listeners better they make them see daily how religious beliefs favor
freedom and public order and it is often difficult to know when listening to them if the principal
object of religion is to procure eternal felicity in the other world or well being
in this one.
What he basically says is, and he means this as a compliment, American religious leaders,
American preachers have adapted the basic Christian message to speak to Americans living
in a democratic society.
Hey, you know, this may not be what a preacher in France would say, but this is what a preacher
needs to say in America about Christianity because preachers in America have figured
out you address Americans where they are.
You don't just pat them on the head and say you're good boys and go home.
You challenge them where they are.
And since Americans love well being, that ministers address the issue of well being.
Not by saying give it all up and go live in the desert and be a hermit like some of the
great saints of the past sermons.
You're more likely to hear perhaps in Europe that very few people are going to pay any
attention to, but rather he's impressed by how the American clergy have adapted the
Christian gospel for their audience.
Now I think Tocqueville perhaps is not as aware as he might have been about how this
can ultimately reshape Christianity so that Christianity becomes comfortable.
You remember a book written in the second half of the 20th century called the Comfortable
Pew as a description of at least some parts of American Christianity.
And perhaps Tocqueville is more comfortable with being comfortable, if you will, than
some Christians today or then for that matter would say.
But at any rate, what he does say is that Christianity is very effective, not in radically
challenging Americans, but at least sort of keeping them morally in line and altering
their behaviors so that their goals are pursued in a Christian way.
Exactly what I said about Tocqueville a little while ago.
It doesn't make you Christianity doesn't make you not want to accumulate material goods.
What it does is guide you in doing it in a certain way and not using by whatever means
you have available to you.
He then turns to the question for a minute of Catholicism in America because there are
a lot of Catholics, although by percentage there's they are still a small minority except
in very limited areas such as Maryland.
And he says that what I've said about Protestants is generally true of Catholics too, that even
the Catholic sermons that I hear in America went to Mass while he was here are very different
than what I would hear back in the village of Tocqueville or in the city of Paris.
So that even the Catholic priest who have a more firm and unshakable doctrine and some
sort of direction from outside the United States, even there on the ground in your local Catholic
church in the United States, Catholicism too addresses, we might say, American themes
or is in the process of becoming Americanized.
Now Tocqueville also has a great deal to say about the separation of church and state.
Let me read you a brief passage.
Religion, which among Americans never mixes directly in the government of society, should
therefore be considered as the first of their political institutions.
For if it does not give them the taste for freedom, it singularly facilitates their use
of it.
There's a paradox here.
When is Christianity most effective in shaping the body politic in America?
But it's not talking directly about politics because what it does is provide a kind of
structure and moral framework in which people can act responsibly while acting freely.
Freedom after all can be used with incredible irresponsibility that we've all said that
to our kids somewhere along the way when we let them stay out a little bit later or let
them have the keys to the car for the first time, freedom brings responsibility.
But of course as long as one doesn't break a law, one can be as irresponsible with freedom
as one chooses.
That's what freedom is all about in a sense in the United States.
What does we always say?
We have the right to be wrong.
What Tocqueville says is religion provides a structure that helps America use its freedom
in ways that are good, in ways that are beneficial to individuals and in ways that are beneficial
to society in America.
Now let's talk about therefore the church as America's first political institution.
The clergy stay out of politics and stay far away from political parties.
This impresses Tocqueville a great deal.
Nobody stands up in the pulpit and says vote for Andy Jackson or vote for John Quincy Adams
or the world will come to an end.
That the clergy do not participate in politics at all either in church or out of church.
In fact some states, my state in New York being one of them, had written into its constitution
that clergy could not be elected to office.
They could not hold civil authority.
Of course those clauses are gone nowadays.
But the point is what it demonstrates is this need to keep political discourse in a
formal narrowly defined sense away from religious discourse and to keep that political discourse
direct partisan political discourse out of the pulpits.
Tocqueville had a conversation with a minister named Mr. Wainwright while he was in Auburn,
New York.
And I want to read you just a brief piece that Tocqueville wrote down of this conversation.
He had previously asked Mr. Wainwright, is there any point of contact between religious
ideas and political doctrines?
And Wainwright had said no.
So Tocqueville follows up with this question, how does that state of affairs arise?
And here is Wainwright's answer.
Because the ministers of the different sects have never interfered in politics and have
never been nor claimed to be a political power.
We feel that to do our, I'm sorry, we feel that we do our standing harm if we meddle
with any political matter.
A great many of us even abstain from voting in the elections.
That is what I, for my part, am always careful to do.
In other words, we don't get up and say vote for John Quincy Adams.
What we get up and say is a Christian believes in helping the poor or whatever it might be.
And we let our individuals in the congregation decide how to vote.
We don't lead them to a partisan political decision.
We lay out principles that we like them to evoke when they're considering political questions.
We don't belong to parties ourselves.
We don't advocate, we might say today, for particular legislation or candidates from
the pulpit and even in our private lives, we don't participate in politics.
And what Wainwright has said is that therefore churches are very powerful politically.
They're powerful because they don't discuss politics.
He says if churches engage in partisan politics, they will be treated like all other parties
and political associations.
People will start savaging them, attacking them in newspapers and in speeches and whatever.
Why those damned fill in the blank, Presbyterians, Methodists, Catholics fill in the blank.
What they are is a surrogate for this party or whatever.
And if I can attack that party, I can attack them because they're at surrogates.
If churches talk about the principles, the basic moral guidelines of Jesus, nobody's
going to attack that.
In fact, Tocqueville says even people, and there are very few of them who run for office,
who have no religion at all, can't say so.
If you go through the list today of the 535 members of Congress and see what it says under
religious preference, now you know some of those folks don't go to church.
And some of them, if they write down something generic like Protestant, probably means they
aren't associated with a particular denomination at all.
You can't find one that says none.
You can't find one that says don't believe in God or atheist.
That Tocqueville says even the revolutionary areas in America, in fact, respect Christianity
and act respectfully toward it.
They will not if Christian denominations engage in politics.
If they do, they will influence some people a great deal.
Some people will listen to what the minister or the priest say in the pulpit and do it.
But in really influencing a few, they will lose their influence over the many.
They will lose their more general influence.
And you know, we can think of various times in modern American history where from both
the Democratic and the Republican side, it seems sometimes that some branch of Christianity
has been at surrogate.
And I think that we've seen exactly what Tocqueville talks about, whether it was attacks on Catholics
when Padre so-and-so gets up in the pulpit and says vote for John F. Kennedy in 1960,
or whether it has been certain associations that are perceived between certain groups
of Protestants and Republicans.
So that I think Tocqueville makes a very powerful point here, that religion should be, must
be, is in his own day, very powerful in shaping this Democratic nation.
But it will lose its power to shape this Democratic nation if its denominations begin to be involved
in the details in the partisanship of the political process.
That politics ultimately is about interests and religion is about love.
And when religion claims to be about politics, Tocqueville says, meaning again, very specific
kinds of legislation or candidates, that will be dangerous to Christianity and it will do
damage to democracy by weakening this foundation that needs to be there because of the majoritarian
based instability that exists in America.
Churches direct mores, habits of the heart, Tocqueville says, also by the way churches
regulate families and the way they regulate the behavior of families.
For example, churches he says, probably somewhat simplistically, are sovereign over women and
it is women who make mores in America.
Again, think of what he says, okay?
Churches preach certain kinds of moral values that particularly affect the way women think
about things.
Women take those values home, they practice those values in their home, the men develop
those values and then the men go out and act based on those values in politics.
We'll say more about women as Tocqueville understands their roles in a democracy a little
bit later.
He says that marriage is more respected in America than anywhere else in the world.
He says that when a man leaves the political arena and comes home, remember politics can
be pretty chaotic, at least they can look pretty chaotic from time to time when you
go to a rally or whatever.
When a man leaves the political arena and he comes home, he enters a place of peace
and order and when he goes back out in the public square, he will take some of that peace
and order with him so that politics over time will become somewhat less chaotic and
more ordered and more peaceful.
I want to take up one last issue that Tocqueville throws out for us to think about because in
the one hand it seems quite counterintuitive.
He argues that Roman Catholicism at its base is favorable, maybe even more favorable to
democracy than Protestantism.
Now on the surface that seems sort of wacky because, well, first of all, we know that
democratic origins in the United States are very deeply rooted in a kind of Protestantism.
That is to say the Puritans, those Calvinists that settled in to New England.
Secondly, you say, wait a minute, if Christianity, if democracy rather, is about equality of
conditions, how more hierarchical is any institution in the world than the Roman Catholic
Church?
You've got a pope and you've got bishops and you've got priests and then you've got laypeople.
So in a hierarchical system, in a dogmatic system like Catholicism and one that's been
imported rather late into America, at least in big numbers, how could Tocqueville argue
that it may be a better fit with democracy than Protestantism?
Well, first of all, let's take up the Catholic side.
He says Catholicism is something akin to an absolute monarchy.
Within a parish, one person, that is to say the priest, is sort of really the boss, but
everybody else is equal.
And it's the equality of everybody else that Tocqueville sees as the democratic element
in Catholicism.
Again, it's not a multi-tiered church within the institution of one parish.
It is rather one guy at the top and everybody else is equal below that.
And therefore, from a particular perspective, there is a great deal of equality of conditions.
There are a lot of Irish Catholics in New York City by this time because a lot of Irish
have come to the New World.
This is before the Irish potato famine, but they still come.
One of the things they did was build canals like the Erie Canal, for example.
And what he sees about this immigrant Catholicism is that by and large, they are poor.
Not all of them, but by and large, they're poor.
And he says all classes intermingle at the altar.
If you go into many Protestant churches that existed when Tocqueville came, what you will
discover is, for example, that some of the pews in the front were bought or rented and
that, therefore, the wealthier people sat in front and the not-so-wealthy sat in the
back, you'll find those kinds of pews labeled with people's names, for example, in the
Old North Church in Boston.
You'll find it in a zillion of them that still stand in New England and in the Midwest and
whatever.
Tocqueville says, therefore, there's a kind of equality, a kind of primitive, not very
well thought out democracy in Catholicism that doesn't exist even in Protestantism.
If Protestants are more independent than Catholics, Catholics seem to operate on a more equal basis
than Protestants.
And in fact, Tocqueville predicts that religious belief in the future in America is going to
go one of two ways.
Many are going to be drawn to Catholicism and some are going to move away from Christianity
completely.
He's pessimistic for the long-term success of sort of middle ground Protestantism in
America.
