Lecture 19, Education and Culture in Democracies
Elections to Tocqueville talks some about education in a strict sense, obviously talks
a lot about education in the broadest sense of what that means, but he does talk a lot
about American culture, about literacy, about reading habits, about the pursuit of science
and knowledge, about the arts and whatever, and by and large what he says is not very
flattering and not very hopeful that there is this sense that education and culture are
broad but mediocre in America and he never quite breaks out of that way of thinking.
Furthermore, as I've mentioned before, Tocqueville tries to distinguish what things are American
because of American exceptionalism and what things are American in the sense that they
are democratic qualities or results or causes, so to distinguish those things that are lessons
to be learned and those things that really wouldn't apply places other than America.
This is a difficult thing and it's very difficult in the cultural and educational realm.
For example, he's not very hopeful that America is going to produce great literature or great
science or great theater or any of those things, and yet as we look back at Tocqueville from
the perspective of the beginning of the 21st century by any reasonable standard, whether
you look at the list of Nobel Prize winners, whether you look at the quality of America's
greatest universities, whether you look at the Pulitzer Prizes for great novels and plays
and nonfiction writing and so on, the easy thing to say is Tocqueville just missed it.
What he thought was democratic or American in fact perhaps was simply a phase of the
development of America rather than something that was always going to be so in America.
And furthermore, we have to say he sort of missed even things that were going on while
he was here. The Transcendentalist movement was beginning and he spent time in Boston.
He seems to be unaware of the Transcendentalist movement in its beginnings and therefore
I think in some ways this is one of the most frustrating topics to read about in Tocqueville
because the easy response is, guys, she got an awful lot of stuff wrong. He just missed
some things or maybe he just made the best prediction he could but America has simply
gone in different directions. But at any rate, the question obviously is, is Tocqueville
very useful to us today in talking about these themes? And I want to suggest that even though
he is, I think, wrong in some of his predictions about American education and culture and probably
wrong about some of his observations at the time, nevertheless, he does raise some questions.
He does lead us to look at our educational and cultural heritage as well as contemporary
society perhaps with a little bit different lens than we would otherwise. And even if
we don't agree with the way he understood things, I still think that Tocqueville can
be useful. In general, education and culture are broad but shallow. More people read in
America than in Europe but they do not read great books. More people possess works of
art but they are often mass produced and somewhat tawdry. Much of the high culture of America
and he recognizes there is a high culture in America comes from Europe. So we need to
look at this general picture of Tocqueville. The great culture comes from Europe, America
broad and shallow. Education in America, he says, focuses on science, commerce and industry
with a plan to produce practical results. Why do we have our kids learn to read, to write,
to calculate and so forth? Well, that's simple. So they can make more money, invent nifty
things to make things more efficient or to be able to produce things better, commerce,
industry and a practical kind of science. And I think if today we read a lot of what
school boards and government agencies that run education bureaucracies talk about, they
do talk about, you know, we are preparing people for the jobs of the 21st century. Nobody,
I think, would object to that. But in many ways, Tocqueville is a little bit worried
that education is so immediately practical that there's some things missing. That education
is broad in terms of the number of people but it doesn't provide the depth of understanding
and thoughtfulness and appreciation of the arts that you would get in some other educational
systems. In fact, he says, you know, what America needs, a few great universities rather
than a lot of bad colleges. Again, this is an observation made in the 1830s. He does
say, interestingly enough, that at those great universities that should exist, the classics
should be studied. But they're only going to be studied by those at the great universities,
a kind of elite, because they are the exact people who should be reading the classics
because, after all, many of the classics, those of ancient Athens and some of those
of ancient Rome before the time of the Empire, were written in democracies and republics
and written for the elites of those societies. And so it would make sense that the elites,
and of course he doesn't mean a formal elite, but the elites of American society need to
benefit from that learning. But Tocqueville doesn't seem to think that a sort of broad
study of the classics would be particularly useful. He makes this statement, I think there
is no country in the civilized world where they are less occupied with philosophy than
in the United States. Because, as we've seen in the last lecture, America depends on religion
rather than philosophy to provide unshakable principles. And for a lot of reasons, that
love of the particular, that sort of fear of grandiose intellectual schemes and only
a relatively small number of people can understand, which seems to go against American egalitarianism
for all those reasons, basically, Americans don't much like philosophy. Another thing
he says is that people use the reason of the individual and make judgments for themselves.
If you will, what we might call moral or philosophical judgments are more individualized in America
and more based on the individual's experience as opposed simply to book learning. We saw
in an earlier lecture that that's one of the things Tocqueville emphasizes, that people
trust their own experience. And therefore, when they make decisions, they take their
own experience into account more than perhaps people do in other countries. This is part
of the process of what I'm going to call individualism because it's a word that Tocqueville uses
in the next lecture. So we want to focus on that a little bit later. But at any rate,
people make use of reason as individuals more than in other countries. He also says
that, and I repeat this from an earlier lecture, Americans may not like broad philosophical
systems, but they don't object to, and in fact, they make a lot of, easy and facile
generalizations. Let's turn specifically to science for a minute. America seeks practical
outcomes rather than scientific principles. Perhaps to put that in a language that we
would think of today, America is better at producing inventors than theoretical scientists
because what America wants from science is, to use the old phrase, a better mousetrap.
What we want is a new drug that cures this disease. I'm not saying that's bad, nor is
Tocqueville. He's simply pointing out that Americans are less interested, he says, in
theoretical science and more interest in the kind of science that will help our physical
well-being. Again, a better mousetrap, a pill to make headaches go away, and so forth. The
kind of broad theoretical science that Tocqueville talks about, he says, requires, and this is
his word, meditation. And democracies, he said, are not conducive to meditation. They're
not meditative societies. They're feverish societies. They're societies with a great
deal of competition and activity, and things are constantly changing. To be looking for
sort of the great, unshakable, unchanging scientific precepts, therefore sort of goes
against those basic habits of the heart of moving forward, trying to make progress, changing
things all the time, and whatever. He also gives this example. He says the steamboat,
which of course was invented in America, is changing the world. But there is no law of
mechanics that has been discovered in America. Again, America is good at inventing things.
And again, he's not criticizing that. Hooray for the steamboat. He's after all not a troglodyte
on matters of technology, but he's simply trying to make a distinction. America is good at sort
of, we won't call it applied science, more than it is good at theoretical science. It's
interesting, by the way, that even though he mentions the steamboat, and indeed the steamboat
is, of course, a very important American invention, it seems that in general he was not very attuned
to some of the extraordinary technological achievements of the United States. Again, in
a 700 page book that's based on part, in part, on experiences he had, let's say, traveling
from upstate, all the way across upstate New York, he never mentions the Erie Canal, which
you know, even so audacious a thinker as Thomas Jefferson thought was just too wild an idea
ever to try. But the artificial river, as we know it, was open in 1825. It was six years
old and it was changing New York. It was changing its economy. It was changing its settlement
patterns and everything. Tocqueville seems not to have gotten it. So I don't think we
want to rely too much on Tocqueville for his comments on technology and science and their
relation because although he said some interesting things, there is an awful lot that, you know,
he just was almost literally stumbling over that he seems not to have seen very well.
What Tocqueville does worry about is that if we lose sight in America, he says, of scientific
principles, if we move forward, if you will, in inventions, in applied science and not
move forward in theoretical science, pretty soon, he says, maybe there won't be much
practical science either. They need to go together. They need to move hand in hand.
I think I'd be willing to argue that America, in fact, did that made that adjustment if
Tocqueville is right in 1831. But anyway, Tocqueville is concerned in a sense that these
two ways of doing science, science as a means to a better mousetrap and science as sort
of a set of intellectual principles to be discovered, Tocqueville believes they need
to go hand in hand and he worries that there's not an even balance in America. That's something
I think that is worth pondering. With regard to literature and the arts, Tocqueville says
America has produced great quantity, but not great quality. And there are reasons for that.
It's not accidental. First of all, he said, let's not forget the puritan origins of American
democracy and the influence of puritanism beyond New England. And well, he says puritanism
was not favorable to the development of the arts. That there just wasn't a great deal
of art of a certain kind anyway. Certainly if we go into New England churches, we're
struck by perhaps the beauty of the architecture, but they don't have stained glass windows,
they don't have paintings on the wall, things, of course, that Tocqueville would have been
used to in Catholic France. So he notices that that puritanism and the arts are not
always very much thought of together. Secondly, he says, like everything else, Americans pursue
the arts for their practical value. Remember, everything has to be useful. Beautiful things
have to be useful, Tocqueville had said. And anyways, an artist, and of course he doesn't
mean just painters or basket makers, he means novelists and poets and all the rest. Artists
have profit as their goal. They're not different than the rest of Americans. Americans have
this feverishness, this desire for physical well-being. They want nice stuff. They want
a certain level of prosperity. And that is one of the most fundamental habits of the
heart in American democracy. And so it indeed applies to the world of artists and artisans.
They want to make the most money. And the way they do that is by making things in units
that have the least cost. And therefore they look to mass produce goods. Tocqueville gives
a specific example. We may not think about this as art, but he did. He said, now that
there's an attempt to make watches, timepieces, for more people and to make them cheaply so
more people can have them, the quality of watchmaking has gone down. So what happens,
he says, is, OK, I'm a watchmaker. I want to maximize my profits. Now how do I do that?
I can make a few watches and sell them for a great price and have a very limited audience.
Or if I can make a whole bunch of these watches cheaply and sell them at a profit, the profit
of selling many, even though less on each individual watch, will be greater than the
sum of the profit that are great on just a few watches. And so the tendency is to want
to make more things, but to make them more cheaply. And so there is a tendency in this
society because of the economic drive of the artisans, after all, they're Americans too,
to make more things that are of less quality. By the way, I think Tocqueville misunderstands
not so much America, perhaps, as the model on which he bases this, the thing he contrasted
with, which is the Renaissance in Italy, the Da Vinci's and the Michelangelo's and the
Giotto's and all the rest of it. I think that he fails to understand how much those artists
were businessmen. Now, certainly they worked for elite audiences and they worked on commission.
But the bottom line, some of these guys were really good at wheeling and dealing and getting
commissions and we read some of those contracts that were made today between artists and they're
negotiating over exactly how much of this kind of blue I have to use because this kind
of blue is more expensive than this kind of blue to make. And I think Tocqueville knows
less than perhaps he thinks he knows about what produced that great art of the Italian
Renaissance. He also says that artists in America are interested in a kind of realism.
They're interested in copying nature while he says in the Renaissance, artists wish to
surpass nature. A painting is meant to be better than nature because, for example, you
can have something in focus close up and then you can also have the background in focus
in an Italian Renaissance painting that the artist wanted to surpass nature. All Americans
want to do is to reproduce nature. He also says that artists tend to focus on what he
would regard perhaps as somewhat trivial topics. That is to say artists produce works that focus
on the details of private life. Here's still another painting of mom and dad at home around
the dining room table or posing for a family portrait or whatever. I think Tocqueville thought
that artists in America were less likely to address the great themes of the world than
the artists in America were who sort of focused in on daily life and the here and now and
the immediate. So Tocqueville was somewhat put off, if you will, by the arts, especially
the visual arts in America. He stops for a minute and says, let me tell you about Washington,
D.C. He says, after all, it was built as a nation's capital. It didn't just develop
as a nation's capital. He said, it's a modest city with a grandiose plan. What does it prove?
What does Washington, D.C. prove? He says, first of all, it proves that government can
sponsor large works of art. Now, of course, when we come to Washington today, the great
monuments we see are almost all built after the Civil War, so Tocqueville didn't see any
of them. But nevertheless, he's aware of sort of the monumentality that can be attached
to a national capital because the people of the United States collectively, through the
Congress, can afford to build grandiose things. But, he says, Washington is deliberately grand,
but really, he says, how dare they name the hill where the legislature meets? Capitol
Hill, C-A-P-I-T-O-L Hill. Because, he says, that name derives from the Roman Hill, the
hill in the city of Rome, the capital line hill. And, how dare the Americans think that
this sort of mediocre town in this still new and developing country can claim the name
of the most grandiose seat of government in the history of the world? Tocqueville is a
little bit put off by American pretentiousness. Let's turn to reading and writing. Tocqueville
says there are many books in bookstores, but most of them are not by known authors.
Go into a bookstore in America, he says, and what do you see? Elementary treatises, religious
tracks, and political pamphlets. That a lot of people read, a lot of people buy things
to read, but they don't read the best, they don't read the most profound stuff. The great
literature that is in those bookstores, again, is largely from Europe in particular, of course,
from England. He notes that just about every log cabin has a copy of Shakespeare, but he
doesn't quite say why. Is it because people think they should read Shakespeare? Is it
because they want to be able to say, I've got a volume of Shakespeare? But he does observe
anyway that in those log cabins, perhaps along with the hatchet, the Bible and the newspapers,
is often a volume of Shakespeare. He says Americans in general like books that are easily
read and do not require a lot of background to understand. And so he says, for example,
they like sort of how to do it books, very practical books. They like small books, books
that perhaps don't take too long to read, books that you don't need to have known a
lot of history or classical mythology in order to understand. American literature is sort
of short and simple by and large. He says also it doesn't seem to follow any fixed rules.
There are certain implicit rules in the way you write certain kinds of poetry or prose
in Europe. There don't seem to be any rules in America. Anybody not can just write anything
he or she wants to write it in any way in any form. Now, of course, I think there are
those who would look back today and say, boy, isn't that wonderful that America was able
to break out of certain kind of models, expand the notion of what the novel might be or expand
the topics that are regarded as appropriate topics for various sorts of poetry. We may
see that today as one of the strengths of America not being too dependent on European
forms. Tocqueville doesn't quite see it that way. However, he says, you know, writing that
arises in aristocratic countries has a certain set of rules for each genre and a certain
set, a certain kind of style. Literature consists of large books with erudition and profundity.
American literature is small books. Even though they've got a lot of energy and imagination
in them, they don't have the erudition and profundity. He looks at poetry, has some things
about poetry. American poetry, he says, is very much about people and does not look back
to the past. We think of how many poems are rooted in the past, stories that are reworked
from mythological sources or from historical events or whatever. Tocqueville says, American
poets don't do that. It's sort of about people. And he even notes that American poets, he
said, don't actually pay much attention to nature, even though one of the great themes
of American history is the conquest of nature in the sense of dealing with the frontier.
He just sort of notes that and thinks that is odd. Theater, that's something to say about
theater. He says, the theater that I've observed emphasizes more emotional rather than intellectual
pleasures. And again, he doesn't think theater is going to develop very well in America for
two reasons. One, of course, Puritan didn't like the theater. Okay, this is a particular
art form that Puritans were not crazy about. And secondly, and I made this point in an
earlier lecture, he says Americans are fairly humorless with regard to themselves. They
are not very good at laughing at themselves. They don't like satire. They don't like to
be made fun of. And therefore, comedy is not going to flourish in America. He has some
things to say about the English language. Now you've got to remember, Tocqueville is
a Frenchman. And we know even today how the French, perhaps more than any other nation
in the world, guard their language and are very, very careful in the regulation of their
language and not allowing too many foreign words in and whatever. I mean, what is it
that Henry Higgins says? The French don't care what they say actually as long as they
pronounce it properly. There's always this notion of the French and their language that
we think of. Whether they're true or not, we all have these tales that we tell about
being in France and trying to speak pretty good French and thinking we made ourselves
intelligible and people sort of looking at us as if we're great pariahs because we didn't
quite say something correctly. Whether that's a fair stereotype or not, it is important
to say that Tocqueville as a Frenchman has a particular view of language that's shaped
by the culture in which he is raised. He points out that language, English, is democratic
in America. For one thing, he says many new words are added. The Americans just make up
a lot of words. Now remember, Tocqueville speaks English and reads English but he's
not a native speaker and he's not yet married to his English wife so his English isn't as
good as he got probably later on when in fact his wife never learned French very well and
they spoke English at home to one another. But he said a lot of the new words are political
jargon or new words that are made up to describe gizmos and inventions and new words that are
used in business transactions. In other words, it's the daily life of things Americans do.
They're good at making things, they're good at making money, they're always involved in
politics and those activities produce new words. Secondly, he says that Americans have
this habit of liking to make up really fancy words to mean simple things. He probably learned
this by the way from looking at posters when he traveled around America, advertisements
for various things and the example he gives is that he saw apparently a poster where a
tightrope walker was called a funambulist. Come and see the funambulist perform and he
says in a funny way Americans like these big fancy words that there's something attractive
about that. He also says that in America because language, remember everything's majoritarian,
language changes meaning because majorities keep changing and so words change meaning
or gather multiple meanings and become less clear and less precise. And Tocqueville doesn't
like that very much and he notes in fact probably with some annoyance that some of those words
that have become more broad, more vague and less precise are words that they borrow from
the French. That probably rankles Tocqueville a little bit. The last topic I want to talk
about is one that I think Tocqueville has very important things to say. Whether he's
right about poetry and science and literature and theater, again we can decide and whether
he at least raises things for us to think of, we can decide. Some people will say yes,
some people will say no. But when he talks about the theory and writing of history I
think he has some very interesting and important things to say. Traditionally he says in Europe
history emphasizes individual people as the causes of historical change. That in this aristocratic
world view of Europe whether it be England or France or wherever, where in a sense in
an aristocracy a few people matter a lot and everybody else doesn't matter too much. That's
sort of what an aristocracy is in some ways. Then what historians do is focus on individuals
and so you get biographies and you get eras that are named for people. You know let's
focus on Napoleon, let's focus on the age of Louis XIV, let's focus on Martin Luther
rather than perhaps simply all of the social elements of the Protestant Reformation. That's
the way Europeans traditionally write history. However for reasons that I think are clear
Americans take a very different approach to understanding the past. Americans emphasize
general causes and here's why Tocqueville says, with the principle of the equality of
conditions historians can't examine all the individuals who matter. You can't go out
and talk about during a presidential election what every elector is thinking and yet every
elector has an equal vote because after all we live in an egalitarian society and since
historians cannot examine every individual in an egalitarian society they turn to broader
and less personal causes for understanding the past. Now Tocqueville says there's some
dangers in this. First of all if you see history as something that involves vast and impersonal
sources you can be led to a fatalistic view of history. It could just, it can only happen
this way. No individual or group of individuals can change the way things happen because these
were vast impersonal causes. Tocqueville says in America that can be reinforced by certain
strains of Protestantism especially Puritanism which emphasize if not a fatalism at least
a kind of denial of free will. After all Calvin said human beings don't have free will all
that was obliterated in the Garden of Eden when Adam and Eve ate the fruit. Tocqueville
however stands back and says you know what we need in the world is a kind of history
that does both. That Americans may exaggerate broad impersonal forces and aristocratic societies
might exaggerate the role of the individual in shaping events. What we need is a history
that takes both of them into account. That therefore American historians, historians
in America need to be more aware of how individuals can make things happen and Europeans need
to learn from Americans. Tocqueville takes sort of a moderate kind of compromising stance
saying the Americans don't have it exactly right but neither do we. We need to learn
from the Americans. They need to learn for us and I think this is of all his cultural
comments the one that I find the most interesting and challenging now.
