Lecture 21, The Desire for Wealth in America
I mentioned in an earlier lecture that by and large, Tocqueville doesn't seem real
sensitive to economic explanations of things that happen and developments that take place
in America.
But Tocqueville does take out some serious time to talk about the importance of people's
desire to acquire wealth.
The desire for money and economic well-being spends a great deal of time actually discussing
why it happens in a democracy, why it's natural to a democracy, and what the dangers are to
a democracy, and then, as he always does, how a good democracy can mitigate the dangers
to itself if it's aware of the problem.
Here's where it starts.
In a democracy where there is, by definition as we know by now, equality of conditions,
there's a longing for people to achieve material well-being.
This is more than just a desire not to starve or not to be exposed to the elements at night.
It's part of that notion that is related to our concept of individualism.
Remember what he says, that when everybody's alike in the public square, when everybody's
alike with all their political rights and whatever, there's a tendency to want to withdraw
into some sphere in which you are special.
That's the whole individualism point that Tocqueville makes.
Well, another side of that same tendency is to want to get wealthy.
Okay, I still only get one vote on election day, and I still don't have people tip their
hats to me, and I still don't have any legal privileges.
By God, I'm wealthier than that person.
I have more money than that person.
But we can go to such a great economic thinker as Tevye in the musical Fiddler on the Roof.
Remind you of that one great line in If I Were a Rich Man, when you're rich, they think
you really know.
You get a certain kind of distinction that goes with wealth, and since there are no legal
distinctions in America and fewer social distinctions than in other societies, this is a way in
a sense to be special.
And so, although it's a tendency, perhaps, always to want to have a little bit bigger
house or to have a little bit more food on the table, in America it's particularly important
to recognize this as a tendency of democracy.
He says this acquisitiveness of wealth is a middle-class passion, and most Americans
then, as well as now, are middle-class.
He also says that it's important to remember that most people in America who are rich were
once poor, and therefore there is this sort of nouveau rich phenomenon in America.
People who are rich but were once poor are intoxicated, Tocqueville says, with their
little enjoyments.
And so it's not an inherited wealth, it's an acquired wealth that has a different effect
on the society.
America he says, and he observes this in a number of places, in democracy in America,
in his letters home, America, they feverish place.
You know, always running around, it's a busy place, and this is where he wants to start
his discussion of some of the problems of this feverishness for democracy.
What are some of the problems?
Here they are.
A taste for well-being can easily put people into the hands of someone who's willing to
satisfy their desires.
We certainly see this tendency in political campaigns in modern times, because how many,
despite all the rhetoric, how many candidates ultimately say, if I get elected, you're gonna
have more money.
Either wages are gonna go up, or taxes are gonna go down, or whatever.
And when economic well-being is so important, Tocqueville says, there's a danger of citizens
being willing to hand over government to somebody that can make them a little bit better off.
Is that really the criterion you want to decide who holds elective office, for example, whoever
can offer the crowd the most?
If the crowd's willing to go along with whoever offers them the most, Tocqueville thinks that's
not a very good thing for democracy at all.
Secondly, he says, a desire for gain leads people to ignore the bond that exists between
the individual good and the common good.
We've talked about self-interest well understood.
That is to say that whole notion that I will give up something that might be in my immediate
self-interest because I have a broader conception of self-interest.
I understand that in giving up this little advantage, or not getting cash back right
now, I am doing something that makes the society better generally, and ultimately that makes
me better off.
But if simply acquiring property, getting richer than the next guy, is job one, or even
the only job that you're thinking about, then there will be that disintegration of self-interest
well understood, and you will go back to a much narrower self-interest that pits people
against one another because it's me against you, not how can you and I both give up a
little bit, work together for a larger good, a larger, happier village or town or whatever
it might be.
So he's very concerned about the fact that people who are so anxious to acquire money
know that they are operating in their self-interest, but lose that sense of self-interest well understood.
He also says that in a society where everybody's anxious to acquire wealth, ambitious men can
take power, and then once they get power, the fear of anarchy will keep them in power.
In other words, you get people in high office who aren't fully committed to all the complexities
of democracy, all the wheeling and dealing and compromises that take place in democracy.
You get ambitious men holding office, and then what they'll say is, keep me or things
will fall apart, and that fear of anarchy is a great fear in a society where people
want to acquire wealth because anarchy, think this is fair to say, is not good for business.
So he is concerned about these factors of well-being and how they can be inimical to
the preservation and development of democracy.
Let me read you a passage.
It's a fairly long passage, and it's a way of summarizing what I've said up to now,
but I think Tocqueville's words are interesting and his tone is interesting.
Materialism, he writes, is a dangerous malady of the human mind in all nations, but one
must dread it particularly in a democratic people because it combines marvelously with
the most familiar vice of the heart in these people.
Tocqueville favors the taste for material enjoyments, because in a sense, I'm paraphrasing,
now everybody has access to them in a way that wouldn't be true in other societies.
To continue to quote, this taste, if it becomes excessive, soon disposes men to believe that
all is nothing but matter, and materialism in its turn serves to carry them toward these
enjoyments with an insane ardor.
Such is the fatal circle into which democratic nations are propelled.
It is good for them to see the peril and restrain themselves.
Usually Tocqueville doesn't give little moral lessons like that, but here's one where he
stops to say, you know, Americans really have to be aware of this tendency.
How once the acquisition of wealth becomes so important to people, it sets off a series
of actions and changes in the society that ultimately are damaging to democracy.
Usually it's implicit in what he says that forewarned is forearmed, but he says it explicitly
here.
I think he's really worried about this.
For one thing, perhaps because of his aristocratic background, he's somewhat put off with what
he doesn't quite, but almost characterizes as American greed.
He says it's sort of under control.
It's not outrageous yet.
It's not absurd to use the word the translator chooses here, but nevertheless it can become
absurd.
The person who wants a nicer house today can become the person who wants 17 extra rooms
for no reason at all day after tomorrow.
And Tocqueville understands the more things go that direction, the more dangers there
are for democracy.
And so part of it perhaps is a matter of taste for him.
He just doesn't like all this sort of grubbiness, this sort of everybody always seemed to be
operating for economic reasons.
Everybody's trying to get richer all the time.
It sort of puts him off because it certainly isn't the world he personally grew up in.
But nevertheless, he's able to see through his own concern that we might say is a matter
of taste and recognize some of the dangers for democracy.
He says also in a democracy equality of conditions usually means people are discontented with
what they possess.
I always remember one of the early insider trading scandals of the early 1980s when one
of these first guys that got caught went to prison.
And I remember reading about him and reading that at the time he did his deed, at the time
he cheated, he was worth $117 million.
Now you know, for most people the reaction is, well, gosh, if I have $117 million the
last thing I need to do is cheat to get some more.
That buys me as many cars and boats and trips and all the rest as I would ever possibly
want or be able to use.
But we also, I think, know enough to realize that's not the way people sometimes think.
There's never enough.
There's always somebody who has more.
There's always some new advantage to be gained.
There's always a kind of personal satisfaction that goes with, you know, made an extra six
mil today even though I have not a clue what I'm going to do with it.
And I think Tocqueville sees this, that in this particular society where there are so
few ways in which we are differentiated from one another in public because of equality
of conditions, this is one and therefore it can become almost kind of a possessing factor
for Americans.
They want and they want and they want because it's the one place that may gain them that
sort of special status.
I remember at one time I was working at a charity dinner and I knew almost everybody
who came because I had organized it and sold the tickets.
And so I would greet everybody, hi, Sally, hi, Fred, come in, let me seat you over here
and so on.
And the person who came, who was the richest, and I knew that, richest by far as it turns
out, when she walked in I addressed her by Mrs. even though I knew her first name.
And I realized a little bit later thinking about this, that she's the only person I had
addressed as Mr. or Mrs. rather than just Fred and Sally.
And I realized it was because she was rich.
It was the way that I showed her respect even without thinking about it.
And I think Tocqueville sees that in America.
And again, it bothers him.
If people never have enough, if people have this desire to get more, where do they turn
to get it?
And he says they turn increasingly to commerce and industry because commerce and industry
are the quickest ways to get rich.
It's not in law, it's not in medicine, it's not in teaching.
It's in commerce and industry, it's in business, we would say today, that is the quickest and
perhaps the easiest way to get fairly wealthy fairly fast.
Now one of the things that bothers Tocqueville with is this.
If in fact some of the smartest and ablest and most ambitious and far-seeing people,
if they all say, well, my goal is to make money and therefore I'm going to go into industry,
they're not perhaps going to seek the world of politics.
They're not going to seek to run for office.
In a sense, industry and business skim off some of the brightest and the best because
being involved in politics, well, you look around today and you say there are a lot of
people who go into government service today, especially at the various high levels, who
take a big pay cut to do it, to make a big economic sacrifice to do it.
And so what he fears is that a lot of the people who are most able, who could and at
least should seek out some sort of political, public, elected or appointed role won't because
it gets in the way of their number one passion, which is making money.
Tocqueville is also very concerned, very concerned that the development of big business, of industry,
is here just really before the big time industrial revolution happens in America.
But it's already taking place in England and he sees evidence, I think, of the beginning
of bigger industries developing in the United States.
If there is a continued development of industry, it could lead to the creation of an aristocracy
in America.
And fundamentally reform the kind of society America is, that there are many different
kinds of threats to democracy.
But one of the threats to democracy is it could become at least a de facto aristocracy.
If that happened, who would the aristocrats be?
Tocqueville's talked about an aristocracy of lawyers, but I think he sees that as sort
of a benign idea because, again, he's a lawyer, but lawyers have an important role to play,
on the other hand, in preserving democracy.
But I think he fears that the captains of industry, the big business guys, could form
a more pernicious aristocracy and that concerns him, as I said, a great deal.
Here are some of the developments that can happen, Tocqueville says, that could lead
in that direction.
Tocqueville says, workers in big companies, in big industry, we're talking about producing
things now, making things, workers lose their facilities of applying their minds to their
work, that the kind of work that's done in factories sort of narrows you.
Because you do one thing very often, and you do it over and over and over again, and you
do it for many hours a day.
This is, after all, before the 40-hour work week, and ultimately, it's a narrowing experience
for the people who do it.
It's more monotonous and whatever.
Then what happens is workers become more skilled, but less industrious, and the more skilled
workers become at some specific job, the more they are unable to leave that job.
If I'm the guy who does these seven particular mechanical operations in this factory that
has this machine that makes this thing, and I'm really good at it, that's good.
The problem is, nobody else needs me to work for them, and therefore I can't leave, I
can't really move very far, and of course what that does is allow my employer in theory
not to treat me terribly well, because my employer knows I really don't have any options.
I can't go to another place that will pay me the same or better to do this same series
of operations because no other factory has the same series of operations.
So what he worries about is workers, therefore, becoming weaker and more dependent on their
employers.
Or I guess we could put it another way.
There's always going to be some gap economically and in other ways between the guy who owns
the factory and the folks who work there.
But Tocqueville says that over time that gap is going to get broader.
The gap is going to be bigger economically, bigger in terms of what actually happens on
the job.
In other words, what he says is while in the rest of the world, meaning the American Society
at large in this case, we are moving toward a quality of conditions, but within a more
micro-society, the society of this business, this factory and whatever, there'll be greater
disparity, there'll be less equality of conditions.
Workers and masters differ more and more.
Industry ultimately lowers workers and raises the masters.
Question, Tocqueville says, I see this happening.
I see this tendency.
Can it continue to go on forever?
In other words, can that gap, will it just automatically stop at a certain point or will
it continue to grow and grow and grow?
And if it does continue to grow, it has very serious implications for democracy.
What it's going to mean is that there are going to be a few opulent people at the very
top and a lot of people, he says, who live in misery.
That might be something of exaggeration because in other places, Tocqueville says, well, really
most Americans don't live in misery, but there's going to be a huge economic gap, a few people
who are excessively rich, if you will, and a lot of people who don't have very much.
And it's an interesting question.
Clearly Tocqueville, when he says equality of conditions doesn't mean economic equality,
but to have equality of conditions as a whole, the premise for democracy working after all,
can there be less and less economic equality?
Does greater economic inequality ultimately do harm to the broader picture of what democracy
is all about, the equality of conditions?
He says, here's where it can go.
If there is a greater gap between the workers and the master, the people who own the business,
the people who have the widget factory and whatever, then one of the consequences will
be they'll live in different areas, they'll separate, and they won't see each other outside
the factory because they won't live in the same places.
Now think about that in terms of the kind of civil societies and local government we've
talked about.
Where do people mingle?
Where do people get together?
Well, they belong to civil associations, and certainly some of those are, if not neighborhood
bound, at least bound to very small geographical areas.
They go to the church that's nearby.
They form the let's get oak street paved society because they want their street paved.
Those are the kinds of civil and political associations that make democracy work.
But even if both the, what he calls the workers and the masters, even if both of them join
civil and political societies, they're likely to join different ones.
One of the reasons is simply a kind of housing segregation that will happen.
Another thing that will happen is as the rich become less and less in contact with people
who still have needs, those rich will be willing to turn over the taking care of the poor to
charity.
In other words, when you depersonalize this, when the people who have the money don't know
the people who need it because they don't live in the same neighborhood, they don't
see them any place, and therefore they have no personal feel, no personal connections
to them, and therefore the tendency is to say, government, you take care of them.
Okay, I don't want to be bothered with that.
It's a social problem.
It's not my problem.
I'm not going to solve it.
I guess my taxes will help solve it, but you guys solve it.
Well, we know where that can lead.
Government doing more things, centralization of administration, and those things, as we
know, are bad for democracy.
He also says that, as he describes it, two men, a leader of industry and a worker will
see one another, but not know one another.
And that's not good for civil associations, equality of conditions, and so on.
What Tocqueville says he's just described in taking us through this scenario is the creation
of an aristocracy.
An aristocracy based on wealth rather than an aristocracy based on birth, or land owning,
or family name, or any of those things, but an aristocracy nonetheless.
In fact, Tocqueville issues this warning, let me quote, still, the friends of democracy
ought constantly to turn their regard with anxiety in this direction toward the problem
he just talked about.
For if ever, listen to this, for if ever, permanent inequality of conditions and aristocracy
are introduced anew into the world, one can predict that they will enter by this door.
If there will be an aristocracy in America, this is what it will be like.
And it will be a real aristocracy, not a kind of benign aristocratic sense that lawyers
perhaps have about themselves, or even that others have about lawyers.
It will become a bad aristocracy, it will do real damage to the democracy.
I think although perhaps the details of the scenario of Tocqueville are not necessarily
all right in his predictions, I think it is worth asking today whether in fact we have
moved toward a kind of permanent aristocracy of the wealthy.
One thing, by the way, that Tocqueville didn't fear.
He did not fear that wealthy people would then simply go and grab political offices.
The aristocracy that they would form would not necessarily overlap into the political
office holding, but as we've seen today in part because of the amount of money that's
infused in campaigns, a lot of times very rich people are able to turn their wealth
into political power as well.
Now Tocqueville I think didn't so much see this coming because obviously he couldn't
anticipate the cost of political campaigns.
When he heard about David Crockett's campaign or other, what he heard about is the cost
of rum in a campaign.
Well, I don't know how much rum cost in 1831, but probably relatively less than big market
TV ads in the 21st century.
So in some ways I think if Tocqueville were to magically return today, he would not only
perhaps see moving along some of the things he described toward an aristocracy of wealth,
but he would probably be even more worried about how that aristocracy of wealth has also
made a certain kind of claim on a number of high political offices and how it's important
to have wealth or at least be beholden to it in order to run for high offices.
I believe I read the other day that 96% of congressional candidates who outspend their
opponents win.
In other words, if you're looking for a single good predictor of which candidate's going
to win a race, check their financial situation, check and see how much money they've raised.
Given the fact that it's very often hard to raise money in little amounts, a lot of
local and regional political parties have reached out to candidates saying, well, we'll
give you the nod if you will pay for your own campaign.
This has happened recently in my congressional district where a person stepped forward and
said, I'd like to run for Congress and the party officials say, well, we've never heard
of you before.
And his basic response was, I will pay a million and a half of my own money for the campaign.
And the answer came back, I'm exaggerating, but not too much, endorsed.
I think Tocqueville would even be more concerned with the formation of an aristocracy of wealth
today if he saw how it came to be fused in many cases with political power and the holding
of high office.
Tocqueville, however, says that we need to appreciate the fact that there are some mitigating
factors.
There are some things in the system that we have that keep the desire for wealth and the
creation of an aristocracy from happening.
Let's talk about what they are.
First of all, he says, American selfishness is enlightened.
Yeah, Americans are acquisitive and they're more acquisitive than he would like and maybe
even a little bit greedy.
But Americans still, to a great extent, understand that it's good to sacrifice a part of their
immediate self-interest for self-interest rightly understood.
It's very important that principle stay in place.
It's very important people don't lose that sense of self-interest well understood.
Secondly, he says, America's passion for material well-being is, after all, limited.
Americans, he says, I think this is interesting, have created softness but not absurdity.
Yeah, they want luxuries and they want nice things, but they're not crazy about it.
He says there's some context in which it happens.
Now, another factor that we can bring in from a previous lecture, religion in America is
the most important restraint.
If you live in a culture that's feverish in which people all around you are trying to
get wealthier, where do you ever hear the other side of the story?
Whoever talks about the other side of the coin, the answer is the minister and the pulpit.
Religion works against isolation.
It works against the desire for immediate fulfillment.
Americans, Tocqueville says, want the best in this world, but they're not willing to
risk their status in the next world.
In other words, those words from the pulpit, which are words about the long haul and not
only the long haul, but the really long haul, eternity.
After all, somewhere in church, you can't go too long before somebody reads you, blessed
are the poor.
If you will be perfect, sell everything you have and give to the poor, those words appear
in church and they become the subject of sermons.
They may not become radical social sermons, but you know what ministers say.
Look, when Jesus said, blessed are the poor, you don't have to go out and live in rags,
but you've got to be very aware of the responsibilities of wealth and you've got to be aware of the
needs of others and you've got to remember that ultimately you are a caretaker for the
property that God made, not an absolute owner.
Those are the kinds of things you hear in moderate American sermons, Americanized Christian
sermons, exactly the kind of thing Tocqueville talked about in his discussion of religion.
And Tocqueville once again in this issue, as in so many others, worries what happens
in America if in fact religion fades in importance, that there's no voice speaking to remind
you that you've not only got to face the judgment of your neighbors and how nice your
house is, you've got to face the judgment of God where how nice your house is really
doesn't factor in.
And so I think in the right conditions, the desire for living well, not a bad desire,
the importance of religion is there in the right conditions, Tocqueville says.
There is such a thing as an honest materialism that is not corrupting.
Tocqueville believes it's possible, doesn't necessarily believe it exists in America.
But he does want to remind us, materialism can be dangerous to everybody and especially
democratic people.
