Lecture 22, The Democratic Family
I want to read to you the second paragraph of this big 700-page book, Democracy in America.
In the first paragraph, Tocqueville has, as I've read to you very early in the course,
described equality of conditions as the central issue in democracy.
Paragraph 2.
Soon I recognize that this same fact, that is to say equality of conditions, extends
its influence well beyond political mores and laws, and that it gains no less dominion
over civil society than over government.
It creates opinions, gives birth to sentiments, suggests usages, and modifies everything it
does not produce.
One way I summarize what Tocqueville says here is, democracy is not just a form of government,
it's a way of life.
And indeed, as a way of life, as we've seen in the last several lectures, democracy in
fact changes relations among citizens.
Or to put it another way, democracy is not just what goes on in the town hall, it's
also what goes on on Main Street.
The democracy is not just a form of government, it affects the way citizens relate to one
another.
In this lecture, I want to go one step further than where we've been, and look at what Tocqueville
says about how democracy modifies relationships within the family.
There is such a thing as a democratic family.
And after discussing family as an institution, I'm then going to turn particularly to what
Tocqueville has to say about women, women's role in society, women's role in the family.
And I think therefore, although it seems we're moving farther and farther away from traditional
discussions of democracy, when we talk about how husbands and wives get along, how fathers
and sons get along, but Tocqueville would argue that would be incorrect.
Democracy is a way of life and it touches everything.
Tocqueville has the historical perspective to understand that the idea, the concept,
the institution of family is dynamic and not static.
In fact, he makes an interesting statement that modern scholars certainly have agreed
to and supported.
And that is, if you look at an ancient society like Rome, he says the Roman family, as they
understood it, no longer exists.
In other words, the very definition of family has changed.
It's changed from the ancient Roman family, both in terms of what kind of authority the
father has over the family, which yet sometimes in Roman history literally was life and death.
But it also changes in terms of who is part of the family, who counts as being part of
a family.
In ancient Rome, it was much more likely to include people who were not related to you
by blood, that is to say various kinds of retainers and clients and so forth.
So we need to realize that family is something, the definition and reality of which change
over time.
Tocqueville understands that.
Now let's talk about some of the factors of the democratic family.
The distance, he says, between fathers and sons is less.
Again, if you go back to the Roman family in particular, you think of the paterfamilias
or even in the Middle Ages, in stuff I do my research on, Francis of Assisi's dad when
Francis was about 24 years old, locked him in the cellar, I mean imprisoned his own son.
We might say that's not nice, but it was perfectly legal because the relationship between father
and son was defined in law and custom very differently than it is in democratic societies,
Tocqueville says.
Paternal authority in a democratic family is diminished.
And Tocqueville says, as boys grow up, the bonds between father and son are somewhat
loosened.
Because we've seen not just the fact that American society has individuals, there have
always been individuals, but we have a kind of individualism that's a tendency in America.
That is to say, therefore, that although sons remain sons and love their dads and send
father's day cards and all those sorts of things, there is a kind of general loosening
between generations as children grow up.
And remember also in America, because it's such a mobile society, sons are much more
likely to leave home and head for Ohio or if you're already in Ohio, Illinois, or if
you're already in Illinois beyond the Mississippi River.
So there is a kind of fluidity, a kind of movement where it's not that family isn't important,
but it means something different and certain kinds of bonds are differently conceived, differently
perceived, differently lived out in a democratic family.
In fact, Tocqueville says, perhaps with some exaggeration, in a democracy, a father is
only a citizen who is older than richer than the son.
In other words, after all, when I grow up and reach adulthood, daddy and I are equals
in the eyes of the world because we're both citizens.
Our votes count one.
Again, nobody has to tip his hat, there is no formal aristocracy.
And therefore, daddy and I are equals when we are in the public square as soon as I reach
adulthood and can, among other things, vote and sign contracts and all those sorts of things.
So who is daddy?
Well, from one point of view, daddy is simply an older version of myself, not a superior
version of myself.
He's richer than I am, I may be deferential to his judgment, but ultimately we are equals.
And therefore, the way the world perceives us in the public square affects the way we
perceive one another.
Again, there is such a thing as a democratic family.
He also points out that although in some ways bonds are loosened because of this equality
that exists once your child becomes an adult, nevertheless, Tocqueville says, I've noticed
that fathers are more intimate with their sons and have sweeter relations with their
sons than they do in aristocratic societies.
So on the one hand, if you will, there's a kind of equalizing and in certain ways a
kind of loosening bonds, but there's another kind of bond, a sort of much more purely
emotional bond that really is stronger.
You know that daddy and I are equals, but by golly, I like to give him a hug.
There's a kind of intimacy.
At the same time, there is a kind of loosening of certain other elements of filial relationships.
Interesting, careful, subtle observation Tocqueville makes.
Now one of the specific issues he looks at, some critics, by the way, have argued he spends
too much time looking at this, is how inheritance laws in a democracy affect family relations.
Here's basically his argument.
Inheritance laws are different in a democracy because states in America at this time have
tended to get rid of primogeniture, to get rid of the principle that the eldest son inherits
everything and rather change to an equal distribution of property among children or at least among
sons.
Now this has obviously a couple effects.
One is it divides the inheritance.
If you have four brothers, the five of you split up in some real way, not just dad's
money, but dad's farm.
And therefore you have a smaller pot of money and a lot smaller farm than dad had.
So in some ways, it has the effect of making everybody of the next generation, when there
are multiple sons anyway, poorer.
But as Tocqueville points out, there are also some things that mitigate that problem.
Number one is the frontier.
I may have now only a small amount of land, but you know what I can do?
I can work out a deal where I'll sell it to one of my less adventuresome brothers, and
I'm off to Illinois, where I can buy a great big piece of land and build a cabin and settle
in.
And by the way, Tocqueville would say, and then I might do that again 10 years later
and move to Kansas or some such thing.
So the mobility and the opportunity to get land and to make money, the frontier really
therefore provides a sort of, what I want to say, a kind of barrier, a kind of stopping
of the disadvantages of the elimination of primogeniture.
There's a second thing though that happens when you get rid of primogeniture.
One of the problems with the eldest son getting all the land, Tocqueville says, is that the
other sons are jealous.
And you know, there are back in the middle ages and so on stories of people sort of bumping
off the eldest brother because if the eldest brother outlives dad, eldest brother gets
all the land.
I get nothing as a younger brother, so you clunk them over the head with your basic
mace and all of a sudden I get to inherit the land rather than get sent to a monastery
or whatever.
So there was a lot of jealousy among family members in a world of primogeniture.
But Tocqueville says in America, every brother gets what's his equally and therefore it binds
brothers together more.
It creates stronger bonds in that part of the family relationship.
Brothers intermingle better because there is less jealousy.
So Tocqueville argues that although democracy loosens social bonds, tends as to want to seek
at individualism, it nevertheless deepens certain family bonds.
And the democratic family is different than the family back in France.
The word means different things.
I want to turn now to Tocqueville's discussion of women in America.
Very important issue.
He observes that women in general and in America in particular make mores.
It's women who shape the habits of the heart, a sort of synonym for mores that we talked
about a few lectures ago.
And remember, Tocqueville has said there are three main reasons for the success of American
democracy, right?
One of them is its geography and its history, its accidental things.
Secondly are America's laws.
And third and most important are mores.
It's American mores, more than the Constitution, more than the frontier, more than the Puritans
coming to the new world that are responsible for the success of democracy in America.
And women are the ones who make mores.
Consequently, Tocqueville says, everything affecting women in America is of great political
interest and consequence.
If you want to get down to the nitty gritties of the success of American democracy, despite
the fact that women don't vote, women don't stand up by and large and give political
speeches, despite all that, you've got to focus, maybe even first, you've got to focus
on women in this society.
Let's talk about, Tocqueville says, how young women, how girls are raised in American society.
He by the way makes some distinction between how Protestant girls are raised and how some
Catholic girls are raised, although in both cases what he emphasizes is the importance
of religion in their upbringing.
At any rate, here's what he says, as girls, they are left largely to themselves growing
up in America.
They are freed gradually from the tutelage of their mothers.
They are allowed to think for themselves, to speak freely, and to act alone.
They come to know the vices and perils of society.
They don't keep women ignorant of the nitty gritties.
They don't cover their eyes.
They don't try to make them avoid learning about some of the cruder, crasser sides of
society.
It's not so much about formal schooling, although it is that it's much more the attitude in
the home.
They are more independent, allowed to speak for themselves, do things that they themselves
decide, and again, they are allowed to be informed.
So women form habits as girls, and this is extraordinarily important, Tocqueville wants
to argue.
By the way, it strikes me that as I read material that Tocqueville wrote back home, well, where
did he talk to young women?
Of course, he's a young guy, he's 25 years old.
The first place was, I know I go back to my old home stand here, is in Canandaigua,
New York, where he was much taken by the unmarried, this is very important, unmarried daughters
of John C. Spencer.
And in those conversations that took place with Spencer, presumably in the parlor or
on the porch of his house in July of 1831, we certainly can imagine Tocqueville saying,
boy, a young woman in France wouldn't say that, or young woman in France wouldn't have
seen that, or experienced that, or even known about that.
And I think probably it was from experiences like that, that he realized that young women
were raised very differently, they were much less sheltered, they were much less ruled
over sort of in a minute by minute basis than young girls would have been in France.
They grow up full of confidence.
He says, American girls have pure mores, but not chased minds, meaning their morals
are pure, but they're not pure out of ignorance of vices.
They know what vices are, they know what's going on in society, if you will, you know,
they may know their prostitutes.
So they aren't moral out of ignorance, out of knowing what some of the less moral choices
are.
They're moral and they understand, in a sense, what they haven't chosen, what goes on in
the world.
This is a powerful situation that Tocqueville describes.
He also says women are armed with reason, although he also says they are honest and cold, developing
judgment at the expense of imagination.
Now these are my words, not Tocqueville's, but in a sense he sees women as being somewhat
more, well, masculine than in French society.
They are trained much more like men are in America than women are in France.
I don't know whether you remember, in one of the early lectures I pointed out that Tocqueville
said that women are more likely to hear a speech in the public square and go form a
club, at least to talk about it, than they are to sort of join the theater guild, that
they are more alert to the issues of the day and are interested in talking about them.
So there are these strong, educated, worldly, pure, morally pure women.
I mean, wow, that didn't get any better than this, in listening to Tocqueville describe
the development of women in America.
And then, and then they get married and everything changes.
Everything changes.
When women get married in America, Tocqueville says, essentially they agree to surrender
their independence and women continually in marriage sacrifice their own pleasures.
They know what all there is to do.
They know enough about politics.
They know all of these things because of the way they've been educated and the independence
of mind they have had as young women.
When they marry, they give it all up.
Women are then confined to a small circle of interest and domestic duties.
Or to use Tocqueville's paradox, women exercise their independence of mind which they gained
as young girls by choosing to endure the sacrifice of marriage.
Their independence allows them, in a sense, to choose, rather than to have forced upon
them, to choose dependence.
It is an odd paradox that Tocqueville sees.
Now he also says, let's look at that husband and wife.
Let's look now inside that marriage.
Democracy and its principles have brought down many of the barriers in the home between
men and women.
The middling economic conditions of most people, remember most aren't real rich and
most aren't living in misery, that middling condition has led to women remaining inside
the home handling the details of domestic administration.
If they were real poor, remember, women wouldn't have anything to administer in the home.
If they were real rich, they could hire people to administer everything in the home.
But the economic conditions that are part of democracy, the more or less general middling
quality of most people's economic situation, means that men and women both have a lot of
work to do in the family because she neither has nothing to administer nor somebody to
administer for it.
So while the husband is doing the work for pay, he's making the money outside the home
or he's out in the fields all day, the woman is sort of the social manager and business
manager and whatever and that's sort of a full time job is what Tocqueville implies.
We all know that there's a kind of division of labor, it's not that one side labor is
on the other dozen, there's a kind of division of labor in America between men and women.
Tocqueville raises this question, obviously there are many, many differences and indeed
inequalities between men and women.
One obvious one is men vote women don't and women can't as we know, question, will the
equality of conditions in America finally affect and alter that inequality?
Let me read you a passage from Tocqueville on this issue.
I think that the social movement that brings son and father, servant and master and in
general inferior and superior closer to the same level elevates women and must more and
more make her the equal of man.
In the basic principle here is clear.
If the foundational principle of democracy is equality of conditions and if he's right
saying that democracy is not just a form of government but a way of life, what you do
in public affects the way you act with others in private, then isn't it inevitable that
women and men are going to become more equal, closer to equal, obviously the better way
of saying it?
Isn't that inevitably going to happen?
And Tocqueville says, well I've heard some of my fellow Europeans comment on this and
there are those who assume that pretty soon or at least eventually men and women will
essentially be alike.
They'll be doing all the same things and they'll be a kind of total equality.
In other words, essentially other than obvious physical differences, there won't be any
real difference between men and women.
Tocqueville doesn't agree with that.
Tocqueville says the Americans actually have taken this idea of equality and not applied
it that way because what America has done in the family is say, okay, here are the two
jobs that have to be done.
Making a living, taking care of all the house and that includes some of its budget and whatever,
not just dusting or taking care of the kids, those are the two jobs.
Now what we're going to do is say, man does one, woman does the other.
Each respects what the other does.
Each recognizes the importance, the vitality, the necessity of both of these jobs.
So in certain ways they are equal but they're not alike.
And Tocqueville says that's the way the family has developed in America.
Women deal with external affairs and enter the political sphere.
Women do the work within the home and family.
And Tocqueville says, no doubt wrongly, there is no home in America in which this is not
true.
Now Tocqueville spent a long time in America, 10 and a half months.
He traveled a lot of miles, 7,000 miles.
He was in some homes like the Spencer home in Canandaigua and others.
But obviously he didn't have a glimpse at the entire sociology.
He might have been in a log cabin but he probably wasn't in the hovel of an urban poor person
in New York or in Baltimore or in Philadelphia.
And certainly he wasn't in the home of let's say free black people and whatever.
And so just like you will read sometimes that boy back in the 50s, which is when I was growing
up, you know, mothers stayed at home and dads went out and worked.
Well, the first thing to say is, by the way, that was true in my family, is that's a crock.
I know many friends of mine whose mothers worked as well as the father outside the home
because they had to to make ends meet.
Is it not just a phenomenon of the second half and the later second half of the 20th
century?
Together it's the extension into different social groupings of something that was always
true among certain people in America.
So I think probably Tocqueville is not right about the fact that there is no home in America
where this division of labor between men and women isn't true.
Tocqueville says it's just sort of obvious every association has a head, meaning there's
a president of the Kiwanis Club and there's a president of the NRA.
Every association has a head and the association we call the family, Tocqueville says, is run
by the man.
The man is the head of the family.
As he says, women aren't much praised because, of course, they don't do things outside the
home.
They don't give great speeches or pass laws or all those sorts of things to get praised.
But women are well-esteemed.
They are the inferiors to men in society, but they are the equal of men intellectually
and morally.
Again, interesting where the inequality can exist without, in Tocqueville's mind, harming
the notion of the inequality of conditions that are fundamental to a democracy, but also
where men and women truly are equal in America in many spheres in which he says they are
not equal in Europe, in France, in particular.
I want to read you one more line from Tocqueville about women in America because it really is
quite a stunning statement he makes at the end of his discussion about women in America.
It's a fairly long passage, but it's worth reading.
Americans who have allowed the inferiority of women to subsist in society have therefore
elevated her with all their power to the level of man in the intellectual and moral world.
And in this, they appear to me to have admirably understood the true notion of democratic process.
Tocqueville's comfortable with this.
He admires this.
As for me, I shall not hesitate to say it.
Although in the United States, the woman scarcely leaves the domestic circle and is in certain
respects very dependent within it, nowhere does her position seem higher to me.
And now that I approach the end of this book, this is way toward the end of the book, where
I have shown so many considerable things done by Americans.
If one asked me to what do I think one must principally attribute the singular prosperity
and growing force of this people, Americans, I would answer, listen to these words, I would
answer that it is in the superiority of its women.
I've been writing a lot of pages up to now.
I've been talking about a lot of reasons why America works and some reasons why perhaps
it doesn't work as well as it should.
Somebody sort of, you know, puts a gun to my head metaphorically and says, OK, Tocqueville,
number one reason why American democracy is flourishing.
He says my answer is the superiority of American women.
Very interesting answer.
I want to play a little game now, a serious game, intellectual game.
Tocqueville was here in 1831.
In 1848, 17 years later, came the first women's rights convention in Seneca Falls, New York.
A place, by the way, that Tocqueville passed by almost literally went through the village
and perhaps did, but if not, he came on the edge of it.
He might not have remembered it.
He doesn't mention it in his journal.
But at any rate, we know about that meeting held primarily thanks to the work of Elizabeth
Katie Stanton.
By the way, Susan B. Anthony was not there, one of those historical errors we often make.
Frederick Douglass was.
And one of the things about that convention was the declaration of sentiments that begins
with these words.
We hold these truths to be self-evident that all men and women are created equal.
Question.
What would Tocqueville have thought about that?
He may have heard about it.
After all, he was alive and in the most active part of his political career in France in
1848.
He might not have ever heard about this because after all, it was hardly in the days of 24-hour
news cycles and cable news networks.
But how might he respond?
It's a good intellectual game in the sense it makes us look not only at Tocqueville's
words, but at some of the implications of things Tocqueville says that he might not
see all the consequences of.
On the one hand, the obvious answer is Tocqueville would be shocked because after all, he said
women and men have made the decision that women do domestic things in marriage and men
do the sort of social and political things.
That's the division of labor that men and women have agreed to as he saw in America.
But I wonder if on thinking about this some more, Tocqueville might have gone over some
of his own observations and analysis and maybe not been so surprised because after all, might
Tocqueville not say, wait a minute, you know, maybe it's unrealistic to say that women are
educated to be independent, worldly, knowledgeable, strong, and all these things, can they really
or at least can all of them really just say, I give all that up when I say I do?
Is that realistic to think all that stuff is just goes out of them and they say, OK,
from now on it's household, household, household, and all that stuff, otherwise forget about
it?
I also wonder whether Tocqueville took into consideration that there were women raised
that way who never married.
Let me give you one name, Susan B. Anthony.
And many of the women who led the women's rights movement were in fact unmarried, although
by no means all.
A little bit of Katie Stanton had a whole brood of children, for example.
So I'm wondering whether Tocqueville might not have rethought this if he heard about
and understood what the Seneca Falls Convention was about.
I think to raise the question is for us to do something very useful with Tocqueville.
A, what does he say?
B, might not, he need to rethink all of the way he put those things together.
