Lecture 23 Are Democracy and Excellence Compatible
Toward the end of Democracy in America, Tocqueville, even more than usual, speculates about some
big things, some big questions. Let me look at one passage right at the end of the book
that I think will help to frame what we're going to talk about in this lecture. The spectacle
of this universal uniformity in America saddens and chills me, and I am tempted to regret
the society that is no longer. Tocqueville, after all, was an aristocrat, and even though
the aristocracy in France was different when he was growing up than it was before the French
Revolution, remember he was born during the Napoleonic Age. Nevertheless, there are some
things about this aristocratic society that he liked, that he was comfortable with. Let
me give you one example. He says in talking about virtues, that honor, he says, at least
in a particular definition of it, honor, he says, is an aristocratic virtue, and it will
disappear in America, because America doesn't have an aristocracy. So Tocqueville understands,
I think, the greatness, the importance, the magnitude of the shift that's going on, and
he does have nostalgic moments, and the passage that I read to you was one of those nostalgic
moments. In some ways, the bigger question, even then, oh shucks, aren't we losing a lot
with the demise of aristocracy, the bigger question really is whether or not the world's
better off with the equality of conditions, whether the trade-offs, in a sense, are worth
it. And in particular, one of the ways he deals with that question is to ask a question
that has been the concern of people with regard to democracy since ancient Athens. Is democracy
compatible with excellence? This is a really important question, and it's a tough question.
And in order to begin to deal with it as Tocqueville does, let me go back to those ancient Athenians
and suggest two different perspectives we find in that ancient literature. Probably the most
eloquent statement of the defense of democracy in ancient Athens is the funeral oration of
Pericles, which is found in Thucydides' history of the Peloponnesian War. And basically what
Pericles argues, not in these words, is that democracy stimulates excellence because in
a democracy, all citizens are stakeholders with public responsibilities, and in a sense
what citizens do is rise to that occasion. You give citizens, you give people more responsibility
for their lives, both private and public, and by golly they'll act well. They'll act
better than those same people would have acted had they not been given responsibility. And
so Pericles argues that in fact excellence is compatible with democracy. On the other hand,
his fellow Athenian Plato argues something different. Plato in the Republic, in particular in
Book Eight, for those of you who are Republic fans, Plato argues that democracy is government
by the majority rather than, of course, government by those who know. The majority largely don't
understand matters of great importance, those abstract truths that need to be understood by
those who govern. And therefore democracy is fundamentally unstable and unjust. It is government
by the lowest common denominator. In fact, Plato rates aristocracy, government by the excellent,
as the greatest of all forms of government. So there in the starkest terms is the debate.
One is that in a democracy, ordinary people are raised up. And in the other argument,
the people who are the best are dragged down by the majority. So which is it? Let me give you
an interesting modern perspective on this. Obviously one of the most quotable and quoted
people of the 20th century is Winston Churchill. Let me give you Churchill's quickie on this.
Democracy, he says, is the worst form of government except for all the others that have been tried
from time to time. This is a brilliant line, I think. And it may be one that Tocqueville
agrees with. That is to say democracy is not perfect. Democracy has flaws, democracy has
dangers, democracy has problems. But ultimately what democracy does is better than what any
other form of government does despite all of its flaws. And I think Tocqueville falls
somewhere despite his nostalgic moments in that category. Democracy may not in a kind of idealized
mindset be the best form of government, but its flaws are perhaps more fixable
and less drastic than the flaws of other kinds of government. And I think for Tocqueville it's
important to say, therefore, where democracy is weakest, what the greatest dangers are of
democracy as well as what its achievements are. So that it is a mixed bag in some ways. It isn't
democracy, all good, every other form of government, all bad. But it's a much more nuanced issue.
And what Tocqueville especially wants to do is explore this question of whether or not democracy
simply is kind of mediocre. In other words, it raises up the bottom, but it lowers the top.
And if that's so, is ultimately that a better government than governments that do different
things than that. Let me read you a passage that will start this particular discussion.
Do you want to give a certain loftiness to the human spirit? A generous way of viewing the things of
this world? Do you want to inspire in men a sort of contempt for material goods? Do you desire to
give birth to or to maintain profound convictions and to prepare for great devotions? Is it a
question for you a polishing mores of elevating manners of making the art shine? Do you want
shine? Do you want poetry, renown, glory? Do you intend to organize the people in such a manner
as to act strongly on all others? Do you destined to attempt great undertakings and whatever may
be the result of its efforts to leave an immense mark on history? If this is, according to you,
the principal object that men ought to propose for themselves in society. Do not take the government
of democracy. It would surely not lead you to your goal. Here again, Tocqueville is asking,
and to some extent answering the question, is democracy sort of mediocre?
Does democracy in its lifting up the bottom also sort of squish down the top so that lots of little
things go right, but the greatest things are not achieved? Let me tell you some of the terms
that Tocqueville uses to discuss this question. He says that America has the fewest number of
learned people and the fewest number of ignorant people of any country in the world.
Very interesting notion. He says, therefore, you can look at America and American education
from two perspectives. You can say, wow, America educates more people percentage-wise than any
other country in the world, measuring things like literacy rate or whatever it might be.
But if you look at it from the other side, you say, you know, there aren't very many
really, really super well-educated people. Education has breadth but has less depth
than other societies. If we look for the learned, there is a very small number, he says. If we look
for the ignorant, America appears to be the most enlightened nation on earth. This is a useful
lesson for us, I think, because it reminds us, of course, of things we know about statistic. We
can look at numbers and we can read them a number of different ways. But it is important, I think,
because, for example, we have debates about this today. We talk a lot about how does our
educational system measure up to that of Japan or England or France or the Czech Republic or
name another country. And we try to look at, you know, what can 15-year-old Czechs do and what can
15-year-old Japanese do in mathematics and what can 15-year-old Americans do and so on.
And we have this argument and we look at the numbers and we say, guys, you know, our schools
really aren't very good. But one of the counter arguments to that is, of course, everybody's
still in school at that age, but also more than that, that we don't track children at such an
early age so that instead of, you know, 15-year-old someplace only learning how to glue widget thing
into widget thing, all of our students are studying math and history and science and language and so
on and so forth. In other words, the counter argument to our students aren't achieving what
those other students are achieving is we have more students achieving more things
that all of our 15-year-olds are studying math and science and history and so on. So,
indeed, it is a matter, to some extent, of perspective. Which question is the more important
question to ask? Is it the question about breadth or is it the question about depth? Is it a question
of an elite education of a few who will be the elite or is it a question of making sure everybody
has a certain level of education? Tocqueville really does ask the question both ways and
understand the way you ask the question determines the answer. And that's pretty interesting.
What he has to say about American education. It's not just the answer that, yes, America is
mediocre or yes, America is excellent. It is. Which question are you asking? Are you asking about
the number of Americans who are reasonably well educated, reasonably well informed, able to
participate in political discourse? Or are you asking, you know, how many can explain everything
that Newton never said and, you know, read Homer in the original? Very important to think about
those questions. Tocqueville takes up a related issue, one that clearly bugs him. And that is what
he finds in general is that America's office holders, including the very highest office holders,
are not a very impressive lot. Now, it seems to me he has been colored by a couple of experiences.
One of those experiences, for example, is the experience of meeting President Jackson. Go to
the White House for a social call. They don't talk about policy. But clearly, because he tells us
directly, we don't have to infer it. He's not impressed by Andy Jackson.
Doesn't think he's terribly smart, terribly sophisticated, and sort of wonders about a
country that has a president like that. This sort of rude, in some ways, frontiersman,
as I think he pictures, Andrew Jackson. And probably Tocqueville's view is colored by something like
the stories he heard of Davey Crockett. Again, Davey Crockett might be the king of the wild
frontier to us, especially people who were my generation and had their coonskin caps.
But Davey Crockett was sort of a semi-literate
passer out of Rome during the campaign, member of the U.S. House of Representatives.
Tocqueville hears these stories when he's in the South. And so I think he sort of put off
by that. But sometimes I think he forgets that Jackson's predecessor was John Quincy Adams,
whom he met twice and for whom he has a great deal of respect. That the guy I keep talking about
from Cannondale, New York, John C. Spencer was, in fact, at one point a member of the U.S. House
of Representatives, a member of the New York State Assembly, a member of the New York State Senate,
and after Tocqueville returned to France, he also was the Secretary of War and the Secretary
of the Treasury in the Tyler administration. So I think Tocqueville is probably unduly influenced
by Andrew Jackson and the stories of Davey Crockett and perhaps some other folks he met
along the way, and perhaps even some scurrilous tales he heard about politicians that would not
shock us, after all, in today's world. But he is worried about that. He's worried about the
fact that the most remarkable man, he said, do not, by and large, run for public office.
Again, as we've seen in an earlier lecture, one of the reasons is there's this passion for
getting wealthy and sort of public service gets in the way of that. Whether it's at the local level
where somebody says, I really want to expand my insurance agency, I'm not going to run for the
town board, that's going to take too much time, to somebody saying, gee, I can run for Congress
and I can make 150,000 bucks a year. But guys, that really cuts my salary down from my job as a
consultant here or a CEO there or whatever. And so Tocqueville is concerned that there are things
in America that lead to the mediocrity of public officials. And notice it's not so much that people
choose mediocrity, although that's part of it. It's that the people who should be seeking office
by and large don't in America. So he worries about the mediocrity of elected officials.
Here's some other things that Tocqueville is concerned about in this excellence mediocrity thing.
He says that Americans, as we've seen before, value the reasoning of individuals rather than
philosophical systems. They're sort of more independent in their judgment. They rely on
experience, which in and of itself is a good thing, but they're not trusting of intellectual systems.
And I think Tocqueville worries about that, worries about, in a sense, having consistent
philosophies, taking a stand on this issue because taking that stand is consistent with a general
philosophy that people espouse, a philosophy that has certain premises and leads towards
certain goals. I think that there's a kind of catch as catch can Tocqueville fears a kind of
pragmatism about the way Americans think. And sometimes that can be good. And sometimes it
can lead away from the sort of consistency and brilliance that he admires. He says there are
a few good writers in America, but no great historians or poets. We've talked about that
and we've seen why. He also says that science is not done in America for its own sake.
Although he points out there are more people interested in science in the United States
than in other places. Again, broader, but not as deep because the broader is, well,
more people are going to be interested in science if science has practical applications that makes
farming easier or, you know, invent the vacuum cleaner or whatever it might be later on. So
science is broader, but not as deep, not as speculative or meditative as Tocqueville would say.
There's a lot of art in America. I think that means on cabin doors and all the rest of it.
There's a lot of art, but it lacks the highest quality. Let me read you one comment he makes
about writers in America. He says, no longer able to aim at the great. They seek the elegant
and pretty. They strive less for reality than appearance. That applies to literature and
the fine arts. But again, there's a lot of it, but it isn't of the highest quality.
Similarly, as we've seen before, Tocqueville says there are many books in America, but the ones
produced by Americans are short, oriented toward how to do things and don't require much background
to understand. I think if Tocqueville came back today and walked into a big bookstore,
he would not be surprised how many, how two books there are and how many self-help books there are.
I think he would see those as qualities of a broad literacy and a broad readership.
But I think he would say, did you notice that those are the racks in the front of the bookstore
and not, you know, the racks that contain Homer and Virgil and Plato and Russo and Montesquieu,
or for that matter today, Tocqueville's democracy in America. You got to wade through a lot of books
to get to the parts of the bookstore where those kinds of books are. I don't think Tocqueville
would be surprised about that. He says that American culture has imagination. Imagination's
not extinguished, but it's used to conceive the useful and represent the real. So that,
in a sense, what happens is, you know, books are about how to rather than great ideas.
Art tries to get things real accurate, but the greatest art goes beyond realism and accuracy,
whether it's a painting or whether it's a piece of literature. So I think that to a great extent,
Tocqueville sees American culture as somewhat mediocre. Tocqueville also argues that the American
doctrine of self-interest well understood mitigates against greatness. It's a good teaching,
but it's not the highest teaching. Again, let me read you Tocqueville's words.
The doctrine of self-interest well understood does not produce great devotions,
but it suggests little sacrifices each day. By itself, it cannot make a man virtuous,
but it forms a multitude of citizens who are regulated, temperate, moderate, farsighted,
masters of themselves. And if it does not lead directly to virtue through the will,
it brings them near to it insensibly through habits. Do you want a nation of heroes?
Those sort of Achilles guys from the Iliad or Odysseus from the Odyssey, democracy is not your
form of government. Democracy doesn't tend to produce the greatest heroes. Self-interest well
understood produces good, virtuous, solid folks. It produces better folks, by and large, than other
forms of government, other cultural realities. And so once again, we may not have, he says,
in America, as many great heroes, what we have is more solid, good folks. It is broader, again,
but not as deep. Democracy, he says, is not about great devotions. It's about small sacrifices.
Now, that doesn't, of course, mean that American soldiers don't die, or American people don't give
their lives for causes, such as we saw in the Civil Rights Movement. But I think what Tocqueville
wants to emphasize, after all, he knows about George Washington, he knows about Thomas Jefferson,
and all those sorts of folks are, for that matter, Andy Jackson's victory at the Battle of New Orleans.
But what he's saying is that many, many, many Americans are willing to make sacrifices.
I mean, my parents are from the greatest generation. They, in a sense, lived through the Depression,
and they won World War II. My dad was overseas for first two and a half years of my life, in fact.
And, you know, what we see is, even my father, who spent all that time in the military, would say,
you know, I did what any good red-blooded American would do. I volunteered, and I fought for two and
a half years, and I gave up my profession. And I don't think my father saw himself as a
great hero. It's simply what you do if you're an American. My mother, on the other hand,
was a single mother for that time, and, you know, did all the stuff. You collect your tin cans,
and you follow the rationing rules, and all those sorts of things, and made sacrifices.
And Tocqueville's impressed about that quality of Americans. The level of sacrifice that Americans
are willing to make is very broad. It's not just, you know, Hero A and Hero B, and then everybody else.
And I think, in fact, in recent years, going all the way back to the 1960s, we've especially had
debates in this country about guns and butter. That is to say, at times of great crisis,
shouldn't our leaders ask us to make sacrifices, saying that we can do that, we can do all this
stuff, and make no sacrifices at all at home. We'll still have whatever it is, higher wages, or
whatever it might be. So it's interesting, because it strikes me anyway, looking at my own life in
America, that maybe we become a bit timid in being willing to ask Americans to sacrifice.
Tocqueville would say, go ahead. There is this habit of sacrifice. There is, in this democracy,
this willingness to make sacrifices. You know, don't ask everybody to sell all their property,
but ask people for sacrifices. It's part of the American character. He says,
extraordinary virtue in America is rare, but so is utter depravity. And then he says,
something about ambition that I want to read you, even though it's very brief.
He says this, as great fortunes are partitioned, remember we talked about the end of primogeniture,
and science is spread, no one is absolutely deprived of enlightenment or goods, the privileges and
incapacities of classes being abolished, and then having broken forever the bonds that held them
immobile. The idea of progress offers itself to the mind of each of them. The longing to rise
is born in all hearts at once. Each man wants to leave his place. Ambition is the universal
sentiment. We've talked about that feverishness in America, something that could trouble Tocqueville
some, maybe he's a little bit put off by, but he says Americans are ambitious, not outrageously
crazy ambitious, but they are ambitious. They don't necessarily, you know, want to be the richest
person in the world, or the president of the United States, or Miss America, or the Heisman
Trophy winner, although there are plenty of people that want to do all those things. What they want
is to be better off than their parents, maybe better off than their neighbors. There is a lot
of ambition. There's a lot of movement. Again, it starts sometimes with law, the end of primogeniture.
Nobody inherits the whole chunk. Everybody inherits a chunk. The question then is, okay,
we've all got an equal chunk. What do we do with it? How do we make lives for ourselves if I get
one fifth of my dad's property that I inherit because I have four brothers? A very interesting
question. He says Americans don't necessarily aim at the highest things, but they do all have
ambition because we have this equality of conditions. People can change their status
in this society economically and so forth. And so Tocqueville, I think, is sort of impressed by that.
One way he says this is while the individual is lowered, the species is raised. You know, there's
always the joke about how economics works. You know, for example, let's just take the
easiest possible statistic. You have two people, one who makes a million dollars and one who makes
$10,000. Okay, there are two ways to analyze that data, right? One way is to say, wow, America's rich
because the average salary is $505,000. The other is to say, wow, America has great extremes of poverty
and wealth. You can read that either way. Tocqueville sort of says, you know, if you look at America
on balance, there may not be as many of the greatest individuals,
but in some ways, America is the greatest people. The species is raised. The average,
in a sense, is very, very good. Not because there are a few at the very top and a few at the very
bottom, but because so many who might be at the bottom have at least been raised to a middling
status in America. Now, one could read what I've said so far in this lecture,
whether positively or negatively. Guys, you know, there's some really interesting good
qualities of America. We're happy about the average being higher. Or you could say, oh,
guys, Tocqueville really is arguing that mediocrity is the quality of democracy.
But I want to read one more passage again, right at the end of the book, that in many
ways make Trump a lot of that, oh, guys, he's whining about mediocrity. Listen to these very
powerful words. Equality is perhaps less elevated, but it is more just. And its justice makes for
its greatness and its beauty. Government can do limited things in some ways. Government doesn't
make everything in the world. Government doesn't make relations between fathers and sons. Laws
may affect it, but government doesn't shape those things. We have to ask. I mean, we always have
to ask, what's government good at? What can government do? What's the highest good that
government can achieve? And what Tocqueville says here is the highest achievement of government
is justice. And you know what he says? Democracy is better at justice
than any other form of government. And that, not the arts, not so many of these other things,
that is democracy's excellence. Democracy is the most just form of government.
And government is ultimately about justice.
