Lecture 24, Tocqueville's Unanswered Questions
This is it, the ultimate lecture, the final shot I have at talking about Tocqueville and
trying to find ways to bring together many of the things we've looked at and to suggest
why this is a book after having spent this time with it that deserves reading and re-reading
to find thoughtful questions to ask about the 19th century, to find thoughtful questions
to ask about the 21st century.
And I want to try to do this summary by bracketing what I say with a quotation from the beginning
of Democracy in America and the very last words of the book.
Just to give you an idea of how far apart these are in the translation I've been using,
let me read to you from page 6, which is the fourth page of the introduction.
The gradual development of equality of conditions is therefore a providential fact and it has
the principal characteristics of one.
It is universal, it is enduring, each day it escapes human power.
All events, like all men, serve its development.
Equality of conditions is a fact, it's a providential fact, it's so universal it must
be governed by providence.
We couldn't turn back if we wanted to, despite the nostalgia that we saw in the last lecture
of Tocqueville for at least some of the elements of the old aristocratic way, he knows it's
gone.
Democracy is here to stay because democracy is a form of government rooted in equality
of conditions, equality of conditions is a providential fact.
Now, having said that, is the world going to be better or worse because of that?
Let me read you the last words of democracy in America, again to give you the idea of
the space in between these two quotations, this is page 676.
Nations of our day cannot have it, that conditions within them are not equal.
But it depends on them, on nations, whether equality leads them to servitude or freedom,
to enlightenment or barbarism, to prosperity or misery.
Equality of conditions is a fact, that it turns out ill or well is up to us.
It's up to the democratic nations to decide that.
Equality doesn't automatically lead to good, it doesn't automatically lead to evil.
It can bring greater freedom than ever before or it can bring another form of servitude.
It can bring a kind of enlightenment the world has never seen or it can bring barbarism.
It can lead to unprecedented prosperity or very broad misery.
I'm going to focus on the first of those, freedom and servitude.
But I want to begin by looking at the other two questions that he asked, will it lead
to enlightenment or barbarism, will it lead to prosperity or misery.
Tocqueville looking at the barbarism enlightenment dichotomy, Tocqueville has positive and negative
things to say about education in America.
As we've seen before, it is broad, but it is not deep.
It brings literacy and general knowledge and understanding, it brings certain kinds of
scientific skills to the table, but it also lacks a certain kind of depth and profundity.
Tocqueville as we know is critical of the state of the arts and ultimately of science
despite the inventions in America.
He was annoyed, maybe even horrified by what he calls America's irascible patriotism.
He found it genuinely annoying that Americans were constantly starting their conversations
with him by telling him how great Americans are.
Instead of put off by that, that's not the way that a confident people ought to respond.
They need to be more self-critical and so forth.
In fact, he's observed that Americans don't take criticism well and although they will
tell foreigners things they won't tell each other.
They don't like it, he says, when foreigners say, this isn't very good.
You could do this better or even God knows we do this better than you do.
They are always too busy proclaiming America's superiority and not busy enough, I think he
would say, making America superior.
So he has mixed feelings because once again, as we saw in the last lecture, it's that
tension between breadth and depth.
And there's a certain kind of, maybe barbaric is too strong a word, but a certain kind of
annoying veneer to Americans.
Probably today we would say maybe that many of them are too busy waving flags and not
busy enough rolling up their sleeves and getting to work and making America better.
Perhaps that would be something of a contemporary version of what Tocqueville is talking about.
And remember my last point on this issue of this barbarism enlightenment, Tocqueville
is very discouraged about the relations between the whites and blacks and Indians in America.
So he's not full of confidence that inevitably we're going to greater enlightenment.
This democracy does have a last the potential to sort of slip back into at least a certain
kind of barbarism, not guys running around with horns in their helmets, but a certain
kind of barbarism.
Let's look at that dichotomy between prosperity and misery.
Tocqueville says in general, Americans have mediocre fortune.
That is to say, there's very, very little real poverty, desperate poverty that Tocqueville
sees.
And he says the very fact that there are so many middling people, although not a lot
of super rich, the fact there are so many middling people is itself a kind of prosperity.
And we need to take that seriously.
However, we also know that equality of conditions leads people to pursue more wealth and that
that pursuit of wealth can do damage both to social bonds and political involvement.
Again, remember he sort of praised the Americans for their ambition in the material I dealt
with in the last lecture, because their ambitions hadn't gotten way out of hand.
But we need to remember that ambition has a downside as well as an upside.
It can lead toward prosperity, but it can also lead toward a certain misery as mediocre
people hold office, as political and civil associations decline because everybody's busy
trying to make more money.
We saw also in an earlier lecture that the pursuit of wealth leads to a real focus on
commerce and industry.
Again, perhaps sort of previewing the famous The Business of America is business comment.
And there are dangers as we know in industry growth because within an industry we get such
a separation, a growing separation between workers and the captains of industry that
we threaten a kind of permanent inequality in America that could lead to a kind of at
least quasi formal aristocracy.
So again, on the question of misery and prosperity, it's a mixed bag.
Now we saw in the lecture on business and wealth that there are in fact mitigating factors
that can lessen the damage that pursuit of wealth can do.
So it's not one of these things where it's inevitable we're going to go one way or go
the other way.
Again, what Tocqueville emphasizes in the very last words of this book that I want to
come back to on this particular point is, let us never forget which way we go with democracy,
prosperity or misery, barbarism or enlightenment is up to us.
We have choices to make as citizens collectively in this democracy that we need to be educated
and public spirited so that we can make those decisions correctly.
And of course, most importantly, we need to know what decisions can be made.
If we think things are inevitable, why worry about them?
If it's inevitable that America will be prosperous, why work to make it prosperous?
If it's inevitable that democracy will lead to misery, why try to make it prosperous when
you're fighting against trends you have no effect over?
It's recognizing where democracies can make real choices that alter the outcome.
In a sense therefore what Tocqueville is saying is democracy can be a means toward enlightenment.
It can be a means toward prosperity and in the topic I want to deal mostly with, it can
be a means of enduring freedom and greater freedom.
The choices are ours, they're not inevitable.
Democracy doesn't program us to be prosperous or miserable.
So let's now turn to that third dichotomy that I want to talk with about the first on
Tocqueville's list, that is to say freedom and servitude.
Certainly today, even though Tocqueville would probably not say it the way we say it today,
when we talk about democracy, the number one thing we talk about is freedom.
Whether it's the end of my country, Tizaville, let freedom ring or whether it is the rhetoric
we use in talking about the benefits of democracy to nations that are just beginning to build
democracies, we always talk about freedom.
So let's look at the issue of freedom and servitude because sometimes we I think tend
to believe that automatically democracy and freedom are together.
You couldn't tear them apart if you tried, but Tocqueville says don't be so sure.
Democracy can lead toward greater freedom, it can also lead toward servitude.
What do we need?
Let's start with this.
What do we need?
What are the most fundamental parts of a democracy that we need to keep in place and build on
if in fact democracy is going to be a freedom-loving democracy?
OK, here's the list.
Freedom of the press and a large number of newspapers.
Freedom of the press so we can communicate many newspapers so the press doesn't control
things.
You need a lot of different voices.
Now we talked about that a long time ago in this course, but it is essential.
As I pointed out then, Tocqueville didn't begin thinking that freedom of the press was
all that important and was sort of puzzled by it.
But he really came to be a convert to the fact that freedom of the press is absolutely
essential to democracy.
Number two, freedom to assemble and freedom of association because those two freedoms
are necessary for the development and activity of political and civil associations.
If you can't assemble, if you can't associate freely with anybody you want to associate
with, then there will not be those political and civic associations which we know are the
number one bulwark against the tyranny of the majority, which of course is not a freedom-loving
form of democracy.
And so we need freedom of association and freedom to assemble because we need those associations.
We need freedom of speech.
We need to be able to say what we want to say.
We need to say it in newspapers.
We need to say it in speeches.
And of course, Tocqueville has pointed out, he knows the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution,
Americans have freedom of speech.
You are thrown in jail for saying something absurd or wrong or wacky or radical.
But remember, Tocqueville said there are informal boundaries on the freedom of speech, that
circle beyond which you really can't speak without being isolated and made fun of and
surrendering all possibilities of having any kind of political power or voice in America.
So Americans obviously on paper have freedom of speech.
Congress shall make no law.
After all, we read in the First Amendment, but it's the informal constriction of freedom
of speech that Tocqueville worries about.
Freedom of speech really has to be there on paper, but has to be there in fact as well.
So that these things together, freedom of the press, freedom to assemble and associate,
freedom of speech, these together will help to stop the development of a tyranny of the
majority because democracy is a majoritarian rule, and if the majority has absolute power
well to anticipate Lord Acton, absolute power can and does corrupt absolutely.
Also these freedoms that Tocqueville talks about guard against administrative centralization.
And we've seen that's been one of the big bugaboos for Tocqueville all the way along.
You create a centralized administration where every law is administered exactly in a uniform
way every place, not taking into account any of the differences that exist geographically
or in other ways, and that centralizes so much power in whatever government it is, federal
or state, that you lose freedom.
And so these freedoms, again the press, the freedom to assemble and to associate and the
freedom of speech are the guards against two of the most dangerous possibilities for democracy,
tyranny of the majority and administrative centralization.
Now Tocqueville proposes in democracy in America that America could become despotic.
It could lose its freedom and become a despotism, a particular kind of despotism, we're not
talking about Louis XIV, we're not talking about Hannibal in Carthage, we're not talking
about despotism of that sort.
But let me take you through the arguments as to why America could be susceptible to a despotic
form of government.
Most of all he says Americans like simple ideas.
They can imagine a nation in which citizens all resemble a single model, that everybody
is alike, that the citizen in rural Oregon and the citizen in the Bronx are, you know,
what it means to be a citizen in those situations doesn't vary.
We have one model of what it means to be an American, one model of what it means to
be a citizen and the attractiveness of that is it's simple.
You don't have to think about it too much.
If you conceive of a single model of what it means to be in America, you can also then
conceive of that nation directed by a single power.
If there's no variation, if there's not much need for judgment in sort of treating this
group and that group equally but not necessarily uniformly, if that's not an issue, if that's
not a problem, then gosh, you know, the simplest government is to sort of let one person or
one group of people sort of run the show.
It could be under some circumstances therefore relatively easy for that simplicity of a definition
of citizenship to lead to somebody or some group having more power that is beneficial
to America.
Americans are also attracted to uniform legislation that one of the problems with equality, Tocqueville
says is, it can lead to centralized administration because centralization is a natural tendency.
There's a mistake he said Americans often make.
They know that every citizen has to use a phrase from the 14th Amendment which of course
wasn't part of the Constitution when Tocqueville was here, equal protection under the laws.
Question, don't we, Tocqueville says, don't Americans, confuse equality with uniformity.
There are a lot of times when I try to treat all of my students equally but I may really
get on this one's case for being lazy and I might really, you know, sympathize with
this student who has done exactly the same thing as that student because I think the
motivation or the context in which it happens is different that I treat them all equally
but I don't treat them the same.
Tocqueville fears that equality gets sort of morphed into uniformity and of course that
then leads towards centralization of administration.
If a person in the Mississippi Delta and the person in Chevy Chase are going to be treated
equally shouldn't that be uniformly and yet to give different people the same thing in
those two places might have very unequal results, might do very unequal things and so centralization
of administration is the easy answer if we confuse equality and uniformity.
Now we all know how difficult it is not to do that.
We know how difficult it is to say, well the solution to a particular kind of problem in
Wisconsin is different than it is in South Carolina and therefore we're going to have
the same goal with the same legislation administered differently in Milwaukee than we do in Charleston,
you know somebody's going to say wait a minute you can't do that because we all have equal
protection of the laws you can't do this for person A and then that for person B you
got to do this to both of them or not do this to both of them or for both of them.
So Tocqueville worries a great deal about that confusion between equality and uniformity.
Now Tocqueville says that despotism in America would be mild.
We're not talking about autodafes, we're not talking about throwing people into dungeons
forever without trials.
Let me tell you what it would be like he said, it would degrade but not torment citizens.
That would act as a school master not as a tyrant.
Government sort of knows all and government is constantly the school master and you know
how school masters operate every now and then they get out the cane and sort of wrap
your knuckles and so on and so forth.
In fact Tocqueville says there would be those who would accept a school master kind of government
because after all they help to choose it.
In other words the very fact that a president or a congress or a governor or whatever is
elected by people would make them more inclined to accept it because well this is a school
master and makes me do this and tells me to do this and disciplines me here but by golly
I chose him.
That's a danger he said.
A despotism in America would be paternalistic.
That is to say its goal would not be suppression in the way we might think of it in totalitarian
states that we've at last had to deal with in recent years all over the world but rather
the government would want to keep us children forever.
To keep us a little bit dependent.
To sort of admonish us and chastise us and say okay you know whatever the legal equivalent
is of what parents do with their kids.
You can't watch an R rated movie, you can't drive after 11 o'clock at night or whatever.
The government can become paternalistic.
It would work he says for people's happiness.
We're not talking about governments that want to make everybody miserable.
The government would work for people's happiness but it would seek to define what happiness
is and to be the sole agent of it.
The danger is not a government that says you know we're going to screw all these people
because they're nasty people.
It is we're going to make them happy.
We're going to tell them what it means to be happy and we're going to make them do the
things that make them happy.
That's the kind of despotism.
That's the kind of paternalistic government Tocqueville fears and he said ultimately where
that would lead is that the government would try to take away from people the trouble of
thinking.
Hey, don't bother to think about these things.
We've already thought about them and hear the answers and they would even try to take
away these governments the pain of living.
It would become a kind of drugged society if you will.
No pain, don't bother to think because we will take care of you and therefore you don't
have to worry about those things.
When there's pain, we'll erase it.
When there's thinking, we'll do it.
So you just go on and live your life and be nice and happy and comfortable remembering
of course that we defined happiness and then told you how you can get there and then gave
you all the tools to get there.
Tocqueville fears this sort of mild paternalistic despotism that could happen in America.
It wouldn't happen by radical constitutional changes.
It wouldn't happen by a coup d'etat or any of those things at all.
It would happen much more quietly, much more subtly, much more gently, much more gradually
than the kinds of things we watch on news networks when there are rebellions in countries.
But nevertheless, Tocqueville says it's a danger and Americans need to realize this
could be the result of democracy in America.
Now obviously, the last question to ask is, in that case, if that's a danger, what are
the principal antidotes to general and gentle despotism?
What are the most important things that Americans can do?
What are the most valuable safeguards?
What are the things Americans need to promote and do so that this despotism won't happen?
First of all, Tocqueville maintains there needs to be the maintenance of religion in
America because it is the unshakable values of religion, specifically Christianity, that
again give people that long picture.
And remember, Tocqueville believes that the teachings of Jesus are indeed compatible with
democracy, with equality, with freedom, and therefore with those guys in the pulpits warning
against sort of they don't try to get rich and think about nothing else.
All of that religious guidance is important.
It provides a certain kind of stability.
When there's instability, we know what happens.
It's bad for business and somebody can come along and say, hey, I can make things stable
real quickly.
You don't want that guy.
Religion helps to keep stability.
Number two, and all of these of course we've heard before, local governments need to be
active and they need to do things that matter.
And local governments need to elect officials and they need to elect them often so nobody
has too much power and a lot of people have actually had experience serving in government.
If local government can't do anything, local government will wither away.
If all it does is take the dictates of the state or the federal government and therefore
you can't make any decisions locally, local government will wither and that's a very
bad thing for democracy.
It withdraws people even more than they're naturally inclined to withdraw.
It allows for centralization of administration.
Why run for office?
Why show up to the town board meeting if the town board can't do anything?
If it's become not much more than a gripe society, local governments need to be vibrant
which means they need to have the freedom to do things that matter.
That can be again, where are you going to put the firehouse?
Put up the historical marker, put in the stop light, decide what kind of sewage system
you want and so on.
Third, again something we talked about a long time ago toward the beginning of this course,
a democracy needs an independent judiciary.
Again, he doesn't like the election of judges at the state and local level, maybe the very
local level of justice is the piece but not state and county judges and like that because
the judiciary has to be independent of the other kinds, other branches rather, of government.
Very important.
D, this is not a surprise, both civil and political associations must be vibrant because
among other things they show people that working together in the public square for an interest
greater than their own immediate individual self-interest is a good and productive thing.
It leads citizens not to turn away from self-interest but to have self-interest well understood.
Next, this is one actually I haven't talked about before.
Americans need to take procedures seriously although they naturally disdain them.
Americans don't like sort of going through the stages of doing something.
They'd rather take shortcuts.
Tocqueville says those shortcuts are dangerous.
You need certain structures, certain procedures to do things even if individuals or collectively
people are impatient because you take those shortcuts, you get rid of those procedures
which of course are also guarded especially by lawyers remember.
You take away those procedural structures and it becomes an awful lot easier for somebody
to grab power.
For somebody to say, ah, let's cut through all that, I'll do it for you right now, right
away without going through this and that and the other stages.
So finally, there is a great need to preserve individual rights and freedom, speech and
all the rest.
That there's a difference between strong individuals which democracy needs and individualism which
can take you away from the public square.
America needs independent people who have a full range of rights.
They are a great bulwark against the dangers of despotism in America.
Elections of Tocqueville's book Democracy in America was a great success when it was
published in two parts in 1835 and 1840.
It won awards in France, John Stuart Mill praised it and it was well received in America
when it was first published here just a few years after the original French was put out.
I guess I'd say it this way.
It was an important book in the 1830s and the 1840s on two continents.
It's an important book now, maybe a more important book now because we've come further.
We can sort out some of the things that Tocqueville was wrong about.
We can see some of the roads we haven't taken perhaps.
The Tocqueville asks such fundamental questions, gives us such hard headed thoughts, makes us
look painfully sometimes at democracy, makes us ask the toughest questions, doesn't allow
us to flatter ourselves just because, well, we've got democracy, what else do we need
to know?
And in a world like ours, both for our nation and for the world that's moving toward the
equality of conditions, this is a pretty important volume to know.
We genuinely hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our Great Courses series.
Our courses are available to order online.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12.
That's 1-800-832-2412.
Thank you very much.
