These lectures are part of the Great Courses series, they are produced by The Teaching
Company. The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines. The lectures
in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long. By listening for less than an hour a
day you can finish even the longest course in just weeks. Browse our catalogue or website
and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year
in the best college classrooms in the world. The lecturers are university professors carefully
selected by The Teaching Company and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching
excellence. These lectures are titled, Argumentation,
The Study of Effective Reasoning, Part 1. The lecturer is Professor David Zarevsky.
Professor Zarevsky is the Owen L. Kuhn Professor of Argumentation and Debate and Professor of
Communication Studies at Northwestern University where he has taught for over 30 years. He received
as Bachelor of Science, Master's and PhD from Northwestern University. From 1988 through
2000 he served as the Dean of the School of Speech. A nationally recognized authority
on Rhetoric and Forensics, Professor Zarevsky is a past president of the National Communication
Association and recipient of the Distinguished Scholar Award and the Distinguished Service
Award. On no fewer than 12 occasions his outstanding lecturing skills have been recognized by the
inclusion of his name on Northwestern's Associated Student Government Honorable for Teaching.
Dr. Zarevsky has authored five books, edited three more and has published over 50 scholarly
articles and reviews. He received the 1986 National Communication Association's Wynnins
Wilchens Award for Distinguished Scholarship in Rhetoric and Public Address for his book
President Johnson's War on Poverty, Rhetoric and History and the same award again in 1991
for Lincoln, Douglas and Slavery in the Crucible of Public Debate.
Professor Zarevsky prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures. The course
guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, biographical notes and
a bibliography. To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along
with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 Introducing Argumentation and Rhetoric
Thank you. It's a pleasure to welcome you to a series of 24 lectures on argumentation
in which we'll explore the study of effective reasoning. If we've met in a previous course,
it's good to be back with you. If not, let me say hello at this time and in either case,
I hope that you will enjoy this experience. Courses in this subject are offered sometimes
in English departments, sometimes in philosophy departments, sometimes as in my case in communication
studies departments where I've taught at Northwestern University for almost 40 years.
But often when I mention that I teach argumentation, people will ask, you mean you actually teach
that? Why would anybody want to study that? And that reflects the fact that in contemporary
English usage, the terms argue and argument have often unfavorable connotations. When
a parent says to a child, don't argue with me about that, arguing is not something that's
thought of as very pleasant. Or when a superior and a subordinate in a business relationship
engage in an argument that's seen sometimes as destructive. We often think of arguing
as unpleasant or quarrelsome. We sometimes see disagreement as unhealthy. We sometimes
talk about it in military terms as though our goal were to conquer an opponent or to
vanquish an adversary. And when we express disagreement, it's sometimes seen as rankerous
or bitter, somehow destructive of the self-worth of another person. Now please rest assured,
neither I nor the teaching company seek to promote such a view, which is after all a
perversion of what argumentation really is. So let's set that aside at the outset and
explore argumentation as the study of effective reasoning. Arguing is reason giving. Now what
do I mean by reason giving? When people speak to one another or with an audience in mind,
they make claims. They make statements that they believe and that they would like for
their listeners or their readers to believe as well. We make claims about matters that
are uncertain, that we cannot establish absolutely or definitely. For example, we might say it's
better to build a missile defense system than to rely on an anti-ballistic missile treaty
or vice versa. We might say energy shortages can be overcome through conservation alone
or not. We might say that in the long run, children learn to read better if they're taught
by phonics rather than by whole language or the reverse. We might say that changes in
gender roles over the past generation on balance have been beneficial or harmful. Each of these
is a claim. It's a statement that we assert as our belief and that we want another person
to believe as well. Reasons are the justifications that we give for those claims. Now they're
not absolute proofs because each of these matters is somehow inherently uncertain. It
depends upon a value judgment or it relates to the future or it's so large that it can't
be seen directly. And so we try to justify our claims by giving reasons for them. Hence,
we could say that arguing is the practice of justifying claims and that's certainly
one way to look at what it is that we will be studying. If we think about it for a minute,
what's the alternative to reason giving? It's to accept or reject claims in knee-jerk
fashion based on whim or caprice or on the command of an authority figure. And if we
do that, then we are dismissing to the realm of chance or accident or happenstance or coercion
some very important aspects of human affairs. When we make judgments, when we make predictions,
when we make large global kinds of claims, we don't want to do that. We don't want to
dismiss all of these areas to the realm of the accidental. Indeed, when we think about
it, what makes us rational is the ability to engage in reason giving, to connect the
claims that we make to the justifications for them. And so we could say argumentation
is the study of effective reasoning. Now, once I stick in this term effective, we have
to ask effective for whom? And this implies a concern for an audience. We don't offer claims
or reasons in a vacuum. We offer them with a reader or a listener or a large public in
mind. Indeed, the success of the arguments ultimately depends upon the ascent of the
audience. Now, what do I mean when I talk about the ascent of an audience? Again, I don't
mean a knee jerk agreement or an instantaneous rejection or a reaction that says in effect,
wow, that agrees with my prejudice. What I mean by ascent is adherence to the claim based
on the reasons for it. So when I talk about an audience adhering or giving its ascent
to an argument, I'm suggesting that the audience accepts the reason. It accepts the grounds
that are given, the justifications that are given, and the connection that's made between
these justifications and the claim. Argumentation is then one of the ways that we seek to persuade
others. And while I focus on persuading others, it's also possible to have an argument with
oneself, to ask questions and raise challenges to one's own view so that we will be forced
to justify it. So what I've suggested so far is that we cast aside a notion of arguing
as quarrelsome or rancorous and disagreeable and instead think of it as the practice of
giving reasons to justify claims seeking the adherence of an audience. Now if we think
about it that way, we'll realize that argumentation is something that we engage in all the time.
We talk with another person any time we write, any time we seek to influence what another
person or group of people thinks or believes or does. And that presents us in a way with
a second problem in understanding what argumentation is all about. If we do it all the time, if
it's a natural human activity, why do we need to study it? Why do we need to teach it? It's
just something we do naturally. Now I am assuming that you don't share this view because if
you did, you probably wouldn't have bought this course. So there's a sense in which I'm
preaching to the converted. Argumentation is a skill we can understand and improve.
Skillful argumentation indeed is an imperiled activity. In June of 2005, an op-ed editorial
in the New York Times suggested that argumentation may be a lost art. It said people increasingly
interact only with those who already agree with them. Differences of opinion are treated
as unbridgeable and the result is to weaken opportunities for compromise, deliberation
and mutual understanding. Well, understanding and practicing argumentation is the antidote
to these destructive behaviors. The difference between arguments that are productive, arguments
in which people give claims, make claims, give reasons, exchange reasons, the difference
between arguments that are productive and arguments that are not that invoke all these
negative stereotypes of bickering and quarreling, the difference between them often is the understanding
of the principles that underlie this common human activity. These lectures will enable
us to understand the underlying principles and theories. Now, argumentation is both a
product and a process and we use the same term to refer to both. When we engage in argumentation,
we make arguments and we have arguments and these are two different perspectives about
what's going on. They reflect the fact that argumentation involves the production and
exchange of messages in interaction with other people. Sometimes we want to study the
message, the product of argumentation. Messages sometimes take the form of formal texts, a
speech, a newspaper editorial, the transcript of a presidential debate or a congressional
hearing, but sometimes the texts are much less formal. If we have a conversation with
someone else, the text of the conversation is the message even though we typically don't
write it down. Sometimes the argument is not explicitly verbal. The message could be a
shrug of the shoulders that conveys the claim that we want to make. This isn't really that
important or I don't really care that much about it or it doesn't make that much difference.
Nonverbal cues may imply arguments. Sometimes there'll be a text that's explicit and yet
there will be all sorts of unstated assumptions that are also parts of the argument. So the
message is both explicit and implicit. It's verbal, sometimes nonverbal, but it's capable
at least of being cast into language so that we can examine it as a structure of claims
and justifications. So one view of argument focuses on the product, the message, and in
several of the lectures in this series, that's what we will be doing. But it's also possible
to focus on the interaction with other people. When we focus on that, we're stressing not
the product, not the outcome of the argument, but the process of arguing itself. And when
we look at it this way, what we see is a kind of interaction in which people maintain what
they think are mutually exclusive propositions. What I mean by that simply is the participants
in an argument hold views that they think can't be reconciled. If they could be reconciled
easily, that's what they would do and that would be the end of the matter. They believe
that they can't be reconciled, but they also want to resolve this disagreement. They may
or may not succeed, but they want to. They don't regard it as a trivial matter. They
don't simply say, well, you know, I believe this and you believe that, and that's fine.
They want somehow to come to some common understanding. They seek to convince each other by giving
reasons to justify their views. And at the same time they do that, they're open to the
possibility of being influenced themselves. And so from this perspective, we study how
people go about doing this and how their efforts might be made more productive. So arguing
has this two-faced character. Argument is a product and argument is a process. Sometimes
we'll be talking about the products, the texts, and sometimes about the process, the interaction
between people. As a field of study, argumentation draws on three root disciplines, each of
which itself is often misunderstood, rhetoric, logic, and dialectic. From rhetoric, we derive
our concern with the audience. Unfortunately, just as argument in popular culture has negative
connotations, so does rhetoric. It's sometimes associated with bombast, with emptiness, with
phrases that don't mean anything, with ornate and flowery language, or worst of all, freshman
composition, that dread course, rhetoric 101. And so we're talking about the process of
rhetoric. Once again, these are misconceptions of what rhetoric is about. We need to restore
a conception of rhetoric that goes all the way back to the classical period to ancient
Greece. We'll explore the origins of rhetoric much more in lecture four, but we can say
some things about it right off the bat. Rhetoric focuses on how speakers, or writers, and listeners,
or readers, develop and communicate knowledge. Now by knowledge, I don't mean what's timeless
and eternally true, but what the listeners, what the interactants, what the participants
regard as true, and accept as true, and are willing to believe and to act upon. So, rhetoric
studies how people together create, develop, and communicate knowledge. It's the study
of how messages influence people. We can immediately see from this definition that argumentation
is a subset of that, exploring how people are influenced by reason-giving. Obviously
messages influence people in all sorts of other ways as well, by their style, their presentation,
their emotional appeals, and so on. But argumentation focuses on reason-giving. It was Aristotle
who defined rhetoric as the faculty or skill of discovering the available means of persuasion
in a given case. Faculty or skill of discovering the available means of persuasion in a given
case. In this sense, it is an analytical skill. It's an art of figuring out in a situation
in which we find ourselves what are the resources that we could draw upon to make claims that
would influence other people through the process of reasoning. Until fairly recently, rhetoric
was not regarded as pejorative at all. It was seen as a noble activity. Rhetoric was
one of the seven original liberal arts. We're going to restore that conception of rhetoric
for the purpose of this series of lectures, and when we do that, we will be thinking rhetorically
about arguments. When we think rhetorically, we're in a certain frame of mind that says
we're paying attention to an audience. We would need to know what the audience predispositions
are because we reason from them. It means that we have to recognize the role of choices
on the part of speakers and listeners, and we have to recognize that the influence of
listeners is non-coercive. We don't bludgeon people into submission. We influence them
when we do by making claims and giving reasons that they will find justifiable and acceptable
to which they will want to give their adherence. So argumentation takes from rhetoric a concern
with the audience. There are two other fields of study to which argumentation is related.
One of these is logic, another term that we sometimes misconstrue. Particularly in the
past couple of centuries, logic has been associated with formal symbolic logic or mathematical
reason. When people study logic in school these days, it's often as not studied in a mathematics
class with P's and Q's and truth tables, and if this, then certainly that, and that
is indeed one branch of reason. But in fact, logic is concerned with all structures of
reasoning, whether they are formal or not. And within the second half of the 20th century
in particular, we've seen the development of a whole subfield of study known as informal
logic. That is, reasoning that doesn't have certainty, that isn't mathematical, that's
not divorced from the content of the statements being made. And as we can probably see right
away, informal logic is a close cousin of argumentation, because what after all are
we doing when we engage in argument? We're creating and using structures of reasoning,
structures that connect reasons and claims that are not formal in nature and that don't
have the certainty that's associated with mathematics. So we have rhetoric and logic.
The other field that I want to mention is dialectic. Here's another one that we sometimes
misunderstand. When we think of dialectic, we often think almost in the sense that Karl
Marx wrote about as the grand sweep of opposing historical forces, such as that between capitalism
and communism, that will be a thesis and an antithesis in which there would be a resolution
of grand new synthesis. Well, yes, that's one sense of what dialectic means. But the
term again is much broader than that. And it refers most generally to the process of
discovering and testing knowledge through questions and answers. And of course in this
understanding, the very model of dialectic is the dialogues of Plato, in which the Platonic
Socrates encounters one interlocutor or another. The person states a view, Plato has Socrates
ask a series of questions, and through the exchange of questions and answers, the view
is tested or elaborated or clarified. We often think of the courtroom as another
place where this kind of dialectical procedure takes place through the act of cross-examination,
a series of questions and answers to try to figure out what's ultimately the truth of
the case. For that matter, any conversation that's a critical discussion in which people
are thinking critically and carefully will qualify as employing dialectic as a kind of
testing through question and answer. So, from rhetoric, argumentation derives its concern
with the audience. From logic, it derives the concern with structures of reason. And
from dialectic, it derives a process of testing knowledge through question and answer in an
iterative way. We might say that argumentation is the field of study where logic, dialectic
and rhetoric all meet. And so we've got this family of four terms, argumentation,
rhetoric, logic, dialectic, each of them often subject to misunderstanding. But if we understand
them correctly, they'll point the way to a very important field of study and a very
important human endeavor as well. Now this is the field of study upon which these lectures
will focus. There's another term that we need to examine, and that's the term ethics. Any
attempt to influence other people necessarily raises some ethical questions. After all,
if I try to get you to do something or to believe something, it's a limitation on your
freedom of choice. I'm not leaving you alone to do whatever you want, I'm trying to induce
you to do what I want. And what's more, it's the application of superior to inferior force,
even if the force is intellectual and persuasive rather than physical. And so an attempt to
limit other people's freedom of choice and to impose superior on inferior force automatically
raises questions about whether it's ethical to do. Again, please rest assured, neither
the teaching company nor I knowingly promote unethical activity. In fact, argumentation
seeks to achieve ethical influence. What is it that makes it ethical? Well, for starters,
it does not influence other people against their will. It seeks their free ascent. It
seeks their agreement to a claim on the basis that they have come to accept the reasons
for the claim and the connection between the reasons and the claim. So it seeks free ascent.
Moreover, what's the alternative? If there were no attempts to influence people, then
the conditions of society and community are not possible. Everyone would go his or her
own separate way with no sense of social cohesion, no bonds with others. What is it that creates
the bonds with others on which communities and societies are built? It's the interaction
between people in which we relate to and try to influence others. So it won't do to say
that any attempt to influence other people is to be questioned because we can't avoid
influencing other people. And the issue is how we go about it. It's my belief that the
most ethical way to go about influencing other people is through argumentation which
respects their individuality and respects their freedom and seeks their free ascent.
Argumentation respects listeners and it respects that they have different ways of thinking
and reason. So I hope and I trust that this study on which we are about to embark is indeed
an ethical as well as a noble activity. Now before I conclude this first lecture, let
me talk specifically about what you can expect to accomplish from this course and how we
will go about it. I sometimes get calls or emails from people saying, could you please
teach me how to win more arguments with my spouse? The answer is no. I'm not going to
do that. What I hope is that as a result of the material that we'll be considering, you
and your spouse, if you have one, will both be able to have more productive and more constructive
arguments and turn them into win-win situations where you both come together and you both
come out ahead. But this is not a course in how to overpower your spouse or your significant
other or your friend. Sometimes I get calls saying, would you please tell me how to prove
to an atheist that God exists or how to prove to a religious person that there is no God?
Again, the answer is no. I'm not going to do that. What we will see as we go through
these lectures is that arguments depend at a very basic level on common frames of reference.
And if we have a situation in which there is such disparity in the frame of reference
that there's nothing in common as between an atheist and a religious person about whether
there is a God, there's nothing really for argument to do about that. So we're not going
to do those sorts of things. What are we going to do and what can you get from it? There
are five specific goals that I hope you'll achieve through this series of lectures. First,
we'll learn to recognize arguments when we see them. We'll learn a vocabulary that helps
us to describe argumentation, not in order to give us a whole lot of jargon, but to enable
us to understand and talk about what it is that people do when they argue. So the first
thing we'll do is we'll learn how to recognize arguments, how to find them in conversations
and newspaper editorials and speeches and controversies of any kind, and how to know
them when we see them. Second, we'll become aware of how people when they argue will
make choices. Every time people engage in argumentation, they could go about it in lots of different
ways and they make choices. They may make them knowingly and deliberately or not, but
they make choices. So hopefully we will become aware of how arguing reflects choice and we'll
broaden our understanding of the choices that arguers can make, that you can make when you
build and construct arguments. So that's the second goal. Third, we'll learn something
about how to appraise arguments, how to evaluate them. We talk about good arguments, bad arguments,
strong arguments, weak arguments, better arguments, worse arguments, and so part of what we'll
do is discuss how we make those judgments, how we evaluate arguments, what kinds of standards
govern our assessment. We do that not simply to sit and pass judgment on others, but to
get a good understanding of what can make our own arguments better, as well as to see
weaknesses in arguments that we object to. Four, in attempting all of these arguments
and all of these tasks, we're going to examine as examples a variety of historical and contemporary
arguments. And so one of the things we'll do is we'll learn more about some significant
controversies by looking at them from the perspective of argument. And finally, as a
result of all of these things, we should sensitize ourselves to argumentation theories and as
a result, you should be able to improve your ability both as an analyst and as a maker
of arguments. Here's the plan for doing this. The first four lectures, including this one,
will review the assumptions underlying argumentation and the development of the field. Then, in
lectures 5 through 11, we'll explore the strategies and tactics of argument construction, attack
and defense. In the next seven lectures, we'll consider the components of argument in more
detail and how they work. We'll take two lectures to investigate the concept of validity and
fallacies, and finally, we'll investigate how argumentation functions in society. I
am certainly looking forward to this series of lectures. I hope that you are as well.
Lecture 2 Underlying Assumptions of Argumentation Hello again. In the first lecture, we introduced
ourselves to argumentation, opening up a field of study that is often closed off by
fundamental misunderstandings. We related argumentation to a family of other terms, rhetoric, logic
and dialectic. Now, in this lecture, I want to focus on a series of assumptions that we
make when we use argumentation as a means of decision making. There are five key assumptions,
and I want to spend a little bit of time talking with you about each. The first is that argumentation
takes place with an audience in mind, and the audience is the ultimate judge of the
success or failure of arguments. So the first assumption then is argumentation is audience
dependent. This means, of course, that it is different from statements like 2 plus 2 equals
4, which really don't depend on an audience for their truth or for their acceptability.
Before I explain how argumentation is audience dependent, let's look briefly at a couple
of historical examples that help to make it clear, and I'm going to use these same two
examples throughout the lecture. First, the Federalist Papers. We think of the Federalist
Papers often as exhibiting a philosophical perspective on American government and politics,
but in fact, the Federalist Papers were written for the very specific purpose of influencing
delegates in New York State in the ratifying convention to vote to ratify the proposed
Constitution, which meant that the Federalist Papers had to be written with an eye to what
was on the mind of the prospective voters in New York, and what would be likely to sway
those voters in favor of the new government, so they were constructed with an audience
in mind. Second example is the Lincoln-Douglas debates. We often think of those debates as
eloquent articulations of the competing views of Lincoln and Douglas about slavery, but
in fact, they were tailored to a very specific audience, to the swing voters in Central Illinois,
who were both opposed to slavery and opposed to immediate abolition, and so what Lincoln
and Douglas were doing in those debates, each was trying to portray the other as an extremist.
Douglas portraying Lincoln as really an abolitionist, Lincoln portraying Douglas as really wanting
to spread slavery everywhere in order to appeal to the predispositions of the particular audience
for whom they were both especially concerned. Now, what these examples tell us is that the
claims that are being advanced in arguments are not universal, timeless truths. They are
claims that are subject to the acceptance of actual listeners. An arguer who wants to
succeed with an audience must take that audience into account, and the particulars of the audience's
situation will affect its values, its priorities, and its methods of judgment. Now, who is the
audience? In one sense, it's the people who are physically present to hear an argument,
or the people who actually read an argument, but it's often broader than that. An audience's
all of the people whom the arguer seeks to affect. So if we're talking about informal
arguments between friends or spouses, for example, the arguments are fairly private, the audience
is the people who are participating in the interaction itself. But if we imagine arguments
in a more public setting, let's say on the floor of the United States Senate, a US Senator
is making arguments, not primarily for the benefit of the two or three or four or five
other senators on the floor who are physically present. He's using that occasion, or she's
using that occasion, in order to make arguments that will be read by another audience, that
is, the people back home whom he or she is trying to influence. Now, saying that arguments
are dependent on an audience is sometimes misunderstood as saying, whatever an audience
believes is fine, one argument's as good as another if you can find somebody who will
accept it. Now, this is not right. We're not talking about just telling an audience what
they want to hear. In fact, as we see as we'll go along in the series of lectures, there
are all sorts of other standards that we try to meet, but it is the case that the argument
must take the audience into account if it's going to have a chance to prevail. So the first
assumption then is arguments depend upon audiences. The second key assumption, argumentation takes
place under conditions of uncertainty, takes place under conditions of uncertainty. We
don't argue about things that are certain. Let me digress for just a second to point
out that even the notion of certainty is audience dependent. If you ask, is it a certainty
that it's too early in the morning to have class at eight o'clock, you ask undergraduate
students and they'll say, oh yes indeed, but you ask people who are accustomed to going
to work at seven or seven thirty or eight, they won't understand. So even certainty is
somehow dependent on an audience. Some people believe that the statement two plus two equals
four is objectively true, and some people believe it's true only because it commands
universal agreement. This is a very significant philosophical problem, but fortunately it's
not one that we need to resolve. Whatever the source of certainty, whether it's objective
truth or unanimous agreement, whatever the source of certainty, we don't argue about
things that are certain. They're much easier ways to settle disagreements or to resolve
them. But things that are uncertain are potentially controversial. They could be otherwise, and
we don't know for sure. Take for example the question, when does life begin? Now people
may have fervent beliefs about that subject. They may feel intensely about it, but we
don't know. It's not given to us to know with certainty when life begins. If we could
know it for sure, then the whole dispute about abortion would take a very different course
from the one it's taken. We argue about things that we don't know for sure. Let's again consider
our historical examples. One of the subjects taken up in the Federalist Papers is the question,
is a small republic or a large republic more likely to control factions? Everybody wants
to control factions, the questions, what's the best way to do it? We don't know for sure.
And so the anti-Federalists that argued, if you look at history, it's small republics
that control factions. And the authors of the Federalist Papers argue the opposite, actually
a large republic will better control faction. Or take the Lincoln-Douglas debates. One of
the questions talked about in those debates is, was the Kansas-Nebraska Act part of a plot
to spread slavery all over the country? Now by the very nature of that question, you'll
see that we can't know for sure. It's a speculative question. And so Lincoln argues that if you
put this and this piece of evidence together, you'll have reasons to think that it is. And
Douglas argues that that's a preposterous notion, that it's part of a plot. So these
are controversial. They're uncertain. Controversies involve genuine differences of opinion that
matter to the participants and which they want to see resolved. Now there are lots of
ways we could look at controversy. Controversies may be explicit, that is, they're recognized
as such by the people in them. Or they may be implicit. It may be that only a third party,
an analyst of the argument, can see the controversy. For example, in the Lincoln-Douglas debates
there's an explicit controversy about whether or not the candidates support the Dred Scott
decision. But it's not made explicit that there's also disagreement between them about
what the Dred Scott decision says. That's an implicit controversy that a third party
could look at their debate and see. Controversies may be what's called unmixed, meaning that
only one of the arduers maintains a position and the other one just challenges it. Or they
may be mixed, meaning that each arduer maintains a position. So for example, in 2005 when President
Bush proposed to create individual retirement accounts as part of Social Security, the Democrats
in the Senate said, we are not going to discuss Social Security reform until you take that
off the table. Only one of the arduers developed and maintained a position. On the other hand,
also in 2005, following the resignation of Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor,
some people argued the President ought to nominate a true conservative to that seat, and others
argued the President ought to nominate a moderate to that seat, and both sets of arduers maintained
and defended a position. So we could have unmixed or mixed controversies. And controversies
may be single, that is they relate only to one claim at a time, or they may be multiple
relating to more than one claim. As for example, when the parent says to the teenager, you
shouldn't stay out past midnight, and the teenager says to the parent, you don't trust
me. There are two different claims now, both at issue, one about what the teenager ought
to do, and one about whether or not the parent trusts the child. In any event, however, however
we look at controversies, the uncertainty implies that the outcome is not known for sure.
There's an inferential leap in the argument from the known to the unknown, and the audience
based on their judgment is asked to accept this leap. We can't wait for things to become
certain because they never will, and yet we have to reach some decision. So the first
assumption of argumentation is that it's audience dependent, the second is that it's grounded
in uncertainty. The third is that it involves justification for claims. Argueers offer a
rationale for accepting an uncertain claim, and what this rationale is is the reasons
for making the inferential leap from what we know to what we're not sure about. Those
reasons are considered to be acceptable if they would convince a reasonable person who's
exercising critical judgment, and if that happens we say that the claim is justified. We get
that judgment by giving reasons that a critical listener would accept, and the participants
in an argument assume this role of critical listener for the other. So if I'm arguing
with you, what I want to do is I want to give reasons that you as a critical listener would
regard as acceptable, justifiable reasons, and the thing that will best strengthen my
argument is your critical abilities being brought to bear on what I have to say, and likewise
I will serve as the critical listener for you. The adherence of the critical listener
is the substitute for the certainty that we cannot possibly achieve, and it's the criticalness
of the critical listener that gives us confidence in reaching our judgments even though they
are matters only of probability and not certainty. The arguers in fact who are engaged in this
testing of ideas through critical judgment and questioning can be seen as performing
an analogous role to the scientist in the laboratory whose rigorously testing claims
about the empirical world, the arguers are doing it about things that we can't see or
know directly or certainly. The competing narratives in the Lincoln
Douglas debates provide a good example of how this takes place. One of the questions
in those debates is what did the founding fathers believe about the question of slavery
in the territories? This was an important question because everybody venerated the founding
fathers, but there was no way to know because the founding fathers had not been confronted
with precisely this question, and so what did the advocates do? Douglas tried to justify
his position by saying, look, many of the founding fathers were slave owners, they certainly
would not have believed that slavery was immoral and continued to hold slaves, therefore he
says that's a justification for my belief that the founding fathers would have left
this question up to each state and territory to decide for itself. Lincoln on the other
hand said, look at what the founding fathers wrote, they wrote the constitution, and you
noticed they never mentioned the word slavery in the constitution. Why not? Well it must
be because they disapproved of it and expected it to die out. Now what each man is doing
in this contest is trying to offer a justification for the position that he is taking in the
contest. Now justification is not the same thing as proof in a strict sense, it's subjective,
it's dependent upon a particular audience, it doesn't say that something is true, it
says you should believe it, you should accept it and be prepared to act on that acceptance.
It implies that people are willing to be convinced and yet are skeptical enough not just to
take statements on faith, it's always provisional and subject to change in the light of new
information or new arguments, and it has degrees of strength. There can be plausible justifications
all the way up to highly probable justifications. So the third assumption then is that arguers
try to justify beliefs for themselves and for others. The fourth of the underlying assumptions
that we need to understand is that despite its seemingly adversarial character, argumentation
is fundamentally a cooperative enterprise. Now that sounds odd, we think of argument
as adversarial, but let's think again. Arguers share a common goal of reaching the best possible
decision under the circumstances, otherwise they wouldn't engage in argument, one would
walk away or one would impose his or her will by force. How do we account for the adversarial
elements of argument, their means toward the achievement of this common goal? They improve
the rigor of the procedure. They reduce the likelihood that critical details will be omitted
or that the arguers will jump to conclusions and they increase confidence in the result.
To achieve this common goal, as we've seen, arguers also cooperate in being critical listeners
for one another. Beyond the common goal and common roles, there are still more respects
in which the activity of argumentation is cooperative. All of the parties in the dispute
share some level of agreement. That may seem odd when we're talking about disagreement
and controversy, but disagreements are always founded on some level of agreement. So for
example, take the case of social security reform. Participants in this controversy share the
goal of keeping social security solvent, even as they disagree about what will make it sub.
If there weren't this bedrock agreement, they couldn't have a meaningful argument. Another
thing arguers share, sounds trivial, but it's really not, they share a common language.
And by that I don't mean just that they speak English or French or German. I'm not talking
about that. I mean they share an understanding of what we mean, for example, by solvent in
the social security example. And if we think about unproductive arguments for a minute,
arguments where the two parties are talking past each other, never really engage each
other's positions, it's often because they're not really sharing the same language. They
don't mean the same things even if they use the same terms. Liberals and conservatives
both say that they want courts to interpret the law justly, but they may mean very different
things, for example. Without a common language and set of meanings, the argumentation will
not succeed. The Federalist Papers again offers a historical example of the importance of
these kinds of agreement. There was a shared belief by both Federalists and Anti-Federalists
that power corrupts. There was a shared commitment to holding the union together, a shared understanding
of what virtue meant, and a shared commitment to checks and balances. And the disagreements
between Federalists and Anti-Federalists took place within the context of these bedrock
agreements. What's more, arguers also share a posture which I think can best be described
as restrained partisanship. On the one hand, they're partisan. They really believe what
they say, but they're restrained in their partisanship because they don't want to overpower
the other person. They share a modesty that stems from the recognition that they could
be wrong. They share respect for the audience or for the other person because they value
that person, and they recognize the importance of free ascent that's voluntarily given,
that's not the result of bludgeoning or coercion of any kind. And as audiences, they share
a willingness to listen and a willingness to risk being convinced. Person who comes
to an argument saying, you can say whatever you want, but my mind is made up, isn't really
participating in an argument. That's a shadow of argument. It's going through the motions.
People who engage in argumentation risk that they may be convinced just as they seek to
convince other people. And that leads directly to the fifth underlying assumption that I
want to discuss. Argumentation entails risks. One is the risk of being shown to be wrong.
You know, I start off believing something. I make a claim to you, and in the process
of our interaction, you show that I'm wrong. Now, of course, our ideal is a person who's
shown to be wrong immediately acknowledges that he or she is wrong, picks up and goes
right on from there. But we know that being shown to be wrong can be unsettling. It can
lead to loss of face. It can diminish one's own self-worth. It can diminish one's esteem
in the conversation or in the community or in the society. And so when one engages in
an argument, one is taking on that risk of being shown to be wrong. One's also taking
on the risk of having to alter one's system of beliefs, to take into account something
new, to add something to the storehouse of beliefs that we have, to eliminate some belief,
to modify or change some belief, all those things can be psychologically disturbing.
It's cognitively disturbing, particularly if it suggests that we've got beliefs that
are not fully consistent with one another or that aren't carefully enough worked out.
Now, when people engage in arguing, they mutually assume those risks. If a person knew for sure
that he or she was right, that person might not have an incentive to engage in argument.
And indeed, there are some people who on some topics will not engage in argument. For example,
some scholars will not engage in argument with those who seek to deny historical facts,
such as the existence of the Holocaust, for example.
Others will not engage in argument with those who cast doubt on generally accepted scientific
theories. Much of the dispute between evolution and intelligent design is actually about avoiding
a dispute by trying to deny the legitimacy of one or the other position. So there is
a direct relationship between risk and uncertainty. When we don't know for sure, when matters
are uncertain, and yet we're willing to talk about, to discuss them, to engage in them,
it indicates that we're willing to run some risks. The decision to engage in argument
suggests a willingness to run the risks. Let's go back to the Lincoln-Douglas debates,
for example. Stephen Douglas was the front runner. He was by far the better known of
the two individuals. He was the incumbent U.S. Senator seeking a third term, one of the
most powerful Democrats in the country. He had no political reason to agree to the challenge
that Abraham Lincoln offered to debate him, except for the fact that there was this norm
out on the frontier, that if somebody challenged you to debate and you declined, it suggested
that you had something to hide. That's probably the only reason we could think of for Douglas
is accepting the challenge, but he did. And in accepting the challenge, he recognized
that the outcome of the debates could help his position, or could injure his position.
It could support his commitment to popular sovereignty, or it could bring that commitment
into serious challenge and cause it to be questioned. And so in his agreement to debate against
Abraham Lincoln, he voluntarily assumed those risks. Likewise, Lincoln, in his agreement
who had been traveling around the state following Douglas, Douglas would give a speech and then
Lincoln would give a speech that same night and try to capture the crowd. Lincoln was
taking on a risk. As long as he was following around and giving answers to Douglas when
Douglas wasn't there to respond directly, he might not get as large an audience or as
much attention, but his positions wouldn't be challenged directly. By offering the challenge
to debate Douglas and by seeking that opportunity, Lincoln also took the risk that his positions
would be challenged in such a way that he would be forced to acknowledge that there
were errors or things that needed to be revised. Why do people run those risks? They run them
because they don't know for sure that they are right. And even if somehow they did know
for sure that they were right, they run the risk because they don't want to overpower
the adversary or to bludgeon the adversary or to coerce the adversary. That kind of victory
is meaningless to them. What they want is they want to convince the adversary by the
arguments that they advance, the claims that they make and the structure of reasons that
they offer in behalf of those claims. People run these risks usually because they don't
know for sure that they're right and even if they did, because they value the judgment
of their adversaries and they want assent only if assent is freely given. Now there's
an interesting aspect of this. If we value our adversary and we want our adversaries
assent only if freely given, we could say that what we're doing by making those statements
is we are bestowing a kind of respect of personhood on the person with whom we're engaged in argument.
We may intensely disagree and yet we value that person as a person so that we want a
voluntary assent, the kind of judgment that comes freely and without coercion. And in valuing
the personhood of our opponent, our adversary, the arguer of course claims the same value
for him or herself. We can too easily be misled by the fact that argumentation does have adversarial
elements so that we think of it as a zero sum gain in which I must lose in order for
you to win or in which I somehow suffer as a result of what you have achieved. And it's
important for us to realize when we look at a controversy and the participants in it that
while there are adversarial elements in their behavior, they're basically showing their
respect for each other by taking on these risks, the risk of being wrong and the risk
of needing to alter their beliefs. So we have our five key assumptions. Argumentation is
audience dependent. It deals with uncertainty. It involves justification for claims, not proof.
It is fundamentally cooperative and it entails risks. This view of argumentation makes it
very different from reasoning in formal logic or mathematics. And we'll explore those
differences more fully in the next lecture.
Lecture 3 Formal and Informal Argumentation
Welcome back. In the last lecture, we surveyed the basic assumptions underlying argumentation
theory and practice. I've mentioned several times already that argumentation deals with
the uncertain. And that doesn't sound at all like the certainty we associate with formal
logic. As you may have guessed, one of my central themes is that we can't regard formal
reasoning as the model for all the kinds of reasoning in which we engage in argumentation.
And the time has come now to explore that claim more carefully, to see what formal reasoning
is and why it's not a suitable model for everyday argument. We need to know enough about it
in order to know both of these things. And so in this lecture, what I hope to do without
becoming too technical or too long is to explore the properties of formal reasoning, typical
patterns of formal reasoning, and then to see what the limitations of formal reasoning are
as a model for argumentation. The basic property of formal reasoning is that it is deductive
in nature. Now often back in school, we learned that deductive and inductive reasoning were
different according to the following. That deductive reasoning proceeded from general
to specific, and inductive reasoning from specific to general. The only problem with
that is that it's wrong. Either one could do either. Deductive reasoning is reasoning
that has two basic characteristics. First, the conclusion follows necessarily automatically
from the premises. If the premises are true, the conclusion has to be true. Now notice
I'm not saying that the premises are true. We don't care whether they're true or not.
But if they are, then the conclusion must be true. To have true premises and a false
conclusion in deductive reasoning would be an impossibility. The second feature of deductive
reasoning is that the conclusion contains no new information. Nothing in the conclusion
that's not present at least implicitly in the premises. The conclusion tells us nothing
new, nothing that we didn't already know from the premises. So those are the two features
of deduction. If the premises are true, the conclusion must be true, and the conclusion
gives us no new information. Now from these two features, we can derive two other corollaries,
two other ways to describe deductive reasoning. First of all, we can say that deductive reasoning
is analytic in nature, by which I mean it doesn't require any reference to the external
world or to any actually existing things. We could use symbols, and we often do when
we engage in deductive reasoning. All A is B, all B is C, therefore all A is C. It doesn't
make any difference what A, B and C are, and it doesn't make any difference whether any
of those statements is true. Deductive reasoning then requires no reference to the external
world, and it can even be counterfactual. My favorite example that I often use to illustrate
this, consider the following. All heavenly bodies are made of green cheese. The moon is
a heavenly body, therefore the moon is made of green cheese. It's absolutely good deductive
reasoning. Even though it's counterfactual, so far as we know the moon's not made of
green cheese or anything like it, but the form of the argument is perfect. So deduction
is analytic. It doesn't require any reference to the external world, and it can even be
counterfactual. The other corollary is, deductive reasoning doesn't add anything to our store
of knowledge. It merely rearranges what we already know. If we already knew that all
heavenly bodies were made of green cheese, and that the moon is a heavenly body, then
even though we didn't know it explicitly, we would know that the moon was made of green
cheese. All deductive reasoning does is to rearrange what we know by making explicit
what may have been implicit knowledge, by bringing to the foreground what may have been
background knowledge. That's a quick overview, then, of deduction. Formal reasoning is deductive.
The conclusion follows necessarily from the premises, and it contains no new information.
Now what are the basic patterns of deductive or formal reason? Well, the basic unit is
the syllogism. You've probably heard the term syllogism. All it means is a structure consisting
of at least two premises, and then a conclusion that's drawn from them. If we were exploring
formal reasoning more extensively, if that were the focus of our whole course, we would
quickly see that there are different kinds of syllogisms, and I want just to highlight
the basic differences. The first kind is the categorical syllogism, and it's composed
of categorical statements. These are statements that relate categories of things to other
categories of things, hence the name categorical. The categorical statements could be either
universal or partial. Let's consider a simple example. The categories of politicians and
compromisers. We could say all politicians are compromisers. It's a universal statement,
takes all of one category, and puts it into another category. Or we could say no politicians
are compromisers, takes all of one category, and keeps it out of the other category. These
are universal statements. Or we could say some politicians are compromisers, or some
politicians are not compromisers. These are only partial statements. So categorical statements
could be either universal, applying to a whole category, or partial, applying to only a part
of it. Likewise, if you think about these same four examples, some of them are inclusive.
They take all or some of one category, and put it into the other category, included in
the other category. Some of the statements are exclusive. They take all or some of one
category, and keep it out of the other category. Notice something else about those four statements.
The only terms that we could use to measure or to quantify are all, none, and some. Some
there's no allowing for degrees between all and none. It's all encompassed by the term
some, and that's as far as we can go with measuring categorical statements. What does
a categorical syllogism do? It takes these categorical statements and puts them together
in premise and conclusion structures. Consider a simple example. All politicians are compromisers,
all compromisers are immoral, therefore all politicians are immoral. Now remember, once
again, we're not concerned with whether the statements are true. I hope they're not. But
if all politicians are compromisers, and if all compromisers are immoral, then it must
be the case that all politicians are immoral. We could easily see why that's a sound argument,
a valid argument, if you imagine how we might diagram it. We might draw one circle that represents
politicians. We'd put that inside another circle representing compromisers, because
all of the politicians fall within the category of compromisers. And then we'd put the term
compromisers into a larger circle representing immoral, because we said all compromisers are
immoral. And you'd immediately see, once we put the compromisers circle into the immoral
circle, we've put all the politicians there, because they were all inside the compromisers
circle in the first place. You can draw diagrams like that to see whether the argument is a
sound argument or not. Or there are elaborate rules that can be applied to determine its
soundness. If we were studying formal logic for the whole course, we would go into those.
What becomes a little harder to work out, though, is a categorical syllogism like this one.
All politicians are compromisers. Some compromisers are immoral. Now, what about the conclusion?
Can we conclude that some politicians are immoral? Must that conclusion be true if
the premises are true? No. And we can see why. Imagine our circles again. We take all
the politicians, draw a circle for politicians, and we put that inside the circle for compromisers
just like we did before. But now we've said only some compromisers are immoral, which means
there'd be some overlap between the circle for compromisers and the circle for that which
is immoral. Now, the circle for immoral, when we're drawing that, we don't know whether
it overlaps the part of the compromisers circle that includes the politicians or whether it
doesn't. So we can't say with certainty either that some politicians are immoral or that
no politicians are immoral or that all politicians are immoral or that some politicians are not
immoral. We don't know. We can't conclude with certainty. Somebody who tried to would
not be making a valid argument. That's the categorical syllogism. It takes statements
that relate categories and puts them together in premise and conclusion structures. Now,
a second kind of syllogism is called conditional, sometimes hypothetical. This is a kind of
syllogism that instead of relating categories, starts off with an if-then statement. Consider
this suitably nonpartisan example. If a republicrat is elected, prices will rise. We have an
if-then statement with two parts, an if clause, which is called the antecedent, and a then
clause, which is called the consequent. And then the syllogism proceeds either to affirm
or to deny either the if or the then clause. So we might say, looking at the if clause,
if a republicrat is elected, we might say, if a republicrat is elected, prices will rise.
A republicrat is elected. Therefore, prices will rise. We've affirmed the antecedent.
And again, the conclusion would be absolutely necessarily true, given that the premises
are true. If it's the case that if a republicrat's elected prices will rise, and if a republicrat
is elected, then prices will rise. However, suppose we deny the antecedent. If a republicrat's
elected prices will rise, a republicrat is not elected. Can we say anything about prices?
No. They might rise anyway. We haven't said what would happen under those circumstances.
They might or might not rise. So if we affirm the antecedent, we've got a sound or a valid
argument, but if we deny the antecedent, we don't. Now what about the consequent, the
then part of the if then statement? If a republicrat is elected, prices will rise. Prices will
rise. Therefore, can we conclude a republicrat is elected? No. Because again, prices could
rise anyway, whether or not a republicrat is elected. So while affirming the antecedent,
the if part is a valid form of argument, affirming the consequent is not a valid form of argument.
Indeed, it's a very common fallacious form of argument to affirm the consequent. But
what if we deny the consequent? If a republicrat is elected, prices will rise. Prices won't
rise. Therefore, can we conclude that a republicrat is not elected? Yes, we can. Because we said
that if one were elected, prices would rise. Prices don't rise, so it must be the case
there was not a republicrat elected. So with this kind of syllogism, affirming the antecedent,
the if clause, and denying the consequent, the then clause, become acceptable forms of
reason. But affirming the consequent, or denying the antecedent, are not. One more time, affirming
the antecedent, saying that the if clause is true, and denying the consequent, saying
that the then clause is not true, produce valid arguments, valid forms of reasoning. But
affirming the consequent, saying that the then clause is true, or denying the antecedent,
that the if clause is not true, those don't produce valid arguments. And we see why in
the example, the effect could happen anyway. Alright, so we've got categorical syllogisms
and conditional syllogisms. The third category of syllogisms is called disjunctive, sometimes
alternative. And these are syllogisms that begin with the form either or, either this
or that. Imagine a husband and wife trying to decide how to spend a leisurely evening.
Either we will play cards tonight, or we will go to the movies. Then the syllogism proceeds
to accept or reject one alternative, and then to draw some conclusion about the other. Either
we'll play cards tonight, or we'll go to the movies, we won't play cards. Therefore,
we will go to the movies. Is that a sound argument? Sure it is. Because we said we'd
do one or the other, we've eliminated one of the options, so there's only one left.
We could say the same thing in reverse. We won't go to the movies. Therefore, we will
play cards. Rejecting either alternative automatically leads to accepting the other.
Now here's the tricky part. What if we accept one of the alternatives? Either we'll play
cards tonight, or we'll go to the movies. We'll play cards. Therefore, we won't go to
the movies. Can we be sure of that? Maybe. Here's where we get into a tricky area. The
phrase either or has two different meanings. One of them is exclusive. Either A or B, but
not both. And one is non-exclusive. Either A or B, or both. Could we both play cards
and go to the movies? You might say, well, if the night's long enough, if the movie's
short enough, if the card game doesn't go on forever, maybe we could. In that case,
it would not be valid to accept one option and conclude that we have to reject the other.
But sometimes we're talking about alternatives where we can't do both. Either I'll drive
to work Monday morning or I will walk. Now, I suppose we could contort the meaning of
that sentence and imagine, well, you know, we could drive and then we go back home and
then we come back and walk again. But as we use the terms, we would say, all right, I'm
going to work Monday morning. I'll either drive or walk. So if I drive, I know that
I won't walk. Likewise, if I walk, I won't drive. Now, if either or is used in this
exclusive sense, then we can accept one option and confidently reject the other. If it's
used in the non-exclusive sense, we can't automatically reject one just because we accept
the other. If it's used in the non-exclusive sense, we don't know. But we always know if
we reject one, we accept the other. These then are the three patterns of syllogism,
the three common patterns of formal reasoning. One relates categories to other categories,
one deals with if then statements and one deals with either or. Now, in the past 20 minutes,
what we've done is we have encapsulated a whole course in formal logic. I think we understand
enough about formal logic to know that it's deductive in nature and to realize what that
means. If the premises are true, the conclusion must be and the conclusion gives us no new
information. Until fairly recently, as I said in the first lecture, this was regarded as
the prototype for all forms of reasoning. It was seen as the model case. What other reasoning
ought to do is it ought to aspire to the standards of formal reasoning. This view has come under
increasingly strong challenge and the challenges take several forms. One of them is to suggest
that very seldom, very seldom, does one actually reason in syllogistic form. Let's consider
a couple of things about it. Remember I said it requires no reference to reality, could
be done entirely in symbols, all A is B, all B is C. How often is it the case that when
we talk about things, when we make claims, that we can abstract from reality and it makes
no difference what we're talking about? Very seldom. In fact, most of the time, precisely
what we want to talk about is the category of some specific subject matter. Consider another
feature of syllogistic reason, of formal logic. Remember I said if we want to measure our
categories are all none and some and some admits of no degrees, makes no difference whether
it's 1%, 99% or anywhere in between. How often is that the case? Again, not very often.
Most of the time when we're not dealing with universals, it's very important to know matters
of degree, whether something's highly probable or whether it's just an unlikely possibility,
for example. So one criticism would say, look, we've picked a model that doesn't in any
way describe the reasoning in which we actually engage. Another and somewhat related criticism
is to suggest that most argumentation, most reasoning, is not represented well by a form
in which the conclusion contains no new information. What we want to do most of the time when we
reason is precisely to get from something we already know to something that we don't.
We want new information. We want to move from premises that we're fairly confident of and
see if they can lead us to a new conclusion in which we can have confidence. And this
movement involves a leap of faith, which an arguer tries to justify for us and say, you
ought to make that leap. You ought to make that inference. You ought to derive that conclusion
on the basis of those premises. So what these critiques have suggested is that if we think
about mathematical logic or symbolic logic or formal logic as a model for reasoning in
general, we're going to be led down the wrong path. The model doesn't represent the kind
of reasoning, the kind of arguing in which we customarily engage. Well, if formal reasoning
is not the model, then what is it? From this point of view, it's a highly specialized application
of what are much broader general principles of reasoning. And the trick that we've played
on ourselves for 300 years, this critique would suggest, is to take a highly specialized
example as though it were the model case. Why then should we study formal reason? Why
do I devote a lecture to it? Partly to understand how it is used in the areas to which it does
apply. And partly because some of the thought patterns of formal logic and some of the errors
in formal reasoning are also found in everyday argumentation, as we will see in later lectures.
But what I am really saying here is, let's recontextualize formal reasoning. Let's recontextualize
it as a specialized case, case that's appropriate to mathematics and certain symbolic realms,
but let's quit thinking about it as a generalizable model. Where do we find our generalizable
model then? Increasingly, scholars have said we ought to look not to formal reasoning,
but to informal reasoning, which deals with structures that are not and do not aspire
to be certain. Now in informal reasoning, the argument cannot be extracted from the
language in which it is cast. This is both a blessing and a curse. It means that the
study of informal reasoning is messier than the study of formal reason. But consider a
claim like this one. If we allow stem cell research, we are playing God. We could go
on and affirm or deny the antecedent or the consequent. Now if you took a statement like
that and put it into the if-then structure of formal logic, you could do it. But you would
lose so much of what the content of this argument is about. Playing God is not just the equivalent
of a P or a Q or an A or a B or any symbol because it has connotations, value judgments
of what's permissible and not permissible, and these are bound up in the language itself.
We wouldn't reach a conclusion that says we approve of playing God. As we use the language,
we'd see that as an inconsistent possibility. Playing God is not something that's given
to human beings to do. And to say that one is trying to do that is a powerful accusation.
That's not a neutral statement. Likewise, the verb allow if we allow stem cell research.
I could have said endorse. I could have said encourage. I could have said permit. I could
have said condone. I could have used any of a number of other verbs and they'd all mean
something different because the language itself contains levels of meaning and connotation
that are also part of the argument. So unlike formal reasoning, we can't extract the argument
from the language. Furthermore, in informal reasoning, the conclusion does contain new
information, not present in the premises. As I've said, we reason precisely in order
to get to a new place from the place where we start out. So for example, if we reach
the conclusion that we ought to allow stem cell research, we would reach it from premises
that deal with science and medicine, that deal with morality, that deal with judgments
about the nature of the stem cell. And from these premises, often perhaps through a long
and tortured process of reasoning, we might get to the conclusion that we ought to allow
stem cell research or conversely that we ought not to. We get to a conclusion that contains
new information. It's not where we started out. And the purpose of our reasoning is
precisely to get there. Now as a result, this conclusion doesn't follow with certainty.
Our premises about morality might be right. Our premises about science might be right.
And it still might be the case that we ought not to allow stem cell research or conversely
that we should, depending on which way we were making the argument. The conclusion follows
only with some degree of probability. And it's important to have some sense of how great
that probability is. We're not satisfied with just saying some. We want to know whether
there's an offhand chance that we could be right. Whether it's a medium range probability
or whether it's highly likely that we would be right. So now to recapitulate, informal
reasoning can't be extracted from language. The conclusion does contain new information.
And the conclusion follows not with certainty, but only with some degree of probability.
Now we might ask ourselves, why should we accept a conclusion that relies on probability?
Why should we accept a conclusion that might be wrong? Well the answer in brief is that
if the reasoning follows accepted conventions, if it follows a pattern that's been used repeatedly
over time and has led to generally good results, we can be fairly confident that it's right.
Accumulated experience has borne out that it'll usually be right. Not always. Not always,
but it'll usually be right. Now what those conventions of informal reasoning are, we'll
see in more detail several lectures down the road. But if the question is why should we
accept the conclusion based on probability, we should do it because of accumulated experience
and because absolute certainty is not possible. Formal reasoning has its place. But informal
reasoning is at the center of argumentation. This approach to reasoning has a long and
rich history going back about 2,500 years as we will see in the next lecture.
Lecture 4, History of Argumentation Studies
It's good to be back with you again. In the last lecture we attempted to distinguish
argumentation in general, which is our concern, from formal reasoning which is a specialized
application of it. I suggested that general argumentation grounded in informal reasoning
had a very long history. Now I want with all immodesty to survey 25 centuries of history
and explore how this field of study developed and how it came to take the shape that it
has today. We start off in ancient Greece in the 5th century before the common era.
This is usually regarded as the period of time in which the study of rhetoric and argumentation
began. The immediate impulse for it was frankly political. There had been a tyrant named Thrasybulus
of Syracuse who had been overthrown and a democratic regime was established. This created
a very practical political need. During the period of tyrannical rule, private property
had been seized, been expropriated, and citizens now needed to go to court and to make arguments
on their behalf with regard to their title to their property. They needed to know how
to do it. There weren't professional lawyers then. Citizens represented themselves in court.
They needed to know how to justify the claim that a piece of property that they said was
theirs really was. In response to this need, there developed a class of people, we'd call
them professionals today, who were teachers. They went around from place to place. They
were itinerant teachers who lectured in Athens and in the surrounding area to teach people
the skills to do this, to argue their claims in court. These teachers were called Sophists.
Now again, this is a term that today has negative connotations. Sophistry is talked about as
empty appeals that don't really have any significant substance to them, but at that time the Sophists
were highly respected. One of the earliest of the Sophists was a man named Protagoras,
whom we remember as the father of debate because Protagoras taught that there were always two
sides, at least two sides, to every question, and hence the outcome of the question was not
given or self-evident, but was relative to the arguments that were advanced for it.
So Protagoras introduced the very kind of mindset that we talked about in the last lecture.
Among the other leading Sophists were Gorgias, who focused on different styles of language
in argument, and Isocrates, not to be confused with Socrates. Isocrates, who emphasized the
role of probabilities, and who by the way was one of the leading opponents of Plato.
Isocrates and Plato sort of represent the two poles of antiquity, Plato defending philosophy,
Isocrates defending rhetoric, Plato seeking certainty, Isocrates emphasizing probability,
Plato the man of contemplation and reflection, Isocrates the man of action, and so on.
The Sophists introduced the notion that there were, if you will, storehouses in the mind
or common places to which one could go to find the themes or the appeals to use in the
arguments to be made in court, and they suggested that there was a finite number of these places
in the mind. So if you could learn these common places, you would have a storehouse of resources
to use in making the claims that you would need to make.
There's one other thing, by the way, that the Sophists did that I've always admired
them for. They introduced the principle that teachers should be paid. But they came to
be criticized, and they were criticized by no one as vigorously as by Plato. The essence
of Plato's criticism of the Sophists was that they regarded winning the case as an end in
itself, regardless of one's purpose, regardless of the soundness of one's position, just as
we sometimes stereotype argumentation today. The charge that would be made against the
Sophists is that they made the weaker appear to be the stronger case. They made the worse
appear to be the better case. And how did they do that? The charge went, they did it
by being so concerned with technique as an end in itself, apart from the substance of
the matter, and apart from what was right, so that they would teach people with weak
positions how to make them seem stronger than they really were.
Now of course, the assumption underlying this charge by Plato against the Sophists was that
there was a priori, some notion of what was right and what was wrong, what was worse and
what was better, what was weaker and what was stronger, that you could determine these
features of a case apart from making the arguments for it. Assume that all of these things could
be known and applied. Plato thought that the excessive concern of the Sophists for technique
was inherent in the subject of rhetoric and argument itself, and so he derided the study
and practice of argumentation. Indeed, there's an interpretation of one of Plato's most famous
dialogues, The Fedrus, which suggests that what Plato does in that dialogue is to establish
the requirements for good rhetoric, for good argument, such that they could not possibly
be met. In order to practice good rhetoric, one must know the nature of the soul, and
all the different kinds of souls, and so on and so forth. These would be requirements
that couldn't possibly be met, and so by this interpretation, The Fedrus is in large part
an attack on rhetoric, and it suggests that if you employ rhetoric, if you employ argument,
if you believe, as Protagoras did, that there are two sides to every question and that the
outcome is relative to argument, well, this is just focusing on appearances, not realities.
It's focusing on what is fleeting and ephemeral, not on what's enduring and timeless, and
of course, Plato was concerned with the latter. And so we have all the way back in antiquity,
this opposition between rhetoric and philosophy, appearance and reality, probability and truth,
democracies and Plato. It fell to Aristotle to try to develop a
synthesis of these positions. Aristotle argued that rhetoric and argument were neither moral
nor immoral instruments. They were instruments. They could be used for good, they could be
used for evil, but argumentation was a skill, it was a practical art. And Aristotle wrote
a book called The Rhetoric, which is still studied widely today, in which he tried to
set out this view. It's in that book that he offered the definition that I mentioned
a few lectures back when he said that rhetoric was the faculty or skill of discovering the
available means of persuasion in the given case. And that view led Aristotle to an emphasis
on audience analysis, to a view on the kinds of appeals that one could use, and the circumstances
under which they would be appropriate or inappropriate.
Aristotle's rhetoric is sometimes thought of almost as a recipe book because it suggests
all these different possibilities that an orator could use. But the larger purpose that
Aristotle had in mind was to try to resolve this split between Isocrates and Plato, to
suggest that the study of rhetoric was legitimate. It was worth knowing about, and argumentation
was the foundation of it. And so it was a skill that ought to be taught so that it could
be put to good and useful purpose. And Aristotle really represents the synthesis of classic
Greek approaches to argumentation and rhetoric. Now this synthesis with only minor adjustments
continued to dominate the study of rhetoric, not only through the rest of classical Greece,
but through the Roman era and into the medieval period as well.
What the Romans did was to take the theories of rhetoric developed by the Greeks, particularly
by Aristotle, and to adapt them largely for pedagogical purposes. So the Romans saw rhetoric
as a means of instruction. And if you will, argument and rhetoric became a sort of early
theory of teaching. How do we teach? How do we instruct students? And how do people learn?
And what the Romans did was to take the concepts that Aristotle especially had articulated,
and they systematized them. And they did that by dividing the study of rhetoric into five
parts, which they called canons. The canons were invention, arrangement, style, and the
memory, and delivery. Invention was the process of discovery, of finding what could be used
in an argument, and selecting what would be used. Invention was the process of going
through the storehouses of the mind, identifying the available resources, and then choosing
from among them. Arrangement, as its name suggests, refers to organization, and indeed
the earliest work on patterns of organization came from the Romans. They talked about the
different parts of a speech, and what should be done in each part, and how the parts should
work together for persuasive purposes. Style focused on the use of language, and how different
kinds of language could suggest a different level or tone, and how particular words and
phrases could be chosen. Memory referred to the process of keeping in mind what one was
about to say, and it led ultimately to the discovery and study of all sorts of mnemonic
devices, devices to aid the memory. It didn't necessarily mean memorization, but it referred
to keeping in one's mind the elements of the appeal. And delivery referred to the physical
presentation, the use of the voice, the use of the body, gesture, and so on. So rhetoric
was neatly divided up into these five parts, and as you can imagine, the first two of them,
invention and arrangement, were most closely linked to argumentation. Argumentation became
the process of identifying the appeals that one could use, and figuring out how to put
them together in an order or structure. It was also the Romans, as you probably remember,
who organized whole fields of study, and developed the original seven liberal arts. Rhetoric
was one of these. It was put together with logic and grammar, and the three, logic, grammar,
and rhetoric, were called the trivium, not to be confused with trivial, and the trivium
were the fields that were seen as essential to the training of the good citizen orator.
The ultimate objective of the Roman educational system was to train people to be, in Quintillion's
words, the good person speaking well, because that's what the job of the citizen was seen
as being, being able to speak effectively, and to influence others through argument.
This view, by the way, held through much of the medieval period as well. The cannons
that are associated with the Romans, and especially with Cicero, were maintained. The one significant
change was that if education was the dominant influence of the Romans' use of rhetoric, for
much of the medieval era, it was religion. Religion was the dominant social institution,
and so rhetoric and argument came to be seen as a theory of preaching. And this theory
once again relied on the same cannons that the Romans had developed, and that in turn
was a systematization of a whole way of thought that went back to classical Greece.
Now I want to jump all the way to the 16th century or so, the early Renaissance, and
it was then that some significant changes occurred in the way that people thought about
the study of rhetoric and argumentation. There was an otherwise relatively obscure philosopher
by the name of Peter Ramos, who took the five cannons of the Romans and split them into
two groups, invention and arrangement on the one hand, style, memory, and delivery on the
other. Ramos took invention and arrangement, and he lifted them from rhetoric and assigned
them to philosophy, because these were seen as part of the discovery process of figuring
out what was true. Rhetoric was left with style, memory, and delivery, which some people would
regard as the least intellectual elements of the subject, and certainly the least relevant
to argumentation. But notice what Ramos's division implied. It implied that the process
of discovering what was true was separate from the process of presenting it after it
had been discovered. Remember Aristotle had linked the two together. He regarded all of
this subject matter as interrelated. But under the influence of Ramos, discovery of truth
was distinguished from the presentation of truth. And rhetoric was seen not as a matter
of making and justifying claims with an audience in mind, it was not seen as argumentation,
but as a way of giving effective presentation to what philosophy had already determined
to be correct. This was a view that would have a profound influence over the study of
rhetoric for the next couple hundred years, removing it further and further from the kinds
of concerns that we've been talking about and focusing it much more on mechanics. What
did scholars of rhetoric do during this time? They developed elaborate manuals, lists, category
systems of figures of speech, ways of gesture, ways to move the head and to position the
body. There were whole books published with hundreds of diagrams of different gestures
suggesting different kinds of things, how to use the body during delivery of a speech.
That's what rhetoric was, while philosophy took over invention and arrangement. But then
something significant happened within the field of philosophy, particularly under the
influence of Rene Descartes. We remember Descartes probably most of all for his statement, I
think, therefore I am. What we forget is that what that statement is an answer to is the
question, what can you know? Descartes believed that we ought to systematically doubt everything
and we ought to accept as true only what could be shown to be self-evident. What was self-evident
if I think, therefore I exist? The Cartesian revolution in philosophy, as it is sometimes
been called, was marked by this quest for certainty, for self-evidence. Well, guess what happens
to invention and arrangement, those borrowed canons from rhetoric. Once philosophy takes
on a concern with certainty and self-evidence, they wither away. And indeed, for much of
the 17th, 18th and into the 19th century, there is little further advance in the understanding
of these important canons, and hence little advance of argumentation. Reasoning becomes
identified with the study of formal logic alone because it yields certainty. This is when
formal logic began to be seen as the model of all reason. That what is not formal should
aspire to the standards of formal logic. It should be taken as the goal. And within specialized
fields of study, practitioners developed models of reasoning that were claimed to be deductive
or certain, or at least to approach that goal. And what was argumentation? Very simply, it
was the demonstration of self-evident truth. What would be the model case of argumentation
in such a view? Geometrical proofs. You probably remember studying geometry, where you make
a statement and then you make a reason for it on a table of statements and reasons until
you end up with a certain conclusion. Well, that's what argumentation was thought to be
under the influence of Descartes, a demonstration of self-evident truth. And this point of view
had a tremendous influence even into the 20th century. In fact, some people have suggested
that the very apex of this view was an early 20th century movement known as logical positivism
that was predominant in the years immediately following World War I. And while I oversimplify
what logical positivism was, I don't think it's unfair to say that it held that only
words that clearly stand for something are meaningful, and hence that a large amount
of the language that we use doesn't really have any referent and therefore doesn't have
any meaning. The rich connotations of language didn't count because they were not about
anything, just a report of our feelings. And now we come to the 20th century.
Over the course of the last century, there has been a growing awareness of what this
whole approach of Cartesianism leaves out. And I think it's fair to say that dissatisfaction
with the approach has led to rethinking the whole idea of formal reasoning as the goal
and certainty as the goal and Cartesian philosophy as the model. Because what did this approach
do? It dismissed to the realm of meaninglessness attempts to make sense of the perplexities
of modern life. For example, it regarded a statement of value. Peace is good, democracy
is good, this piece of art is beautiful, has nothing more than a report, if you will,
on the state of our glands. When I say democracy is good, what I'm saying simply is I like
it. I'm not making any claim on you because I can't. I have no way to defend the claim
with any certainty. So statements of value are meaningless. Statements about what ought
to be done are meaningless. So for example, it was suggested that one could not establish
that freedom was better than tyranny or that democracy was better than communism or the
reverse because logical positivism excluded from consideration questions of this type.
The literary critic and theorist Wayne Booth has suggested that this whole view has led
to what he termed two modern dogmas, and of course his use of the term dogma is no accident.
In a kind of ironic, if not perverse reversal, our emphasis on certainty and reasoning leads
us to accept some things as dogmatic matters of faith. One of those dogmas he called scientism,
by which he meant the belief that non-scientific claims were all of equal value because there
was no way to verify them, there was no way to deduce them, there was no way to know them
with certainty, so one's as good as another. I like democracy, you like totalitarianism,
equally good. And the other dogma, he labeled irrationalism, and that was the belief that
things that couldn't be decided with certainty could only be decided by whim or by force,
the stronger would prevail. The emphasis was on the act of will.
Now, I don't know about you, but I find these dogmas, scientism and irrationalism, unacceptable.
I'm not prepared to say that non-scientific claims are of equal value or that matters
that are uncertain can be settled only by force, and increasingly during the 20th century
people reflected on these dogmas and came to the same conclusion. But what's the alternative
to accepting them? Go back to the beginning and question the Cartesian assumption that
certainty is what we're after. Go back to the beginning and question the assumption that
invention and arrangement are matters of philosophy rather than rhetoric. Go back to the beginning
and revive a classical understanding of what argumentation is all about. And there are
several intellectual influences over the past 50 or 60 years that have done just that. And
interestingly, they've come from different parts of the world and different fields of
study. And I want without going into any detail to just mention several of these so that we
get a sense of what's happened as people began to question the idea that Cartesianism,
logical positivism and the quest for certainty were our models.
There's a contemporary English philosopher, although he's now living in America, Stephen
Tullman, who in the 1950s set out to answer this question. When people talk about ethics,
how do they reason? You see, he rejects the notion that they don't reason. He rejects
the notion that ethical discussions are nonsense or just reports of the state of our glands.
And so he starts from the ground up and he says, okay, how do people reason when they
talk about ethics? And what he ended up doing was developing a model of reasoning that we'll
say more about in the next lecture, that he believes better accounts for what we do than
does formal logic or a quest for certainty. Meanwhile, from a completely different perspective,
a Belgian philosopher of jurisprudence named Chaim Perlman asked this question, when people
talk about justice, how do they reason? You notice he again rejects the notion that they
don't reason, rejects the notion that it's meaningless. And he says, when people talk
about justice, when they talk about what courts ought to do, how do they reason? He ended
up developing a whole theory that more than anything else went all the way back to classical
rhetoric. And so the way people reason, he says, they make claims, seeking the adherence
of audiences. They speak to a particular audience, but they also have in mind a larger, ultimate
universal audience which provides the norms and standards for how they argue. He wrote
a very long book explaining how people do that and the different methods and resources
they use. In Australia, a philosopher Charles Hamblin took the idea of fallacies, which
of course comes from formal logic. Fallacies are formally incorrect arguments, at least
in their traditional understanding. And he said in effect, wait a minute, let's explore
some of these fallacies. Depending on how people use them and what the context is, they
may not be fallacious at all. They may be perfectly good arguments. And what results
in our calling them fallacies is the mistaken assumption that we ought to be guided by this
model of formal reasoning seeking certainty. In the Netherlands, two scholars, Franz von
Ameren and Roeb Grootendorst, and then a whole series of others, asked this question, when
people engage in conversation trying to resolve problems, how do the conversations proceed
and how should they? And von Ameren and Grootendorst and their colleagues have worked out a whole
logic of conversation for critical discussions, which they've called pragma dialectics. Notice
what that term pragma dialectics does. It goes back to the concept of dialectic that
we explored in the first lecture, the interchange of questions and answers. And it realizes
that this is taking place for a pragmatic purpose, resolving problems by influencing
other people as to what the outcome should be. And so what their work does within the
realm of conversational analysis is to go back to this old notion of dialectic and rhetoric
in relationship. A contemporary German scholar, Jrgen Habermas, and other theorists of society
have focused on the role of communication in making a society, and they've offered
normative standards for how argument should proceed under ideal social conditions. That
is, it shouldn't be influenced by force. Conversation shouldn't end arbitrarily. The
force of the better argument should prevail, and so on. These have become normative standards
against which Habermas and other critics have measured actual practice. And in the United
States, within several different fields of study in the social sciences and the humanities,
there's been a new emphasis on the role of discourse and interpretation in understanding,
rejecting the notion that understanding is given and self-evident. Now all these different
trends, while they come from very different routes, have worked to revive the classical
understanding of argumentation grounded in rhetoric and dialectic as well as logic, and
today it is again an exciting and vibrant field of study.
After these first four lectures, we've now completed our study of the intellectual and
historical backgrounds of argumentation. It's time now to investigate what arguments
look like, how they arise in controversies, and how controversies proceed. We'll start
there next time.
Lecture five, argument analysis and diagramming. Hello and welcome. In the first four lectures,
we've explored the nature of argumentation and some of the points of view that are implied
or assumed in studying this field. We've examined how formal and informal reasoning
differ, and we've traced the development of argumentation studies across 2,500 years
of history. Now we begin a series of lectures on argumentation strategies and tactics, and
we start off by considering where we find arguments and what they look like.
What does it take to get people to argue? Basically, five preconditions must be met,
and from the discussions we've already had, these should be fairly obvious, so let me
tick them off briefly. First, there's a disagreement between people. There's some controversy.
Second, the disagreement matters to the people who are in it. It's not neutral or trivial.
Third, the assent of the other party is desired. But fourth, assent is valued only if it's
freely given. And finally, fifth, there's no easier or less risky way to resolve the
disagreement. We can remember those things from the discussions that we've already had,
and when those five conditions are satisfied, people will argue. How does a controversy
begin? Well, let's consider some examples. Let's consider six different claims that we
might imagine somebody making. One, in August 2005, George W. Bush was President of the
United States. Two, the teaching company sells this course for $49.95. Three, the red tie
is prettier than the blue one. Four, the city government is unsatisfactory. Five, capital
punishment is murder. And finally, six, Congress ought to pass the President's budget. Now
these are somewhat different kinds of statements. Some of them, as claims, will be more likely
to produce arguments than others. Think for a minute about this question. With respect
to each of these statements, how would you know whether you should believe it? Well,
let's try. Look at statement one. In August 2005, George W. Bush was President of the
United States. That's an item of common knowledge. It's easily verified, and so we can say, well,
everybody knows that, and that would probably be the end of the matter. It's not likely,
unless we imagine the time a hundred years from now, perhaps, not likely that people
would dispute the claim that George W. Bush was President of the United States. Sometimes
we could rely, not on common knowledge, but on widely shared empirical methods. Look
at statement two. The teaching company sells this course for $49.95. There's an easy way
to find out whether you should believe that. Go to their price list. Go to the catalog
and look it up. By the way, I hope you find it sells for a lot more than $49.95 because
of course it's worth every penny. But there's an easy way to find out the answer. We probably
wouldn't argue about it at any length. Sometimes we decide whether or not to believe a claim
by regarding it simply as a matter of taste. Look at statement three. The red tie is prettier
than the blue one. How do you know? Well, I just like it better. It's probably the end
of the matter if I say that or I say red is my favorite color or I've never liked blue
or something like that. These are just matters of taste and that's probably as far as the
conversation would go. But now look at statements four, five and six. They're quite different.
With each of those statements, I could easily imagine someone making the statement and someone
else saying, what do you mean by that? How do you know? What do you have to go on or
something like that? And in cases like those, further discussion will be required. Then
the person who made the statement has got to come up with some reasons for it. Statement
four, the city government is unsatisfactory. Why do you say that? Well, they won't even
plow the streets when it snows. A reason to support the claim. Look at statement five.
Capital punishment is murder. What makes you think so? Well, it's killing people, isn't
it? Or look at statement six. Congress ought to pass the president's budget. Why? Because
it's a good budget and it has the right kind of priorities. Now look what happened with
statements four, five and six. In each case, the statement was questioned and the person
who made the statement then had to come up with some sort of reason that you ought to
believe the statement. The other person might find the reason perfectly adequate. I say,
the city government's unsatisfactory. You say, why? I say, because they can't even plow
the streets when it snows and you say, yeah, you're right about that. End of the matter.
I've come up with a reason. You've said in effect that the reason justifies the claim
that I've made. You'll reach the claim. You'll travel with me to the claim. You'll agree
to it on the basis of the reason that I have provided. But sometimes the reason won't be
deemed satisfactory. Capital punishment is murder. How do you know? Well, it's killing
people, isn't it? Yeah, but that's just a play on words. There's killing and then there's
killing. It makes a difference if it's sanctioned by the state and so on and so forth. We can
imagine that this discussion, this argument might proceed on out for a while. If the original
reasons aren't satisfactory, then the arguer will need to elaborate those reasons further
or to come up with new ones and the process continues. It continues until the parties
to the argument conclude that they have a set of reasons that justify the claims that
have been advanced. In the case of really controversial questions, this argument might
continue for quite a long time. There are arguments that have gone on for centuries. In any case,
however, the first building block of an argument is the claim, the statement that readers or
listeners are asked to accept. Most theorists of argument recognize four different types
of claims and the differences can be important because different types of claims usually have
different proof requirements. How you go about justifying the claim will depend on what kind
of claim it is. The four basic types of claims are fact, definition, value, and policy. Fact,
definition, value, and policy. Let me say just a bit about each. I start with claims
of fact. These involve description. They concern matters that, at least in theory, could be
described and verified independently of the arguers and their matters about the argument
described and verified independently of the arguers and their matters about which in theory
there would be once they're verified a high degree of consensus. Now, I say in theory
because often there's really not a way to stop the argument and verify the matter independently.
Consider this example. Al Gore received more popular votes than George W. Bush in the election
of 2000. This is a matter that, in theory, could be verified independently. You could
look it up in the Almanac. But, of course, if there's one thing we know from the election
of 2000, it's that it's not that clear. What counts as a vote? What got counted as a vote?
Where the error rates were? And if all of those things were sorted out, it would perhaps
be controversial, whether Gore or Bush received the greater number of popular votes, but that's
still a claim of fact. Now, claims of definition deal with meaning or interpretation. We might
think that those are not really matters to argue about either. After all, you want to
know the definition of a word? Look it up. But that's a simple-minded notion of definitions.
And it assumes that definitions are neutral. Think about one of the statements in our list.
Capital punishment is murder. That's a definitional claim. But murder is not a neutral term. It's
a term that, because of its connotations, will evoke disagreement about whether it's
appropriate to put capital punishment in that category. So definitional questions are often
very important for the precise reason that definitions are not neutral. They're laden
with connotations and implications that can form the basis of a dispute. So, okay, we
have got fact and definition. The third kind of claim is value, which involves judgment,
a judgment of goodness or badness, rightness or wrongness, beauty or ugliness, and so on.
A judgment represents an evaluation, an appraisal, according to some kind of standards or criteria.
Sometimes the appraisal is absolute. For example, one of the statements that we used
before, the city government is unsatisfactory. It's an absolute judgment. It's unsatisfactory.
Sometimes claims of value are comparative. Economic growth is more important than environmental
protection, for example. And claims of value can be about terminal values, that is, things
that are good and bad in themselves, or they can involve instrumental values, things that
are good or bad as they lead to something else. And then the final category of claims
is policy. These are claims that involve action. And if I had to guess, I'd guess that there
are probably more arguments that occur on policy claims than any other kind, because
they address the question, what should we do? Typically, they contain some form of the
word should or ought in their statement because these are claims about what should take place
or what ought to happen. They're characteristic of deliberative bodies like Congress or a legislature,
but they also characterize informal deliberations between friends whenever people decide what
to do. So, Congress should pass the president's budget, is a policy claim, but so many people
know is, you should change your internet service provider. They both deal with the question,
what should we do? So those are the four types of claims, fact, definition, value, and policy.
Now let's consider what happens when an advocate advances a claim. And in the process, we'll
identify the other parts of an argument, the other building blocks in addition to the claim.
An advocate makes a claim. We can imagine a very simple diagram, a box with the word
claim in it. And that's all there is, because that claim may be immediately accepted. A
person might say, for example, we are heading into a recession. And the other person would
say, well, I guess that's right. And that's the end of the matter. The claim is immediately
accepted. If that happens, there's no argument, no further discussion. But if the claim is
not immediately accepted, if the other person says, why do you say that? Or how do you know?
Or what do you have to go on? Then the original advocate has to produce evidence to support
the claim, reasons for the claim in the language that we've been using so far. And so in that
situation, let's imagine that the person who said we're heading into a recession and has
asked how do you know, replies, well, the stock market is weakening. So now we could imagine
a diagram where over on the left, we have a box with the word evidence in it. And the
evidence in this case is that the stock market is weakening. So we've got a box for the claim
and a box for the evidence, and we have an arrow drawn from the evidence box going over
to the box that was labeled claim. That arrow represents an inference, an inference that
says that the fact that the stock market is weakening should be taken as a reason for
the claim that we're heading into a recession. Now that might be the end of the matter. Once
we say the stock market is weakening, the other person will accept that the stock market
indeed is weakening, and that's a reason to think that we're heading into a recession.
It's a very simple structure of argument with evidence, claim, and an implicit inference
linking the two. But often that won't be the end of the matter. The evidence and the
inference won't be immediately accepted. And then a couple of things could happen, depending
on what comes next. If I say we're heading into a recession and you say how do you know
and I reply the stock market is weakening, you might say I really don't think so. That
doesn't match what I understand about the stock market. Show me that it's weakening.
Now what I've got to do, I've got to provide some additional evidence to back up the first
piece of evidence. You might think of it by saying I've now got to present a new argument
in what originally was evidence, namely that the stock market is weakening, now becomes
the claim. Now that's what I've got to justify. And I do so by introducing some new evidence.
That is, I cite the Dow Jones industrial average going down, the NASDAQ index going down, and
so on. We could represent this in a diagram by taking the last one we had with evidence
leading to a claim. And now it's the evidence we've got to support. So below the evidence
we've got another box that I'll call evidence one, and this is the Dow Jones and the NASDAQ
figures with an inference leading up to the original evidence box. In other words, I'm
inferring that the Dow Jones index and the NASDAQ index are authoritative grounds for
believing that the stock market is weakening. And because the stock market is weakening,
I infer that we're heading into a recession. So I've shored up my original evidence by
providing additional evidence. And if you didn't accept that evidence, I'd need still
more. But now suppose that what's in dispute is not whether the stock market is weakening,
but whether there's any connection between the stock market weakening and a recession.
In that case, what you're doing is you're challenging not the truth of my evidence,
but the link between my evidence and the claim that I've made. You're challenging that arrow
that went from evidence to claim. And in that situation, what I've got to do, I've got to
defend that it's okay to make that inference. I've got to defend that we can travel along
that arrow from evidence to claim. And that may require me to shore up or to buttress that
arrow. And so now we could represent that by a chart that looks like the second one
with the evidence box leading to the claim, except under the arrow, holding up the arrow,
if you will, will draw a line to another box that we will label warrant. Because what I've
got to do, if you say why does the stock market weakening show that we're heading into a recession,
what I've got to do is I've got to give you some warrant for making that inference. Some
warrant that says it's okay to go from here to here. And what I might do is I might say,
well look, weakening in the stock market is generally a sign of an impending recession.
I'm telling you in other words that I'm making an inference from sign, that one thing can
be taken as a sign or as a predictor of the other. So now what I've done, if what you
question was the link between my evidence and my claim, is I've given you some basis
for accepting that link. I've given you a warrant for it. Now, what if you question
the warrant? What if you say, I don't understand why we should take weakening of the stock
market as a sign of recession? What reason do you have to think that? Then what I've
got to do is I've got to back up the warrant. You might think of it as establishing a new
argument in which the original warrant is now the claim, which I have to establish.
I've got to show you it's okay to regard a weakening stock market as a sign of a recession.
So we can take the diagram that we just looked at where there's evidence leading to claim
and then a warrant box under the link, and we've got to back up this warrant. So we'll
draw another box underneath it. I'll call that one warrant one that links to the original
warrant. What's warrant one? Well, I might appeal to historical evidence and say over
time, most of the time when the stock market drops, historically it's been a good predictor
of a recession. Therefore, we're justified in saying that weakening of the stock market
is a sign of an impending recession. So I've reestablished my warrant, and with that warrant
I've justified the link that says we could take the weakening of the stock market as
a reason to conclude that the economy is heading into a recession. Now, this process
that I've been describing of making claims, offering evidence, having an inference, providing
warrants, shoring up the evidence if necessary, shoring up the warrants if necessary, continues.
It continues until the argument reaches its termination, the arguers reach agreement,
or the dispute is resolved by a third party. What we've seen in the course of working
with these simple diagrams that I've been explaining so far is what the basic parts
of an argument are. There are four, the claim, the evidence for the claim, the inference
that links evidence and claim, and the warrant which authorizes or legitimizes are making
that inference, claim, evidence, inference, and warrant. Now, I want to emphasize that
these parts are not always explicit. In fact, it's hard for me to imagine listening to
a conversation or reading a newspaper editorial or seeing the text of a speech and seeing
advocates who explicitly say, my claim is, my evidence is, the inference I'm making
here is, the warrant for it is, I back up this warrant by saying so and so or anything
like that. Arguers often leave out the identification of the parts. They may even omit some of the
parts because they figure that an audience will assume them and so they don't need to
be mentioned. It doesn't necessarily weaken the argument if some elements are left unstated,
but when we analyze arguments, we reconstruct them, filling in what was implicit as well
as acknowledging what was said explicitly, then we can study the argument and assess
its quality. Now, what we've done here is to develop a working model of argument, identifying
the components and sketching their relationships. This model is adapted from the work of the
contemporary philosopher, Stephen Toolman, and as I've already suggested, it describes
ordinary argument better than does the formal syllogism. The claim is the statement that
we want the listener to believe and act upon. The evidence represents the grounds for making
the claim. It's what answers the question, what do you have to go on? The inference is
the main proof line that links the evidence to the claim and the warrant is a license
to make the inference. Now, notice that both the evidence and the warrant ultimately have
to be agreed to and accepted by the audience or by the other party if you're in a dispute
in an informal setting. It's got to be agreed to, and if not, then there's additional backing
provided for it until it is agreed to. This is a graphic demonstration of something that
I said in another context in an earlier lecture when I said that argumentation is cooperative
and there's agreement underlying every disagreement. If the parties don't agree to the truth of
the evidence and they don't agree to the warrant, then they can't discuss what's the relationship
between these things and the claim. Sometimes, the warrant is not so clear. There may be
exceptions to it. It's a general rule, but there are exceptions, and when that happens,
then the claim has to be qualified or modified, and these exceptions or modifiers also are
incorporated into the model. Let's see how the model works with the argument that we've
been discussing. I'm now referring to a chart that looks very much like the one with the
evidence, the claim, the warrant and the inference, but this time I filled in some content so
that we can relate it to this argument. The claim we're making is the economy is entering
a recession, and what's the evidence that we might offer? First, that the stock market
is declining. Second, if we want more evidence, the unemployment rate is going up. Third,
if we want more evidence, ratings of consumer confidence are dropping, so these are the
reasons that we have for saying the economy is entering a recession. They are the evidence,
and we see the arrow that links the evidence to the claim. On the basis of the stock market
declining, unemployment rising, consumer confidence dropping, we say the economy is entering
into a recession. But remember we said that the evidence might be questioned, and if so,
that it would need to be backed up with additional evidence. So just in case I've put below the
evidence box, where I had before evidence one, that we refer to specific polls and surveys
that back up the evidence about the stock market, the unemployment rate, and consumer
confidence. Now what licenses us to make that inference is the warrant, these things are
signs of an impending recession. Stock market drop, the unemployment rate, consumer confidence
are signs. They're predictors of an impending recession. That's what holds up the inference.
But remember I said that the warrant might be questioned too, and so underneath the warrant
box I've referred to the additional warrant that we might provide, warrant one, which
is accumulated historical experience, that over time these things, a drop in the stock
market and so on, usually have preceded a recession. But then remember I said this is
a general rule, there could be exceptions. And so off to the side of the warrant box
I've put some possible exceptions. Unless there are other explanations for the stock
market declining or unemployment rising, such as the stock market is declining because
stocks were overpriced as a result of speculation and now the bubble is burst. Unemployment
is rising because it's seasonal and more people are coming into the labor force. Consumer
confidence is dropping because people are worried about some extraneous things that
are going on. These might be exceptions or there might be countervailing factors that
would lead us to say, well yes, these things are signs of an impending recession generally
but not always. And since we might be in one of these exceptional circumstances, although
we don't think so, since we might be in one of these exceptional circumstances, we've
got to qualify our claim. And so I've drawn an arrow up from these exceptions to the word
probably that I've inserted before the claim. Probably the economy is entering a recession.
And the word probably also reminds us that we're not dealing with matters that we can
establish with certainty. We're not dealing with matters that we can deduce or with conclusions
that follow absolutely. When we say the economy is probably entering a recession, we're saying
we have enough reason to believe this, that we ought to take action based on it, whether
as individual consumers or from the standpoint of public policy as the case may be. So what
this version of the diagram does is it fills in the content of a specific argument so we
can see in the example that we're working with what each of these parts of the argument
really is. So what I think we've illustrated with this example is how this model, this
layout captures the essential components of the argument that the economy is heading
into a recession. Now I should tell you that while we've covered a lot of ground in this
lecture, we basically have a model of a very simple argument, only one claim at a time
and a limited range of evidence and warrants. What happens when arguments are more complex?
Find out next time.
Lecture 6, Complex Structures of Argument. It's good to be back with you again. As I
warned at the end of the last lecture, the model that we had developed at that point
was of a very simple argument. There was only one single claim and the argument was developing
sequentially as if in a conversation. Only one point was at issue at a time. But many
arguments aren't like that. They're much more complex. There may be multiple claims, all
at issue at one time, some of them supporting other claims. And the argument may have to
be developed all at once without knowing exactly how an opponent or an audience would respond
to it. This would happen in a formal speech, for example, or in a written essay where there's
not the back and forth interaction and the speaker or writer has to anticipate all of
the possible responses and build them into the original argument. These are arguments
that are more complex in nature. And that's the focus of this lecture. In a complex argument,
there is one main claim, the one that captures the substance of the controversy and we call
it the resolution. Any controversy could be seen as one of the most complex arguments
posing a major question. When two friends get together and talk about interfaith marriages,
the underlying question in the controversy is, do interfaith marriages generally succeed?
When in a policymaking context, people talk about whether or not the United States should
develop a national missile defense system, the underlying question that controversy
is trying to address is something like, how should the United States deal with the threats
of terrorism? Now, if we imagine an answer to the question that poses the controversy,
that answer is what we mean by the resolution. It's the position that one of the advocates
in the controversy will defend. It's the ultimate claim on which judgment is being sought.
It may be explicitly stated or it may be implicit in the discourse of the participants, but
it should be capable at least of being captured in a single declarative sentence. And like
any other kind of claim, there are four different types of resolutions, fact, definition, value,
and policy. Implicit in the controversy are certain issues
that an advocate will need to defend in order to uphold the resolution. And the subordinate
claims that the advocate advances will be answers to those issues. Let me say a bit
about issues. The word issue is used very loosely in ordinary discourse. Sometimes it's
used to mean any disagreement, as when one person says to another, don't make an issue
of it, meaning let's not discuss it. But we have a more precise meaning for the term
issue. Issues are the questions that are inherent in a controversy and vital to the
success of the resolution. The key terms obviously are inherent and vital. When I say that issues
are inherent in a controversy, I mean they grow naturally from it. If we were to ask
the question, do interfaith marriages succeed, we would be led naturally to a series of
other questions. What counts as an interfaith marriage? What do we mean by success? How
will we know whether or not it succeeds? And so on. Those are inherent in the larger controversy.
And if we had a resolution that interfaith marriages generally fail, in order to sustain
that resolution, we would have to be able to speak to and answer those issues. They're
vital to it. If we can't answer the issue satisfactorily, then we can't sustain the
resolution. So, issues are inherent in the controversy and they're vital to the success
of the resolution. Now at this point, let me take just a moment and put together the relationship
among controversies, issues, resolutions and claims. If you're following on video, you
might want to look at this chart that I'm going to describe, where we can imagine one
box that I have at the upper left labeled controversy and then an arrow pointing to
another box at the upper right that's labeled resolution. This tells us that from the controversy
we derive the resolution. The controversy poses the question, the resolution is an answer
to the question that one of the advocates will seek to defend. Then, going down from
the controversy, there is an arrow that leads to a series of boxes each of which I've labeled
issue. Each one of these boxes is a question that's inherent in the controversy. It grows
out of the controversy. And the answer to those questions, to the right of each of those
issue boxes, you could draw an arrow to a box and label it claim. And that would be
a statement that would be made to answer the issue. The claims respond to the issues, the
issues grow out of the controversy. And those claims taken together lead back up by an arrow
pointing up on the right side of the chart to the resolution. So, the issues grow out
of the controversy, they're answered with statements or claims that are vital to the
success of the resolution. That then is the relationship among these four key terms, controversy
resolution, issue, and claim. Of course, not every issue will be contested. Some may not
be in dispute, the parties might agree to them. And so we can say that potential issues
minus the uncontested issues will yield the actual issues in the dispute. Let's consider
an example to see how the issues work. In February of 2003, then Secretary of State Colin Powell
addressed the United Nations Security Council seeking approval for military action against
Iraq. He was defending a policy resolution, which we might state as the Security Council
should authorize the use of force in Iraq. His speech was long, 16 pages long in print,
but if we read it carefully, we'll see that he's addressing a controversy, does Iraq pose
a threat to world peace? The resolution answers the controversy and we'll see that he examines
the following four issues. First, is there a problem? His answer is yes, and the claim
he advances is Iraq is developing weapons of mass destruction which it might put into
the hands of terrorists. A second issue he examines is what is to blame? And his answer
in the form of a claim, Saddam Hussein has violated United Nations resolutions and the
UN has not enforced them. Third issue he takes up, although only briefly, will the proposal
solve the problem? He says yes, it will either destroy the weapons or remove the government.
Finally, number four, on balance, will the proposal be better? And Secretary Powell's
claim is yes, because it will remove a threat to peace in the region and it will bolster
the credibility of the UN. Now I should make clear, Secretary Powell does not label these
issues in the way that I have just done, but if you read his speech and examine what he's
saying, you will see that in that speech he develops responses to these issues, the issues
grow naturally out of the question of the controversy, does Iraq pose a threat to world
peace? And these are issues that he's got to answer successfully in order to sustain
the resolution that the United Nations should authorize the use of force. Now we'll consider
later how Powell developed his arguments and how well he defended them. But for now, notice
how he applied the theory that we've been describing. The controversy gives rise to
a series of questions. These are the issues to which Powell responds with claims that
taken together support the resolution. Now let's consider how complex arguments like
Secretary Powell's are organized. The organization of complex arguments is also complex, but
there are three basic patterns. I'll describe each and show you a model of what each looks
like. The models highlight the relationship between individual claims and the resolution.
Of course, each box in these models containing a claim is also part of an argument for which
there is evidence and inference and a warrant as we discussed last time. But these diagrams
would get far too complicated if we put in all of those elements again. So let's just
remember that each one of the boxes we're about to see could be blown up into the model
that we discussed last time. So what are the three basic patterns? First, complex arguments
can be arranged in a series structure, sometimes called by writers a subordinate structure.
This is like a series circuit in physics, and that's where the analogy comes from, or
like the old-fashioned Christmas tree lights, where if one of the light bulbs goes out,
the whole string of them goes out because the current passes through each one successively.
Each one depends upon all the others, and that's a characteristic of the series structure
of argument. Each claim leads to another in a chain, and each one depends upon all the
others if the claim is going to be established. For instance, let's suppose that the resolution
that we want to defend is the claim, airline mistakes cost me my job. And we ask how we're
going to defend this resolution? Well, here are our subordinate claims. First, my luggage
was mis-tagged when I went on a business trip. Because it was mis-tagged, it was sent to
the wrong city. Because it was sent to the wrong city, I did not have valuable documents
and papers that I had packed in my luggage. Because I was missing those documents and
papers, I gave a poor presentation in the city where I was being sent by my company,
and since I gave a poor presentation, I was fired from my job. Now you see here how we
have a classic series structure. Every step depends upon everything that's happened before
it. If we could break one of the links in the chain, we'd break the whole chain of argument.
So each claim leads to another, each depends upon the others, and all of the arguments
must be carried in order to carry the resolution. You might think therefore that this is a poor
way to organize arguments. But consider this. The series structure also creates a chain
of momentum where each one of the steps pushes you forward toward the next step, so that
if you think you can carry the series, you get some extra force from the cumulative kind
of momentum that the series structure generates. But that's one way that we could organize
a complex argument in a series pattern. A second pattern, we could organize our argument
in a convergent structure, sometimes called a co-ordinative structure. Now here's the
difference between convergent and series. Remember in series, we said each argument
depends upon the others. In a convergent structure, each argument is independent of the other
arguments. Each claim stands on its own, but like the series circuit, it's the totality
of the arguments that converge to establish the resolution. That's why the structure is
called convergent. The arguments don't depend on each other, but we need their cumulative
weight to support the resolution. Let's consider this resolution. Airline travel is becoming
more unpleasant. That's the main claim that we want to establish, and we've got a structure
of subordinate claims that will establish it. For instance, we have one claim that says
flights are often delayed. Another one says planes are really overcrowded. Third one says
the airlines don't serve food anymore. Fourth one says airport security after September
11th is really obtrusive. Another one says airports have become tense places where you
really can't relax anymore. Another one says more passengers are rude these days. Another
one says people are always using their cell phones and you have to overhear their conversations.
And all of these things work together to support the claim that airline travel is becoming
more unpleasant, the resolution that we're trying to defend. Now one of those supporting
claims by itself might not be all that significant. We might dismiss any one of those things as
a minor nuisance, not really a signal of unpleasantness. But if you put them all together, if you
have delayed flights and crowded planes and no food and tense airports, you have all those
things together, their convergence supports the resolution that airline travel is becoming
more unpleasant. And then third, arguments may be arranged in a parallel structure, sometimes
called a multiple structure. Again, the analogy is to physics. A parallel circuit is one in
which the current passes through and if one light goes out, the rest of them stay lit,
each stands on its own. Each argument is independent of the others, just like in the convergence
structure. But unlike the convergence structure, each one by itself is sufficient to carry
the resolution. So this time we might imagine a diagram where we've got a group of boxes,
each representing an individual claim, we've got a resolution over here, and each one of
the boxes independently has an arrow going from it to the resolution because each one
by itself would show that the resolution is probably true. Consider this example, still
about airlines. Here are our different claims. Airline prices don't make sense. Airline schedules
are inconvenient. Connections are often missed. To obtain discount fares, you have to buy
tickets way in advance before knowing the details of your plans. Websites and online
reservations are confusing. Reservation agents don't respond well to questions. Those would
all be claims. Supporting the resolution, airline travel is difficult to plan. Now in
this example, each one of the claims by itself establishes that travel is difficult to plan.
If prices don't make sense, it's hard to plan. If the schedules are inconvenient, it's hard
to plan. If you can't make your connections, it's hard to plan. If you have to buy your
ticket too early, it's hard to plan, and so on. Each one separately and independently
helps to establish the resolution. So we have the three basic organizational plans for complex
arguments, series, convergent, and parallel. Now let's go back to Colin Powell's 2003
speech and see how he organized his arguments. I warn you, this is a complex argument, and
so it has a complex structure. If you're on video, you might follow this diagram. If
you're in your car, please don't stop now to look at the outline, check it later.
First off, if you notice across the top of the chart, the main argument that Secretary
Powell is making is developed in a series structure. The resolution he's defending
is at the upper right, the Security Council should authorize the use of force in Iraq.
How does he get there? Well, follow his argument. He says, Iraq was required by the UN to disarm.
Then Iraq cannot prove that it's done so. Then this creates a dangerous situation, and
then the UN has an obligation to enforce its resolutions. Therefore, the Security Council
should authorize the use of force. It's a series structure because each one of the steps
depends upon the ones that have come before it. It wouldn't matter whether Iraq could
prove that it's disarmed its weapons of mass destruction if the UN hadn't required it to
do so. We wouldn't be in a dangerous situation if we weren't unsure about whether Iraq had
given up its weapons. The Security Council wouldn't need to authorize the use of force
if there weren't a UN obligation. There wouldn't be a UN obligation if the situation weren't
dangerous. It's arranged in a series. And if you thought before that a series is an inherently
weak structure, think again, because what this series does is it creates the sense of
momentum for Secretary Powell's argument. But now notice something interesting. As he
develops each one of the steps in that chain, several of them are developed with a parallel
structure. For instance, look at the second step up at the top. Iraq cannot prove that
it's disarmed its weapons of mass destruction. Secretary Powell gives you two separate arguments
independent of each other, but both supporting that. First, that Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction programs are continuing. And second, that Iraqi denials can't be trusted. Each
one of those, by itself, is a reason to conclude that Iraq cannot prove that it has disarmed
its weapons of mass destruction. And now for added measure, each one of those two is independently
supported by three arguments in another parallel structure. So how do we know that the weapons
of mass destruction programs are continuing? Well, Secretary argues, biological weapons
are continuing. Chemical weapons programs are continuing. Nuclear weapons programs are
continuing. Each one of those, by itself, separately would prove that Iraq is continuing
its WMD programs. And Iraqi denials cannot be trusted is supported by three separate
independent arguments. Iraq hides things from the inspectors. Iraq submits useless documents
to mislead the UN. And Iraq won't permit interviews of scientists outside the country. Each one
separately and by itself is a reason to conclude that Iraqi denials can't be trusted.
So this argument that Iraq can't prove it's disarmed is supported by parallel structures,
which in turn are supported by other parallel structures. Now look across the top line at
the next step. This creates a dangerous situation. Secretary Powell has another parallel structure.
Two separate reasons why it's a dangerous situation. Because it flouts, it defies the
international authority of the UN. And because weapons of mass destruction could be given
to terrorists. Each one of those is a reason for concluding the situation is dangerous,
if the UN's authority is questioned or if terrorists obtain weapons of mass destruction.
Look at the next step across the top. The UN has an obligation to enforce its resolutions,
another parallel structure. It's got an obligation, first of all, to preserve its own credibility,
its own relevance, as Secretary Powell said. And second, it's got an obligation because
the risk will only grow. And if it doesn't act now, the threat to peace will be even
more serious in the future when terrorists may get access to the weapons of mass destruction.
So look what we've seen so far about Secretary Powell's argument. His main line argument
is developed in series structure, but almost every one of the steps is in turn developed
in a parallel structure. Now notice one more thing. Let's go back to the weapons of mass
destruction programs, biological, chemical, and nuclear. Every one of those claims that
Iraq's developing biological weapons, chemical weapons, nuclear weapons, every one of those
claims is supported by a convergent structure. Look at biological, for example. Secretary
Powell says Iraq has been producing biological weapons in the past, it can't account for
their destruction and it lies about what it's doing. Now those three arguments are independent
of one another, but they work together, they converge to establish that Iraq is producing
biological weapons. The fact that Iraq has done so in the past wouldn't be enough by
itself. The fact that you can't prove that old weapons have been destroyed wouldn't be
enough by itself. The fact that Iraq is deceiving the inspectors wouldn't be enough by itself.
But put together, they converge to establish that Iraq is developing biological weapons.
The very same arguments, the very same convergent structure are used to show that Iraq is developing
chemical weapons, and with respect to nuclear weapons, there's again a convergent structure.
Iraq has some parts already, is trying to get missing parts, and is developing the weapons
systems to deliver the weapons. So notice what we see in Secretary Powell's speech. We
see a complex argument that uses all of the organizational patterns and combines them
in ways to create a map of the argument that I've represented in this diagram. Now again
I hasten to point out, Secretary Powell doesn't have a chart like this, he doesn't proceed
in exactly this order, and he doesn't label his arguments. But we can, and when we do,
we can understand what he's doing in this argument and how it gets put together. Of
course what we've done with Secretary Powell's speech, you could do with any newspaper editorial
op-ed column or any other example of an argument. We identified the resolution, we figured out
the issues, we diagrammed the structure of the argument, and then if we wanted to we
could go back to the last lecture and within individual arguments we could show the evidence
and the inference and the warrant as well as the claim. Now why should we do that? Why
should you practice this kind of argument diagramming? Well it enables you to understand
what's going on in the argument. Most of us who didn't read Secretary Powell's speech
and didn't diagram it out have only a sound bite or two to go on to figure out what he
really said. We could actually diagram it and structure the argument out. Also understanding
what Secretary Powell did is the first step to enable us to appraise the quality of his
argument. Now Secretary Powell's speech has been criticized in the aftermath of the failure
to find weapons of mass destruction. Did Secretary Powell make a mistake because in fact the weapons
didn't turn up? Was his argument poor or was his argument good and reasonable? Even though
the weapons didn't turn up. Well to answer that question we have to be able to know what
he argued and how he went about it and that's what we gain by diagramming the argument.
We also are able to start thinking about alternatives. What if Secretary Powell had not separated out
biological chemical nuclear weapons? What if he had not used a parallel structure for
why the UN has an obligation to enforce its resolutions? What if he had not grounded the
main line of his argument in a series structure? And we could go on and on and on with each
one of the steps of the argument. We could imagine alternatives, other ways to do it.
And then for practice we could figure out what each of us might do confronted with the
particular situation of the argument that we are examining. Now I know few of us are
ever going to have the opportunity to address the UN Security Council. But if you do this
with a letter to the editor or an editorial in the local newspaper or a conversation that
you've had in your family, the same process works just as well and we can get some real
insight into the nature of the arguments. In other words I'm suggesting that being able
to model and diagram complex as well as simple arguments is highly useful for pedagogical
purposes as a way to teach ourselves about argument. You should know that there are some
theorists who object to this whole process of diagramming arguments. They say that it
gives the arguments a mistaken linear quality, that there's really not this clear progression.
And indeed if you go back and read Powell's speech he doesn't progress clearly in the way
that I've described. And so they say it's misleading to try to diagram the argument
this way. They say that diagramming is an analytical exercise only and it shouldn't
be confused with actually building the arguments. Well, well and good. Well and good. We can
accept that there are limitations to the diagrams. But there's a great value that they serve
and I think we've seen how they serve the value in the example that we have described.
In addition to enabling us to analyze arguments, these tools are also useful when we build
our own arguments and we'll take up that topic next time.
Lecture 7 Case Construction Requirements and Options
Welcome back. We talked last time about the structure of complex arguments in which several
claims are organized so that they support or oppose a main claim called the resolution.
There is a word for this set of arguments and that word is a case, the subject of this
lecture. The particular set of arguments that we put together to support a resolution or
to oppose a resolution for a particular audience is what we mean by the term case. Now in order
to introduce this concept, I'd like to remind us of a diagram that we talked about last
time when we talked about the relationship among controversies, resolutions, issues and
claims. You may recall that I said that a controversy gives rise to a resolution. Underlying
that controversy, inherent in it and vital to the success of the resolution are a series
of issues, questions that are answered by claims and the claims together support the
resolution. Now if you look again at the right hand part of that diagram in which the claims
come together to support the resolution, that's what the case consists of, the grouping or
the arrangement of those claims. Taken together, the claims must speak to the issues, they
must answer all of the issues that are salient in the given controversy, otherwise the case
won't be plausible on its face. The technical term for that, by the way, is prima facia
on first face. If you don't have a case that really speaks to the issues, then just upon
hearing it, it won't seem plausible. It won't seem like it answers the question. But having
said that, I have to tell you this diagram we looked at before is a bit oversimplified.
Not all of the issues will come up in an actual controversy. Some will be stipulated, some
issues will be combined, one claim may speak to multiple issues, and sometimes there'll
be multiple claims speaking to a single issue. So I want us to focus more on how these claims
get put together and what the relationship is between the claims and the resolution.
And to do that, I'd like to talk about how we build a case. There's always a broader
range of material available than can be used. We could imagine more possible claims than
we could put together to support any given resolution in any amount of time, and so we
make choices. We make two kinds of choices. We make choices of selection and choices of
arrangement. The selection choices tell us what we'll pick out from among the range of
possibilities, and the arrangement choices tell us how we'll put them together and what
sort of structure we will use. By the way, we make these choices not only with respect
to arguments that make up the case, but also with respect to evidence within individual
arguments, just as there are more claims than we could ever use to support a resolution,
so there is more potential evidence than we could ever use to support a given claim.
What governs these choices then? Well, here's where the audience comes into play. Remember,
we've said all along that one characteristic of ordinary argumentation, as opposed to formal
logic, is that it's presented in a context. There's an audience, and one of the factors
that governs the choices we make is the audience. We want to pick from those arguments that
are available the ones that will be particularly important or meaningful to the given audience
that we happen to address, and so these choices really combine creativity and constraint.
We're thinking creatively when we try to imagine all of the possibilities and see what
our range of options is, and we're constrained by the fact of the audience, by the audience
composition, the audience predispositions, the audience beliefs or values that we want
to appeal to as we put this structure of arguments together. And of course, a very important constraint
is that the case speak to all the issues so that it will be prima facie. So let's start
with that. How do we find the issues? Given a resolution, how do we really know what the
issues are? There are several different ways that we could discover the issues. For one,
we could ask questions about the text of the resolution. Take each one of the key terms
in the resolution and see what kinds of questions it poses. This is what I did in the example
of interfaith marriage when I said, what do we mean by succeed? How do we know if interfaith
marriages succeed? And so on. A second way we can find the issues is by looking at the
underlying context of the resolution. What's going on out in the world that this controversy
is dealing with? And so if we applied that method to the resolution that the United States
should develop a national missile defense system, we might find issues like, was the
Bush administration wise to abrogate the anti ballistic missile treaty? Will a national
missile defense system work? Is the technology available for national missile defense? Do
the costs exceed the benefits? And so on. Now notice that unlike the interfaith marriage
example, these questions don't come from the wording or the text of the resolution itself.
They instead come from the context. They require us to know about what's going on out in the
world that the resolution is dealing with. So that's a second way we could do it. A third
way we could do it would be to gather up a good sample of what people have said about
the resolution and then figure out out of all of that sample what they agree upon, which
we can then set aside. This is not in dispute. It can be stipulated. And then when you see
what's left, when you see what they disagree about, you could say, well, these are the
central points of disagreement. All of these methods are perfectly good. Each of them will
lead us to discover the issues that are inherent in the controversy. But they have one problem.
They can be cumbersome. They can be really time consuming. So fortunately, there's a
shortcut that we could use to discover the issues. And the shortcut works so well that
it's probably the method that's used most often of all. The shortcut reflects the fact
that certain types of issues recur with resolutions of a given type. So once we know what kind
of resolution we have, fact, definition, value, or policy, we will know what categories of
issues to look for. These categories are called topoi, a Greek word that means place. They
are places in the mind, metaphorical places, that one goes to look to find issues. So what
are the topoi? They were identified pretty well by the ancient Greeks and Romans. For
a resolution of fact, they are fairly simple. One, how will we know if the statement is
true? That is, what are our criteria? And two, are the criteria satisfied? For a resolution
of definition, such as that the fetus is a person, the topoi would be one, is the interpretation
relevant? Two, is the interpretation fair? And three, how do we choose among competing
interpretations? For a resolution of value, one, is the condition truly good or bad as
alleged? Two, has the value been properly applied to the situation at hand? And three, how do
we choose among competing values? And finally, for resolutions of policy, one, is there a
problem? Two, where is the credit or blame for the problem due? Three, will the proposal
solve the problem, will it work? And four, on balance, will things be better off with
the proposal? By the way, if your memory is good, you will notice that those four topoi
are exactly the ones that I used in the last lecture to identify the issues that Secretary
Powell addressed in his speech to the UN Security Council. So the shortcut of finding topoi
will tell us what sorts of issues come up with what kind of resolution or claim. As
we build our case, we want to be sure that we include something that speaks to each issue.
Doing that will make our case prima facie. We'll meet our initial burden of proof, and
that will require that our opponent respond to what we've said. That requirement is the
burden of rejoinder, and it will shift back and forth between us and our opponent as each
responds to the other. So we want to be sure that the case meets our burden, but now we
get to make choices about how to do it. Remember I said that there are choices of selection
and choices of arrangement. So let's take selection first. And here we want to further
divide because there are two main kinds of selection choices. One, whether the arguments
are strong enough, and two, how many arguments to include. So we select according to strength
and according to number. Well, let's look at strength. How do we decide the strength
of an argument? Now here again, remember in formal logic, arguments are either valid
or invalid. The question of degrees of strength isn't an issue. But in a probabilistic kind
of situation, a sort we argue about every day, strength is very much important. Strength
is a function, first of all, of the listener's prior adherence to the evidence in the argument.
Remember we said that disagreement is based in agreement. The evidence has to be agreed
to as to its truth or the argument is not going to work very well. So for instance, facts
or common knowledge, things that are widely shared or things that could be easily established
because of audience predispositions, all of these will work well as evidence and arguments
that contain them are likely to be strong. Secretary Powell used a lot of photographs
and objects in his speech as evidence out of a belief that pictures and objects don't
lie. They're not subject to interpretation. The other thing that governs the strength
of an argument, besides whether the audience will accept its evidence, is how relevant
is the argument to the resolution. That is to say, what happens to the resolution if
the argument succeeds? Or what happens to the resolution if the argument fails? Now we
could imagine at one extreme, the killer argument, the argument that just clinches the resolution.
So that if we're talking, for example, about whether annual testing should be performed
in elementary and secondary schools, if we could establish that annual testing disrupts
the order of the curriculum, we would have a pretty powerful argument against doing it
because it would establish pretty strongly that there's a good reason not to that something
that's more fundamental will be imperiled if we do. At the other extreme, we have arguments
that fail to meet what I call the so what test. Even if you establish that the argument
is sound, so what? What difference does it make to the resolution? So for example, whether
the PSAT, the Preliminary Scholastic Assessment Test, is given in the 11th grade or in the
10th grade, probably doesn't matter very much to the question of whether there should be
annual testing. Yes, we could disagree about when's the best place to give that test, but
it doesn't make much difference to the resolution that's at hand. So a listener's prior adherence
and the relevance of the claim to the resolution are factors that govern the strength of the
claim. Now each of these in turn is affected by a number of other considerations. For instance,
to what degree is the evidence speculative rather than certain? Audiences tend to prefer
more certain to less certain evidence. To what degree does the claim rely on short term
urgent matters that are immediately before us? And to what degree does it involve more
distant long term considerations? People get more interested in things that are immediate
and urgent. To what degree is the claim consistent with common sense, with what we already believe?
You may remember in the 1980s, the government at one point claimed that ketchup was a vegetable
for the purpose of composition of school lunches. Now most people are not inclined to believe
that ketchup is a vegetable, even if it could be shown that it is. And so an argument based
on the assumption that ketchup is a vegetable is not likely to be very strong as an argument.
So all of these elements affect whether listeners are predisposed to believe an argument and
how much good an argument does in establishing the resolution. And these are strength considerations,
the first of the choices that we make. Arguments in the 2005 debate about social
security reform illustrate the concept of strength. For example, one of the arguments
advanced is that the Social Security Trust Fund eventually may be depleted. This is a
relatively strong argument even though it's long term rather than immediate. First of
all, because it makes a big difference to the argument about social security reform
if you don't have a trust fund there. And second, audiences pretty easily can accept
that if you take out more than you put in, eventually the fund will go down. In contrast,
another argument that was advanced was that African Americans should favor private accounts
because they have a lower life expectancy and thereby would get a greater benefit from.
This I think most people would say is a relatively weak argument. First of all, because it offends
our sense of justice, we ought to be trying to improve the life expectancy of African Americans,
not conceding that it's going to be lower. And second, because it doesn't advance the
resolution very much, it says that here's a proposal that's popular with one segment
of the population, not that it's a proposal that is good or that ought to be adopted.
So if we were choosing from arguments to defend President Bush's social security proposal,
we would make more sense for us to pick the stronger argument which is the first of the
two that I described. So that's strength. Now the second selection question beyond strength
is how many arguments? What number and range of arguments to present? Why would we want
to present more arguments? Well, there are two reasons. First, since the arguments are
inconclusive, they're not certain. We hedge our bets by presenting multiple arguments.
We don't stake the resolution on one single argument or on a very small number of arguments
because each one of them is inconclusive. And so we hedge our bet by presenting more.
And second, because an audience is likely to be heterogeneous. It will be made up of
different kinds of people. Some arguments will appeal to some people, and others will appeal
to other people. And so we put arguments together for that reason and present more of them.
There is a technical term for this. It's called amplitude. Just like amplitude in physics
is extending the width of a wave, amplitude in argument is extending the range, widening
the range of the argument by presenting more arguments in support of the resolution. But
presenting more arguments, increasing amplitude, also has risks. What are those? Well, for
example, a poor argument, let's say one of the ones in our range is a relatively weak
argument, reflects badly not only on itself, but on all of the other choices as well, and
on the credibility of the arguer. Somebody tells you ketchup is a vegetable. You will
not only be unlikely to accept that ketchup is a vegetable, but you'll begin wondering
about some of the other claims that this person has made, and about what kind of a person
would make such a claim as that ketchup is a vegetable. What's more, if we pile argument
on argument on argument, it may sound like we don't have enough confidence in any of
them. We may come off seeming defensive, or even whining. And as we increase amplitude
as we present more arguments, we also increase the risk that we're going to present two
arguments that are inconsistent with each other. And one of the things we know about
inconsistency in argument is, while an inconsistency means only that both arguments can't be true,
not that they're both false, but both can't be true. In fact, psychologically, audiences
will often dismiss both. And so we increase the number of arguments we present, we run
the risk that multiple arguments will be ignored or rejected by a given audience. So, there
are dangers to presenting lots of arguments, just as there are benefits to increasing the
number of arguments. There's no recipe or formula that will tell us how many arguments
to present. We have to figure out how many to use based on the circumstances of each
specific situation and understanding what the benefits and the risks are. So, we've got
factors of strength and factors of number that will govern our selection of arguments,
and within each argument, the same factors will govern our selection of evidence. Now
let's talk about the choices regarding arrangement. The first one we talked about last time, whether
to use a series or convergent or parallel structure. We make that choice based on the subject matter
we're discussing, what we think are the relationship among our claims, and what will be the easiest
and most effective way to present those claims to an audience. By the way, there's nothing
that prevents us from combining these structures just as we saw that Colin Powell did. Sometimes
one will be stronger, sometimes another. There's in principle no reason that one of them is
stronger or weaker than another. Now if we decide that the series structure
is the one we want, then there's not a whole lot else about arrangement that we need to
decide. We choose only whether we start at the beginning of the chain and go forward,
each claim leading to the next, to the next, to the next, to the resolution, or whether
we start with the resolution and go backwards and say the resolution is true because of this
and this is true because of this and this because of this and so on back to the beginning
of the chain. That's really all we have to decide. But with a convergent structure or
a parallel structure, there are additional choices to be made. For instance, since it
doesn't make any logical difference in a convergent or parallel structure, which argument comes
first, second, third, or fourth, we take the one that we think is the strongest and where
do we put it? Well here the research is somewhat inconclusive. There's some research that says
put it first because it will capture the attention of the audience and it will color their perceptions
of all the rest of the arguments, a kind of halo effect. Other research says put it last
so that you leave the audience with a very strong impression with the strongest arguments
you could make. The first of these is called the primacy effect and the second is called
the recency effect. Some of the research favors one, some favors the other. But the thing
that they're consistent on don't put the strongest argument in the middle. Put it either at the
beginning or at the end. We saw that Secretary Powell had a parallel structure in which he
talked about biological, chemical, and nuclear weapons. He could have discussed the three
in any order. You notice he put biological weapons first, he put nuclear weapons last,
these are probably the two that pose the greatest threat worldwide. Or another kind
of choice to make. Should you up front anticipate objections and answer them and build the answers
into your structure? And here the research suggests if the audience is composed of people
who are pretty well educated or if the audience is known to be opposed to what you're arguing.
In either of those cases then yes it makes sense to build in, anticipate, and answer
objections. Why? Because a highly educated audience will be thinking along and exercising
critical judgment and they'll come up with objections anyway and so it's important that
you acknowledge them. And obviously an audience that's opposed to you will have objections
already in mind. Another choice. Should you proceed from what's most familiar to what's
least familiar? Well this would be a kind of analogical structure. You start with what
people know and you make links from what they know to what they don't. And that's been
found to make understanding of unfamiliar material more easy for an audience. On the
other hand it may sometimes be at odds with the logical connections among the parts of
the argument. Well these choices, strongest, first, strongest, last, familiar to unfamiliar,
whether to include and respond to objections, in a way these are all things that are matters
of logical indifference. If you've got a parallel structure or a convergent structure
each argument's going to work independently no matter what order you put them in. But
these are questions that are rhetorically very significant. They decide how much salience
an argument will have for listeners. They increase the ease or reduce the ease with
which listeners can process the argument so that it's understood and so that it's more
likely to succeed. Now with arguments that are logically independent, that is a convergent
or parallel structure, there are several very common organizational patterns that people
often use. Because they're patterns they make it easy for a listener to follow along and
anticipate what's coming next. One pattern is chronological, from past to present to future
or from future to present to past. One is spatial or geographical, from near to far
or from east to west or north to south. One is to place items in familiar categories,
the economic, the social, the political. One pattern is to go from cause to effect or effect
to cause or problem to solution or solution to problem. One is to compare and to contrast.
And so the one that we pick from among all these patterns will help listeners to follow
along the structure of the argument. Notice by the way that in making these choices
about selection and arrangement it isn't necessary to organize the argument by reference to the
list of the topoi. That is in a policy resolution, we don't have to talk about the problem first
and then the blame and then the cure and so on. It only matters that we be sure to address
each of the topoi effectively. Well we've talked here about a number of constraints and choices.
Let's look at how these work themselves out in a specific historical example. Of course
you could take Secretary Powell's speech that we discussed last time and see how they worked
out there. But I want to introduce another example. President Lyndon Johnson's Defense
of the Voting Rights Act in his speech of March of 1965. President Johnson is not usually
remembered as a really distinguished orator, but this speech was identified by a group
of critics as one of the top 100 American speeches of the 20th century. It was delivered
a week after the violence in Selma, Alabama and it's remembered particularly for its emotion
in which a southern president addressed the joint session of Congress and uttered the
words we shall overcome. But it's also a speech that has a fairly rich argument to it. You
can download the speech from the web, it's available at presidentialrhetoric.com and
you can see some of the choices that the president made. First of all, he speaks to the relevant
topoi. It's a problem oriented, a policy oriented speech and so he starts with a problem that
is the denial of voting rights and violence against protesters. He blames the absence
of any federal law to do anything about this as the cause. He suggests a new law to enforce
constitutional rights that should be passed without delay and he says that this will benefit
the whole nation, not just African Americans and that the right to vote secures all other
rights. So if we look across his speech, we'll see he does what he needs to do to meet the
constraint of speaking to all of the issues. Notice how he selects his arguments. He picks
arguments that the broad national audience will be likely to accept. For instance, he
emphasizes that the right to vote is protected by the constitution. It's a constitutional
imperative. So you may not like African Americans voting if you're a white southern conservative
but you respect the constitution. You honor the constitution and so the argument that
it's a constitutional right is a strong argument. As is a moral appeal. As is an appeal to a
sense of justice and the president softens the blow to the south by paying homage to
that region and talking about how important it is to the country. You notice certain arrangement
choices in that speech. The president discusses voting rights in an order so that the significance
of the issue enlarges as he goes. He says it's a turning point in history, a basic fundamental
issue. It transcends region or party. It's grounded in founding documents. He catalogs
the deprivations of voting rights. He then enlarges those from the specific bill to civil
rights and the great society more generally. He proceeds from agreement to disagreement.
This speech illustrates the choices of selection and arrangement. Now we'll assume that the
case has been put together and next time we'll start considering how to respond to it.
Hello again. Last time we explored a series of concepts that explain what a case is.
And how one is put together. Now we're about to explore how an advocate can respond to an
opposing case. The very first thing we need to know is how to determine exactly what is
in dispute. This is extremely important in order to focus the response on the true heart
of the controversy and not to be misdirected. For this purpose I have to introduce a new
term, really the only term that we're going to focus on in this lecture. That is the concept
of stasis. Stasis is a Greek term. Sometimes the pronunciation has been anglicized as stasis.
It means literally a point of rest or an equilibrium. It is a nifty concept for figuring out exactly
what's in dispute. We can think of it as a point between opposing forces. If you imagine
a simple diagram in which you've got an arrow moving in one direction and an arrow moving
in the other direction to counteract it, there'll be this point, this almost metaphysical point
in between the two forces where there's rest, where neither force can proceed because the
other force opposes it. If I can mix my metaphors we can think of that point of rest as a fulcrum
point because that's the point that the dispute turns on. Movement can't resume until that
point is somehow overcome. The movement toward a goal, in other words, has got to get past
this point of rest in order to proceed. Now what this fulcrum point tells us is precisely
what's in dispute, what it is that's blocking the movement of these two forces. And once
we know precisely what's in dispute, then the advocates are invited to respond to that
focal point. This concept of stasis originated in classical rhetoric. It was the anonymously
written Rhetorica ad herenium, in case you're interested, in which it first appeared. Cicero
did a good job to synth to refine and systematize it, as he did with many other concepts, and
it was originally designed for advocacy in courts of law, although as I think we'll see,
it has a much broader application. So let's unpack this concept, let's figure out what
it's all about. And to do so I want to consider a very simple example. Forget for the moment
that we're among friends, and suppose I come up to you and I make the statement, you stole
my car. Now what are you going to do in response? We could imagine a whole variety of things
you might do, but since we're discussing argumentation, let's assume you won't punch me in the nose.
But you could make some different responses. Suppose you say, no, I never had your car.
I was never in possession of it at all. Well now my assertion and your response establish
a focal point for this disagreement. Did you have possession of my car? Did the act take
place? And this is referred to in the literature as stasis of conjecture. The question is,
is it? Did it happen? Suppose on the other hand I say you stole my car, and you reply,
no, I only borrowed it. Now notice how this example is different from the first example.
I've made the same assertion, you stole my car, and your response, no, I only borrowed
it. Together assertion and response establish the focal point, but the focal point is not
about whether the act occurred. It's about what we should call it, or how we should
characterize it. And this is referred to as stasis of definition. What is it? So we have
so far a stasis of conjecture and a stasis of definition.
Now suppose I say, you stole my car, and your response is, yes, but it's a good thing
I did, because I used it to take to the hospital someone who had fallen on your sidewalk when
you hadn't shoveled the snow and ice off, and you would have been liable if I hadn't.
Now again we have an assertion and a response. We have these two opposed argumentative forces.
But now the dispute is over whether the act was justified, not whether it occurred, not
what it should be called, but whether it was justified. And it was justified, so you said,
by extenuating circumstances. There was some special need that made it okay for you to
do this. After all, you were not only protecting human rights, but you were protecting me from
legal liability. This is an example of the stasis of quality, which is a stasis that
refers to significance or magnitude or extenuating circumstances.
And now before we completely leave this hypothetical car theft, let's consider one more example.
I come up to you and I say, you stole my car, and you respond, hey, don't accuse me of theft
out here on the street. Theft is a criminal offense. If you've got a case prosecute, I'll
see you in court. Now what's the issue? I've made an assertion,
you stole my car, and your response essentially says, this isn't the right place to discuss
it. It's not the right forum, not the right procedure. And this invokes what we call the
stasis of place. So to recapitulate in the classical understanding
of the term stasis, we have stasis of conjecture, definition, quality, and place. Now at the
risk of stating the obvious, notice how in these four examples, the nature of your response
together with my assertion produced a very different point of clash. In one case, whether
an act occurred. In another, what to call it. In another, whether it was justified. And
in another, whether we're in the right place or the right forum in order to discuss it.
Now it makes a difference which of these we pick because subsequent arguments need to
be addressed to the focal point of controversy. If the focal point of controversy is what
we call it, we don't want to spend our time arguing about whether it occurred.
What's most important in determining stasis, the point of clash, is not the original assertion,
but the response that's made to it. After all, my assertion you stole my car was the
same in each case. What determined the different stasis was how you responded to my assertion.
Now you had choices in how you could reply. Some replies will be stronger, some replies
will be weaker, but it's the reply to the assertion that has a lot to do with determining
where the stasis is. Does this mean that I as the original advocate have nothing to
say about where the focal point of the controversy will be? No. Because the original arguer in
determining what argument to advance in the first place should realize different response
possibilities. And if the arguer wants the stasis to be at one place or at another place,
he or she ought to try to frame the original assertion to produce that result. But it's
the response more than the original assertion that determines the focal point of the controversy.
That's one thing to notice. Second thing to notice is that generally speaking,
with one exception that I'll mention later, generally speaking, stasis is progressive.
What I mean by that is, if we choose to have the dispute center on definition, we are implicitly
conceding conjecture. If we choose to focus on quality, we are implicitly conceding both
conjecture and definition. Go back to my example. When you reply, no, I borrowed your car,
I didn't steal it, you're implicitly conceding that you had possession of it. And so the
question of whether you had possession or not, conjecture, has been waved from the dispute.
It's been effectively stipulated. When you say it's a good thing, because I used the
car to take someone to the hospital, you're implicitly conceding both that you had it
and that you stole it. You're saying that you stole it for good reason, but you stole
it and if you stole it, you had it. So stasis is progressive. Definition implicitly concedes
conjecture, quality implicitly concedes both conjecture and definition. So, what does
that mean? It means that if you're replying to my assertion, as a general rule, you want
to reply that would take a stasis as close to the beginning of the chain as you can carry.
So if, for example, you can carry the response that you never had my car at all, that ought
to be what you say. Now, suppose there were 10 eyewitnesses who saw you in possession
of my car, then it's pointless to say, well, I never had your car. Not only is that an
assertion that will quickly be shown to be false, but when it's shown to be false, it'll
cast doubt on your overall credibility. If you make one false claim, you might well make
others. So the idea is not necessarily to pick the first stasis. It's to pick the first
stasis that you are pretty confident you can sustain, because as you pick higher levels
of stasis, you're implicitly conceding what came before. Now, sometimes you can combine
the stasis. What if you said, I never had your car, but if I had stolen it, it would
have been for a good cause? Well, there you're combining conjecture and quality, and sometimes
that can work effectively. You've made one response contingent on the other. You've said,
I never had your car. That's the first response, but if I took it, it would have been for a
good cause. On the other hand, sometimes the combination of stasis can suggest that you're
being evasive, that you're not really confident of your position. What if you said, hey, I
never had it, and if I had it, I would have borrowed it, and if I'd stolen it, it would
have been for a good cause. You're putting a number of these together, and the natural
kind of psychological response is, me thinks you doth protest too much, and your whole
credibility is called into question. All right, so far we've seen that the response
to the assertion largely governs the stasis, and that stasis generally is progressive.
I said there was one exception to that, and that is that stasis in place is usually preemptive
of everything else. Now, what do I mean when I say that? If we're not in the right place
to discuss this question, if we're not employing the right procedure or the right forum, then
the substance of the dispute, whether this happened or not, what we call it, whether
it was justified, that really doesn't matter until we get ourselves in the right forum.
So that when you reply to me, don't bring this accusation on the street, I'll see you
in court. What you're saying in effect is, don't even begin talking about conjecture
or definition or quality until we get into the right place. So stasis in place tends
to be preemptive. And by the way, this is why we often will find arguments about process
or procedure used in situations to trump arguments about the substance of the case.
Now, that's the basic idea of stasis. I think we can see almost intuitively why it's such
a useful tool, because it reminds us that there are multiple possible points of controversy,
multiple points of stasis, multiple focal points, determined by the joining of an assertion
and the response to the assertion. And in order for the controversy to proceed, we need to
identify the precise point of clash and then to invite the advocates to do so. And then
to respond to it. So far I've used a simple example and we have a simple understanding
of stasis. You may have noticed I used a legal example, because I said the concept originally
developed for purposes of application to the law courts. But it has a broader application,
a broader focus than that. It can be applied to disputes of other kinds as well, although
we have to complicate our understanding a little bit in order to do so. I want to do
that by talking about how stasis applies to resolutions of policy, because these are probably
the most complex resolutions. And so if we can see it there, then of course we can see
it anywhere. So let's look at how stasis applies on resolutions of policy. Here's why they're
more complicated than legal questions, because multiple issues will be at play and each issue
will have its own stasis. We saw this when we talked about Colin Powell's speech, where
many issues were discussed at the same time. We said that the kinds of issues, the topoi,
that policy resolutions address are things like, is there a problem, where is credit
or blame due? Will the proposal solve the problem? On balance is the proposal going
to leave us better off. Now all of those issues will be discussed. For example, let's go back
to the case of national missile defense systems. One of the issues is, is there anything wrong
with our current defense policy? In the course of discussing national missile defense, I
might say, we've left ourselves vulnerable to terrorist threats. And you might respond,
the threat of terrorism by this means is minimal. Now when you do that, you've invoked the stasis
of quality. You see, you've not denied that the problem exists. You've not denied that
it ought to be called a threat, but you said it's minimal. It's not that serious. It's
not serious enough to really worry about. And so on the issue of, is there a problem,
this dispute might center on the stasis of quality. But I said another issue was, can
the proposal solve the problem? And on this one, you might say, hey, this is fantasy land.
The technology for national missile defense doesn't even exist. So what you're saying
is on that issue, there is no solution. So the stasis would focus on conjecture. You
say no solution exists. Never mind whether we really call it national missile defense
or how much of the problem is solved. It's not even there. So the stasis is in conjecture.
At the same time, we're discussing both of those issues. Another issue is, do the costs
succeed the benefits? And on this one, you might say it costs too much. And I might reply,
but you know, those aren't real costs because you've got to compare them to the cost of
doing nothing. And so net, they're not real costs of building this system. And on this
one, you see, the stasis is in definition. We're not disputing what the costs are. We're
disputing should they really be called costs. So we've got this one controversy about should
we build a national missile defense system. And in talking about that, here we are facing
multiple issues with different points of stasis all at the same time. So we can quickly see
I think why a policy resolution is more complicated than a legal question. Multiple issues are
at play, each with its own stasis. However, stasis in place is usually not applicable
to policy resolutions because policy resolutions are subjects for general deliberation about
what we should do. Pretty much whatever forum we use to talk about what we should do is
okay. It's just as appropriate for you and me to talk about national missile defense
as it is for members of Congress or for scientists or for members of the national administration.
So usually in a policy controversy, stasis in place is pretty much irrelevant. But what
does that leave us with? It leaves us with the four topoi. Is there a problem who's to
blame? Will the proposal work on balance? Are we better off? Each of which could have
a stasis of conjecture or definition or quality. For those of you who are into matrix analysis,
you can see that what this gives us is a four by three matrix. Where down one side you can
imagine the topoi, and across the top you can imagine the possible points of stasis.
Let's do that as an exercise for just a minute. For convenience sake, I'm going to shorthand
the topoi, the issue categories, as ill, blame, cure and cost. Ill of course is, is there
a problem? Blame, where's the responsibility? Cure, is there a solution? Cost on balance,
are we better off? So we've got ill, blame, cure and cost, and then we've got conjecture,
definition and quality. Now let's see how this might work. I'm going to consider a new
example that the federal government should establish a patience bill of rights to regulate
medical care. Now let's take the topoi and see how we could have different possible stasis.
First of all, ill. Do the practices of health maintenance organizations, HMOs, leave patients
unsatisfied? That's a question of conjecture. Should this dissatisfaction be considered
a violation of their rights? Definition. Is the violation great enough that something
should be done about it as a matter of public policy? Quality. Now just on this question
is there a problem? You can see how picking one stasis or another will make a huge difference
to the way the controversy proceeds. If you say in response to my assertion there's no
serious problem with HMOs, patients are satisfied with the care they receive, then we talk about
one set of questions, conjectural questions. If you say, well patients might be satisfied
or dissatisfied just like customers in any case are satisfied or dissatisfied, but a
dissatisfied person doesn't mean that rights have been violated, now we're talking about
what we call this dissatisfaction. And if you reply, well you know there may be some
infringements on rights here and there, no system is perfect, but it's not great enough
that we should invoke the federal government and public policy to do something about it,
then we're talking about matters of significance. Not about whether there's a problem, not about
what to call it, but how great the problem is. So you see on this issue of ill, we've
got all these possibilities opened up. And of course, if I imagine one stasis and you
imagine a different one, we're going to have a mismatched argument. Now let's look at
the question of blame, the second issue category. Do HMOs make the key medical decisions? Question
of conjecture. Is there discretion abused? Question of definition. Should we consider
any aggravating or mitigating circumstances? Quality. Just like in the You Stole My Car
example where we said there were mitigating circumstances. So here at this level too, there
are different ways to focus the argument. Look at the category of cure. This is the issue
category that asks will the proposal solve the problem? Can a bill of rights be devised?
Can we imagine a solution? Conjecture. Will it work? Will it correct for the violation
of rights? Definition. How much of the abuse of HMOs will it really address? And how much
will be left? Quality that deals with significance or degree. So here again on this issue, we
have multiple possible points of stasis. Finally, look at the topos, that's the singular
of topoi. Look at the issue category of cost. What will a bill of rights cost patients?
How much will it increase their medical care expense? A question of conjecture. Are they
real costs compared to the costs of doing nothing? Definition. Are the costs worth
it? Is it worth it for us to bring about this result? Do the benefits outweigh the costs?
A question of quality. Now look what we did in this relatively
simple example. We took this imaginary 4 by 3 matrix and we said okay, if we're going
to discuss the question of a patient's bill of rights, we could have as many as 12 different
points of stasis in that controversy because we had 4 categories of issues and on each
issue we had 3 possible stasis. Now you wonder why the discussion of topics like a patient's
bill of rights or national missile defense or educational policy, you wonder why discussion
of policy resolutions is so complicated? It's because multiple stasis are at play at
the same time and the participants in the argumentative exchanges may not be on the
same wavelength. They may not be addressing the same stasis at the same time.
Now let me be very clear. I'm not suggesting that an advocate ought to raise all 12 of
these points of clash in talking about a matter of public policy. Indeed the effect of doing
that would be about the same as the effect of my saying hey, I didn't have your car and
if I had I would have borrowed it and if I stole it it would have been a good thing.
And by the way, don't speak about it here. It would suggest evasiveness. It would suggest
not coming to grips with the issue. The purpose of talking about the whole matrix
is not for us to pick all 12 points. We generally pick no more than one on any given issue.
But it's to make us aware of the range of choices that exist about what shape a controversy
could take based upon how you respond to the assertions that I might make.
Now what I've tried to suggest here is that this concept that was originally developed
for law courts where it's relatively easy to apply because there are formal rules in
a law court that determine the procedure, that determine what's relevant and not relevant,
that this concept actually can be taken and applied more broadly to disputes about policy.
And if it can be applied to disputes about policy, I hope we can see with a little bit
of imagination how it can also be applied to disputes about value, disputes about definition
and disputes about fact. Now, since you've borne with me as I've explained the concept,
let me address the question of why this is such an important concept. And to do it, let's
imagine the negative. What happens when the advocates in a controversy fail to agree on
the point of stasis? What happens when they don't address the same point? Well, sometimes
it can result in the loss of the argument. Many of you are familiar with the very famous
Scopes trial that took place in 1925 that came about when a biology teacher named John Scopes
taught the theory of evolution in violation of a Tennessee state law that made it a crime
to do so. In the course of the trial of Mr. Scopes, the defense represented by Clarence
Darrow argued that the theory of evolution was true, and therefore it was okay for Scopes
to teach it. The prosecution argued that the teaching of evolution was unlawful, therefore
Scopes violated the law. Now, let's think about the stasis categories. Neither side
is disputing conjecture. There's no question that this happened. The prosecution is arguing
definition. This act was unlawful, while the defense is arguing quality. It's okay because
the theory is true. The prosecution replies, we don't care whether the theory is true,
the state has a right to prohibit this teaching, and therefore Scopes broke the law. Now remember,
we said that stasis is progressive. Quality concedes definition and conjecture. So according
to this analysis, the defense, by picking stasis in quality, has implicitly conceded
all the prosecution needed to prove in order to win the case. And so the argument is that
faulty choice of stasis doomed the case. Now there is a competing analysis, by the way,
that says that the defense wasn't trying to win the case, they were trying to build
a record on appeal, but that's another matter. Sometimes failing to agree on the stasis can
hijack the argument and change understanding of what it is. For example, in the dispute
in 2005 about social security reform, some advocates picked as their stasis point, will
private retirement accounts solve the problem? They didn't get very far in the public dialogue
because the public was focused on the question, is there a problem? And so it was a faulty
analysis of stasis. And sometimes it can produce a stalemate. As in the abortion dispute, when
one side is arguing that abortion is wrong and the other side is arguing, the question
is who can decide whether or not to have this procedure in a particular circumstance? There
is no agreement on stasis and hence no clash. Developing clash that is meaningful, productive
and responsive to the argument depends first of all upon selecting the appropriate stasis.
How else it occurs is what we will focus on in the next lecture.
Hello again, it's good to be back. Two lectures ago, when we were talking about case construction,
I used the term prima facie, meaning on first face. And I said one of the things that we
want to do when we put a case together is to have it be prima facie, meaning that upon
first hearing it, it will seem reasonable and plausible to have it be prima facie.
And I said one of the things that we want to do when we put a case together is to have
it be prima facie, meaning that upon first hearing it, it will seem reasonable and plausible
and it will support the resolution that we're trying to advance. Now assuming that somebody
has done that, then the other arguer is in a position where he or she either needs to
accept the case or respond to it. And coming up with a response to the case is called meeting
the burden of rejoinder. Now last time we talked about how one begins to meet that burden
of rejoinder by identifying the stasis, the focal point of the case, so that we can know
exactly what's in controversy and then we can either respond to that point or if we
want to relocate the controversy we can do that, but at least we can understand where
it centers. And so that brings us to a study of the dynamics of controversy, what happens
after the case has been presented and somebody is ready to respond to it. Doing this, meeting
the burden of rejoinder, is accomplished through the interrelated processes of attack and
defense, which together are known as refutation. Refutation is sometimes defined as planning
and execution of attacks and defenses as part of the testing and evaluation of arguments.
And the next two lectures will be devoted to attack and defense, to refutation. Now there
are two problems that I want to address right off the bat before we get into the heart of
this material. One is that for some people talking about attack and defense is difficult
because it sounds like it's a military metaphor and it sounds like what we're trying to do
is overwhelm or vanquish or utterly defeat an opponent. But remember what we've said
throughout these lectures. That's not what argumentation is all about. The goal of arriving
at a sound judgment is a goal that the arguers share. They're in this together. And the purpose
of mobilizing a strong attack and coming up with a strong defense is to give arguments
a rigorous test so that we'll have confidence in the results. Indeed, if they're well conducted
attack and defense are constructive exercises and both parties should benefit from the exchange.
But if there is an aspect of the military metaphor that's appropriate, it's the notion
of strategic planning, careful analysis, concern for choice and for making those choices carefully.
And hopefully we'll see how that's done in these next two lectures. The other problem
I want to speak to briefly is we're going to talk about in a highly systematic way things
that in an actual argument are often done instinctively almost intuitively. We're going
to lay out a series of steps and questions that in most cases in an actual argument arguers
don't stop, hold everything and ask themselves. And you might wonder why we're going to subject
this process to such scrutiny. And the answer is simple. We're trying to learn a series
of skills. These are skills which if we understand them we can practice them and we can refine
them and get ourselves into a position where when we engage in arguments we'll be more
likely to do it naturally and instinctively but we have to start off understanding what
it is that we're doing. I also want to alert you that there is far more to say about attack
than about defense and so the two lectures won't be evenly divided. As we'll see many
of the options of the defense are constrained by the nature of the attack. So let's begin
with attacks. When we want to respond to a case, to attack a case, there's a series
of strategic choices that we have to make and they involve both selection and arrangement
just as case construction involves both selection and arrangement choices. And I want to begin
now with selection choices and I want to focus most of our time in this lecture on four
of these choices. The first one is which arguments to attack. Now remember back in lecture number
six when we talked about Colin Powell at the UN Security Council and we had a fairly elaborate
diagram of his case and there were lots of different arguments in it at varying levels.
We don't need if we're going to attack his case to attack every single argument. In fact
if we did we would get so bogged down in the attacks that we might lose track of what the
case was all about. Moreover if we try to attack every argument in a case we can find ourselves
unknowingly in an inconsistent position where the other person can respond and knock out
some of our attacks. For example also in lecture six we talked about a set of arguments involving
airline travel and at one point I said it was really difficult to understand airline
pricing. At another point I said the ticket agents and reservation agents are not terribly
helpful. Now suppose you wanted to attack both of those arguments. You might say well
first of all airline pricing is really pretty simple so there aren't all of these difficulties
and complexities so I don't know what you're even talking about advancing the argument.
Then you get to the one about ticket agents and you say you know these ticket agents and
reservation clerks are really helpful and they work out all the difficulties in the
pricing. But wait. First attack says there aren't any difficulties in pricing. Second
attack says they work out the difficulties. Person who makes the original argument could
respond to these two attacks by saying these attacks work at cross purposes throw them
both out. So we want to think carefully about which arguments to attack. Besides some arguments
might not even need attacking. They may not matter that much. Even if you give them up
you haven't lost much and if you attack and defeat them you haven't gained much. So for
example suppose someone says that airports have become much more crowded in the years
since September 11th 2001 and you respond by saying they're less crowded in 2005 than
they were in 2004. Suppose you're right. What if you gained. You haven't defeated the argument
that crowding has increased since 2001. And suppose you let it go. What difference does
it make if you have other arguments that are going to deal with the causes of crowding
or are going to present ways to relieve crowd. So not every argument that needs to be attacked
and if it's not attacked it can either be ignored or it can be acknowledged and granted
often with a flourish in which you say this is an argument that does us no damage it doesn't
make any difference. Now deciding which arguments to attack helps to narrow down the potential
issues in the case to the actual issues. How do you decide which arguments to attack?
You use exactly the same criteria that you used when deciding what arguments to put in
the case. Are they strong which means will the audience be likely to believe the evidence
that the attack is based on and is the relevance of the attack to defeating the argument high.
These are the same criteria that ought to govern making that decision. So the first
decision is which arguments to attack. Second key decision. Which part of the argument
to attack? Now I want to refer you back to lecture number five where we had a diagram
of a simple argument that had a claim, it had evidence and it had an inference linking
the two. One could choose to attack the argument once you've decided which argument to attack
at any one of those points or at more of those points than one. So one option is to attack
the claim by denying it outright or by offering some sort of counter claim. So the claim in
the argument is airline delays have increased. We might deny that outright and attack it
by saying no airline delays have not increased. We've denied the claim and if you remember
from our stasis discussion that focuses stasis in conjecture. Has it happened? Have delays
increased? Or we might counter the claim not by denying it outright but by saying for
instance increased delays are really a minor problem. In which case we focused stasis on
definition is it a problem? Or increased delays are justified by safety considerations. In
which case we focused stasis in quality. So one option then is deny the claim outright
or counter it. But that's not the only option. It may not be the claim that we want to attack.
Another way to attack an argument is to attack the evidence on which the claim is based.
So we might say you've talked about airport crowding but you've really examined a limited
sample of airports. You've only talked about Chicago O'Hare and L.A. International and
Washington Dulles. And we know that those happen to be three of the most crowded airports
in the country. And so your evidence really doesn't establish that airport crowding is
a significant problem overall. Or we might say your evidence comes from an unqualified
or a biased source. You quoted an occasional tourist. A tourist doesn't have enough experience
with airports to really evaluate whether they're crowded or not. Or you quoted a known critic
of the airline industry. Of course that person is going to find faults with every aspect
of the industry that he or she could. It's an unqualified source or a biased source. Any
of these examples illustrate attacking the evidence. And remember since we said the evidence
has to be agreed to for the argument to get anywhere, you've attacked the argument by
attacking that part of it. Or you might choose to attack the inference. To attack the link
between the evidence and the claim. You're not attacking either one directly but you're
attacking the vital connection between the two. For example, you might say, well the
relationship between crowded airplanes and rude passengers is only a correlation. You
haven't shown that one causes the other. Or you might say, you've said that the planes
are crowded. That just means that they're not flying enough planes. If they increase
the schedule, why it would solve that problem. What's true of one plane wouldn't be true
of all. Or you might say, you've drawn an analogy to what happened after airline deregulation
in the 1970s but that's a false analogy. Now I realize we haven't yet talked in any detail
about specific inferences. We'll be doing that a few lectures from now. But for now
just remember that attacking the link, attacking the inference is just a strong way to undercut
the argument as is attacking the claim or the evidence. And there's one more choice
you could make about which part of the argument to attack. Think back to that diagram that
had the evidence, the claim, and the inference. And now imagine that we enclose that entire
diagram in a box. We have a box drawn around it. And that box represents the underlying
context of the argument. The set of assumptions, the framework in which the argument is based.
And you might choose to attack that. For example, you might say, this whole argument
about airline crowding and airports and unpleasantness is based on the assumption that the convenience
of the consumer is the principal goal of the airline industry. And while obviously they're
concerned with consumers, it's far more important to focus on safety, on the preservation of
life, and on avoiding threats to national security. And if we look at the airline industry
and the situation of airports in that context, then we get a whole different light on the
matter and these concerns appear relatively trivial. So what we've done in that example
is we've responded not to the claim, the evidence, or to the inference, but to the whole framework
of assumptions that surrounds the argument. So once we've decided which arguments to
attack out of that whole case, for each one we attack, we further choose whether to go
after the evidence, the claim, the inference, or the underlying context. We could of course
choose to go after more than one if there's good reason to do so. The choice of which parts
to attack and how many parts to attack should be governed by a very simple principle. What
will get us the most effective result in bringing the argument into question with the least
expenditure of time and effort and energy? We might think of this as a mini-max kind of
principle to use a term that economists sometimes use. What with minimum effort will get the
maximum gain? That will help us choose what part of the argument to attack. So we have
which arguments to attack, what part of the argument to attack. The third choice is what
type of attack to develop. And here at the risk of seeming to split hairs, I want to make
sure that we all realize that there are lots of different ways to attack an argument. For
example, one could ask a question about an argument. You said that airports have delays.
How many airports have these delays? This is generally not a good attack strategy. And
the reason is it doesn't build up any kind of equity for you. Once the question is answered,
you have nothing left. The original argument is back there again in full. So the only time
when I would normally advise attacking an argument by asking a question is when the
question is important to the argument and is unanswerable. So for instance, suppose
that as one part of the case, somebody said the airline industry executives are meeting
together in secret and planning how to curtail their routes. And you say, where's the evidence
that they're having these secret meetings? And the person responds, well, they met last
year in Detroit and they met in New York. Wait a minute. We know about those meetings.
They're not secret. What about all these secret meetings that you're referring to? Well, of
course, by the nature of secrecy, you don't know. And so you can't answer the question
and yet the question is important to the case. With that exception, asking a question is
generally not a very good way to attack the case. But here's some other possibilities.
Identifying internal deficiencies in the argument will show how the arguer failed to meet his
or her burden of proof if you show problems with the evidence or problems with the inference
as in the examples that I mentioned before. Or a third way to attack an argument is to
identify inconsistencies in the argument that can cast doubt on the sincerity of the arguer
as well as requiring a response to the inconsistency. So for instance, let's suppose that you're
responding to an argument that refers to delays and you've suggested scheduling changes
can reduce airline delays. And then later on, you've suggested that takeoff and landing
restrictions can reduce airport congestion, two different problems that have been identified
in the case. But now wait a minute. Scheduling changes would supposedly reduce delays, but
takeoff and landing restrictions while they cut congestion would increase delays. So you
could point out here's an argument that's working at cross purposes with itself. And
as we saw in an earlier lecture, when you identify an inconsistency, logically that means only
that one of those claims must be false, but psychologically it casts doubt on the sincerity
of both and on the credibility of the arguer him or herself. So that's another way to attack
an argument. Yet another way is to label the opponent's argument strategy. Now, this
approach relies on the principle that once you identify what is the underlying strategy,
you reduce the effectiveness of that very strategy, because you've called attention
to it, you've recognized it for what it is. And so if you respond to an argument by saying
well that's loaded language, you see what you've done. You've identified the strategy
that the arguer is using, which is to load the deck by using language that is not neutral,
it's biased language, and that calls attention to it. Or you might say you're trying to create
a dilemma where there really isn't a dilemma here, we're not forced into these two undesirable
choices in the way that you thought. And so what you're doing is you're pointing out
attempts to thwart the goal of reasoning critically and resolving the underlying disagreement.
Well those are four ways you can attack an argument. Another is a touter argument. This
is a denial of the claim itself, as in the examples I illustrated above, and when you
do that, the nature of your denial will define the point of stasis, and now the listener
will have to choose between the competing claims that you and your opponent have advanced.
And finally, the sixth choice that I want to mention, you could choose to recontextualize
the argument, placing it in a broader context in which it now appears to be unsatisfactory.
And my example before when I tried to recontextualize from consumer convenience to safety and national
security is a good example of that. So just as in deciding which arguments to attack and
which parts of the argument to attack, what type of attack to develop is an important
strategic choice. Now there's one more choice that I want to mention very briefly, and that's
how many attacks to develop. Given all of the arguments in Colin Powell's case, if you
want to attack it, how many attacks should you make? And the reason that I want to cover
this so quickly is that the answer is exactly the same as it was when we discussed this
topic under case construction, how many arguments to put in the case. We can increase the amplitude
of the attack, that is, a wider range, more attacks, by hedging our bets because the individual
attacks may not be conclusive, and so we put a lot of them together and we'll convince
some people that the argument's weak for this reason and some people for this reason and
some people for this reason. And that takes advantage of the fact that the audience is
heterogeneous, different people will be appealed to by different kinds of attacks. But if we
increase the amplitude and have lots of attacks, we may weaken our credibility, it may seem
like we're just launching these scatter shot attacks here and here and here and here and
here because we don't have anything really substantial to say against the case, and we
run the risk of getting ourselves into an inconsistent position and suggesting we don't
have confidence in our own attacks. And so just as we said with respect to case construction,
we have to find the right balance between too few and too many attacks based upon the
specifics of the case and of what we want to accomplish. So these then are the four basic
choices that relate to selection when we go about attacking a case, deciding which arguments
to attack, where in the argument, what type of attack, how many attacks. Now as I've
said, arguers often make these choices instinctively and in the heat of the moment. But we want
to study them systematically so that we can understand them so that we can become aware
of the range of choices and begin to coach ourselves in how to make better judgments
and better choices. Now lest you think that this is all a hypothetical discussion and
all grounded in theory, I want to spend a few minutes with an actual example of choices
regarding selection of attacks. And for this purpose, I want to go back to the very first
presidential debates between John F. Kennedy and Richard Nixon in 1960. So much of what
we remember about presidential debates is either the mistakes or the gaffes that get
made or the visual contrast between the candidates that we focus sometimes on superficial things
and don't realize that there's actually a lot of substantial argument going on. That
was certainly true in the Kennedy Nixon debates. And so as an example, I want to pick what
was not one of the major themes of the debates by any means, but what came up during the
course of the third debate. Now you may remember that the format was that there were questions
posed by journalists and one candidate had two and a half minutes to answer and then
the other candidate had a shorter time in which to respond. Sometimes the journalists
posed open-ended questions so that the candidate's response was the case construction and the
other candidate was making the attack. But sometimes the journalists focused a question
on an argument that the opposing candidate had been making so that the candidate to whom
the question was posed was invited to attack that argument. And that's what happened in
this example when the journalist Douglas Cater asked Senator Kennedy this question.
Vice President Nixon says that he has costed the two party platforms and that yours would
run at least $10 billion a year more than his. You have denied his figures. He has called
on you to supply your figures. Would you do that? So Cater has posed Nixon's argument
and has invited Kennedy to respond to that argument. Now look at the selection choices
that Kennedy makes in what he says. In the course of his two and a half minutes, he basically
says four things. He says, yes, I have stated in both debates and state again that I believe
in a balanced budget and have supported that concept during my 14 years in the Congress.
The only two times when an unbalanced budget is warranted would be during a serious recession
or a national emergency. So the first thing that Kennedy does is to recontextualize the
argument. Not about whether his program will cost $10 billion more than Nixon's. He doesn't
want to focus on that. He wants to focus on the question whether he is fiscally responsible.
And his reasoning is most people who argue that you're spending too much really mean
to say that you're fiscally irresponsible. And so he selects a stasis in quality saying
that costing more is okay because the budget is balanced. He recontextualizes the argument.
Second thing he says, he says now, on the question of the cost of our budget, I have
stated that it's my best judgment that our agricultural program will cost a billion and
a half, possibly $2 billion less than the present. My judgment is that the vice president's
program will cost a billion dollars more than the present. Second, I believe that the high
interest rate policy that this administration has followed has added about $3 billion a
year to interest on the debt. I would hope under a different monetary policy we could
reduce that burden. Third, I think it's possible to gain $700 million to a billion dollars
through tax changes, which I believe would close up loopholes. Fourth, I have suggested
that medical care for the agent would be paid under Social Security, which by the way at
that time was off budget. It was not part of the federal budget. So what Kennedy does
is he identifies these four specific examples where he thinks his program would cost less
than Nixon's would cost. Inviting you perhaps to generalize that his program overall would
cost less, but not directly responding to the claim that his program would cost $10
billion more. So he's attacked evidence in this second case. He's attacked specific examples.
Third, he acknowledges that in some areas he will spend more than Nixon. He says in my
judgment we would spend more money on aid to education. We'd spend more money on housing.
We'd spend more money, and I hope more wisely on defense than this administration has. So
in those areas, he's granting the argument. He's choosing not to attack the argument with
respect to those examples because he's going to suggest it's a good thing to spend more
there. And finally, he accuses Nixon of misstating his figures. Mr. Nixon misstates my figures
constantly, which is of course his right, but the fact of the matter is here is where
I stand and I just want to have it on the public record. So again, he's attacking evidence.
Now these choices about what to do reflect Kennedy's application of the Minimax principle.
He thinks here is where with minimum effort he can get the best results in launching his
attack. We can see what he does and doesn't do and can evaluate his choices based on the
understanding that we've just gained about what the advocates range of choices are. Next
time we'll look at attack choices that relate to arrangement and then we'll talk about defense.
Butcher 10, attack and defense, part two.
It's good to be back. Last time we began a discussion of attack and defense, which as
I reminded us are not military operations but constructive exercises in which we try
to test arguments and reach conclusions with which we're comfortable and in which we're
confident. I talked about a number of choices regarding the selection of arguments to attack
and I said that there were also choices to be made with respect to arrangement and so
I want to pick up with that now and focus really on two major arrangement choices. The
first of them is the question, should the attacks be organized in the same way as the
arguments that are being attacked? In other words, if the person that you're responding
to presented a series of arguments one, two, three and four and you're going to attack
them, should you organize your attack the same way, one, two, three and four? Doing
so will make it easier for audiences to follow the argument. They follow the attack that's
in exactly the same sequence and the same progression as the original argument. But the danger is
that doing so may put you on the opponent's ground and you may actually be better off building
your own organizational scheme around what you think are the central points in the dispute.
Let me illustrate this with a fairly simple example. In lecture six, when I first began
talking about airlines and airports and all of that, I used as one of my organizational
examples a set of arguments in a series structure. Remember I said my luggage was misdirected,
it was mis tagged when I checked it in at the airport and so it went to the wrong city
and because it went to the wrong city, there were valuable documents that were missing
and because those were missing, I gave a presentation which was nowhere near as good as it should
have been and because my presentation wasn't very good, I got fired from my job and that
was the whole series structure. Now if you were going to attack that point by point following
the same organizational pattern that I used, you would take each one of the steps in the
sequence that I developed and if you're going to say something about it, you'd say it and
if not, you'd skip over it but you would follow my structure. But doing that focuses the argument
on my ground. What am I trying to do with that argument? I'm clearly trying to fix the
responsibility for my losing my job on a series of mishaps that were ultimately caused by
the airline. Now suppose instead you respond to this argument in a different way. Suppose
you say your termination notice was written before you ever left on this trip and that's
all you say. Now look, you haven't responded to my substructure, you haven't taken each
one of these individual steps that I went through but you have focused the dispute on
the question, is it the airline's fault? And you could well reason that that's the central
question in the dispute and if you can demonstrate that it's not the airline's fault, then you've
defeated my argument even though you haven't followed my substructure. Because if I was
effectively fired before I ever started on this unfortunate trip, then it's pretty hard
to argue that the airlines were responsible for whatever mishap befell me. So what you've
done is you've focused on what you want to accomplish which is responsibility doesn't
lie with the airline. So what I'm trying to suggest is sometimes it makes sense to follow
the organizational structure of the argument being attacked but sometimes it doesn't and
this is a choice to make and it's a choice to make based on the strategic considerations
of what you're trying to gain and what the argument looks like. Remember that in the
last lecture when I talked about the example of the Kennedy Nixon debates, Kennedy developed
his own organizational structure. He didn't follow along the lines that the question suggested
and doing that enabled him to refocus the debate on what he wanted to emphasize which was number
one that he was fiscally responsible and number two that he had good budget priorities and
he wouldn't have been able to do that as effectively if he had responded directly, you say my programs
cost ten billion dollars more, no they don't, here's the arithmetic piece by piece by piece.
So the first arrangement choice is whether to follow the opponent's structure or to follow
your own. The second of the two arrangement choices that come up when we attack arguments
is how completely to develop the attack as we present. What all do we include in the
presentation of the attack? Well let me tell you first what the ideal answer is according
to most of the textbooks on argumentation. Most of the textbooks say what you want to
do is you want to present a complete attack and a complete attack includes the following
things. First, it includes a statement of the argument that you're going to attack. Stated
in neutral language not trying to load the deck in language that the audience would agree
upon and if at all possible using the very language that your opponent used in making
the argument. Then second what you ought to do is you ought to explain what's the basis
of your attack. What is it you're going to say about this argument? And then third you
develop the attack and support the attack with evidence and explanation. And then fourth
and finally having made the attack you explain the significance of what you've accomplished
by making the attack. So you state the argument that's going to be attacked, you state what
you're going to do with it, you develop and support the attack and then you state what's
been accomplished by the attack. That's the ideal answer about how to develop the attack.
The problem is that that takes a lot of time and if done repeatedly attack after attack
it can get cumbersome and you could even come off seeming fairly pedantic. And so the question
is in any given case how much of that should you do? How fully should you develop the attack?
Well it depends upon how obvious your attack is, how clear it'll be to the audience, what's
your going after and going after a particular argument, how clear it'll be what you've accomplished
once you have done it. And these are obviously strategic judgments that need to be made case
by case. Notice that in the Kennedy Nixon debate example, Kennedy didn't go through all of
those four steps when he made each one of his attacks. He didn't restate the argument
from the questioner, he only hints at the basis of his attack and he shorthands what
has been accomplished by the attack into a very short set of phrases. Now why? Because
he's got limited time, he has only two and a half minutes, he wants to make several attacks
against this argument and he wants to establish that he's turning around and suggesting that
Nixon doesn't state his figures accurately. He needs to do all of that in about two and
a half minutes. And so Kennedy instinctively, because I'm sure he didn't sit down and map
this out, but he instinctively made the judgment that in making the attacks he could eliminate
some of those steps in the ideal presentation and he'd be okay because the audience would
be able to follow along. Well this is the kind of judgment that you need to make whenever
you're launching an attack. So the two arrangement choices are whether to follow the same organizational
structure as the argument you're responding to and how fully to develop the attack.
Now we focused between the last lecture and this on selection and arrangement choices
related to attacking arguments. Now I want to switch over and talk about defending arguments.
And the first thing we will notice is that the strategic choices available to the defense
are much more limited. It's not a good selection choice for example to ignore an attack. So once
an attack has been made you want to defend the argument, you've pretty much got to respond to
the attack. So what kinds of selection considerations come into place, how to characterize the attack
and that might determine how one goes about responding to it. For instance, you could demonstrate
that the attack is inapplicable to the case. Let's suppose that your original argument in your case
was the Social Security Trust Fund will be depleted by the year 2042. And the attack in response to
that was to say wait a minute, Social Security Trust Fund is large now and it's been growing since
the 1980s since the last time we reformed Social Security. Now if your case is that it's going
to be depleted by 2042, you could pretty easily point out that that attack is not applicable.
Your case is talking about trends that are going to take place in the future and the attack has
dealt with the past. It's simply not applicable. Or another thing you could do is to demonstrate
that the attack is trivial in its consequences. So let's go back to the example I used a few
lectures ago about mandatory standardized testing of students in school. And I said one of the
arguments that was made that we're doing too much testing cited the fact that we give the
preliminary scholastic assessment test, the PSAT, in 10th grade. And suppose the attack says no,
no, no, no. The PSAT is given in 11th grade, so we're okay as far as 10th grade is concerned.
Now, remember, the question here is, what are the effects of repeated standardized testing on an
overall educational curriculum? Does it really matter whether we give the PSAT in 10th grade
or 11th grade? And so you could dismiss this attack by saying, you know, this is of such small
consequence that even if it's corrected, really doesn't damage or imperil our position, so we're
not going to focus on which grade this test is given in. So that's another choice. Or you could
demonstrate that the attack is inadequately established. So the original argument, this time
we'll imagine a family situation. Original argument is a teenager makes a case wanting to have the
family car out past midnight, and the parents respond, you know, you are always testing limits.
Every time we set up a rule, you try to get around it, and the teenager responds, that's not so.
This is a special case. It's the only time I've made this request. Advice to the teenager, if you
want to make this argument, make sure the facts are with you on that one. But what the teenager is
trying to do is to defend the original argument by saying, the attack is not adequately established.
It's faulty. It's based on evidence that's either not there or that is mistaken.
Or you could demonstrate that the attack is simply wrong, that it's an error. The attack says that
there's an inconsistency in the way the airlines price for tickets, depending on distance that you
travel. The defense might say, no, there's no inconsistency. Most of the pricing structure is
pretty reasonable, and where there are discrepancies, there are good explanations for it. So you could
characterize the attack as inapplicable, as trivial, as inadequately established, or as in error.
And you could probably do other things too. You could probably say it doesn't outweigh the case,
and so on. But the most basic selection choice that you have is not when you respond to the attack.
It's how you present the argument in the first place that may determine what attacks can be made
against it and what cannot. Now, before I completely leave selection choices, I want to say another
thing about them. When you defend an argument, your defense really has a two-faced nature to it.
On the one hand, you're rebuilding your argument. You're rebuilding a position that's been attacked,
and that's where your choices are fairly limited. But you're also attacking the attack. And when you
think about it that way, you have a wider range of choices. We can go back to the last lecture and
talk about all the selection choices that are involved in attacks, and they can be applied here.
But the danger is that if you think about a defense only as an attack on an attack,
you'll lose sight of your original argument that after all you're trying to rebuild. So we have to
keep both aspects of the defense of arguments in mind. Still in all, the selection choices are fairly
few. And the arrangement choice in defending an argument is basically whether the structure of the
original argument or the structure of the attack will be the dominant organizational plan.
Now, each one of these has a pitfall to it. You want to be careful if you choose to make the
structure of the original argument your plan. You want to be careful that you don't just repeat
the original argument without extending it or responding to the attack. Let's suppose my original
argument was that congestion in major airports creates delays which lead to economic losses.
And suppose your response is to say, look, there's no serious problem of congestion in most of our
major airports. It's limited to a small number, and these can be addressed individually. There's
not a serious problem. And I respond, but you didn't deny that congested airports create delays
that lead to economic losses. And I just repeat my argument. Now, it's true. You didn't deny that
there's a link between congestion and economic losses. But what you did was to deny that there
was any serious congestion. You attacked the evidence even though you didn't deny the inference.
And so for me to just repeat the inference will not help me very much at all. That's the pitfall
in going back to your own organizational structure. But on the other hand, if you let the structure
of the attack govern you, the danger is that the attack will run away with the argument.
So that the attack, rather than the argument, becomes the dominant focus.
So for instance, let's imagine I've presented a case arguing that stem cell research should
be strictly limited. And you've provided a lot of different reasons that limits aren't appropriate
and broader support for stem cell research is needed. Now, suppose I come back and say,
I said that stem cell research should be seriously limited. Let's consider all the attacks that were
brought against it. The first attack was so and so. Well, let me say this about it. Second one
was so and so. Here's my response to that. The third was this one. And here's how I answer that.
And I lose track of my own position. I spent all of my time emphasizing your attacks,
not my original position in favor of limiting stem cell research. So we want to try to avoid
both of these pitfalls, both the pitfall of just repeating and the pitfall of letting the attack
run away with the argument. So we try for a middle range position in which the focus is on the
original argument, but in which we're also sensitive to the individual attacks and comment
about those. Now, I said that there wasn't as much to say about defense as about attack. We've
covered what the basic selection considerations are and what the basic arrangement considerations are.
So let's look at an example. Let's go back to the same example we talked about last time,
the Kennedy Nixon debates of 1960. And I want to pick up where I left off then.
Remember that the original argument presented by Douglas Cater, the panelist, was that Kennedy's
platform would cost $10 billion more than Nixon's. And that Kennedy attacked this argument by
recontextualizing it, by providing counter examples, by admitting some increases, and by
challenging the accuracy of Nixon's figures. Now it's Nixon's turn to rebuild to defend his
original argument. And let's look at the choices that Nixon makes and see how they relate to what
we've been discussing. Here is Nixon's response. Senator Kennedy has indicated on several occasions
in this program tonight that I have been misstating his record and his figures. I will issue a white
paper after this broadcast quoting exactly what he has said on compulsory arbitration,
for example, and the record will show that I have been correct. That's the first part of Nixon's
response. Now notice what he did. He picked up on the very last thing that Kennedy said,
you've been misstating your figures. Of course, his honor is being attacked, so he feels the need
to defend himself, but he doesn't really talk about the figures on the budget. He talks about
another argument in which Kennedy says his position has been misrepresented on compulsory
arbitration. That's the very first thing Nixon does to try to defend himself, is he responds to
this charge of misstating figures, but doesn't respond to it directly. Then Nixon talks about
Kennedy's counter examples, and he says this, now as far as his figures are concerned here tonight,
he again is engaging in this what I would call mirror game of here it is and here it isn't.
Look what Nixon's doing there. He's labeling Kennedy's argument strategy. Remember we said
in the last lecture that labeling the argument strategy is a way to call attention to the
strategy and to defeat its effectiveness. And then he talks about some of the specific
counter examples, and he tries to suggest that they are illusory, that they're not real counter
examples. On the one hand, for example, he suggests that as far as his medical care program is
concerned, that really isn't a problem because it's from social security. But social security is
a tax. The people pay it. It comes right out of your paycheck. This doesn't mean that the people
aren't going to be paying the bill. Remember Kennedy had used social security as an example
because it's off budget. So it's not going to add to the cost of his program to the federal budget.
Nixon's point is this is an illusory saving because people are still going to pay the tax.
He also indicates that as far as his agricultural program is concerned that he feels it will cost
less than ours. Well, all that I can suggest is that all the experts who've studied the program
indicate that it is the most fantastic program, the worst program in so far as its effect on the
farmers that America has ever had foisted upon it in an election year or any other time. Well,
Nixon certainly riled up, but you notice he doesn't respond to Kennedy's claim that the agricultural
program will cost less. Although he then introduces a new argument saying that part of the cost of
the program that Kennedy left out is a 25% rise in food prices that people would have to pay.
That's not documented, but what he's suggesting is that's a hidden cost. Then he goes on to
say that he's going to change the interest rate situation and that we're going to get some money
that way. Well, what he is saying there in effect, we're going to have inflation. We're going to go
right back to what we had under Mr. Truman when he had political control of the Federal Reserve Board.
I don't believe we ought to pay our bills through inflation through a phony interest rate.
Of course, what Kennedy had been talking about was by cutting the budget deficit,
you'd be able to reduce the interest rates and what Nixon is saying is you're going to have
inflation and that's not a good thing. Now, notice that one of Kennedy's counter examples,
closing loopholes, gets no response from Nixon. Notice that Nixon never draws together what he's
accomplished by responding to these counter examples. They're pretty scattershot responses.
He attacks this one for this reason and this one for this reason and this one for another reason.
Notice also that Nixon doesn't respond to Kennedy's argument that increased spending
in certain areas is a good thing and there's no response at all to the main point that Kennedy
had made, which was that he was fiscally responsible and was going to achieve a balanced budget.
If we think about Nixon's response, notice he doesn't go back to the original argument,
which is Kennedy's program will cost more than his, nor does he focus on the structure of
Kennedy's attacks, suggesting that item by item the attacks fall short. He does a little bit of
this and a little bit of that, picking and choosing in ways that probably are strategically
not the best for him. Now, Nixon was an accomplished debater. I don't mean to question his ability at
all, but in this example, we can see what he's done is made choices about selection and arrangement
of his defense that were probably not the best strategic choices. And the reason that we're
focusing so systematically in these two lectures on the choices that people can make is so that we
can get a sense of them so that when we're in actual arguments, we will put into practice what
we're exploring, and over time will become instinctively more skillful in making the strategic
choices that do us the most good. Well, now what we've seen here is we've seen the deployment
of the defense choices on the part of Nixon in the Kennedy-Nixon debates, and we've seen earlier
the deployment of the attack choices on the part of Senator Kennedy. So we've talked about both attack
and defense, and now I want to discuss some general approaches to refutation that can be used in both
attack and defense, general strategies that can be used not only to attack an argument,
but also to rebuild it once it has been attacked. And there are a number of these. One of them
goes by the Latin term reductio ad absurdum, reducing to absurdity, and this is a device to suggest
that the other arguer's position, whether you're the attacker or the defender, that the other arguer's
position should be rejected because it leads to unacceptable implications. It's not absurd in the
sense that you'd laugh at it. It's absurd in the sense that it leads to a result that nobody would
accept. So for instance, you say ketchup is a vegetable, and some people did during the 1980s.
Well, if ketchup is a vegetable, then salt and pepper or carbohydrates relish is a fruit,
mustard is a protein, and we can have a balanced diet consisting of nothing but condiments. An
obviously unacceptable result, and since what leads us to that unacceptable result
is the standard that says ketchup is a vegetable, we reject that position. That's reductio ad absurdum.
Another one of these general devices of refutation is called turning the tables,
and this means showing how a position that is claimed by one arguer actually benefits the
other arguer. So let's talk about airline safety one more time. Let's imagine that
you're making an argument, you want to improve airline safety, and you say the way to do that
is to build more airports in order to reduce congestion at the existing major airports,
and let's imagine I'm responding to you, and I say you want to improve airline safety.
What will really improve airline safety is not to build more airports, which will just boost
demand. What will really improve airline safety is more careful scheduling controls, improved
safety procedures for the airlines taking off and landing, in other words, more regulation,
not more freedom. So if safety is the goal, safety doesn't work to your advantage as a
reason to build more airports, it works to my advantage as a reason to increase regulation.
So I've turned the tables on you, I've taken your value and used it for my purposes.
Another general means of refutation is to pose a dilemma, to suggest that the opposing arguer
must choose between unattractive alternatives. So a critic of the George W. Bush administration
might say, you want to overcome the economic slump and to improve the rate of job creation,
there are only two ways to do that. We've got to reduce the federal budget deficit,
either by reducing the expense on the war in Iraq or by increasing taxes. You don't want to do
either one, but those are the only two things that are going to make enough difference to the budget
to get us out of the economic slump and pick up the pace of job creation. So the dilemma poses
unattractive alternatives and suggests that those are the only alternatives. And so if you're right
that they're the only alternatives, the dilemma can be a very potent means of refutation.
Another one, in addition to reductio ad absurdum turning the tables, posing dilemmas,
the argument from residues, which dictates what position your opponent can be in by eliminating
all of the other possibilities. This was a favorite form of argument by President Lyndon
Johnson during the Vietnam War, when he would defend his position against his critics by saying,
look, we have only three alternatives. We can turn tail and run, which is the way he characterized
withdrawal, not exactly in neutral language. We can pour it on, bomb them back to the stone age
in risk World War Three, or we can persevere in the course that we're in. So what he's doing is
he's responding to attacks by saying, there's only this one choice. Then there's the argument
afforsiori. This is an argument of comparison that suggests that what's true of the lesser
is true of the greater or vice versa. If it's important to count the votes accurately in an
uncontested race, all the more should we count them accurately in a closely contested race.
And final general means of refutation, I've suggested this before, to identify contradictions
or inconsistencies in the opponent's argument that eliminate at least one of the other arguer's
positions, as well as questioning the other arguer's general credibility. These then are
approaches that are available to both attack and defense. The processes of attack and defense
together help to move the argument forward by identifying and focusing on what is in dispute.
And so as we've said, they are constructive and very important processes. Next time we'll talk
about another aspect of putting arguments together, and that's the language and style in which they're
cast.
Lecture 11, Language and Style in Argument
Welcome back. For the past several lectures, we've been talking about aspects of argumentation
strategy and tactics, being able to recognize and diagram both simple and complex arguments,
case construction, stasis, attack and defense of arguments. There's one more major topic that I
want to take up under this general heading, and that's the way that language and style work in
argumentation. And this lecture is really built around a fairly obvious claim that has implications
that are not quite so obvious, and that is that arguments are cast in language. The sorts of
arguments that we have every day are not reducible to the symbols of mathematics or formal logic.
All A is B, all B is C, if P, then Q, and so on. And the language in which our arguments are cast
is not simply addressing or covering that we put onto the substance of the argument itself.
It's very much bound up with the argument itself, and the way in which arguments are cast in
language has some profound effects for understanding the nature of the argument. What's more,
arguers make choices about language, just as they make choices about case construction and attack
and defense, and these choices serve as a strategic resource. As with other choices,
they often make them unthinkingly, but we want to be systematic in our ability to understand
and talk about them. So recognizing that we can't separate substance and language or substance and
style that they're bound up together, let's look if we can at some of the ways in which language
and style figure into argumentation. Let me begin with definitions. There's a dry subject you might
think, and yet definitions are a really important strategic resource for an arguer. Let's remind
ourselves, first of all, of the different purposes that definitions serve. The most obvious one is
to characterize common usage, to talk about how people ordinarily use a term, what they mean by it,
and those are the definitions that we find in a dictionary. Sometimes definitions are used to make
vague terms more precise. You may have noticed that in these lectures there have been a number
of technical terms, hopefully not too many, but when I've introduced technical terms,
I've done so in order to give us a precise meaning, a clear meaning or clear understanding
for a concept that might otherwise be vague. And definitions are also used to invent or to
characterize new usage. In the past 10 or 15 years, we've seen loads of examples of this
related to information technology, terms like boot up, surf the net, download, and Google as a
verb, for example, are all terms that characterize usage that didn't exist prior to the personal
computer age. So those are all purposes that definitions serve. But there's another purpose
that is particularly important for the use of definitions in argumentation. And that is the
persuasive definition, or a definition that conceals an argument within it. That's almost an
invitation to have an argument. This is a form in which definitions are used to gain an argumentative
advantage for one person or another. They alter the meaning of a term by associating that term
with either positively valued terms or negatively valued terms in the hope that the positive or
negative value will transfer from the other terms to the one for which we use the persuasive definition.
That's the theory. Persuasive definition transfers emotional meaning from one term to another.
Now, let's try to understand this theory a little bit more with a simple example.
One of the things that I occasionally encounter as a college professor is I'll receive from a student
a paper that has been found to be copied from another student or from a printed source or
increasingly from the internet. It's been plagiarized. Now, what do I call the act that
has taken place? Do I call it carelessness or sloppiness? These are terms that would suggest
unintentional error, calling for a classic teachable moment in which I explain to the student
how to be more careful, how to make sure that he or she uses sources that are his or her own.
Certainly a mistake, but nothing malicious about it, nothing intended to deceive.
But what if I call it fraud or theft of another person's ideas? Now, I've put it in an entirely
different context. I've suggested intent and motive and maliciousness. So in one case,
I've defined this act as carelessness. And in another case, I've defined the act as fraud.
And the definitions are persuasive because there are connotations bound up in those terms,
like carelessness or fraud. And obviously, it makes a difference in how I'm going to respond
to this behavior based on what I think of the act and how I'm going to evaluate the student
who was involved in it. In other words, these are not neutral or trivial choices of language
to define the act one way or another. When we do this in an argument, our definitions affect
the perception of the argument and of how to respond to the argument. There are many contemporary
examples of just this kind of a use of persuasive definition. For example, the estate tax has been
referred to by its opponents as the death tax. Now, the connotations that are involved in calling
it the death tax are pretty obvious. The suggestion that death should somehow be a taxable event,
as if the tax were on the person who died rather than on the person that inherits this windfall
estate, makes the tax objectionable and helps the cause for elimination of the tax.
The Democrats in the Senate, who were concerned that the rules might be changed to eliminate
filibusters on judicial candidates, referred to this rule change as the nuclear option.
And of course, the connotation of nuclear option is that this would just be a devastating blow
to the civility and the procedures of the Senate almost like dropping a nuclear bomb.
This would not be a minor change in the rules or a different way in counting up the votes.
Or a particularly obvious example in the early years of the 21st century, a particular medical
procedure that has the name intact dilation and extraction has been called by its opponents
partial birth abortion. And of course, calling this procedure partial birth abortion
is not neutral at all. It's a way to mobilize objection to this particular procedure
by suggesting that it is especially gruesome and inhumane. Now notice in all of these examples,
the argument is tasked in a particular language. The language is an attempt to define some key
terms, but the definition is not neutral. The definition affects the way in which the argument
is perceived and is dealt with. Now, how are definitions used? One of the ways that they're
used in argument is to widen or narrow the scope of the conflict, to widen or narrow what the
dispute is about, and consequently who might be in a position to have something to say about the
dispute. And it happens in two ways. One, definitions can be used to widen the scope of argument.
The person who stands to lose the argument if it's confined to a narrow scope may seek to
widen the scope. For example, what happens if we refer to budget deficits as immoral?
Once we enlarge the scope of the argument to refer not just to technical economics,
but to morality, we have broadened the circle of people who have something legitimately to say
about the argument. It's not just economists. It's not just a professional dispute. It's not just a
technical matter. It's a matter that raises questions of principles and morals about which
anybody is qualified to be involved or to have something to say. So if you stand to lose by
having the argument be construed narrowly, you define it in such a way as to broaden the scope.
It can also work the other way around. Definitions can be used to restrict the scope of argument
by excluding otherwise interested parties. There's a famous speech in which President
Kennedy said that the management of a modern economy is increasingly technical in nature.
Well, this is an attempt to do the opposite of my first example, to say if it's technical in nature,
then the people who are qualified to say something about it are those with technical
expertise and training, not ordinary citizens. Or when in discussing missile defense,
some advocates said the concept of throw weight and how it's measured is an increasingly technical
kind of problem. It's to suggest, hey, for people who don't have this kind of technical training,
stay out of the argument because you're not qualified to say anything about it.
So definitions can be used to alter not only the connotations of a term,
but the scope of the dispute of the controversy itself.
Now, however they're used, as a general rule, definitions ought to be clear enough
that they avoid some common errors in meaning. And I want to talk briefly about some of those
errors and it'll be pretty obvious why there are things we generally try to avoid.
One of them is equivocation. Equivocation is the use of a term in two different senses
in the same argument so that the meaning subtly changes and if we're not careful,
we'll lose track of the original argument. So for example, the parent who says to a teenager,
I trust you, I have always trusted you, and therefore I trust you will be home by midnight.
Well, the term trust means something different in that last statement. It means I expect you
to be home by midnight. It's not referring to trusting one's judgment or placing one's trust
in another person as it is in the beginning of the argument. My favorite example of equivocation,
by the way, is an argument that's set up almost like a syllogism. It goes, I love you,
therefore I am a lover, all the world loves a lover, you are all the world to me,
therefore you love me. Now, you might want to try this and see if it has any benefit for you,
but it should be pretty obvious that several of the terms change meaning during the course of
that argument. What love means, what a lover is, what all the world is, and so on. So that's
equivocation. Second thing we want to avoid as we use definitions is ambiguity. Most of the
time we want to avoid ambiguity, and that's a situation in which a word has multiple meanings
and we can't tell from the argument which meaning is intended. Take the simple statement,
the cardinals are in town. Do we mean birds? Do we mean a baseball team? Or do we mean officials
of the Roman Catholic Church? We can't tell simply from the statement. It's ambiguous.
A close cousin of ambiguity is amphiboli, amphiboli. This is a less known term, but what it refers to
is where a phrase, not a single word, but a phrase has multiple meanings and you can't tell just
from the statement which one is intended. My favorite example of this is something that I
always threaten to do, but honest I've never actually done it. I'm asked often to write letters
of recommendation for students, and some of those I'm very happy to do. Some are much more difficult
to write, and so I've thought about writing a letter of recommendation that says I can't recommend
this student highly enough. No one would be better for the position that you advertise.
Now, think about it. Does that statement mean there are no superlatives that I could use that
would capture the student? Or does it mean students not very good? I can't recommend them enough
to be supporting them positively. You can't tell simply from the statement itself. That's
amphiboli. So we have equivocation, ambiguity, amphiboli. Vagueness is another problem with
definitions, and vagueness is a situation in which a term or concept is indeterminate as to what it
means. There's no way to pin it down. I'm sometimes asked how old someone is, and I used to say,
well, he's middle-aged. What does middle-aged mean? At one point in my life, I thought it was anybody
over 25, and then as I've aged, why my understanding of middle-aged has changed proportionately. I
now think 85 and up is a pretty good definition of middle-aged, but the point is there's no way
to pin it down. It's an inherently vague term, and as a general rule, we want to try to avoid vagueness.
Then there are a pair of problems that are related. They're the mirror image of each other,
and they go by the name the heap and the slippery slope, and they both involve using language
that refers to making distinctions that it's hard to make precisely and so suggesting that they
can't be made at all. So for example, let's talk about the heap. If you're watching this on video,
you can tell the color of my beard. If you're stuck with the audio version, I'll tell you that it's
gray or white depending on your point of view, but 35 years ago, when I grew it, it was very dark.
Now at some point, there was a gray hair, but that didn't change the overall color of my beard.
We still referred to it as dark. Then there was another gray hair. One more hair didn't make a
difference. Another one didn't make a difference. No one hair made any difference in the color of my
beard. Therefore, how could the color have changed? That's the heap. Because we can't identify the
point of change, we say there's no change. This, by the way, was an argument strategy that was
used during the Vietnam War, when with each escalation in the number of troops, there were
official pronouncements that this is not a widening of the war or a change in our basic mission,
but somehow as we got from 16,000 to 500,000 troops, it became an American war. That's the
heap. And the slippery slope is just the opposite. It's setting off a chain of events
that you assume can't ever be stopped, a chain of consequences. And so I have students who come to
me and say, please let me into your class because if I can't get into your class, I can't fulfill
the requirements, and then I can't have this major. And if I don't have this major, I can't
graduate. And if I can't graduate, I'll have to turn down this job that's been offered to me.
And if I turn down this job, I'm going to seriously weaken my long-term income possibilities. And if I
weaken my income possibilities, it will hurt my mental health. And if I hurt my mental health,
I'm going to be more likely to be suicidal. So let me into your course or I will commit suicide.
Now that's a slippery slope. It's a set of events that is alleged to be unstoppable,
and it leads to a result that is far fetched from the point at which it starts off.
This was also widely used in official U.S. government rhetoric during much of the Cold War
under the heading of the Domino Theory. One of the sections I didn't talk about from the
Kennedy-Nixon debates involved the islands of Kimoy and Matsu off the coast of mainland China.
And the argument was that if they fell to the communists, Formosa would be next. And if Formosa
fell, then Japan. And if Japan, then the Philippines. If the Philippines, then Thailand. If Thailand,
then Malaya. And all of a sudden from the loss of these islands that were the size of postage
stamps, we would have communism surging across the Pacific Ocean and threatening all of the world.
That's the slippery slope. Now all of these errors, equivocation, ambiguity, amphiboly,
vagueness, heaps, slippery slopes, they come about from the inexactness of language,
which is a condition that's peculiar to informal argument. Language is messy.
And you might think therefore that what we ought to do is we ought to make our language at least
as precise as we can. And that's a good general rule. But not always. Sometimes imprecise language
is desirable. Why is it that diplomatic statements are often rendered in ambiguous language
to leave options open for later consideration? Why else might things be rendered ambiguously
or imprecisely to allow parties with different interests to agree on something even though
they have different reasons and different points of view? So for example, the Congress of the United
States passed a resolution apologizing for slavery prior to the Civil War. And the apology was fairly
vague because some people believed that they were personally responsible and some didn't.
Some believed that reparations should be paid and some didn't. Some believed that slavery was a
continuing blight on our landscape. Some believed that we should get over it. But they could come
together around fairly general language to express this statement of apology. So sometimes we want
language to be less precise. And when that happens, there are ways to do it. One is the euphemism,
a term that cloaks meaning in a fairly general kind of statement. If you study the history of
the American Civil War, you'll know that in the years immediately after the war, different terms
were used to refer to it. Sometimes it was called the War of Southern Rebellion, or conversely the
War of Northern Aggression by people who wanted to rub raw the wounds. But for people who wanted
to heal, it was sometimes called the War Between the States, or my favorite, the Late Unpleasantness.
Now that's an imprecise term if ever there was one, and it's deliberately chosen in order to not
reopen the controversy. Ambiguity, equivocation, vagueness, the very things I just talked about
as errors, sometimes can be used deliberately to make language less precise. So for example,
in the 1970s, when President Richard Nixon went to China, there was a communique that was issued
in Shanghai that said, everybody agrees that there is but one China, and Taiwan is part of China.
Seemingly clear, and yet ambiguous. Did that mean that mainland China would eventually encompass
Taiwan, or that the nationalist Chinese on Taiwan would eventually reconquer mainland China? Deliberately
an unanswered question. On the other hand, most of the time we want to make language more precise,
and we can do that sometimes by stipulative definitions. So a parent and child who disagree
on what it means for the child to clean up his room, the parent says, now by a clean room, I mean.
No clothes on the floor, all the things put away on the shelves, and so on. You stipulate
the operations to be performed, and you thereby make the definition more precise. Drawing analogies
to other arguments can make language more precise. So if we want to understand gender discrimination,
we say this is just like racial discrimination that we presumably understand more clearly.
Are we name or label the argument? President George H. W. Bush referred to the vision thing,
and sometimes people who wanted to criticize him talked about the vision thing argument,
referring to general goals or objectives. Okay, so we have definitions, and we have precise or
imprecise language. Figures of speech, which we think of if we studied them in English class
as ornamentation, also have argumentative implications. They affect the way an argument is
perceived. For example, consider some metaphors. During much of the Cold War, communism was talked
about as a cancer. If we understand communism as cancer, it tells us what we ought to do.
We ought to detect it early and remove it early before it gets to be fatal.
The war in Iraq has sometimes been discussed by its critics as a quagmire, and the metaphor of
quagmire suggests we're sinking deeper and deeper in, and it's going to be hard, if not impossible,
to extricate ourselves. In the last 30 years, all manner of political scandals have been referred
to with the suffix, gate. Of course, conjuring up the image of Watergate and suggesting here is an
analogy. Here is a comparison of scandals. And just a couple lectures ago, I said, think about how
the military metaphor can mislead us when we talk about attack and defense of arguments.
Figures of speech make a concept more salient. They bring it to the forefront of our consciousness.
Other figures of speech suggest a choice, as for example, antithesis. When President Kennedy
talked about not a pledge, but a request, I offer you not luxury, but sacrifice.
And metaphors can also be used to pose choices. Like the cancer metaphor, are we going to cut it out?
Or are we going to let it grow until it kills us? Figures of speech also can increase a sense of
communion between the arguer and the audience through references to common activities or
experiences. So, for example, the Quagmire metaphor in the case of Iraq, for most people over a
certain age, evokes memories of Vietnam, for which the term Quagmire was so often used.
So just like definitions and precise language, figures of speech have argumentative implications.
There's a very famous speech that illustrates a number of these ideas. It's a speech delivered
by Abraham Lincoln, when he accepted the nomination to run for the U.S. Senate against
Stephen A. Douglas. It's the House Divided Speech, in which Lincoln said a House divided
against itself cannot stand. We often misunderstand this speech. Lincoln was not predicting the
Civil War. What he was predicting was that the country would become all free or all slave,
and that it was moving in the direction of being all slave. Most people would think this
a preposterous idea. The evidence for it was flimsy. But Lincoln effectively used language
and style to support that argument. For instance, he uses the metaphor of machinery to refer to
an alleged plan to make slavery national. He says, let anyone who doubts carefully contemplate
that now almost complete legal combination, piece of machinery, so to speak, compounded of the
Nebraska doctrine and the Dred Scott decision. To suggest that this is deliberate, he refers
to the designers of this plan as its chief architects and the executors of this plan
as its chief bosses. Stephen A. Douglas's position, popular sovereignty, which Lincoln
criticizes, he talks about as scaffolding. He says, under the Dred Scott decision,
squatter sovereignty squatted out of existence, tumbled down like temporary scaffolding,
like the mold at the foundry served through one blast and fell back into loose sand.
He uses the metaphor of building a house to refer to the unfolding of the plot.
He can't prove the plot directly, so he argues it by metaphor.
When we see a lot of frame timbers, he said, different portions of which we know have been
gotten out at different times and places and by different workmen, and we see these timbers
joined together and see they exactly make the frame of a house or a mill, or if a single piece be
lacking, we see the place in the frame exactly fitted and prepared yet to bring such a piece in.
In such a case, we find it impossible not to believe that Stephen and Franklin and Roger
and James all understood one another from the beginning and all worked upon a common plan or
draft drawn up before the first blow was struck. How does he prove there's a plot?
He tells a story by metaphor and says, when you see these things happening,
it's impossible not to believe it, and the metaphor suggests these things are happening.
He uses accumulation of historical details to suggest the success of the plot so far,
and he uses a metaphor to refer to Douglas, to forestall people from defecting and voting for
Douglas. He says, a living dog is better than a dead lion. Judge Douglas, if not a dead lion for
this work, is a caged and toothless one, meaning you can't rely on Douglas if your goal is to
stop the tendency toward nationwide slavery. Well, now I've covered this speech very briefly,
but I hope you can see from these few examples how language becomes a resource in the argument,
how it helps Lincoln to develop the position that he is trying to make.
Language and style are part of the substance of the argument, not separate from it. They affect
the strategic positions and the interests of the arguers, and so our consideration of argument
strategy and tactics needs to include a focus on language and style as well.
Next time, we'll start something new.
Lecture 12 Evaluating Evidence
Hello again. For the last several lectures, our focus has been on argumentation strategies and
tactics, and we've been looking at how we take individual arguments and put them together
into larger units. We've looked at the structure of a case, and we've talked about attack and
defense. And at the end of the last lecture, I promised you that we'd now be shifting our focus
and taking up something new, and we will. Now for the next several lectures, I want us to focus on
the individual argument as our unit of analysis. This is a kind of switch, if you will, from the
macro to the micro level of analysis. And we'll talk about the parts of individual arguments
and how we determine if they're strong or if they're weak. So we'll be focusing on both argument
construction and argument appraisal. Now we've already got a head start, because if you remember
the different parts of the argument, one of them is the claim. And we've talked already about the
claim. We did so several lectures ago when we talked about types of claims and how claims get
put together and how the major claim is called the resolution. And so we'll count that as done,
and focus in this lecture on another one of the parts of the argument, which is the evidence,
the building block from which the claim is based. And to illustrate that oftentimes what arguments
depend upon is the nature of the evidence, let me just briefly remind us of some significant
controversies that took place in the early 2000s. In the fall of 2004, CBS News aired a story about
President Bush's National Guard Service and the allegation that he had been absent from duty.
And it was forced to retract this story because the story was found to be based on faulty evidence.
In the spring of 2005, Newsweek magazine published a story which it then had to retract
about the mistreatment of Muslim detainees at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba, and particularly the
allegation that the Quran had been mistreated or abused. And in the 2000 election campaign,
networks twice prematurely called the state of Florida, once for Gore and once for Bush,
in both cases before the results were conclusive, and that led to congressional investigations
and changes in the way networks report election results. Now in every one of those controversies,
the outcome of the controversy was based upon the quality of the evidence. In some cases,
the claims were never directly denied, but because the evidence was unacceptable,
the argument could not proceed. And so it's very important that we focus our attention on evidence
and that we understand what's required for evidence to be approved. Evidence, of course,
is what answers the question, how do you know or what do you have to go on when a person makes a
claim and the claim is then called into question. And just to remind ourselves of something we've
already said, the evidence needs to be agreed to by all of the participants so that it's a secure
starting point for the dispute. If it's contested, discussion of the claim stops until the adequacy
of the evidence is established. As the examples I've just cited illustrate, in each case the
controversy about the claim didn't proceed any further because acceptable evidence that people
would agree upon could not be marshaled. So settling the matter when evidence is in dispute
requires a separate argument in which the original evidence now functions as the claim to be established.
Now when we say that audiences accept the evidence as to its truth, what's required to do that?
Well, sometimes as in technical fields, like the law, there are specific rules. That is for
something to count as evidence in a court of law, it must meet certain tests. If it meets the test
we accept it as evidence, if not we exclude it. So for example, what a witness has directly observed
can be considered evidence, but what a witness has heard but not observed directly is not considered
evidence. It's hearsay and is ordinarily ruled to be inadmissible. So there are some technical
rules in particular fields, but in ordinary usage, in ordinary argument, the test is what would a
critical audience be likely to accept as true? Now when I phrase the test that way, notice what
I'm saying. An argument is delivered for a particular audience, and we may know lots of things about
that specific audience, but that's not enough. It may be that a particular audience will be swayed
by astrology or might be inclined to accept unsubstantiated claims of conspiracies and plots,
but ordinarily a critical audience would not. And so we want to set as our standard for acceptability
of evidence, what would a critical audience, an audience that's reasoning and thinking critically
be likely to accept? By the way, Speech Act philosophers have worked on this and have come
up with a very specific definition of what it means for an audience to accept evidence.
You may be interested in this if only for its specificity. Listen to this. Providing evidence
means, one, a speaker wants a hearer who does not accept a claim to do so willingly and freely.
Two, both speaker and hearer realize that there are truth conditions for this claim.
There are things that if they could be established would show the claim to be true.
Three, the speaker believes that some other statement not obvious to the hearer is such
a truth condition. Four, the speaker utters this other statement. And five, the hearer accepts it,
regards it as a truth condition for the claim, and therefore accepts the claim.
Now, you may conclude that what that establishes is that Speech Act philosophers are pretty
pedantic and focus on the obvious and maybe so. But what they've done is to spell out,
what does it mean for us to say that the evidence has got to be provided and acceptable
in order for the argument to go further? Well, let's explore this in a historical example.
And since I talked in the last lecture about Abraham Lincoln, I want to use another famous
speech of Lincoln's that is built very carefully on evidence. And that's the speech that Lincoln gave
at Cooper Union in New York in the spring of 1860. He claimed after the fact that it was this
speech that made him president. And it's certainly a very important speech. What Lincoln does in
this speech is to respond to a statement made by Stephen Douglas that the founding fathers
understood the question of slavery in the territories even better than we do now.
And so what Douglas did was to enlist popular reverence for the founding fathers and to claim
that the founding fathers really supported his position on the issue. Now, what does Lincoln do
in the Cooper Union speech? He accepts Douglas's premise that the founding fathers understood
the question better than we do. And that was a wise thing for him to do because everybody revered
the founding fathers. But then he proceeded to produce evidence that the founding fathers were
actually consistent with his position, not with Douglas's. Now, as I think I mentioned before,
this was kind of hard to do on either side because the founding fathers didn't take any position
on the question immediately at hand, one had to infer it. So what does Lincoln do in this speech?
He defines the founding fathers as the signers of the Constitution and he relies on various forms
of evidence. He uses historical documents, which are a kind of tangible object. He uses shared
historical understanding, kind of social consensus. He uses the credibility of the founders that
Douglas stipulated. He accumulates examples of specific founders and their views. And so he
cites the adoption of the Northwest Ordinance by the Articles of Confederation Congress,
the act of the first Congress under the Constitution to enforce the Northwest Ordinance.
The fact that this act was signed by George Washington, he refers to Congress's organization
of the Southwest Territory, what became Tennessee, Mississippi and Alabama,
where Congress didn't prohibit slavery, but it did regulate it. He talks about the prohibition
importing slaves into Louisiana territory. He talks about the Missouri Compromise. All of these
things illustrate congressional regulation of slavery, which Douglas said the founding fathers
opposed. So Lincoln marshals all these different kinds of evidence to add up the number of the
founding fathers and to conclude that a majority of the signers of the Constitution believed that
Congress had the power to regulate slavery, which was the position opposite to Douglas's
and opposite to Douglas's use of the founding fathers. It's a remarkable speech, remarkable
for the specificity and the range of evidence that Lincoln uses. We can get a better appreciation,
I think, for what Lincoln did if we take some time to explore the different types of evidence.
And while different theorists categorize evidence different ways, I'm going to group
evidence under the headings of examples, statistics, tangible objects, testimony,
and social consensus. So we'll have five main categories of evidence. I begin with examples.
These could include brief mention of an instance without any development of it.
It's become common in the years since President Reagan for the President of the United States,
when he delivers the State of the Union address, to have sitting in the First Lady's box one or
more special guests who will be briefly mentioned during the speech as an example of some quality
or other that the President wishes to praise. Nothing said in any detail about these people.
They are recognized, asked to stand and to receive applause and they're cited as an example.
That's a very brief mention. Or an example could be developed more elaborately as an
illustration of some point or other. Famously during the 2000 presidential debates, then Vice
President Al Gore spoke at some length about conditions in a school in Florida that was
overcrowded with the result that a student had to stand up and there weren't enough desks and
supplies and so unavailable. Now it turned out that Vice President Gore was not entirely correct
about his facts, but what he was doing is he was offering an illustration, an extended example.
And in either case, whether it's a brief mention or an extended example, what the
arguer is doing here is providing the materials from which he or she will build a generalization
to say that something is true about a category as a whole. Now one can argue about whether or
not the examples support the generalization and we'll see in the very next lecture, in fact,
how we do that. But the truth of the examples themselves has to be accepted before that argument
can take place. If the examples are not considered true, then we have to have a separate argument
to bear out their truth for them to be able to serve as evidence. So examples are one very common
type of evidence. Another type of evidence we see quite often is statistics. And there are
all sorts of kinds of statistics. And if this were a course on statistics, we'd cover them in much
more detail. But let me just highlight some of the different ways that statistics can serve as
evidence. The most simple statistics are raw numbers. There have been two father-son pairs of
U.S. presidents as of 2007, for example. Or over 1700 U.S. soldiers died in Iraq as of mid-2005.
Raw numbers that nothing has been done to. That's the simplest kind of statistic.
Percentages, ratios, index numbers are statistics that have been refined a bit by analysis.
So 55% of baby boomers are planning to retire before they reach the normal retirement age,
a percentage. The ratio of women to men in nursing schools is eight to one.
A ratio that tells us for every one of one category, we have eight of another. Or if the price of
gasoline in 1993 was 100, it would be 240 now. That's an index where numbers are placed against
a standard which is usually set to be 100. And what those all do beyond simply reporting raw
numbers is they give the numbers some meaning by putting them in context. So a percentage says
out of 100, we have this. A ratio says here's how the categories compare and so on.
Other kinds of statistics include the measures of central tendency, of which the famous ones are
the mean, the median, and the mode. So if we say the average price of a new home is $425,000,
if we mean by that the mean price, we would take all the homes in the country that were sold
and add up the sale prices, divide them by the number of homes, and we'd get that number 425,000.
If we said 425,000 was the median price, we mean that it's the one in the middle. Half of the home
sold cost more, half of the home sold cost less. And if we say it's the modal price, we mean it's
the most often cited price. So more homes sold for 425,000 than for any other price.
Another kind of statistical measure is the rate of change. The city of Las Vegas is gaining
20,000 new people per day. That's a rate of change. Our probability statements, including the outcomes
of controlled experiments and studies, these results are significant at the .05 level, meaning
that if we did this experiment over and over again, 95% of the time we would not get this result
just by chance. Now each one of these statistical forms is subject to tests for its accuracy,
because in order for statistics to function as evidence, the truth of the statistics must be
accepted. And of course it's an old adage that you can prove anything you want to with statistics
depending upon how you contextualize the statistics and what statistics you use. So they're
accuracy needs to be established for the purposes of their serving as evidence in an argument.
So we have examples and we have statistics as types of evidence. Another form of evidence
is tangible objects, actual things, or pictures of the actual things. These figure prominently
as evidence in criminal law. For example, it's very important in a murder trial to be able to
find the murder weapon. And if the murder weapon can't be discovered, then there's an important
piece that's missing in the chain of evidence that has to be established in order to make a case
for a conviction. In the mid-1990s in the O.J. Simpson murder trial, for example, one key question
was, there was a glove found on the scene. Did it fit Mr. Simpson or not? So the glove was tangible
a tangible object that functioned as evidence to support or to oppose the claim that O.J. Simpson
likely committed the act for which he had been charged. Sometimes the tangible object is important
historically, as in the discovery of particular artifacts. And they need not be ancient artifacts.
In the 1940s, in the Alger Hiss case, the case that made Richard Nixon famous, the case turned on
the existence of some microfilm papers and the microfilms were found in a hollowed out pumpkin
on a farm in Maryland, right where a key witness had said they would be. And so the availability
of those microfilms was very important as a tangible object. The significance of tangible
object is probably captured in the adage that a picture is worth a thousand words. And this may
be why, to refer back to Colin Powell's speech before the UN Security Council, Secretary Powell
showed so many photographs and videos as part of his presentation and at one point in a now
controversial move held up a vial which he claimed represented the uranium that Iraq was trying to
obtain in Africa. Sometimes, however, even words will be tangible objects, as in the example of a
historical document. So the U.S. Constitution could be cited as a specific document or legal
contracts could be cited or any kind of agreement or letters or diaries. These are tangible objects
that exist in documentary form. All right, so far then we have examples, statistics, tangible
objects. And in each case, the truth of the evidence itself has to be accepted in order for
the argument to proceed. And when I mentioned Lincoln at Cooper Union, hopefully we can see
already how Lincoln used several different kinds of evidence. He used examples. He counted up the
number of founders, a particular case of statistics, simple case of statistics, and he used tangible
objects. He used documents. Another kind of evidence, fourth kind I want to mention, is testimony
of fact or of opinion. We rely on testimony a lot because there are lots of things that for each of
us we can't know directly. And we're not qualified to have a reliable opinion. And so we rely on the
judgment of people who are in a position to know directly and who do have a reliable opinion.
We accept testimony because of the credibility of the source. Aristotle wrote about what he called
ethos, by which he meant the apparent character of a person, not necessarily the person's real
true inner character, but the judgments that someone else makes about the character of the person.
If you judge me to be a trustworthy person, whether I am or not, then my ethos is positive
as far as your concern. You've made a positive judgment about my character.
Ethos or credibility has been shown through research to be composed of judgments about
competence. Do I know what I'm talking about? Trustworthiness or goodwill. Am I positively
disposed toward you? And dynamism. Do I seem to be energetic in what I'm saying? Those are all
factors that will lead people to judge me as being a credible source. Credibility can be
established either for oneself or one could derive credibility by using credible sources.
So for instance, eyewitness access to information will make one a credible source in a courtroom.
If I saw it happen, I'll be more credible than if I didn't. Background and training
will make one a credible source. So for example, every four years when there are presidential
debates, I get called up by the news media for my opinion and I enjoy my 15 minutes of fame.
Why do I get called? Because somebody believes that I've got background and expertise in the
evaluation of arguments that would be pertinent to the presidential debates. A good track record
will make a person a credible source. So for instance, for much of the 1990s and into the
early 2000s, Alan Greenspan was regarded as a credible source on what the Federal Reserve was
up to and what the economy would do because for a long period of time, he had a good track record
of calling things right and making good judgments. All of these are things that will make a person
be perceived to be a more credible source. And so I can rely on my own credibility or I can cite
sources that have been established to be credible in offering testimony. Now we have to be careful
though because there also are factors that could call a person's credibility or ethos into doubt
and would then require a separate argument to establish the evidence. For instance,
is the person an authority on the subject about which he or she speaks? Entertainment and sports
celebrities often speak out for example on political questions. They may not have any expertise or
any special authority on those topics. Is there a clear basis on which the person reached the
conclusion? Or is he or she just mouthing off a personal preference without anything to back it up?
Does the person have a bias or vested interest? Is there a reason for the person to express a
particular opinion because it will benefit him or her to do that? We call that eager evidence if
a person stands to gain from something that he or she says. And if the person stands to lose
by making a statement and makes the statement anyway, we call that reluctant evidence and
regarded as more credible because it's in opposition to the person's own self-interest.
And a final question to ask, do credible sources disagree? Is the person whose testimony is being
quoted representative? Or is he or she the outlier among equally credible sources?
So we want to be sure. We want to be sure that we have a credible source because testimony
relies on the credibility of the source. And if we're not sure, then we raise these tests and
we have another argument to establish credibility in order that it may serve as evidence.
Those are four of the categories of evidence. The one remaining one I have called social
consensus. And by that I mean things that are so generally believed that an audience treats them
as if they were facts. Just as good as facts for that particular audience. Even though the beliefs
may turn out later not to have been well founded, at the time they function as if they were facts.
For instance, common knowledge is a type of social consensus, things that everybody believes to be
true. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the belief that politicians manipulate budget numbers
could be called a piece of common knowledge. All of the disputes about first the budget deficit
and then the budget surplus and then the budget deficit again, which was real, what should be
done with them, it was commonly accepted that these numbers were manipulated to serve political
purposes. Or another kind of social consensus, shared value judgments. Most people and certainly
most critical audiences would place a high priority on what would be good for children,
particularly their own children. What would benefit the next generation? And so we find
public figures of all political persuasions claiming that what they want is, in a famous
slogan, to leave no child behind. And to emphasize a priority for children, valuing children as a
kind of social consensus. Shared historical understandings are another type of social
consensus. For example, in the United States, it is widely believed that the United States
won the Cold War by the late 1980s. It is widely believed that the civil rights movement made great
gains during the 1960s. And these widely shared historical understandings focus as a kind of
social consensus. Conclusions that have been established already in an argument can be considered
an item of social consensus. And they can be used as if they were facts because the audience has
already agreed to them. They've already been established as a result of a previous argument.
And then finally, in the particular discussion, things can be stipulated when we say,
let's assume for the sake of argument, that phrase for the sake of argument is saying,
we're going to stipulate for this particular discussion that something or other is true.
And then in this discussion, it will focus, it will function as an example of social consensus.
Now, if there are differences in core values or common knowledge, they'll need to be resolved
before social consensus can be accepted as evidence.
I want to clue you in on one thing. I've said in all of these examples of what counts as evidence
that our standard is what a critical audience would accept. And that's a good normative standard.
But we should note that actual audiences often have looser standards. Judgments of the quality
of the evidence are affected by whether one agrees with the claim. They're affected by a
speaker's delivery. They're affected by whether the source is familiar. Evidence is most influential
when an audience is unfamiliar with the subject matter. And when the goal is sustained attitude
change over time. Now, what do we make of the fact that there's a discrepancy between what people
accept as evidence and the standards that we suggest? It doesn't mean we should abandon our
standards because we want to improve the quality of argument. When we examine arguments and when
we construct them, we'll try to reach a higher standard. So we've talked now about claims and
about evidence. In the next lecture, we'll begin to talk about inferences and warrants.
