These lectures are part of the Great Courses series they are produced by the teaching company.
These lectures are titled, Argumentation, The Study of Effective Reasoning, Part 2.
Lecture 13, Reasoning from Parts to Whole.
Welcome back. In the last lecture we began to consider the composition of individual arguments
so that we can both improve our ability to build arguments
and improve our ability to appraise them when we see them.
We spent the last lecture talking in detail about evidence, one lecture on that.
Earlier we had spent less than a lecture talking about claims
and now I'm going to slow down the pace and for the next several lectures
we'll be looking at specific types of inferences and the warrants that support them.
We're going to spend so much time on this topic because it's particularly important.
Arguments are often characterized according to their patterns of inference and warrant
and it's the inference and warrant that sometimes control the nature of the argument.
In fact there are some textbooks that instead of calling them warrants
call them argument schemes because they're really schemes for the whole layout of the argument
and for its function.
So we'll be able to explore the major forms of inference and warrant.
Remember that inferences show that the evidence is a basis for the claim.
They link the evidence to the claim and they do so because they're justified by a warrant.
But the link is almost never established with certainty only with some degree of probability.
Consequently when we study warrants we need to examine two aspects of every warrant.
We need to know first of all in any given argument what the warrant is and how it works
and then second we need to know some of the tests to determine whether in the particular instance
it's a strong warrant whether it gives us good reason to draw the conclusion on the basis of the evidence.
Now just a quick word on the terms inference and warrant.
They're sometimes used almost interchangeably.
In any given argument the inference is you can go from here to here.
On the basis of the evidence you can make the claim.
What distinguishes inferences is the warrant that supports them.
The reason that we can go from here to here.
And so sometimes we use the word warrant to refer to both the warrant and the inference
and sometimes we use the terms separately.
We will examine six major inferential patterns.
Six major types of warrants.
Example, analogy, sign, cause, common places and form.
And we'll also consider some hybrid patterns that combine some of these.
And I want to begin in this lecture with inferences and warrants from example.
Now last time we talked about example as a kind of evidence, a specific instance of something.
But example is also a type of warrant supporting a particular type of inference.
And these are inferences that link parts and holes.
So that's the subject of this lecture, reasoning from parts to holes and from holes to parts.
Before I get into the details of the analysis.
Let's consider a very famous historical example in which this kind of reasoning was used.
It's an unusual example because it's not primarily an argument.
It's primarily a ceremonial speech that was delivered by President Franklin Roosevelt
to a joint session of Congress seeking a declaration of war against Japan following the attack on Pearl Harbor.
As I said, there's not too much argument in there.
And yet in the middle of the speech, there's a very clear example of the warrant from example.
President Roosevelt said,
The attack yesterday on the Hawaiian islands has caused severe damage to American naval and military forces.
In addition, American ships have been reported torpedoed on the high seas between San Francisco and Hawaii.
Yesterday, the Japanese government also launched an attack against Malaya.
Last night, Japanese forces attacked Hong Kong.
Last night, Japanese forces attacked Guam.
Last night, Japanese forces attacked the Philippine islands.
Last night, the Japanese attacked Wake Island.
And this morning, the Japanese attacked Midway Island.
Japan has therefore undertaken a surprise offensive extending throughout the Pacific area.
Now look what's going on in this fairly simple example.
The evidence is a listing of the many cases of Japan's simultaneous attacks on different nations or their possessions.
The claim that the President is advancing is that Japan has undertaken a surprise offensive throughout the Pacific area.
The inference is that what's true of the part, what's true of the Philippine islands and Wake Islands and Guam and Malaya,
what's true of the part is true of the whole.
And the underlying warrant is that the examples are representative of Japan's intentions for war.
And so by putting together this string of examples,
what the President is able to argue is that the attack on Pearl Harbor is not isolated, it's not accidental,
it's part of an overall concerted strategy.
So there's a very clear case where we can see a reasoning process that goes from part to whole.
The warrant that undergirds this inference in President Roosevelt's example is that the part is basically like the whole.
Sometimes the warrant is that the whole is basically like the part.
So depending on which way we're going, what the warrant is telling us is either one,
we can accept what's true about the part as probably true about the whole,
so that we can move from a specific statement in the evidence to a general claim,
or two, we can accept what's true about the whole as being also true about the part.
This enables us to move from a general piece of evidence to a very specific claim,
so we can proceed either from general to specific or from specific to general.
Now if you remember back in lecture three, I said that people often think that the difference between deduction and induction
is whether we move from general to specific or specific to general.
I said most people believe that, but it's not right.
I said either movement could be deductive or inductive, and I promised later on that I would show you why.
Well this is the lecture in which the time has come.
Let's explore these patterns of inference and see how either movement from specific to general or general to specific
could be either inductive or deductive, both of these movements are inferences from example.
So let's start with the pattern that goes from specific to general.
This is the pattern that we call generalization.
It uses the inference from example to derive a general statement from specific cases,
and the warrant is that what's true of the part is probably true of the whole.
Let's take an actual situation to work with here.
I suspect you can relate to it and it's actually happened to me.
I've occasionally received emails or letters from people who've watched or listened to lectures in a series that I've done with the teaching company.
When I received one of these emails I said, you know, the person who sent me this email is asking a really intelligent question.
Then I got another one a few days later.
I said this person asked a really good question too.
Same thing happened a few days later.
So I concluded that customers of the teaching company ask intelligent questions.
Now remember we're not focused at the moment on the truth of these statements although I'm sure they're true, but notice what I did.
I had about three or four instances in which I received a response that asked an intelligent question,
and I moved from those specifics, from person A, person B, person C, person D,
to a general claim, customers of the teaching company ask intelligent questions.
I went from specific to general and my warrant was that what was true of the part was probably true of the whole.
What's true of the four people who sent me emails is probably true of customers of the teaching company generally.
Now that's a good example of a generalization.
Now let's look at the kind of inference I made in doing that.
I told you that I went from four specific examples to a claim that applied to thousands and thousands of people to all of the customers out there.
Now suppose for a minute that I had done something differently.
Suppose I had received an email from each and every customer, from all of them.
I said this one asked a very intelligent question, and this one did, and this one did,
and so on through the thousands of emails, every single customer.
Then I conclude customers of the teaching company ask intelligent questions.
Now in that case, has my conclusion added any new information?
No, because if I covered each and every one individually, then when I say they're all asking intelligent questions, I'm not saying anything new.
And what's more, my conclusion, my claim is certainly true.
If every one of my evidence statements is true, there's no way the claim could be false.
Well guess what? That's the definition of deduction.
The conclusion follows with certainty, and it adds no new information, even though it went from specific to general.
But of course, that's a highly unrealistic scenario.
It's unlikely that every one of the thousands of customers would send me an email or that I could read them all.
And usually, when we make generalizations, it's unrealistic to assume that every member of the category has been covered.
Why? Because the categories often are very large.
Thousands of customers, millions of taxpayers, billions of pieces of paper, and so on.
So what we customarily do is we incompletely enumerate members of the category, as I did earlier when I had only four examples.
I have four people who sent me emails, and I draw a conclusion about people who didn't send me emails.
The enumeration is incomplete.
Well now, the conclusion does have new information.
It suggests that the people who didn't send me emails are basically like the people who did.
It's not restricted to the four people who wrote to me.
As a result, it doesn't follow automatically anymore.
And that's the definition of induction.
The conclusion contains new information, and it follows not automatically, but only with some degree of probability.
So look what we've seen.
If the enumeration of the specific cases is complete, then the conclusion follows deductively.
But that's unlikely.
Usually, the enumeration is incomplete, and the conclusion follows inductively, only with some degree of probability.
And what enables us to reach the conclusion is the warrant that the part is like the whole.
Now this is a very common reasoning pattern.
I buy three cars of the same make, and I have trouble with all of them, and I conclude cars of that make are lemons.
Or you might see a few of your children's teenage friends with poor posture, and conclude teenagers today just don't have good posture.
Or I might have the experience of looping around four badly designed voicemail systems in which I can never get my question answered and get back to the main menu,
and I conclude voicemail technology is impersonal and ineffective.
These are all examples of reasoning from part to whole, from a specific case to a general statement.
These generalizations usually follow one or the other of two patterns.
One is a statistical generalization, and the other is an anecdotal generalization.
When we say, for example, 52% of a sample of a thousand people say they'll vote for a particular candidate,
and then claim that 52% of the voters in the country will probably vote for that candidate, we've made a statistical generalization.
We've said that the same ratio, the same percentage that's true of a defined sample is probably true of a larger universe.
We make an anecdotal generalization when we cite several specific instances, and then we draw a conclusion about the entire category.
So we say in one school district there are not enough textbooks, in another one there aren't enough desks for people to sit down in class,
and in another one there's a big teacher shortage, and we conclude there's significant underfunding of education in the country.
We've taken some specific instances and then drawn a conclusion about a broader category.
So we've got statistical generalizations and anecdotal generalizations.
Now since these do not follow with certainty, they're subject to specific tests.
For the statistical generalization, we want to know that the sample was big enough, that it was appropriately selected,
and that it's representative of the larger population, so that we can confidently say that what's true of the part is probably true of the whole.
And for the anecdotal generalization, we want to know that there are enough examples, that there's a diverse enough range,
that there aren't significant counter examples, and again that the examples are representative of the total population.
Now when I say representative in both of these cases, I mean simply, is the sample like the larger population in all essential respects?
There's a very famous story of what happened in the case of an unrepresentative sample.
It occurred in the 1936 presidential election when the literary digest, then a very popular magazine, did a telephone and mail-in survey of its subscribers,
and concluded that Governor Alfred Landon of Kansas would overwhelmingly defeat President Franklin D. Roosevelt in his bid for reelection.
Of course, as you remember from your history, Alfred Landon carried Maine and Vermont, and that was it.
Where did the literary digest go wrong?
Well, it turned out that literary digest subscribers were far more affluent than the general population,
and in the middle of the Depression, people who had telephones were more affluent than the general population,
and people who were more affluent were much more likely to vote Republican.
So it turned out that the literary digest had an unrepresentative sample. It was a heavily Republican sample.
By the way, the damage that this did to the literary digest reputation eventually caused the magazine to fold,
so using an unrepresentative sample can have serious consequences.
In addition to sample size and representativeness, there's one more test of a generalization,
and that is it should be tested for what's called the fallacy of composition.
The fallacy of composition consists in assuming that what is true of each of the parts individually
is necessarily true of all of the parts collectively when they make up a whole.
Consider the following.
Take any country you want. For a given country, it might have a strong motive to try to develop chemical and biological weapons.
Why? Because if that country did so, then it would have a potent weapon,
and the threat to use that weapon could give it a dominant position in world politics.
But what if every country tried to develop chemical and biological weapons?
Now the odds are far greater that the world would be destroyed than that any given country could be dominant.
That's, I presume, why we have treaties to regulate or limit or outlaw chemical and biological weapons.
What is true of the part the development of these weapons would lead to domination of world politics is not true of the whole.
What's true if one country did it is not true if every country did it.
So we wouldn't want to argue that every country ought to do what anyone individually might want to do.
You'd be surprised how often generalizations run into precisely this problem, the fallacy of composition.
Those then are generalizations, cases where we reason from the part to the whole.
Sometimes we go in the other direction. We reason from the whole to the part.
We start with a general principle and we derive a specific application, and these are called classifications.
The warrant is that what is true of the whole is probably true of the part.
Now if the general principle were itself the result of a complete enumeration,
then the reasoning from general to specific would be deductive.
The conclusion would follow with certainty.
Let's go back to my example of the teaching company customers.
If my statement, teaching company customers ask intelligent questions, was derived by surveying each and every customer,
then my conclusion, customer X asks intelligent questions would follow automatically.
Because after all, customer X is included in my general statement that would function as the evidence.
So it would follow automatically and it would tell me nothing new because I knew that to start with.
All teaching company customers ask intelligent questions, so of course I would know that customer X asks intelligent questions.
So it would be deductive, it would follow automatically.
But as I said before, that is seldom the case.
And because it's seldom the case, the warrant, as with generalization, is that the examples are representative of the whole,
so that the whole is basically like the part.
Suppose that my evidence is the result of an incomplete enumeration.
Teaching company customers generally ask intelligent questions.
Now I've gone beyond the evidence when I talk about customer X.
Because customer X wasn't necessarily included in the sample from which I drew that generalization.
Customer X may or may not have been, I don't know.
So I'm taking something that applies to people in general, not necessarily to each and every person, but to people in general.
And I'm applying that statement to a particular person, customer X.
Well, you know, it might be that customer X is your highly atypical exceptional teaching company customer who doesn't ask intelligent questions.
So my claim about customer X could be false, even though my evidence, a general statement about teaching company customers, is true.
Well now look, we went from general to specific.
But we have an inductive inference, because the conclusion doesn't follow automatically, and it contains new information.
So just as we saw a few minutes ago, that specific to general could be either inductive or deductive, now we see that general to specific also could be either one.
And in fact, general to specific is often inductive, and it's inductive for precisely the same reason that we saw before.
It's very difficult to establish the general statement that we start with with any degree of certainty, because the categories that we're talking about typically are very large.
And so what we do when we use classifications is, we take a statement that applies in general to most of the category that we're talking about, and we infer that it probably applies to the particular case about which we want to reach a conclusion.
Now why is it worth exploring, as we've done, how either one of these could be either deductive or inductive?
Let me explain.
If we think that inferences from general to specific are always deductive, we won't test those inferences very carefully.
We'll assume that they follow with certainty, and we won't ask the questions about representativeness, sample size, whether the person is in the right category, and so on, that we really need to know in order to know whether we're misusing the particular general statement or using it properly.
Conversely, if we have a complete enumeration, even though we go from specific to general, we'll have a deductive inference, and we might not need to subject it to the tests that we would appropriately apply if the inferences were inductive.
So that's why it's important to realize that either one could go either way.
Now back to classifications, back to these movements from general to specific.
The effect of classification is to make an abstract or general statement more concrete, to make a statement that applies overall to a category and apply it to a particular concrete example of that category.
And doing that makes it more salient, more important to the person for whom we're making the statement. It brings it, if you will, to the forefront of consciousness.
That's just the reverse of generalization, which takes local examples that are probably much more familiar to the person, and then abstracts from those local examples to make a general statement.
Classification makes an abstract or general statement more complete.
A general statement that most people's retirement financing is uncertain, for example, is made much more salient to an audience, particularly if I'm a financial planner and the audience is a group of people approaching retirement age.
If I infer from most people's retirement planning is uncertain to, you may think you're all set up for retirement, but your retirement financing is probably uncertain.
I've taken the general statement and I've given it much more force, much more salience, much more compellingness by applying it to the particular case.
If I say most people's retirement financing is uncertain, so yours probably is, I'm likely to get your attention and get you to focus on the argument that I am trying to develop.
Like generalizations, classifications are subject to tests, and we employ these tests in order to find out whether we've got a really strong warrant or an inference or not.
And here are the tests.
First of all, does the particular member really belong in the general class?
Is the person that I'm applying this generalization to really a member of the category that's covered by the argument?
Is person X really a customer of the teaching company so that person X would be covered by a statement about customers in general?
Second, is there a reason to think that the particular member is an exceptional case, an atypical case?
Is there a reason to think that customer X might be that atypical exceptional customer who doesn't ask especially intelligent questions so that the general principle, even though it's true in general, might not apply to the particular case?
So those are two of the tests that we employ for classification.
And then there's a third, and it's the flip side of the fallacy of composition.
Remember I said just a few minutes ago, the fallacy of composition assumes that what's true of each of the parts individually is true of all of the parts collectively.
Well, the fallacy of division is just the reverse.
It's assuming that what's true of all of the parts collectively is necessarily true of each of the parts individually.
Let's imagine that I have a friend who owns a piece of property that's a quarter of a city block, and he wants to find out what his property is worth but he doesn't want to pay to have it appraised.
Well, as it happens, a grocery store chain comes in and offers to buy up the entire city block for $2 million.
Well, one of the owners doesn't sell so the whole deal falls through.
But my friend says, guess what?
I found out what my property is worth.
The city block is worth $2 million.
That's what the grocery store would pay for it.
I own a quarter of it, so my property is worth half a million dollars and I didn't have to get it appraised.
But hold on.
That city block may be worth $2 million if but only if you could get the whole block.
Because then you could put up the grocery store having zoned it commercial and you could make a profit.
Just because the whole is worth $2 million, it doesn't follow automatically that each of the parts is worth a proportionate share of that.
What's true of all of the parts collectively is not necessarily true of each part individually.
That's the fallacy of division.
So let's review what we've said about inferences and warrants from example.
It's based on a warrant that relates parts and holes.
It can go either way.
The warrant can be the part is like the whole, generalization, or the whole is like the part.
Classification.
Either could be deductive or inductive, but usually both are inductive and thus subject to tests about sample size and appropriateness,
representativeness, the fallacy of composition, and the fallacy of division.
In the next lecture, we'll look at another common pattern of inferences and warrants that involves analogies and comparisons.
Lecture 14, Reasoning with Comparisons
Hello again.
We're continuing our discussion of individual patterns of inferences and warrants,
and we're doing so because these dictate the argument schemes that enable us to organize many informal arguments.
In the last lecture, we focused on warrants and inferences from example,
the kind that link parts and holes together,
and we showed that we can either reason from part to hole or hole to part,
and that either could be inductive or deductive.
Now I want to turn our attention to warrants and inferences that are based in analogies,
and these involve comparisons and resemblances.
Things are understood to be similar in certain respects, that's the evidence,
and they're predicted, therefore, to be similar in other respects, that's the claim,
and the inference that links the two is supported by a warrant that says that things that are basically alike
will probably be alike in the respect that's under discussion.
Now for this inference to be deductive, for the conclusion to follow certainly,
the items being compared would need to be exactly the same, but they aren't.
No two things are exactly the same.
The items that are being compared are not identical, they're similar.
They may be highly similar, but they're similar, not identical.
Therefore there's always an inferential leap when we say that things that are alike in this respect
will be alike in that respect, and so the inference that's involved is always inductive.
It follows with a certain degree of probability, and we want to test carefully to see if it follows in a given case
and it contains new information.
When we talk about analogies, there are basically two types of analogies, literal and figurative,
and I think probably the easiest way for us to talk about them is in that order.
So literal analogies are direct comparisons of objects, events, situations, places, and so on.
The items that are being compared are in the same sphere of reality,
by which I mean simply we think about them as being in the same general category,
and the inference is that the items are like each other in some particular respect.
The warrant says if they're alike in most basic respects, then they will be alike in the respect that's under discussion.
So for instance, we might compare the cities of Houston and Phoenix,
and we'd say these cities are basically alike in a lot of important respects.
They're both Sunbelt cities. They both grew dramatically in population over the last 50 years.
They're both geographically spread out. They both depend heavily upon the automobile
with very little use of mass transportation.
They both have a culturally diverse population with a significant number of recent immigrants and non-English speakers.
So they're alike in a lot of respects.
And now we say in Phoenix there was a particular approach to public education that worked successfully
and resulted in increased student achievement, particularly by minority students.
And so we say if this program were tried in Houston, it would probably work there too.
Because after all, Houston and Phoenix are basically alike and it worked in Phoenix.
See what we've done in this example?
We've taken two things that are in the same sphere of reality, in this case two large cities,
and we've said that these cities are basically alike in lots of different respects,
and we've concluded therefore that they're probably alike in the respect with which we're concerned,
namely programs that work in public education to improve student achievement, especially minority students.
That's an example of a literal analogy.
It compares two things that are in the same basic category.
It says they're alike in a lot of respects, so they'll probably be alike in this respect.
Now we use literal analogies all the time.
We use them to suggest that one case is parallel to another case.
We use them to set precedents.
We say we've got a situation where something has worked and so it'll probably work in this new situation.
We use them not only in public speeches or formal occasions, but we often use them informally as well.
A lot of arguments that take place within families, for example, will employ literal analogies.
A teenager wants a certain privilege and says,
well my friend Susie is able to do so and so, whatever it happens to be.
And the assumption the teenager is making is that she and Susie are basically alike in lots of different respects.
They have similar life experiences.
They reflect the same culture.
They come from similar kinds of families, similar upbringing, so they ought to be alike in this particular respect.
And if Susie has this particular privilege, whatever it is, then I should have it too.
That's a literal analogy, fairly straightforward and easy to grasp.
They're often used to reason from presumably similar historical situations.
So that we use literal analogies to take guidance from the past.
And there are lots and lots of cases that we could come up with with very little difficulty.
At the very beginning of United States partisan politics in the 1790s,
there was intense dispute about whether the United States ought to develop basically like England or basically like France.
And the advocates of the then competing factions would each point to one or the other of those countries
as the precedent, the kind of model that the new United States government ought to follow.
In 1861, the southern states that seceded from the Union believed that they were doing exactly the same thing
that the 13 colonies had done in 1776 when they declared their independence from Britain.
And what they said was, this situation is basically like that one, just as the colonies in effect seceded from Britain,
so the disaffected southern states will secede from the United States.
And of course, the counter argument was to suggest that these were not like situations at all.
But the point is the advocates for secession were invoking this literal analogy,
saying one historical moment is like another historical moment.
More recently, in the last 50, 60 years, we found this kind of literal analogy used very often
so that critics of the war in Iraq in the early 2000s frequently compared that war to Vietnam.
They referred to it as Vietnam revisited.
And their argument was that just as the United States got bogged down in Vietnam
and ultimately had to leave without seeing a victorious result,
the same thing is going to happen in Iraq because Iraq is basically like Vietnam.
At the time of the Vietnam War, supporters of that war suggested that Vietnam was like Berlin in 1948,
that just as communist forces had threatened Berlin until the Berlin Airlift demonstrated the resolve of the western powers not to yield,
so now communist forces were threatening Vietnam and so in the same way,
the western powers would need to demonstrate their resolve not to abandon that country.
First of the Cold War, the prospect of negotiating with the Soviet Union with our adversary was seen as a repetition of Munich in 1938
when Neville Chamberlain decided that the easiest way to forestall the Nazi advance was to appease Adolf Hitler and make some token concessions.
Munich, of course, carried a stigma for years thereafter because it didn't prevent war
and if anything, some historians argued it enabled Hitler to miscalculate the will and the resolve of the western democracies
and thus made war more likely and so negotiations were seen like Munich.
In the late 1940s, Stalin was seen as being like Hitler.
In the early 2000s, any case of terrorism anywhere was seen as a recurrence of September 11th, 2001 and for opponents of abortion.
Abortion was seen as basically like slavery.
Just as slaves at one time were not recognized as legal persons, so fetuses are not recognized as legal persons,
but just as the public consciousness on slavery eventually changed, so these critics reasoned public consciousness on abortion eventually will change
and just as the Dred Scott decision was effectively overturned, so they reasoned, so will Roe vs. Wade.
Well, if nothing else, this litany of cases should suggest to us that reasoning from literal analogy is a very common reasoning pattern
and it's easy to see why.
One of the things that we know about how our minds work and how people are persuaded and how attitudes are changed
is that we're persuaded by resemblances between something that is new and something that we already know and understand
so that if the new can be assimilated to the old and shown to be basically like it, we are much more likely to accept what's new than if that were not the case.
So that's the literal analogy.
Now before we look at the other kind of analogy, I want to comment on two specialized cases of the literal analogy that we may want to zero in and focus a little bit more intently on.
One of these is the judicial analogy that like cases should be treated alike.
As you might guess, the judicial analogy is frequently used in law when advocates argue that a case should be decided in the same way as a precedent case
and the fact that courts tend to reason in this fashion helps to explain why there's a consistency to court decisions
and why courts are not frequently overturning their own decisions.
For instance, a few minutes ago I mentioned the case of Roe v. Wade.
It may be worth reminding ourselves whatever we think about that case, how it came about.
In 1965, the Supreme Court heard a case called Griswold v. Connecticut in which the Supreme Court established that there was implicit in the Constitution
and in several of the amendments of the Bill of Rights a right to privacy.
And that right of privacy protected communication between married couples.
The particulars in the case involved the use of contraceptives.
But the point was that the case of Griswold v. Connecticut established a right to privacy.
And then what the case of Roe v. Wade did when that came along is it applied the precedent from Griswold v. Connecticut.
It said if there is such a thing as a right to privacy, which we've established that there is, then this right to privacy certainly applies to one of the most private decisions that anybody needs to make
and that's the decision whether or not to terminate a pregnancy.
And so Roe v. Wade was decided on right to privacy grounds and it focused primarily on the privacy of communication between a woman and her doctor.
So what's being done here is to apply a precedent case to a new case and that's the judicial analogy.
Sometimes the judicial analogy is used not just in court but as a general rule of conduct arguing that like situations should be treated alike and the way one acts in one case should govern the way one acts in a similar case.
It's called the rule of justice.
So let's suppose that the CEO of a company announces that he or she is going to fire and prosecute any employee who is found to be embezzling.
And along comes an employee who's been found to be embezzling and that person is indeed fired and prosecuted.
And then a little while later another employee is found to be embezzling except this time the employee is the boss's son.
Well the rule of justice says like cases should be treated alike as the CEO did in the first case of firing and prosecuting the person for embezzling so the CEO should do even when the alleged embezzler is the boss's son.
So that's the judicial analogy and it's a particular application of a literal analogy.
The other particular application that I want to mention is a form of argument that we've encountered before in a slightly different context and that is the argument of for sure.
The argument that compares more and less.
You may remember when we talked about refutation I suggested that it's a general means of refutation that's available to either attacker or defender of an argument.
But let's zero in on that argument and see what it's actually doing.
It suggests that what is true of the lesser is even more true of the greater or vice versa.
For example, if a business insists upon accounting for missing office supplies then all the more should it insist on accounting for missing amounts of cash.
What it will do in the lesser case, office supplies, it ought even more to do in the greater case than is the case of large amounts of cash.
Or if US senators are willing to filibuster against nominees for lower court appointments all the more will they be willing to filibuster against Supreme Court nominees where the stakes are higher.
So what's true of the lesser will even more be true of the greater.
And as I said, sometimes this argument is used the other way around.
For instance, what's false for the greater is even more likely to be false for the lesser.
If I'm not going to pay for an extended warranty for my car, even less will I be likely to pay for an extended warranty for my cell phone.
If I don't think it's worth it to protect this really expensive piece of property, all the less will I think it's worth it to protect a much less valuable piece of property.
Or if I'm willing to sell my house without a lawyer, all the more will I be willing to sell my timeshare without a lawyer being present.
So you see how the argument of forciori works.
This kind of argument is sometimes called a super analogy because look at what it's saying.
It's not saying that one situation is basically like the other one.
It's saying one situation is even more so or even less so than the other one.
And so what applies in the one case will apply with greater force in the other or what doesn't apply in one will apply even less in the other.
So we have the judicial analogy and the argument of forciori as special cases of literal analogies, direct comparisons between things, events, situations, people, and so on.
Now you'll recall I said there were two kinds of analogy and we've been talking so far about literal analogy and its variations.
The other kind is a figurative analogy.
This is a comparison not between things themselves but between relationships between objects, events, places, situations, and so on.
The items compared are not in the same sphere of reality.
They're not in the same category.
They're in different categories and they're brought together for the moment by the figurative analogy.
Let's take a simple example.
Responding to concerns in the early 2000s that there were impending shortages in the Social Security Trust Fund, one of the suggestions that was advanced was that some or all of social security ought to be privatized.
That is, people ought to be able to take a part of their social security benefits and invest them privately in order if they were lucky to derive a higher rate of return.
Some critics thought that this was far too drastic a remedy for the real problems in the Social Security Trust Fund.
And they would say, well that's like using a machine gun to kill a mosquito or burning down a barn to kill the rats.
Now, look what's happening here.
The things being compared are not at all in the same category.
We don't think of Social Security and its Trust Fund together with machine guns and mosquitoes or burning down a barn and killing rats.
The comparison is the relationship between them.
The relationship between privatization and the problems of Social Security is like the relationship between the machine gun and the annoyance of the mosquito.
In both cases, the remedy is far disproportionate to the problem.
And that's what the argument is really trying to suggest by bringing together these two very different things and comparing the relationships between them.
The form of a figurative analogy is easy to describe.
A is to B as C is to D.
Now notice it's not A and C that are being compared or B and D that are being compared.
We're saying the relationship between A and B is like the relationship between C and D.
One of those pairs of terms are things that we're relatively more familiar with.
And the pair that we're more familiar with is called the foros.
For those of you listening, that's P-H-O-R-O-S.
And the pair that we're less familiar with is called the theme.
The theme is what the analogy is really about.
And the point of the analogy is to suggest that the relationship between the pairs in the theme is like the relationship between the pairs in the foros.
And since we already know and are familiar with the relationship in the foros,
we're more likely to accept that same relationship applied to the theme.
The warrant is the relationship between the terms in the foros will also characterize the relationship between the terms in the theme.
Now if we often use literal analogies, we're sometimes a bit more wary of figurative analogies.
We might think that they are literary devices, that they're figures of speech and intended for embellishment.
But as we saw in the lecture on language and style,
you can't separate the language in which an argument is cast from its substance.
Figurative analogies have an important argumentative purpose.
They're used to make ideas more concrete or acceptable by comparing a not-so-well-known pair of terms with another pair of terms that is much better known.
And since our mind works by way of resemblances, if we can see the unfamiliar pair as being basically like the familiar pair,
then we're more likely to accept the relationship in the unfamiliar pair having already accepted it in the more familiar pair.
By the way, in addition to this argumentative purpose of figurative analogies,
they're also used to test our understanding of relationships.
And that's why, depending on what age you are and when you took standardized tests,
you found standardized tests often having a section of analogies in which you would have term A is to term B as,
and then there would be four or five different options to pick from to complete the analogy.
And of course, what's being tested there is can you recognize what it is that characterizes the relationship between the two given terms,
and then which of the pairs of terms that you have to pick from has that same characteristic to it.
And if you can see the similarity of the relationships, then that's a sign that you can reason analogically.
And that's a particularly important way to effective reasoning.
There are some outstanding historical examples of the use of figurative analogies,
and I'd like to take just a few minutes and talk about two of them that are quite famous.
One is Abraham Lincoln's House Divided Speech.
We talked about that speech in lecture 11 when we talked about his stylistic devices and use of language.
I want to zero in here on one particular feature of that speech.
You remember I said he talked about workmen who were building a frame house,
and he said when we see a lot of workmen who've gathered up these timbers and we find that they all fit together,
they exactly make the form of a house or a mill,
or if there's one piece missing, we see exactly the niche that's cut out
and we know exactly where it's going to fit,
then we find it impossible to not believe that the workmen all worked together
on a common plan that they had drawn up before the first blow was struck.
And I didn't emphasize it when I talked about it before,
but Lincoln went ahead and named the workmen Stephen, Franklin, Roger, and James.
This, of course, was not a coincidence since Stephen Douglas, Franklin Pierce, James Buchanan,
and Roger Tunney, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court,
were the figures that he was trying to indict as being part of a plot to spread slavery all over the country.
But what's he doing? He can't prove that there's a plot to spread slavery all over the country.
In fact, it's rather preposterous and a far-fetched set of arguments.
So what he does is he argues by figurative analogy.
He's saying Stephen, Franklin, Roger, and James planning to spread slavery all over the country
is just like an imaginary Stephen, Franklin, Roger, and James who are getting ready to build a frame house.
In the frame house case, they've got all the materials and they fit exactly and they make the house.
In the slavery case, we have all these legal examples, the Kansas-Nebraska Act and the Dred Scott Decision in particular,
and what these examples are doing is they're making the structure of national slavery leaving only one piece to be filled
and that is to prevent states from outlawing slavery.
So that's what Lincoln is doing in the speech.
He's trying to prove by using a figurative analogy, something that he can't prove directly,
that the relationship between these politicians and national slavery is the same as the relationship between these imaginary workmen
and the frame house that they're building.
So that's one very famous example.
Another one involves Franklin D. Roosevelt.
We talked about him briefly in the last lecture.
During the period before the United States entered World War II, but after the war had already broken out in Europe,
President Roosevelt was trying to strike a delicate balance between preserving the neutrality of the United States and giving aid to the allies, especially Britain.
And as Britain's cash reserves dwindled, it became clear that in order to defend itself, Britain would need destroyers that it couldn't pay for
and weapons that it couldn't pay for, and so it asked the United States for help.
Now, President Roosevelt wanted to preserve American neutrality, and so he thought about this as a very simple transaction
and in justifying what he was going to propose, which came to be known as lend lease,
he delivered a famous speech over the radio in which he used a figurative analogy.
He said, if my neighbor's house is on fire and I have a length of garden hose and my neighbor comes over to me and says help,
I don't say I'll sell you that garden hose for $15, I guess that's what they cost in 1940.
I don't say I'll sell you the garden hose because the neighbor doesn't want that.
He wants the use of the hose and it's of no value to him after the fire is put out.
So what I do is I say neighbor, take my hose, borrow it, use it, put out your fire, and then when your fire is out, bring it back.
And so President Roosevelt concluded it would be the neighborly thing to do for the United States to permit Britain to borrow these old destroyers
and use them for the duration of the war and give them back when the war was over.
Now, of course, little of these materials actually came back, but that's another matter.
The point is that what President Roosevelt did was to justify a highly controversial action, arguably a violation of neutrality,
by saying it's just like the neighbor who lends his garden hose in order to put out the fire.
My point in citing these examples is to make clear that figurative analogies are not just literary devices or figures of speech.
Now, since we said at the beginning that both literal and figurative analogies are inductive, they always need to be tested carefully
because resemblances are not identities, and there's one key test.
Do the essential points of similarity between the items or the relationships outweigh the essential points of difference?
If not, if they're more different than alike, then we have a false analogy, and that's something we definitely want to avoid.
In the next lecture, we'll talk about yet another pattern of inference and warrant, those based on sign.
Lecture 15, Establishing Correlations
It's good to be back with you. In the last two lectures, we've been talking about individual patterns of inferences and warrants
so that we can learn better how to construct various kinds of arguments and also to appraise and evaluate them.
We've talked so far about warrants and inferences that are based on example that relate parts to holes,
and warrants and inferences that are grounded in analogies that are based in comparisons and resemblances.
Now, in the next two lectures, we're going to be talking about two other patterns of inference and warrant that are closely related and often confused,
sign and cause. We'll be talking about sign inferences and warrants in this lecture and causal inferences and warrants next time,
but we'll need occasionally to remind ourselves of the difference between the two because they're often confused with each other.
So, sign inferences involve correlations, that is, patterns or occurrences or changes that vary in relation to each other.
We could say that what sign warrants do is that they establish that there is a predictable relationship between things
so that given one, we can predict the existence of the other, or given changes in one, we can predict changes in the existence of the other.
Let's consider two examples right off the bat. You may remember that in lecture 13, I talked about teaching company customers who ask intelligent questions
and I gave you several examples. I said, this person, this person, this person, and this person asked intelligent questions,
so teaching company customers generally ask intelligent questions. Suppose I went further with that example and I said,
teaching company customers generally ask intelligent questions, therefore they are probably intelligent people.
What I'm saying then is that asking an intelligent question is a sign of being an intelligent person.
I can't tell for sure if somebody is an intelligent person, but I can predict it if they ask an intelligent question.
So one thing is a sign of the other. It's an indication that the other one is present.
Now here's a more extensive example. In the 2002 State of the Union message, President George W. Bush referred to the nations of Iraq,
Iran, and North Korea as an axis of evil, and his particular concern was that those countries were in danger of developing nuclear weapons
with the risk that they might share them with terrorists. Well let's see what the reasoning is that would be underlying that example.
It would be something like this. When more countries develop weapons of mass destruction, the balance of power is threatened.
Now notice something carefully. Despite what we might think, this argument doesn't say that more countries developing weapons of mass destruction
causes the balance of power to be threatened. It might or it might not. It might be that there's something else that leads to developing of the weapons
and that also leads to destabilizing the balance of power. All we know is that given that more countries are developing weapons of mass destruction,
we can predict that the balance of power is threatened. What's the form of this argument? Well it's saying X is a sign of Y.
That's the underlying warrant. One thing can be taken as the sign of another, then X occurs or changes, therefore we can predict Y occurs or will change.
The underlying warrant is that something can be predicted from the occurrence of something else, so one thing is a sign of the other.
Now this relationship, the sign relationship is sometimes also called a correlation, which is simply a way of saying there's a predictable relationship between these two things.
It doesn't account for it, it just says that it's there. We have no idea why. We don't know whether one causes the other or not, but given one, we can predict the existence of the other.
That's the sign warrant. Now what things are used as signs? Well in theory a sign can be anything that stands for something else.
But let's talk about some commonly used signs. One is a statistical index. We think about something like the gross domestic product.
We generally take the GDP, the gross domestic product, and changes in it as a sign of the health of the economy.
So if we say the gross domestic product grew at an annual rate of 2.5%, we say that's a sign of a robust economy and economic health.
On the other hand, if the GDP basically didn't grow at all, say it grew by 0.2%, we say that's a sign of a stagnant economy.
And if the gross domestic product declines for two quarters in a row, that's a sign of a recession. So we're taking a statistical index as standing in for this abstraction called economic health.
That by the way is why this inference pattern, this warrant, is called sign. One thing stands for something else.
Sometimes we use physical observation as a kind of sign relationship. So we observe for example that parking lots at the mall are typically crowded on a day when there is a sale.
We drive by the mall and we see that the parking lots are full and so we infer that there is a sale going on in the major stores in the mall.
Or we'll sometimes use institutional regularities, things that by convention happen in a predictable pattern as a kind of sign relationship.
To use a very simple example, we know that the major department stores send out their catalogs at the beginning of the holiday shopping season.
And so if I receive in my mailbox a whole batch of catalogs in mid-October, I infer that the holiday shopping season is about to start because mailing out the catalog is a sign of the beginning of the shopping season.
The two things happen in a predictable relationship, in a recurrent pattern.
Well, we use all kinds of things as signs. Those are just three very obvious examples of things that we can claim stand for something else.
Aristotle distinguished between fallible signs and infallible signs.
An infallible sign is one that invariably, without the possibility of exception, would always stand for something else, so that given the existence of the sign, we could be absolutely sure of the existence of what it stood for.
Now if we had such a thing as an infallible sign, then the sign relationship would be a deductive relationship. The conclusion would follow certainly, and it would contain no new information.
But I submit that there are few, if any, infallible signs. Even things that we might think of as regularities that never vary, say the sun comes up in the morning.
When we think about it just a bit, those aren't infallible signs. There are cloudy days. There are parts of the world where depending on where we are in the calendar, the sun never comes up until very late in the day and stays up for a very short time.
There's such a thing as a solar eclipse, so we can't say infallibly that the sun comes up in the morning.
And by the way, yes, I know that that's a metaphorical way of speaking and that the earth revolves around the sun and not the other way around.
But because there are few, if any, infallible signs, the sign inference depends on probability, and it follows only with some measure of probability, so that we could be mistaken in asserting the sign inference.
Making the inference, therefore, is dependent upon a warrant that says there is a predictable relationship between the variables.
This enables us to predict a conclusion, but not with certainty. We could be wrong, so our reasoning process is normally inductive.
The prototype case of a sign relationship is a surface characteristic or property that is regarded as a sign of some deeper underlying essence.
We see this very clearly in one of the most famous speeches of the 20th century, Dr. Martin Luther King's I Have a Dream speech delivered at the March on Washington in 1963.
There's one section of the speech in which Dr. King refers to people who were asking supporters of civil rights, when will you be satisfied?
The implication being that the movement has gone far enough or is pushing too fast for some of its goals.
And Dr. King answers that question by identifying a number of signs of racial injustice.
He identifies several surface manifestations of underlying racism.
He says we will not be satisfied as long as African Americans are victims of police brutality.
He says we won't be satisfied as long as blacks are excluded from hotels and motels.
He says we won't be satisfied as long as geographic mobility is limited from a small ghetto to a large ghetto being the only way to go.
He says we won't be satisfied as long as voting rights are denied in Mississippi and as long as blacks in New York feel that they've got nothing for which to vote.
And then he alludes to the scriptural injunction and says we are not satisfied and we will not be satisfied until justice rolls down like waters and righteousness like a mighty stream.
Now we can take that section of the speech and understand it as a sign argument.
Each one of the problems that Dr. King identifies, police brutality, exclusion from hotels and so on, is a sign of racial injustice and lack of righteousness.
These things all occur, therefore American society lacks righteousness and racial justice.
And as long as that's so, we will not be satisfied.
What he's done is he's taken surface characteristics that he identifies as signs of a deeper underlying problem and says as long as those surface characteristics are there, the problem is there.
So we've seen what sign arguments are and we've talked a little bit about what kinds of things can serve as signs.
Now let's focus for a while on the purposes for which we use sign arguments.
Why do we use this particular warrant and inference pattern?
And I'm going to suggest at least three basic uses.
First, they are used to infer the unknown from the known.
If we think about it, there are lots of constructs that are unknowable abstractions such as intelligence, economic health, happiness.
Every one of those things is unobservable.
There's no way to know it or to see it directly.
And so we use other things as signs of those abstractions.
For example, we use statistical indexes and other measurements.
We use IQ test scores as a sign of intelligence.
We use the Dow Jones industrial average as a sign of the health of the economy and so on.
Likewise, we might infer a person's personality from his or her outward manifestations, his or her actions.
You want to know what kind of a person so and so is?
Well, you know that personality is an abstraction.
You really can't know the essential character of the person,
but you infer it by how the person behaves in a variety of situations.
So the acts are the external property that's taken as the sign of the internal essence, the character or personality of the individual.
Or a group and its members.
You want to know what the members of this organization are like?
Well, look at some individuals.
They believe this.
They do this.
They act in certain ways.
That's a sign of their membership in this particular organization.
Or an era and its events.
How do we think of the 1920s, for example, or the 1980s or the Cold War?
We think of those periods of time by their signs, by the events that happened during those periods of time.
Whether it's the 1980s being seen as a decade of greed or the Cold War as a period of mutual suspicion or the 1920s as the roaring 20s.
We form a judgment about this essence, about the era from the events that we take to be its signs.
So a property, some external characteristic, is seen as a sign of a deeper internal essence.
And that's what a sign relationship is about.
So one of the uses of a sign argument is to infer the unknown from the known.
A second use is to predict outcomes when it's not necessary to explain reasons for the outcomes.
So for example, we notice that people who bundle up in the winter avoid colds and stay healthy.
And we conclude that bundling up is a sign of staying healthy during the winter and not getting a cold.
We obviously want to stay healthy and avoid colds, and so we decide we will bundle up.
Now very important, we weren't able to say that bundling up is what causes us to stay healthy.
It might be.
It might be that we avoid germs that way, it might be that we avoid extreme body temperatures,
but it might be that there are other factors that explain why we avoid colds,
the state of our emotional health or mental health or who we come in contact with.
Nevertheless, if we can predict that bundling up is a sign of staying healthy and avoiding colds,
it will behoove us to bundle up.
We can't be sure that the practice causes the outcome, nor do we care,
as long as the relationship between the two is predictable.
And by the way, that happens far more often than we would think.
When we remember that this is a complex world, the chain of causality often can't be isolated or determined with precision,
and so what we want to know is, is it likely that a given practice and a given outcome will coexist?
We just have to be careful not to confuse sign with cause.
So for example, knowing that teaching company customers ask intelligent questions and that's a sign that they're intelligent people,
I want to become an intelligent person, I buy a course from the teaching company, now I'm a customer, therefore now I'm intelligent,
that's not likely to work.
So we have signs used to infer the unknown from the known and to predict when we don't need to explain.
The third way in which we use sign arguments very frequently is to rely on the judgment of expert authorities.
The assumption that we're making is first of all that a person's credentials are a sign of his or her expertise,
and then second, that his or her expertise is a sign of accuracy in the statement that the person has made.
And we do this of course because we can't know everything and so we need to rely on other people's judgment.
And so we assume credentials are a sign of expertise and expertise is a sign of accuracy and therefore we trust the judgment.
So for example, if we know that a person holds advanced degrees, holds a prominent and prestigious position,
we don't know the person at all perhaps, but we'll take those credentials as a sign that the person is probably an expert.
Having the advanced degrees and the other credentials becomes the sign of expertise.
And then the fact that the person's an expert will take as a sign that he or she probably knows what he or she is talking about in the case at hand.
So we'll take credentials as a sign of expertise and then expertise as a sign of accuracy.
Of course, we must be sure that the expert is speaking in his or her field of expertise, has a basis for making the statement,
and is not reflecting obvious bias or vested interest.
But what we've done here is to illustrate some of the common ways that we use sign arguments.
And I hope it's clear from this discussion and from the examples that I've provided that like the other patterns of warrant and inference that we've been examining,
sign arguments are very frequently employed.
We use them all the time and we use them typically when we want to make a statement about something that we can't see or observe directly
or something that we can't control or something that we don't have access to.
There's something in each case kind of just beyond our understanding, just beyond our ability to access.
And we infer it from something else that's a manifestation of it, that's an outward indication of it.
And we let that outward indication stand for whatever it is and so we conclude that that outward manifestation is a sign of the underlying reality.
Now you remember a few minutes ago, I suggested that just about all signs are fallible,
that if there was such a thing as an infallible sign, I couldn't really think of it.
And to say that signs are fallible is to say that we could be wrong.
It might be that X is generally a sign of Y and yet in the particular case we may not be able accurately to predict Y from the existence of X.
And so whenever we encounter a sign relationship with a fallible sign,
we want to ask a series of questions to test the strength of that relationship,
to determine whether we've probably got a good sign relationship or whether we don't.
And here are some of the things we would want to know.
For instance, we would want to know do the sign and the thing that it stands for generally appear together.
Because if they're just as likely to appear apart as together,
then it's much less likely the case that one is the sign of the other.
Let's consider an example.
In periods of prosperity, tax revenues go up.
And so we could say prosperity is a sign of increasing tax revenues.
But if there are periods of prosperity without corresponding increases in tax revenues,
or if there are increases in tax revenues during times that are not prosperous,
then we're far less confident in the statement that prosperity is a sign of increasing tax revenues.
When we talk about statistical correlations, by the way,
there's a way to show how strong the sign relationship is.
Correlations are typically measured from plus one to minus one.
So a plus one correlation would tell us just about all the time that we have one thing, we have the other.
A minus one correlation would say just about none of the time when we have one thing, do we have the other.
And a correlation near zero would be almost random.
There's no way to predict one from the other.
And so when we're talking about measurable correlations,
we can answer this question pretty precisely how likely are the sign and the thing that it stands for to occur together.
That's the first question we would want to ask.
A second question is, are there counter signs?
Are there signs that point the other way that would mitigate the strength of the sign relationship that we think we have?
Let's say, for example, that we regard increases or decreases in the stock market as a sign of economic health or economic sickness.
But we also regard housing starts as a sign of economic health or economic sickness.
So if there's new housing construction at an increasing rate, that's typically taken as a sign of a healthy economy.
Because it's saying people are betting on the future, they're buying houses, they're taking on long term mortgages.
Now what if there's a declining stock market and an increase in housing starts at the same time?
We have counter signs.
We have signs arguing the opposite relationships.
And so we ought to be cautious in saying, well, the stock market is dropping, therefore it's a weak economy.
Or housing starts are increasing, therefore it's a strong economy.
Because we've got in the same landscape both a sign and a counter sign.
So a second test question we would ask ourselves is, are there counter signs?
Third question, can a sign actually signify two or more different things, perhaps even opposite things?
For instance, we've said that declines in the stock market could be taken as a sign of a weakening economy, a downturn in the economy.
But we also know that sometimes the price of stocks goes up artificially as a result of excess speculation.
That's what probably happened, for example, in what we regard as the dot com bubble of the late 1990s and early 2000s.
To use an inexact way of describing it, sometimes this speculative bubble bursts.
And stock prices go down to what the economists believe is a more appropriate reflection of value.
It's what the market analysts call a market correction, in which stock prices drop to levels that are seen as more accurately reflecting the values of the companies.
And hence their position in the economy.
So we could have a declining stock market as a sign of a downturn in the economy.
But we also could have a decline in the stock market as a sign of the market correcting itself following a speculative bubble.
And so simply from the presence of the sign, the drop in the stock market, we can't be sure what it is that the sign stands for.
And because that kind of situation can easily present itself, we ask ourselves as the third test question, can the sign actually signify two or more different things, perhaps even opposite things?
Then a fourth question to ask.
Do we have a basis for thinking that the relationship between the two things is anything other than mere coincidence?
Now granted, a sign relationship can't account for the relationship.
It can't account for what causes what.
But do we think there's something there that goes beyond mere circumstance?
Let me give you my favorite example of an argument that reflects this concern.
In the history of American presidential politics, there is a phenomenon that has been called the zero factor.
Beginning with William Henry Harrison in 1840, for a long time, every president elected in a year ending in zero died in office.
Harrison, who was elected in 1840, Lincoln, who was elected in 1860, Garfield, who was elected in 1880, William McKinley, who was elected in 1900,
Warren G. Harding, who was elected in 1920, Franklin D. Roosevelt, elected in 1940, and John F. Kennedy, elected in 1960.
Ronald Reagan, who was elected in 1980, survived his two terms in office, but Reagan was the victim of an attempted assassination.
So there's a close correlation between being elected in a year ending in zero and dying in office.
Now, should we conclude from that, that Al Gore and George W. Bush were both crazy to have run for president in the year 2000?
Well, hopefully not, because on the face of it, there's nothing other than simple coincidence that seems to explain that relationship,
and so we would be less likely to think of it as a very strong sign.
And the final test, have we mistakenly regarded a sign relationship as a causal relationship?
Remember, I started out the lecture saying we've got to be very clear about the difference between the two.
So for example, if we say, we're going to have an arms race, and you say, how do you know that?
And I say, we're developing a national missile defense.
It's not immediately clear whether I've asserted a sign relationship or a causal relationship,
whether I'm saying that national missile defense causes an arms race, or simply that national missile defense can enable us to predict the occurrence of an arms race.
If it were a sign relationship, and yet I treated it as a causal relationship, I could be in for big trouble.
Just as you could be, if you took the statement that the teaching company customers are intelligent, and say, buying a course will automatically make me intelligent.
We need to keep straight the difference between a sign inference that asserts a relationship but doesn't account for it, and a causal relationship which does both.
So what we've seen is that sign warrants assert a predictable relationship.
Signs include statistical indexes, physical observation, institutional regularities.
Most signs are fallible, so the conclusion is inductive.
We use them for a variety of purposes, and we test them for their appropriateness and strength.
In the next lecture, we'll talk about causal relationships.
Lecture 16 Moving from Cause to Effect
Lecture 16 Moving from Cause to Effect
Hello again, and welcome back.
In the last lecture, we talked about sign inferences, and I warned you a couple of times that they're often confused with the inference pattern that we'll be talking about now.
Remember that we said that sign inferences assert that there is a predictable relationship between things based on the warrant.
But they don't explain that relationship, they don't account for it.
Causal inferences and warrants, the topic of this lecture, are warrants which both predict and explain a relationship between variables.
And before we get into our analysis of these arguments, let me simply observe that discussion about public matters frequently involves causal inferences and warrants.
Let's take some obvious examples.
Many people argued that the failure of the democracies during the late 1930s to resist Hitler's early aggressive moves is what caused World War II.
Now, in making that argument, the people who believe that are saying, World War II did not happen by accident.
There was an influence that led to World War II coming about.
And what that influence was, was that the democracies of the West didn't stand up to Hitler when they could have.
Second example, during the 1960s, there were a number of political liberals who argued that frustration with despair in the inner cities caused race riots.
While conservatives argued that social permissiveness and an attitude of permissiveness is what caused the riots.
Now, here what we've got are competing attempts to explain a phenomenon, to explain what influenced it, what led to it, and obviously which one we pick of these competing explanations will make a difference to the policy we recommend as to what ought to be done about it.
Third example, during the 1980s, many conservatives argued that the U.S. defense buildup under President Reagan caused the collapse of the Soviet Union.
While many political liberals were more likely to credit Mikhail Gorbachev for facing up to the economic weakness of the communist system and saying that caused the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Again, we've got two competing accounts, but what each of them is trying to do is to identify a factor which not only enabled us to predict something else, but explain it by showing what influenced what, what produced what kind of effect on what.
And final example, President George W. Bush and many others have argued that the retirement of baby boomers will cause the collapse of the social security system unless the system is changed.
The argument here again is if the social security system falls apart, it won't be by accident, it won't be a random occurrence, it will be the result of a phenomenon, namely the retirement of the baby boomers.
Well now what's real clear I hope in all of these examples is that causal inferences both identify and explain relationships. The inference is that doing something will lead to something else.
And by the way, we could argue the relationship either way. We could start with the alleged cause and say it's going to produce this effect, or we could start with the alleged effect and explain it as the result of the alleged cause.
Now claims that employ causal warrants and inferences based on them would follow from the evidence certainly and the argument would be deductive if and only if all other possible influences could be controlled for and eliminated.
And that's about as likely to happen as we are to get an infallible sign, not very likely. Hence the causal argument relies on the warrant that one phenomenon has influence on another.
And influence cannot be observed but is only inferred and our inference could be wrong, which means that the conclusion goes beyond the evidence, the conclusion follows only with a certain degree of probability and it is therefore inductive.
So just as we've seen with example, with analogy and with sign, the typical use of an argument employing a causal warrant and inference is inductive in nature.
Now one of the difficulties that we experience when we talk about causality is that the very concept of causality is ambiguous. It's been used by different philosophers and theorists to mean different things.
And let me just give you a flavor of those differences by suggesting some of the meanings that are associated with causality. Some people have suggested that cause means sufficient condition.
You may remember when you studied mathematics a discussion of necessary conditions and sufficient conditions. A condition is sufficient if, given that condition, you're assured of the presence of the effect.
It's all you need for the effect to occur. So for instance, a meteorologist might say that the combination of a high pressure front and high humidity is a sufficient condition for rainstorms.
But if you get those two things together, you can be sure that you will have rainstorms following because those things are the sufficient conditions. It's all you need to have rain.
And so for some philosophers, causality means sufficient condition. Other philosophers say no, sufficient condition may be a strong sign, but it's really not what we're talking about when we talk about causality.
There are other philosophers who identify causality as meaning human action or intervention into the normal order of things.
For these philosophers, the recurrent processes of nature are not what we mean when we talk about cause and effect. We don't ask what causes rain, but we do ask what causes war, because war is something that's produced by human action, by our intervention into the natural world.
And this usage of cause implies that only things that reflect choices and hence only things that human beings can do are causes. So on this reading, cause means human action or intervention into the natural order.
Yet other philosophers, some of the philosophers of law have said causality refers only to things that are abnormal, things that are normal, regular, predictable, recurrent.
We don't talk about as being cause and effect. When we use causality, we're talking about abnormal events. And so to use the old cliche, when the dog bites the man, we don't talk about what caused it, but when the man bites the dog, we do, because one is a regular, predictable, normal occurrence, and the other is not.
Well, there are other meanings as well. And my point in mentioning this is not to try to resolve this dispute or to settle the question of what does causality mean, but simply to indicate that one of the difficulties that we encounter in talking about causal arguments is that philosophers don't even mean the same thing, necessarily, by the word cause.
Which meaning is most appropriate, in fact, may depend on the use to which the causal argument is put, although here again in some cases different meanings are equally serviceable.
But at any rate, let me take a few moments and talk about some of the ways that we use causal arguments, arguments based on causal warrants and inferences.
We use them sometimes to make what are called causal generalizations. These are sometimes called covering laws. So for example, we say that depletion of the ozone layer results in an increase in ultraviolet rays.
Well, there what we've suggested is a kind of natural law explanation. If the ozone layer thins, then more of the sun's ultraviolet rays get through, and that will produce an increased incidence of cancer.
It's a natural law kind of explanation for a general phenomenon that could take place, and that we're probably likely to rely on causality as sufficient condition.
Sometimes, however, we use causality for the purpose of explaining or predicting events. So we say mobilizing each political party's base will increase turnout in national elections, as it did in the election of 2004.
Well, now what we've done is we've said here is an explanation of what's taking place. If you mobilize the base, then you will increase the turnout.
We could say that's human intervention because it's human beings that mobilize the base, or we could say that's sufficient condition because we're identifying a phenomenon that if you do it will be enough to bring about the effect.
Or we might say guilt leads people to try to purge their guilt. And so if you make them feel guilty about various conditions in the world, they'll be likely to give more money to charity if the charity is dedicated to doing something about those world conditions.
It's another explanatory hypothesis that could be used both as a prediction or as a retrospective explanation. So those are a couple of the uses of causal arguments to form natural law, covering law, generalizations, and to have explanatory hypotheses.
Often we use causal arguments to relate means to ends. Something is a means to the achievement of some other end. So to keep warm during the winter, dress in layers.
Well, that's a very common use of causal arguments. If you want to do X, then you should do Y because Y is a means to accomplish X. And again, you could think of that as human action. You could think of it as sufficient condition.
There's a specific application of relating means to ends that is called the pragmatic argument. And what the pragmatic argument says is we choose between values or we choose between actions based on their consequences.
And if the consequences of one are better than the consequences of the other, then that's what we choose. So what we do is we almost set up a parallel structure where we say this value or action will lead to these consequences.
This other value or action will lead to different consequences. I prefer the first set of consequences over the second. Therefore, I'll take the first action rather than the second action.
So we use the pragmatic argument as a way to choose between values or to choose between actions based on the consequences that we think will follow from them. So each choice becomes a means to a different end.
We decide which end we like better, and then on that basis we make our choice of consequences. So for example, in early 2005, when the president of Harvard University made some speculative comments that were interpreted as demeaning to women, and there was a desire to repair the damage, one way to do it was to appoint a commission to investigate the higher end.
And that would have certain consequences. It would focus attention on the problems of women in the sciences and focus attention on the importance of hiring. And that is the choice that the president of Harvard University made, but a different choice might have taken some other action.
Might have been to stonewall the reporters or stonewall the faculty questioners, for example, and that would have certain consequences. It would prevent the president from needing to apologize or to appear weak, but it would also make the president seem further removed from his critics and from the problems.
And so he concluded one set of consequences was better than the other, and so he chose accordingly what action to take.
Sometimes we use causal arguments to explain paradoxes. So for example, our so-called paperless society, since the advent of computers, has actually served to produce more paper, as we see the need to print out more and more things from the computer.
How can it be that a paperless society generates more paper? Well, that's a paradox that needs to be explained, and when we explain paradoxes, we rely on the concept of cause as abnormality.
And finally, we use causal arguments sometimes to assign responsibility. After an election in which the candidate who the polls predicted would win didn't, and we ask the question, why did the candidate who was expected to win lose?
We're looking for assignment of responsibility. Who's responsible for that? Who's to blame? What's the explanation for that? And that's a case where we start off with the effect and we search for the alleged cause.
Well, each of these represents a different purpose for using causal arguments, and the frequency with which these purposes come up should reinforce the fact that we use causal arguments, arguments based on causal warrants, all the time.
Now, suppose we're making such an argument, and we want to know, in the given case, how do we determine whether we have causality or not? And again, there's some different approaches depending on the subject matter.
There are empirical approaches to deciding if we have causality, and these rely on the tests for sufficient condition that have been developed in the 19th century by the philosopher John Stuart Mill.
Here is one of Mill's tests, the method of difference. He says, create conditions in which two things are identical in every respect except one, observe whether there is a difference between the two things, and if so, you can safely infer that the one respect in which they're different is what produced the cause of the difference between them.
Because you held constant everything else. Mill has several other methods, but that should give you an idea of how he suggests going about it.
Now, in the last few decades, quantitative approaches have been developed that rely on statistical regression analysis, which is a mathematical technique for explaining how much of the variance between things is attributable to each of the factors that you might identify.
So we have empirical methods, those of Mill, and we have quantitative methods, regression analysis. And both of these, I'll tell you, are probably not applicable to much everyday argument. Why?
Well, often, when we're talking about very complex systems or large populations, holding everything constant, making sure things are alike in every respect except one, may be an impossibility. It often is an impossibility.
The system is just too complicated. There are too many factors. They interact. We can't be sure we've controlled for everything. And you know, even if we could, there are many situations in which we would have real ethical questions about doing that.
We want to determine, for example, whether exposure to some element causes cancer. And so what would we do? We'd get two populations. We'd have them alike in every respect except we'd expose one population to this element and the other population we wouldn't.
And we'd see if the exposed population got cancer. Now, I don't know about you, but I suspect we would all have serious ethical qualms about doing that. If we have reason to think that here's a cause of cancer, we wouldn't expose anybody to it.
Even though doing that would be a way to empirically test whether it's a causal influence or not. So we tend not so much to use empirical or mathematical approaches in everyday argument. Instead, we use a rhetorical approach.
We make a two-stage argument. First, we identify how some factor possibly could be the cause. We give a reason how it could be the cause. And then the second step is to explain why it ought to be considered the cause.
Give reasons again. So we show how it could be and why it ought to be considered the cause. When human actions involve the first one of those steps, establishes means and opportunity. How could a person have done something?
And the second step establishes motive. Why would the person have done something? And so this approach is very common, for example, to causation in legal argument. So we've got empirical, quantitative and rhetorical approaches to determining causality.
However we go about determining it, and whatever conclusion we reach, we remind ourselves that it's probably an inductive inference and so our conclusion could be wrong.
And to test out whether it's right or wrong, whether we have confidence in it or not, just as we did with sign arguments, we want to satisfy several tests. And here are some examples of the tests to which we would subject causal inferences.
First, has a simple correlation been confused with a causal relationship? Have we asserted causality when all we have is a sign?
This was one of the criticisms that was advanced against early studies of the relationship between smoking and health. What the earliest studies established was that there was a correlation between heavy smoking and increased incidence of lung cancer.
And some people argued smoking causes cancer. And the early studies probably didn't permit that conclusion because all they established was a correlation.
As later studies controlled more carefully for other factors and examined this relationship under more controlled conditions, it became clearer that smoking was not just a correlation, that smoking was a cause of various kinds of health problems.
So has a correlation been confused with causality?
Second test, is there some common cause that is masked by the appearance of a cause-effect relationship that is really spurious?
In the years shortly after World War I, historians who were examining the war noticed that in the years shortly before the war, there was a build-up in spending on armaments among the major belligerents.
And historians concluded increased arm spending causes war. Other critics weren't so sure. They said, wait a minute, it may be that both increased armaments spending and war are caused by some other common factor such as a breakdown in the conventions of normal diplomatic procedure.
That's what led countries to spend more on armaments and that's what led them to ultimately go to war.
So the question is, we have something that looks like a cause-and-effect relationship. Might it be that the alleged cause and the alleged effect really have no relationship but are both effects of some common cause?
Third question, has temporality been confused with causality?
Now granted, a cause must come before its effect, but coming before its effect is not enough for it to be called a cause.
Suppose you say, I bought a teaching company course on argumentation and since I did, I have won more arguments with my spouse, therefore buying the course caused me to win more arguments.
Now remember, by the way, I said in the very first lecture that this is not about how to win more arguments with your spouse, but look what you've done.
You've assumed that just because one thing came before the other, you bought the course and then you won more arguments, buying the course caused you to win more arguments.
You've confused temporal order with causality.
By the way, there's a fancy name for what you've done. You have committed the post hoc fallacy.
Post hoc means after this and the fallacy is assuming that what comes after is caused by what comes before.
A fourth test, are there significant multiple causes or multiple effects?
Now this test is a little bit different from the others because it's not identifying so much an internal failure in the causal argument as it is identifying a difficulty with the action that you propose to take based on the argument.
Let's explain it this way. The world is complex and effect might have multiple causes in which case treating only one of them might not alter the presence of the effect.
Difficulties in getting to the polls cause people not to vote, someone might say.
Therefore we should make election day a holiday.
Now suppose we do. Suppose we make election day a holiday.
Can we now say that more people will go to the polls and vote?
Maybe, maybe not.
Suppose we find that among the reasons that people don't vote is that they don't care who wins.
They don't think their vote will make any difference.
Or they're not registered.
Or they're afraid if they show up to vote their name is going to be put on a jury list and they don't want to be called up for jury duty and so on and so forth.
Now if we make election day a holiday, have we changed the likelihood of people to vote?
Well it depends. It depends on whether having election day a holiday has an independent influence on people voting above and beyond these other possible factors.
Now you'll find committed partisans who will say the most significant reason people don't vote is because of difficulties getting to the polls.
And so they'd say we haven't taken care of all of the causes granted but we've gotten rid of the most significant one and so it will clearly make a difference.
Again maybe or maybe not.
If each of these causal factors has influence independently of the others then getting rid of the most significant cause will just promote the second most significant cause into the number one position and you could still have the same problem.
And so one of the questions we ask of a causal argument is are there multiple causes of a given effect?
Likewise a given cause can have multiple effects in which case you may have unintended consequences of something that you propose to do.
So let's imagine the argument that we ought to have annual testing of all students in basic skills of reading and math and the argument is that will lead to greater accountability of schools and better measures of student performance.
And for the moment assume that's true.
But what if it's true that annual testing also leads to high anxiety, disruption of the academic curriculum, focusing on teaching for the test, greater pressures to cheat and so on.
Now if that's so and we've got multiple effects of this one cause then if we support this policy position that annual testing will produce greater accountability and better measurement we will have brought about also consequences that we didn't intend and don't want as well as those that we did intend and want.
Sometimes cause and effect may be reversed.
We might say that having the technological capability turns a dissonant faction into a rogue state when in fact it's being a rogue state that creates the desire for the technological capacity.
So all of these are examples of questions that we ask about causal inferences in order to determine whether we've got a strong and reliable inference or not.
So what we've seen in this lecture is that causal warrants and inferences based on them both identify and explain relationships that the term cause has different meanings and that causal warrants are used for different purposes.
There are a variety of means to determine causality and we often use a rhetorical approach and that causal inferences are usually inductive and therefore must satisfy several tests.
In the next lecture we'll talk about the remaining two dominant patterns of warrants common places and form.
Lecture 17 Common Places and Arguments from Form
Lecture 17 Common Places and Arguments from Form
Hello again. In the past several lectures we have been considering individual patterns of inference and warrants and the arguments that are built upon them.
And we've looked so far at arguments from example, analogy, sign and cause.
Now there are two more of these basic patterns of inference and warrant that will be the focus of this lecture.
Common places and arguments from form. They seem to be very different from each other but as we'll see at the end they have a very important feature in common.
So let me begin with common places.
The idea behind common places is fairly simple as the name suggests there are things that are generally available as places to go for warrants to justify inferences.
There are general categories of inference that have usually proved reliable and are assumed to be reliable in the case at hand.
Another way to talk about common places is to say there are kind of social knowledge.
There are general beliefs that can be accepted as facts and can serve as warrants or there are general categories to which we might appeal.
So for example, the statement government bureaucracies are inefficient could be taken as a general belief that most people would accept as true
and so it could function as a warrant in an argument. That's one kind of common place.
Or as another example, we should do what's principled or we should do what's pragmatic are examples of general categories to which we might appeal for warrants in arguments.
The argument takes a particular situation, applies the common place of whichever kind and derives a claim from it.
It looks like deduction. The claim seems to follow certainly and absolutely from the knowledge of the situation and the statement of the common place.
And it may work that way for somebody who believes absolutely in the common place.
In fact, there's a name for this structure of argument. It's a fancy term. It's called an enthameme.
And an enthameme is just like a syllogism except that at least one of its premises is drawn from the beliefs or values of a particular audience.
Rather than from statements that are independently established to be true.
And so for that audience, whether it's a person or a group of people, for that audience, it may work just like deduction.
But these inferences really are not certain because, ironically enough, the generally accepted beliefs can be contested.
Why? They can be contested because there are certain beliefs that we accept that are at odds with other beliefs that we also accept.
Such as the value of coordination and the value of decentralization.
We generally accept both of these beliefs or values and yet in a particular situation they can be at odds with each other.
And so the fact that we generally accept it doesn't automatically mean that it warrants the argument.
Similarly, we sometimes privilege a category that's at odds with another category that we sometimes privilege.
For example, we sometimes privilege freedom of individual choice and we sometimes privilege benefit to society.
So simply to appeal to one of these categories or the other will not automatically warrant an inference because it can come into conflict with another category that we also value.
So, while these may look like deductions, in fact they are inductions, they require an underlying warrant which is the applicability of the particular belief or value to a specific case.
By the way, we should remember that back in lecture 12 we talked about commonly accepted beliefs and values as a kind of evidence and they are, but they can also function as a kind of warrant as we see here.
Now so much for general theory. Let's look at some specific kinds of common places. There are two basic types that I want to take up.
First, shared beliefs. Well, maxims and adages are a kind of common place. If you want the job done right, do it yourself.
A generally accepted belief or value that can serve as a warrant to an argument. It might support the argument or there might support the claim that the home rather than the school should be the source of moral instruction.
Because if you want something done right, do it yourself. Or another example, if something seems too good to be true, it is.
While some people might use that as a warrant to support the claim, the prescription drug benefit in Medicare won't work.
Seems like it's going to solve all the problems if something seems too good to be true, it is.
Or don't put off until tomorrow what you should do today might be a warrant to justify the claim we should fix social security before it goes bankrupt.
So these are maxims and adages, one sort of general belief that can serve as a common place.
Another kind of general belief that can serve as a common place is beliefs about the essential nature of something.
So again, here are some examples. The United States has a special mission in the world.
That's a widely shared belief about the essential nature of the U.S.
And it might be used, let's say, as a warrant to justify the claim we must be an active player for peace in the Middle East.
Or another example of a belief about the essential nature of a thing, God directs the affairs of our lives.
Might be used as a warrant to justify the claim, few things happen by chance.
Or another example, human beings are basically guided by self-interest.
Might be used as a warrant to justify a claim such as appeals to altruism are not likely to succeed.
So we've got maxims and adages, we've got beliefs about the essential nature of a thing.
Another kind of a widely shared belief is a value judgment.
So for instance, we could say a widely shared value judgment is all human beings deserve respect.
Which might be used to justify a claim such as society has an obligation to people without means as well as to those who are well off.
Or another widely shared value, our children should have the best future that is possible.
Could be used to warrant a claim we ought to privilege the future over the present in forming our public policies.
Or a very different kind of shared value, there is beauty in a colorful sunset.
Might be used to warrant a claim such as we shouldn't rush our lives so fast that we don't see what's around us.
Now these are all examples of widely shared beliefs.
Ironically however, as I suggested before, there can be conflict about supposedly consensual beliefs.
There can be conflict about whether they are the most important.
So we might generally hold the belief and yet it could be trumped by some other consideration.
And there might be conflict about whether the belief really applies to the situation at hand.
Now you might wonder where do we find these common places in actual argument.
And we find them all the time, we find them in arguments between friends for example.
But one particular place I want to mention where we often find common places in the US is in presidential rhetoric.
Presidents in their speeches frequently employ common places of this kind, widely shared beliefs,
because they are trying to speak to and for the entire nation.
Let's look at some examples.
President Reagan in his first inaugural address and in several of his speeches would make statements like
why shouldn't we be optimistic about the future after all we're Americans.
And what President Reagan is doing there is appealing to the common place that Americans can do whatever they set their mind to do.
And he used that common place to warrant claims for particular actions or particular policies that he urged upon the American people.
President Lyndon Johnson in his 1965 inaugural address asked is a new world coming.
We welcome it and will bend it to the hopes of man.
Well we will bend it to the hopes of man reflects another widely shared belief that serves as a common place,
which is we are in control of our destiny and can subdue the forces of nature and forces that are external to ourselves.
President Kennedy said United there is little we cannot do,
appealing to the common place of unlimited possibilities, another widely shared belief.
President George W. Bush in the aftermath of September 11, 2001 said freedom and fear are at odds and God is not neutral between them.
Now he wasn't really saying that he knew the will of God.
What he was doing was appealing to a common place that says there is a divine order and there are certain divine preferences.
So presidents frequently employ just this kind of common place.
There's a notable exception that I can think of in recent years and even that exception proves the rule.
President Carter with his crisis of confidence speech, which was sort of a sermon about the failings of the American people that talked about limits to what we could do,
didn't go over well at all.
Why? Because it violated the common place belief that there are no limits to what Americans can do if they put their mind to it and are determined enough.
So this is one kind of common place then, generally shared beliefs.
The other major kind of common place is a preference for one or the other of opposed general categories, often categories of value, but not always.
Now there are lots and lots of these I'm going to consider just a couple of examples to make the point.
One of the examples I want to consider is the value conflict between pragmatism and principle.
The argument from pragmatism is we should decide between choices on the basis of their consequences.
What gives us the best results?
And the argument from principle is we should decide between choices based on enduring beliefs or enduring values without regard to their consequences in particular circumstances.
Now in different situations, each of these preferences could trump the other and opposing advocates may appeal to one or the other of these categories.
So for instance, in 2003, when there was extensive public discussion about whether or not the United States should go to war in Iraq,
some people argued we have an obligation to promote freedom and democracy.
This is an argument from principle.
It's something that says even if it's going to be long and difficult and costly, we should do it because we have this obligation.
Others argued we ought not do it because it will divert from the war against terror and if anything will make us more vulnerable to terrorism.
This is an argument from pragmatism.
We ought not to do it because of the consequences.
Now the point that I want to make is that neither one of these arguments necessarily is better than the other.
In fact, what's going on in this situation is one advocate is invoking the argument from pragmatism.
The opposing advocate is invoking the argument from principle.
They're each making the assumption of a warrant that one is better than the other in the case at hand.
And as analysts of argument, what we have to ask ourselves is have they accurately described the situation?
Is there a countervailing principle or a countervailing consequence?
Do other considerations outweigh the ones that have been stated so that we have to decide in the particular set of circumstances
which one of these opposed categories is more applicable?
Second example I want to mention, the value conflict between quantity and quality.
These are also opposed categories that could be a source of common places.
The argument from quantity is based on achieving the greatest good for the greatest number at the least cost.
And the argument from quality is based on the value of the unique.
Now again, each of these preferences could trump the other in a particular circumstance.
Among other organizations that are faced with just this kind of a conflict are school boards in deciding how to allocate school district resources.
So the argument from quantity would say we ought to put our resources into support of basic instruction because that will do the most for the most students at the least cost.
And the argument from quality would say we ought to support honors classes or we ought to support co-curricular programs or we ought to support unique activities because these are special.
These distinguish us as a school district and these make unique opportunities available to students who are particularly poised to benefit from them.
Now again, there's no way to say universally that one of these is more important than the other.
In any given situation what we as analysts have to do is to weigh and balance them and consider whether the quantity or quality claim has really been established,
whether there's a better way to achieve the goal of quantity or quality and whether other considerations outweigh it.
But in a particular argument what an advocate is likely to do is to appeal to one or the other of these categories as a kind of commonplace and rely on the warrant that it applies to the case at hand.
So in each case one value, one belief, one category is put forward as a decision rule as a basis to settle the controversy but is answered by a contrary decision rule.
And so the controversy centers on which is more applicable to the case at hand and hence more appropriate to serve as a warrant.
Now we understand commonplaces. Let me now focus on inferences from form.
These rely on the structure of the argument itself and the structure looks like deduction in which the conclusion follows with certainty but they really aren't.
As used in ordinary argument they really reflect probabilities and hence require an underlying warrant.
The inference is that the form justifies accepting the conclusion because it looks like a form with certainty
but the form despite its seeming resemblance doesn't really resemble deduction. It doesn't completely match.
So there's an underlying warrant that has to be relied upon in the case at hand.
Let's consider some examples of inferences from form which by the way are sometimes called quasi-logical arguments because they look like the arguments of formal logic.
Let me begin with the dilemma. The dilemma appears to resemble the disjunctive syllogism, the either or kind of syllogism that we talked about in lecture three.
We are presented with alternatives, each of which will lead to unattractive outcomes.
So here's an example of a dilemma that might have been posed in 2004 or 2005.
We can either stay in Iraq or we can get out. If we stay in we'll be committing men and money indefinitely to a cause whose end we can't predict.
If we get out we will leave behind anarchy in an important region in the Middle East.
So we either will be making an indefinite commitment or we'll be leaving behind anarchy.
We have two options. Either of them will lead to an undesirable consequence and that's our dilemma. We can't avoid an undesirable consequence.
Now what the basis of this inference is is the seeming completeness of the alternatives. Staying in or getting out are only two choices.
But often with dilemmas there are more options, more possibilities such as plan for an eventual withdrawal, stay in contingent on certain things happening and so on.
And if there are other alternatives then we have what's called a false dilemma meaning that we can't be certain that we'll be stuck with one of these acceptable alternatives.
So the power of the dilemma resides in its form that it looks like a disjunctive syllogism.
The actual warrant however is in the particular case we really have exhausted all of the possible alternatives.
And the reply to the dilemma would be you haven't exhausted all the possible alternatives.
That's one example of an inference from form, the dilemma.
Here's another example. The argument from hypothesis looks like the conditional syllogism, the if-then syllogism that we discussed in lecture three.
This argument begins with a hypothesis and predicts what will happen if the hypothesis is true.
So we might say if the theory of global warming is true then hurricanes will have more destructive force than they've had in the past.
We observe what happens and we see particularly after Hurricane Katrina in 2005 hurricanes have more destructive force than in the past.
And so we conclude the theory of global warming is true but not so fast.
When we talked about the conditional syllogism we said that affirming the consequent, which is what we just did, that affirming the consequent is a fallacy.
Why is it a fallacy? Because hurricanes could have more destructive force for reasons other than the truth of the theory of global warming.
And so the destructive force of hurricanes by itself does not prove that global warming is true or false.
But now you might ask, doesn't most scientific inquiry depend upon just this kind of argument?
We assume a hypothesis, we say if it's true we'll get these conditions, we test it out, we get the conditions, we conclude that the hypothesis is true or false.
Am I saying then that all scientific argument that's based on inquiry and experiment is fallacious? No I'm not.
What I am saying is it's not deductive, it's not certain, even though it looks like the conditional syllogism.
And so the question is, in a given context is one explanation stronger than another explanation to account for the observed phenomenon?
And this incidentally is why, when the scientist does an experiment, the scientist tries as much as possible to eliminate other possible explanations.
That's why there are control groups, that's why there are matched groups where everything is held constant as much as possible, except for the thing that the experimenter is trying to test.
Of course in the natural world we don't do experiments like that, but we can compare historical evidence, we can do simulations, we can do careful questioning of our premises,
instead of simply assuming that the destructive force of hurricanes proves that the theory of global warming is true or not true,
we ask ourselves what other explanations might there be and is there a reason to think that those explanations might have greater force?
So two examples then of inferences from form are dilemmas and arguments from hypothesis.
I want to mention one more example and that's reasoning from comparisons.
This appears to resemble a simple mathematical computation.
And of course in mathematics probably more than any other field we could say conclusions follow automatically with a degree of certainty when we follow an accepted procedure.
But there are a lot of arguments that look like they're mathematical that really aren't.
For instance, we can discuss terms like more and less without really measurable units.
When President Reagan, campaigning for office in 1980, asked are you better off than you were four years ago, he was invoking just this kind of argument.
There's no precise way to measure better off whether you're better or worse, whether you have more or less is a subjective judgment.
And yet Mr. Reagan was appealing to it in the same way that one would make a mathematical comparison.
Or here's another example, the law of transitivity.
Mathematics it says if A is greater than B and B is greater than C, then A is greater than C.
Well what about this?
Ohio State sometimes beats Michigan in football even when Michigan is more highly ranked.
On rare occasions, Northwestern, where I teach, beats Ohio State.
So if Northwestern was better than Ohio State and Ohio State was better than Michigan, does it prove that Northwestern was really better than Michigan even though Michigan was ranked number four in the nation?
Of course not. It looks like a transitive relationship, but what's different is any team can beat any other team on a given day.
Or here's another example, argument from sacrifice.
I occasionally encounter this when a student comes to my office and says, of course you have to give me an A on this paper, I worked for 20 hours on it.
It assumes that effort or sacrifice can be measured precisely and that reward is relative to it.
So these are three examples then of arguments from form.
So what do common places and arguments from form have in common?
They both resemble deduction.
Common places resemble deduction in the contents of the statements, inferences from form in the structure of the arguments, and yet they aren't deductive.
They depend on interpretation and agreement that they apply to a given situation, which is why they need to be scrutinized carefully and subjected to the tests that we have described.
Now we've now considered a number of inference patterns one at a time, but often we find that they are combined, as we will see in the next lecture.
Lecture 18, Hybrid Patterns of Inference.
Welcome back. We've now considered six basic patterns of inference, example, analogy, sign, cause, common places and form.
We've talked about how they work and some of the tests that they must meet, but there are some textbooks and argumentation that will identify as many as 20 or 30 different patterns of inference, or as they're sometimes called argument schemes.
Often what these are is combinations of the basic six building blocks, hybrid patterns of inference.
And in this lecture, I want to consider some of these hybrid patterns. I warn you at the beginning, I'm not going to be comprehensive at all. In fact, I'm only going to look at three hybrid patterns of inference.
But I hope to illustrate how in general these combinations can be put together, as well as to talk about the specific inference patterns I'll describe and how they work.
The first of them that I'd like to talk about is reasoning with rules. Now a rule is an if-then statement. Its typical form is if conditions x arise, then y is either required, permitted, or forbidden.
If you drive faster than the speed limit, you may get a ticket. It's an example of a rule. Like any conditional statement, it contains antecedent and consequent clauses.
And it also contains an indication of the force of the rule, that is whether it is required or whether it's permitted or whether it's forbidden.
The rule functions as a commonplace. It's treated as an established principle, generally accepted, and could be used as if it were fact.
And what the rule does in an argument from rules is it mediates between a statement of factual conditions and a statement of what should be done in the particular case, so it facilitates case-based reasoning.
What about the statement of facts in an argument from rules? Well, the statement of facts is used analogically. So what's the evidence? The facts of a particular case. What's the claim? The action stated in the rule should be taken.
And what's the warrant? The rule applies in the case at hand because the conditions in the case at hand match those in the rule.
Now, since the rule was framed from a consideration of specifics, the case at hand is claimed to be basically like those on which the rule was built. That's the analogy.
And the judicial analogy, as we talked about when we looked at analogies, is then employed to say that like cases should be treated alike.
So what we've got when we reason with rules is a combination of the use of commonplaces and the use of analogies.
By the way, we could also note that since a rule is a general statement, we could say that it's applying a general statement to a particular case, and that's a particular example of reasoning from whole to part.
So we could say there's a three-way combination going on here.
Now, let's look and see how this theory works itself out, how reasoning with rules is used. Famous court cases could be cited to illustrate this hybrid inference pattern. Let me mention some.
The landmark case of Brown versus Board of Education in 1954, which established that segregated schools were unconstitution.
The rule that was being used was, if a practice violates equal protection of the laws, it must be changed, because after all, equal protection of the laws is a constitutional guarantee in the 14th Amendment.
The facts of the case were that schools in a number of states in the Union were legally segregated on the basis of race.
The claim that was advanced by the Supreme Court in its decision was, segregated schools are unconstitutional.
And the warrant is that segregated schools have conditions like the conditions that the 14th Amendment was intended to prevent, and thus segregated schools are inherently unequal and must be outlawed.
So you see what Brown versus Board of Education does. It involves an analogy between the facts of this case and the facts preceding the 14th Amendment, and it involves a rule if a practice violates equal protection, it must be changed.
The case of Roe versus Wade in 1973, which established the right to abortion, also involves reasoning with rules.
The rule in this case is, there is a right to privacy in communications between doctors and patients that must be protected.
So the rule could be stated, if doctors and patients are engaged in a relationship, that relationship is protected by privacy.
The facts of the case were that Texas law outlawed abortions.
The claim was that the Texas law was unconstitutional, and the warrant was that restrictions on abortion, in most cases, infringed the privacy of the doctor-patient relationship.
Now, anyone who has studied this decision knows that it's a very complex decision. The court did not put that forward as an absolute rule.
In fact, they said it's a rule that has greater force early in the pregnancy than late in the pregnancy.
Our purpose is not to go into the details of the decision's substance, but just to observe that it follows the pattern of reasoning with rules.
And a final example, the case of Bush versus Gore in 2000 that decided the 2000 presidential election.
The rule, once again, was equal protection. If a practice violates equal protection of the laws, it must be changed.
The facts of the case were that there were different standards for conducting manual recounts of the vote in different counties in Florida.
The claim was that the Florida county's recounts should be stopped, and the reason the warrant was disparate standards violate equal protection.
They are like the conditions that were envisioned when the equal protection phrase in the Constitution was established.
So, each one of these court cases illustrates this hybrid pattern of reasoning with rules that combines commonplace and analogy.
Now, the application of the rule to the facts of the case seems to be automatic, mechanical, even deductive.
But it's not. There are a number of judgment calls involved, so determining whether rule-based reasoning is valid involves certain tests that we have to ask.
Do the factual conditions of a given case satisfy all the requirements of the rule? Is the case like that of the rule?
Remember when we discussed analogy, we said analogies can never be deductive, because we're talking only about things that are similar, not identical.
Second test have all relevant aspects of the situation and context been considered.
Do the essential similarities outweigh the essential differences, for example.
And a third test, is the rule being applied unthinkingly or with a kind of misplaced literalism?
Have we exalted the letter over the spirit? I can tell you a personal story here.
I used to run a summer program for high school students in which there were several rules, one of which established for insurance purposes was
students who ride in motorized vehicles may be sent home, because there wasn't insurance coverage for them.
There was a particularly obnoxious student who one of my staff members one day found riding the escalator in one of the buildings and said,
Aha! Student is riding a motorized vehicle. Now that certainly is misplaced literalism exalting the letter of the rule over the spirit.
No reasonable person would invoke the rule in such a case.
Now sometimes the rule itself is contested, in which case it has to be justified by some greater rule or antecedent rule with a similar hybrid kind of reasoning pattern.
So what I've established here is that reasoning with rules, which by the way is a common pattern in law and in ethics, among other fields.
It's a hybrid that combines common places, analogy and reasoning from whole to part. That's one hybrid.
Another hybrid pattern of inference is arguing about values. Now arguing about values is difficult.
They can be highly personal. They can be intense, basic to our worldview.
But not being able to argue about values is also dangerous, because it leaves us no way to resolve value conflicts except to say,
Well, it doesn't make any difference. You have your values. I have my values. Or to say,
Well, the difference between these values has to be resolved by whoever has greater force.
Arguments about values frequently involve conflicts between values or value hierarchies rather than disagreement about whether something is good or bad.
We don't ask, should we be honest? Instead we ask, is honesty more important than friendship, for example?
So what happens when values are contested? Well, there are several different ways they can be defended.
One value might be argued to subsume the other, permitting us to enjoy both, so we could say protecting life also protects the quality of life.
One value might be argued to give us a greater benefit than another, or to be more important than another.
Justice is more important than happiness, for example, or vice versa.
One value might be preferred because forgoing it is irreparable. We can't go back and correct the situation.
Begrating the environment can't be repaired, we might argue.
One value might better promote some other value that both argueers share.
Both argueers believe that teenagers should be helped to become mature adults, and one says autonomy for teenagers better achieves this value than does distrust.
One value might be argued to be better supported by authoritative texts.
So, for instance, acceptance of the gay lifestyle or discouragement of the gay lifestyle is more in keeping with the Bible.
One value might be argued to be better supported by respected people.
The morality or the immorality of U.S. military intervention is supported by more Nobel Prize winners than the opposite.
One value might be argued to lead to more desirable consequences than the other. This is called the pragmatic argument.
So, we might say infringing on people's privacy will enable us better to protect against terrorism.
Safeguarding people's privacy will enable us to enhance civil liberties.
And protecting against terrorism is more important than enhancing civil liberties or vice versa,
preferring one value to the other on the basis of consequences.
Well, these are all different ways that we conventionally argue about values when the values are in conflict.
Now, how is this a hybrid inference pattern?
Well, it employs inferences from form, mathematical-like relationships, for instance, in seeking to compare values.
And it employs causal argument in a discussion of what adopting one or the other value will lead to.
So, it combines inferences from form and inferences from cause.
A couple of contemporary moral issues illustrate this hybrid inference pattern.
So, consider, for example, the controversy over stem cell research.
One claim might be stem cell research has the potential for eradicating disease.
And the competing claim stem cell research destroys, depending on your point of view, potential or actual human life.
The value conflict results from matching the causal claims with regard to the effects of stem cell research.
And the inference from form comes about through comparing the consequences in order to decide which is best.
Likewise, the controversy over end-of-life decision-making and maintaining life support for terminally ill patients illustrates arguing about values.
One claim might be removing life support risks hastening a person's death.
And the competing claim might be maintaining life support risks sustaining an unacceptable quality of life.
Again, there are causal claims that are set in juxtaposition to each other.
And the comparison is made in order to decide which consequence is better.
So, as both of these examples illustrate, we argue about values we combine inferences from form and inferences from cause.
Now, I don't mean to suggest that all arguments about values can be resolved.
Because in order to resolve them, we have to use one of the six or seven methods that I described, all of which ultimately appeal to something on which the arguers agree.
But sometimes there isn't any bedrock base of agreement to which the arguers can appeal.
Not all value disputes can be resolved.
In those cases, the argument functions for each participant as a way to clarify and better understand his or her own values, even though it's not settled.
But I would suggest that the conclusion that there is no basis for agreement ought to be the last resort of the arguers, not the first resort.
They shouldn't start out being unwilling to argue about values because they then get into the problem I discussed before.
There's no way to settle a dispute.
So, even when value disagreements can't be resolved, the discussion of the value conflicts is still useful.
So far, we've discussed reasoning from rules and arguing about values as hybrid patterns of inference.
The third one I want to discuss, and I promised you there would only be three, is called dissociation.
And this time, if you'll indulge me, before I explain what dissociation is or talk about any of the theory, I want to talk about an example that I think will help make it clear.
I want to talk about how, in a famous speech at Howard University in 1965, President Lyndon Johnson introduced the idea of affirmative action into public discourse.
What Johnson did was he took what traditionally had been regarded as racial equality, namely the absence of legal discrimination.
And he said that it was only the appearance of equality.
He described his own vision, equal results, as true equality.
And he made a distinction. He said we should have equality not just as a right and a theory, but equality as a fact and a result.
And he defended his description by a figurative analogy to a foot race.
He said, you do not take a man who has been hobbled by chains, bring him up to the starting line of a race, say you are free to compete with all the others and think that you have been completely fair.
The unstated point of the analogy, of course, a legacy of past discrimination requires offsetting compensatory action.
This was the beginning of the discussion of affirmative action.
Now the case of President Johnson should show how this inference is a hybrid.
He took an analogy. Remember we said analogies compare what's familiar to what's unfamiliar.
He took the familiar part, that is the person in the foot race, and accepted that as a commonplace, that it wouldn't be fair to take a person who had been hobbled by chains and say you're free to compete with all the others.
So he employed analogical reasoning. The man in the foot race is like African Americans in the contemporary U.S.
The argument also contains a sign inference. One thing, that is results, is claimed to be a better sign of equality than another thing, which is professions in the law.
So his inference combined analogy and sign.
Now let's examine what Johnson was doing and we'll see what dissociation is and how it works.
Dissociation involves two analytical steps.
First, a previously unambiguous concept with a single commonly accepted meaning, such as equality, is divided into two concepts.
The absence of legal discrimination and equal outcomes.
One of which is valued more positively than the other. Equal outcomes in this case.
That's the first analytical move to take a previously simple, commonly understood term and divide it into.
The second analytical step is to identify one's adversaries position with the less valued concept and one's own position with the more valued concept.
So Johnson identified the position of unnamed adversaries with absence of legal discrimination and his own position that he was trying to urge upon the American people with equal results.
How does one do this? How did Johnson do it?
Well, the division is accomplished by applying a pair of terms that are opposed to each other to the previously unitary term.
So he took terms like right and right versus fact and theory versus result.
The philosophical pair, the pair of terms, two contrasting concepts, one preferred over the other.
Fact preferred over right. Result preferred over theory. Other common examples, reality preferred over appearance.
Spirit preferred over letter. Truth preferred over opinion.
That's what a dissociation is.
Now let me take another example. Although I'll do this one probably more briefly, another famous one.
Lincoln and his views about slavery and equality.
Lincoln believed that all men are created equal as stated in the Declaration of Independence.
But he also believed that the two races could not coexist peaceably under conditions of political and social equality.
So he did not favor permitting African Americans to serve on juries.
He didn't favor permitting them to vote until the very end of his life.
He didn't favor permitting them to hold office.
He didn't favor permitting them to intermarry with whites and so on.
Now this seems on the face of it like a contradiction.
How could you believe that all men are created equal and not believe in any of those other things?
Lincoln resolved this tension in his beliefs by taking the concept of equality and dividing it up.
Performing a dissociation.
He dissociated equality into, on the one hand, economic equality and on the other, social and political equality.
He would say, I don't believe in perfect equality between the races.
Perfect equality by the way was a euphemism for intermarriage.
But he went on to say, in the right to eat the bread that his own hand earns, blacks are every bit the equal of whites.
So he took one aspect of equality, privileged it over the other aspect of equality and identified the privileged aspect with his own position.
So what the cases of both Johnson and Lincoln illustrate is dissociation at work.
Now in public discourse, there usually are clues to suggest that a dissociation has been employed.
The use of opposing adjectives, such as apparent versus real.
That's one clue.
And apparent tautology, when we say boys will be boys, what we're cluing is there are different aspects of being a boy.
An apparent paradox, as in the case of Lincoln.
How could you believe in the Declaration of Independence and not believe in social or political equality?
The use of terms such as pseudo, so-called and quasi, which suggests that the term isn't really being used in the way one might think it's being used.
Or the use of quotation marks around the term, suggesting that the user doesn't really mean the term in the way that it's commonly understood.
These are all clues that what's going on here is a dissociation.
Now we've talked for a long time about dissociations, you might ask, why are they used so often?
And the answer is, a dissociation can advance a controversy by changing perceptions of the argument, reframing the issue, putting the issue in a new light.
So for example, what Johnson was doing with his dissociation of the term equality was he was trying to say, we can't just be satisfied with law.
We have to also look at actual behavior and actual performance.
And so in order to get from a purely legalistic perspective to a policy-oriented perspective, he dissociated the meaning of the term.
Lincoln did the same thing in order to get beyond the popular racial prejudice of the 19th century, some of which frankly he shared.
And to focus on what he thought was the most essential aspect of human freedom, namely the right to upward mobility, he performed a dissociation and reframed the issue from a social and political issue to an economic issue.
It puts the issue in a new light in order to get beyond a seeming impasse.
Now, we as analysts of argument have to ask ourselves, is a particular dissociation a reasonable inference?
Like any of the inferences we've been discussing, it doesn't follow automatically.
And so we ask ourselves certain things.
Are the two parts of the concept, the two sides of equality, for example, really different?
Are the opposing terms like appearance, reality, letter, spirit, are they in the correct relationship?
Is the right one being preferred?
Or should we perhaps invert the relationship?
And does the dissociation really reframe the controversy?
Does it really change the perspective and get us to see things in a different way?
So what I have suggested in this lecture is that reasoning with rules, arguing about values, and dissociations are all examples of hybrid inference patterns.
They combine two or more of the basic patterns that we've been describing.
They're valuable to understand in their own right, and they also illustrate how many sophisticated argument patterns can be designed with combinations of the six basic schemes.
Now it's time to recapitulate our study of inference patterns that has occupied us for the past six lectures.
Inferences from example relate parts to holds. Inferences from analogy involve comparisons.
Inferences from sign establish correlations. Inferences from cause trace influence.
Inferences from common places apply social knowledge.
Inferences from form rely on an argument's structure.
And there are also hybrid inference patterns like the ones we've been discussing in this lecture.
For each of these inference patterns, there are questions to raise and test to employ in order to determine whether the argument is valid.
This matter of validity, a key concept to determine whether an argument's good, will now be our principal focus starting in the next lecture.
Lecture 19, Validity and Fallacies, Part 1
It's good to be back with you again. For the past several lectures we've been engaged in argument analysis, as we've talked about types of claims, categories of evidence, and patterns of inference and warrants.
Argument analysis enables us to take an argument that we might see or hear in a political speech, newspaper editorial, perhaps even in a conversation, and understand what's going on, what are the internal workings of the argument.
And it also enables us to construct arguments with confidence that they're complete even if we don't make all the parts explicit.
But argumentation deals not only with analysis, but also with appraisal.
We evaluate arguments as good or bad, strong or weak.
And we do that because we want to know not just what does convince people, but what should convince people.
Or to put it another way, what would convince people if they were exercising their critical judgment in reasonable fashion.
So there's an inherently normative component to argumentation as well. This is called argument appraisal.
And the next two lectures will deal with that.
The central question is what makes a good argument? And the answer is two-fold.
One, the evidence or the premises, true. This is a fairly straightforward matter.
It can be determined by empirical methods or by authoritative consensus.
Second answer to what makes an argument good is validity, the relationship between the evidence and the claim.
The question is whether the claim is warranted on the basis of the evidence.
Now, validity is a concept derived from formal logic. It is a matter of form, not content.
It has nothing to do with the truth of any of the statements, but rather with the relationship and the structure among them.
Simply put, an argument is valid if, when the evidence is true, the claim must be true.
To have true evidence and a false claim would be a contradiction.
So if all heavenly bodies are made of green cheese and the moon is a heavenly body, then the moon must be made of green cheese.
Now, in formal logic, we can say that an argument is valid if it follows the rules for a particular pattern of inference.
And it's invalid or fallacious if it fails to follow the rules for that particular pattern.
Well, what are those rules? Let's go back to the three kinds of syllogisms in formal logic that we discussed in lecture three.
Begin with the categorical syllogism. Remember, this is the kind of argument that takes things from one category and puts them into another.
There are elaborate rules to evaluate categorical syllogisms, which we don't have time to develop here, but fortunately there's a shortcut.
When we draw diagrams, like those that I described in lecture three, do we know for sure where to put all the parts?
Consider a simple case. All doctors are courteous. All lawyers are courteous.
Therefore, all doctors are lawyers.
Now, we instinctively reject that conclusion because we know, in fact, that all doctors aren't lawyers.
But that deals with truth. Here we're talking about validity. What's wrong with that argument as a matter of form?
Well, we draw a circle representing all the lawyers, and we put that in a larger circle representing the category of people who are courteous.
Now we want to draw a circle representing doctors and put that in the category of people who are courteous.
We'll quickly see we don't know whether there's any overlap between the category of lawyers and the category of doctors.
So we would say that that categorical syllogism is not valid. We don't know where to put all the parts in the diagram.
In the conditional syllogism, the if-then syllogism, we said that an argument is valid if it affirms the antecedent or if it denies the consequent.
It's invalid if it affirms the consequent or denies the antecedent. Simple enough.
And in the disjunctive syllogism, an argument is valid if it rejects one alternative and accepts the other.
It's invalid if it accepts one alternative and rejects the other if the term or is being used in the non-exclusive sense,
so that it could mean either one thing or the other thing or both.
Now, those are the rules. We follow the rules, we've got a valid argument. We fail to follow the rules, we have an invalid argument.
And in formal logic, the terms invalid and fallacious are essentially synonymous.
A fallacy is a deficiency in the form of an argument that's not immediately apparent.
The problem, however, is when we apply the concept of validity beyond formal argument to the kinds of argument we've been talking about in every lecture except number three,
it's tricky because the claim doesn't follow from the evidence with certainty,
so we can never say that if the evidence is true, the claim must be true.
So strictly speaking, validity as formal logicians understand it is not possible in everyday ordinary arguments.
But we need something to do the same work as the concept of validity.
We need a middle ground between rejecting all informal arguments as unacceptable, we've already seen why we can't do that,
and accepting that whatever happens to persuade anybody is a good argument.
We also can't do that, or we have no normative standard at all.
So ordinary informal argument tries to achieve the function that is served by validity, not by focusing on form, but by focusing on experience.
And instead of saying that an argument is valid, we sometimes say that it is reasonable, we use the term synonymously.
Accumulated experience with a reasoning pattern yields standards that are generally accepted as guidelines of reasonableness.
Of course, the application of these guidelines is subjective, though not whimsical.
So sometimes opposing arguments can both be reasonable.
So what are the guidelines?
In this and the next lecture, I want to discuss four categories of guidelines.
First, there are standards that correspond to each specific pattern of inference.
And in many cases we talked about these without calling them standards of reasonableness when we examined the inference patterns.
So let's follow the same order we did the first time around.
Starting with inferences from example.
Valid arguments that employ inferences from example are those which avoid certain key pitfalls.
They will avoid hasty generalization, reaching a conclusion from too few examples.
They will avoid unrepresentative samples, like that we talked about in the case of the literary digest poll that surveyed only subscribers and telephone owners.
Valid arguments will avoid the fallacy of composition, assuming that what's true of the part is automatically true of the whole.
And they'll avoid the fallacy of division, assuming that what's true of the whole is automatically true of the part.
So what makes a valid inference from example?
It's an inference that steers clear of these problems.
For arguments relying on inferences from analogy, there is really one very simple standard of validity.
Valid analogies are those in which the essential similarities outweigh the essential differences.
And invalid arguments are those in which they don't.
Now for inferences from sign, how do we determine whether an argument is valid?
The sign and the thing that it signifies generally occur together.
There are not obvious counter signs.
The same sign doesn't herald opposite things.
The relationship is not mere coincidence like we saw about the years ending in zero and presidents dying in office.
And again, sign is not confused with cause.
For inferences from cause, valid arguments avoid the errors that we saw associated with that pattern.
They too will avoid confusing sign with cause.
They will avoid failing to identify a common cause when there really is one that produces both of the things that we might mistakenly think to be cause and effect.
They'll avoid confusing temporality with causality or to say the same thing another way they will not commit the post hoc fallacy.
They'll avoid confusing cause with effect and they will not ignore multiple causes or multiple effects which might limit the force of the causal claim.
What this means is that they won't over claim causality.
They won't over claim what they'll do about solving a particular problem if the problem has multiple causes.
And they won't under claim.
They won't under claim what the consequences will be including unintended perhaps as well as intended consequences.
Valid inferences from common places will show that the common place applies to the specific situation at hand more than do any competing common places.
And finally for inferences from form, valid arguments are those which recognize the difference between the appearance of deductive certainty and the reality that the claim follows only with some degree of probability.
Not every dilemma really considers all the alternatives.
Reasoning from hypothesis although it looks like a conditional syllogism in fact is something different.
And arguments that look like they're mathematical computations are valid if we don't forget that the assignment of numerical values is somewhat arbitrary and that we're essentially quantifying the unquantifiable.
So with respect to each of the inference patterns we've examined, accumulated experience with the pattern suggests the validity tests that we want to meet in order to avoid fallacious arguments.
We actually discussed these tests in detail when we considered the inference patterns and what I've done now is just quickly to review them.
But some fallacies are broader than individual patterns of inference.
So a second general category of fallacies, errors in informal reasoning includes those that are deficiencies of clarity.
Deficiencies of clarity result from the inexactness of language.
And of course that's a condition that's particular to informal reasoning.
With formal logic, language really doesn't matter.
Once we cast arguments into everyday ordinary language though, we can run into problems such as equivocation.
Equivocation is the use of the same word to convey different meanings within the same argument so that the meaning of the term shifts as the argument proceeds.
Consider this example.
Anyone who tries to violate a law should be punished even if the attempt fails.
People who fly are trying to violate the law of gravity.
Therefore, they should be punished.
Simple example.
And we can quickly see what's wrong.
The meaning of the word law changes during the course of the argument.
In the first case, it's used to refer to a legal statute.
In the second case, it's used to refer to a natural law, principle of the law of nature.
And so we don't accept the conclusion that people who fly ought to be punished.
In fact, we'd probably laugh at it.
That's equivocation.
Closely related, but not quite the same thing, is ambiguity.
Ambiguity is a situation where a word or phrase has more than one meaning.
And it's not so much that the meaning shifts in the argument as that we can't be sure which of the different meanings is the intended one for the argument.
Let's consider an example.
We shouldn't hire Peter because our company has a policy against hiring drug users and I saw Peter take aspirin.
Now, obviously, in this case, the word drug has more than one possible meaning.
It can be used in the context of prescription drugs, can be used in the context of over-the-counter drugs,
or it can be used in the context of illegal substances.
And it's not clear which meaning is intended.
Now, we could guess in such a simple example that the policy against hiring drug users is not intended to refer to prescription drugs or over-the-counter drugs,
but it's not always so obvious which meaning is intended.
Here's another example.
Smith and Jones have a conversation and Smith says,
the first thing you need to know if you want to become a musician is the scale.
Jones says, what's the scale?
And Smith answers, it all depends on the union.
In this town, it's about $8 an hour.
Now, when Smith first talks and says you've got to know the scale if you want to become a musician,
we might imagine that the term scale is used to refer to the musical scale.
But apparently not.
There's a different meaning intended, so the term scale is ambiguous.
In recent history, probably the most famous example of an ambiguous term,
which most of us probably didn't think was ambiguous,
occurred when President Clinton said it all depends on what the meaning of is is,
suggesting that even such a simple term as that can have multiple meanings,
and it's not always clear which one is meant.
Similar to ambiguity is a third clarity problem, amphibaly,
which results when we can't be sure which of a set of possible meanings of a phrase is the intended meaning.
So, ambiguity refers to terms amphibaly to phrases.
Consider the statement, the cardinals are in town.
Does this phrase refer to birds, to a baseball team,
or to officials of the Roman Catholic Church?
It's not clear.
Another problem with clarity is vagueness.
A term is vague if there is no way to pin down what is meant.
My favorite example of a vague term is the term middle age.
At one time, I thought this term meant anybody over the age of 30.
Amazingly, as I've become older, the term middle age has changed as far as what it means to me.
I now think of it as probably older than 80, 90, 95.
But the point is, it's a term that it's almost inherently impossible to render precise.
Now, there are two other clarity problems that are somewhat related.
And they are the problem of the heap and the problem of the slippery slope.
The problem of the heap can be illustrated by a simple example.
You have a little pile of sand.
You add another grain of sand to it, and you still have a little pile.
You add another grain, still have a little pile, and so on.
So the pile never changes into a big one.
Or to use another example, those of you who are watching on video can see the color of my beard.
You might be generous and say it's salt and pepper, or you might say it's gray or even white.
But I grew this beard over 30 years ago, and it was black.
One day I found a single gray hair, but I still said my beard was black.
Found another gray hair, still said my beard was black, and so on.
So my beard never changed from black to white.
That's the fallacy of the heap.
During the Vietnam War, the argument was that the addition of more American troops did not fundamentally change the war.
We'd put in 5,000 more and 10,000 more and 10,000 more, and our objectives would be basically the same.
Except somewhere along the way, we went from American advisors assisting the Vietnamese to an American war with half a million troops.
So the clarity problem with the heap is not knowing precisely when a difference in degree becomes a difference in kind.
The problem of the slippery slope is the reverse. Any difference becomes a difference in kind.
Once you get started on something, there's no stopping. You'll travel down a slippery slope.
So consider this example.
The United States should oppose military aggression wherever it happens, no matter how minor,
because letting any aggression go unpunished will just encourage even more and more horrible forms of aggression
and will eventually lead to war throughout the world.
You see what's being said. Any small case of aggression will set us on an unstoppable slippery slope that will lead to world war.
And of course, the fallacy in the slippery slope is the assumption that once something gets started,
there's no way to reverse course or no way to stop, so every difference in degree turns into a difference in kind.
So we have equivocation, ambiguity, amphiboly, vagueness, heaps, slippery slopes.
These are all deficiencies in argument that could render an argument fallacious or unreasonable because of clarity.
And in order to have a valid argument, these are fallacies we want to avoid.
So we've looked now at deficiencies particular to individual inferences and deficiencies of clarity.
A third category of fallacies are those that are the result of vacuity.
These result from the failure to provide necessary proofs, leaving holes or empty spaces in the argument.
Again, we can consider a number of examples of this kind of problem.
I want to talk first about circular reasoning. This is a great name for a fallacy because you can visualize exactly what's going on.
The reasoning proceeds in a circle. The claim, instead of following from the evidence, just restates the evidence in slightly different language.
And so you really haven't made any inference at all. You haven't moved beyond the statement that you started out with.
Consider this example. Freedom of speech is for the common good because the unrestrained expression of opinions is in the best interest of all concerned.
Now what does that argument really say?
It says freedom of speech is for the common good because freedom of speech is for the common good.
The claim simply restates the evidence. It reasons in a circle. The evidence proves the claim, the claim proves the evidence, and we don't really advance our understanding at all.
Or consider this case. When B applies for a job from A, A says, how can we know you are trustworthy?
And B says, Mr. Davidson will write me a recommendation. A says, why should we trust him? B, I assure you that he is honest.
Now here again we've got a clear case of reasoning in a circle. The point of the conversation is to establish that B is trustworthy.
But the conclusion when B says, I assure you that Davidson is honest depends upon the fact that B is trustworthy, the very thing that we're trying to prove.
It proceeds in a circle.
Or again one more example. This is a characteristic form of argument in some religious circles.
The Bible is the inerrant word of God because God speaks only the truth.
How do we know? Repeatedly in the Bible God tells us that the Bible consists of his words.
Now again, don't misunderstand me. I'm not commenting about whether or not the Bible is the literal word of God.
But this proof, this means of proving that the Bible is the literal word of God works in a circle.
Because it depends upon God saying that the Bible is God's own word. So it repeats what it begins with in the evidence.
So that's circular reasoning and that's a fairly common problem of vacuity.
Now somewhat related but slightly different is the problem of begging the question.
This occurs when a claim is really dependent on other claims that need to be established but aren't.
They're implicitly assumed when they shouldn't be assumed.
The classic case of begging the question is, have you stopped beating your wife?
Now there's no way you can answer that question.
If you answer yes, well you've just admitted that you used to beat your wife.
And if you answer no, you've admitted you're still doing it.
The question that is begged is that you ever were beating your wife in the first place.
That really needs to be proved.
Consider an example.
An opponent of capital punishment says, state-sponsored murder only doubles the evil of the original crime.
Now I have no doubt that the opponent of capital punishment believes that.
But what is begged in that statement is the assumption that capital punishment is state-sponsored murder.
That's something of course that the advocate ought to prove.
So we have circular reasoning, we have begging the question.
Another kind of problem that's associated with vacuity is ignoring the question.
This is the result of digression or focusing on a matter that's extraneous to the question at hand.
And when this kind of extraneous matter is introduced it's sometimes called a red herring.
This is a metaphor that goes back a couple hundred years from Fox Hunts in which a red herring would be drawn across the trail to lure the dogs away and have the dogs not smell the fox.
A red herring is introduced in a situation like this.
Imagine an argument in which you say, the growing federal budget deficit curtailes our ability to meet important priorities.
I respond, a tax cut gives people more control over their own money.
That's a red herring.
We're not talking about whether people ought to have more control over their own money.
The question at issue is, what's the effect of the increasing deficit on our ability to meet important priorities?
And to say, well a tax cut gives people more control over their own money is to introduce an irrelevant element that ignores the question at hand.
That's the key point of this problem, it ignores the question that's at hand.
Then there's what may seem like a catch-all fallacy, the non-sequiture, which means it does not follow.
On the face of it, there's no connection between the claim and the evidence.
So what's vacuous here is that there's no inference really going on.
Of course, X wouldn't be a good public servant.
He has a beard and can't carry a tune.
Hello?
On the face of it, there's no connection at all between whether or not X has a beard or can't carry a tune and his ability to be a good public servant.
Sometimes we talk about attacking a straw man.
I apologize for the masculine reference, but that's how the fallacy has been named.
This is another vacuity problem.
A straw man has been attacked when one's argument responds to a claim that has not been made and is not in dispute,
rather than to the claim that has been made that's the focus of the dispute.
So imagine on a proposal to outlaw the burning of the flag, someone says,
I oppose flag burning. I am a patriotic American.
And the response might be, the claim I'm a patriotic American is a straw man,
because nobody's ever questioned your patriotism.
So the straw man consists of answering what hasn't been attacked, rather than what has.
And then a final example of vacuity problems is the self-sealing argument that permits no possible testing,
because it can encompass opposite results.
During the Cold War, our country believed that we needed to be firm and strong.
And if things turned out for us, we said, great, that proves that being firm and strong works.
And if things didn't turn out for us, we said, that only proves we weren't firm and strong enough.
Whether foreign policy works for us or against us, it bears out the assumption that firmness works.
There's no way to challenge whether that's the right foreign policy.
These then are problems of vacuity that we want to avoid in order for our arguments to be valid or reasonable.
One more category of fallacies, deficiencies of relevance.
We'll begin there in the next lecture.
Lecture 20, Validity and Fallacies, Part 2
Welcome once again.
Last time we introduced the concepts of validity and fallacies,
explaining that in order to know whether an argument is good, we must know if it's valid.
We considered how validity translates from formal to informal argument,
and then we considered three categories of validity tests,
those related to specific warrant or inference patterns,
those involving deficiencies of clarity, and those involving vacuity.
There is one more category of validity tests to consider, deficiencies in relevance.
And these result from introducing into the discussion some factor that has nothing to do with the relationship between evidence and claim or inference and warrant.
And again, we can talk about several examples of these.
One of the most common has the name ad hominem against the person.
Ad hominem arguments are usually defined as those in which an attack on a person is substituted for a response to an argument.
So let's imagine that you and I are having a discussion about whether having a tax cut is a good idea.
And I say that I'm opposed to it, I don't think it's appropriate at this time to have a tax cut.
And you reply, look, the main opposition to tax cuts always comes from people like you who depend on government programs that are funded by taxes,
so we should pay no attention to what you have to say.
You see what this response has done?
Instead of responding to my claim that we ought not to have a tax cut, it has substituted a personal attack against me.
Well, you know we ought not to take seriously what you say because you depend on the government programs.
It's an error of relevance.
Whether I depend on the government programs or not on the face of it has nothing to do with whether a tax cut is a good idea.
That's the argument ad hominem.
Another kind of relevance problem is the appeal to authority.
Particularly if the authority is outside his or her area of expertise or has no basis for reaching the conclusions that he or she offers.
Remember we said that a valid use of authority comes when expertise is taken to be a sign of accuracy.
But when you have prominent entertainment figures, sports figures or politicians endorsing commercial products saying this product is good and you can take it on my say so,
we usually have fallacious arguments, usually incorrect appeals to authority.
The authority of the sports figure or the politician has nothing to do with his or her use of the product that's being endorsed or his or her ability to recommend that product to you.
Another kind of relevance problem is the appeal to popularity.
This is sometimes called the bandwagon effect.
Something or other is a good thing or a bad thing because everybody's doing it.
And so popularity is substituted for the rightness of the argument.
This is a very familiar argument pattern to anyone who is in a home with teenagers.
Once the teenager says, well all of my friends are allowed to go to the mall or everybody's allowed to stay out late, why can't I?
And of course the fact that everybody does it doesn't make it a good thing.
And so the response to this argument often takes the form of what I will label the dad's refutation.
And that is, if all of your friends were going to jump in the lake, would you go do it too?
This is a rhetorical question that serves to make the point that popularity by itself is not a warrant.
It doesn't make it right.
Yet another relevance problem is the appeal to tradition.
Now an appeal to tradition like any of these appeals is not always wrong,
but an appeal to tradition can be used to block consideration of change without engaging the argument.
So let's imagine a situation in which a new business practice is being proposed.
If a company changes its accounting method or the way it keeps its inventory or the way it does this or that,
it can maximize its profit or minimize its cost or improve employee productivity.
And the response is, but we've always done it this way, period.
End of discussion, we've always done it this way.
This is an appeal to tradition that's inappropriate because it's used not to recognize the culture of the business or the organization,
but to block further consideration.
It's irrelevant, really, to the question of whether this change in the business practice would produce the appeals that are claimed for it.
Appeals to ignorance are another kind of relevance problem.
Now this is not an accusation that somebody is ignorant.
Rather, it's the assumption that a claim must be true because it can't be shown to be false,
or it must be false because it can't be shown to be true.
Ignorance becomes the premise in the argument.
It's used as a reason to do or not to do something, to believe or not to believe something.
President Reagan, expressing his opposition to abortion, once said,
you know it's interesting that all the people who favor abortion have already been born.
And of course, what President Reagan is saying is because we don't know what the fetus would think about abortion,
we ought to conclude that abortion is wrong.
Or here's another example.
This one characterizes the discourse of some organizations on the political fringe.
We can't prove that there isn't a plot by the United Nations to take over the U.S. by putting chemicals in our drinking water.
Therefore, we ought to conclude that there is.
Because we can't disprove some sort of fanciful plot, we ought to conclude that it's a real and serious threat.
Yet another example of a relevance problem with argument is an argument that appeals to inappropriate emotion.
It can prevent a response because of expressions of anger or fear or something else that's just irrelevant to the discussion.
This is characterized stereotype, for example, in the line from the movie,
I'm mad as hell and I'm not going to take it anymore.
And one's anger becomes a way to stop further consideration of the argument.
Now let me be very clear.
I'm not suggesting that every appeal to emotion is inappropriate, far from it.
There are arguments that are quite legitimately intended to reason to a conclusion that we ought to be angry.
We ought to be upset.
We ought to be outraged.
We ought to be shameful or whatever.
These are perfectly legitimate arguments.
The fallacy in the argument comes about when the appeal is inappropriately to emotion in such a way that the emotion,
instead of furthering the discussion, blocks consideration of what it is that's being talked about.
And my final example in this category, threats.
Threats coerce the conclusion, not because of the power of the argument,
but in order to avoid force or other kinds of serious consequences.
Employers sometimes have been accused of saying to their workers,
if you don't contribute to candidate X, I will fire you.
A worker who then contributes to candidate X cannot be assumed to have done so on the basis of the strength of the argument,
but rather on the irrelevant factor to the argument, namely the threat.
So, all of these relevance problems, the ad hominem argument, the appeal to authority, appeal to popularity, appeal to tradition,
appeal to ignorance, appeal to inappropriate emotion, and the threat,
introduce into the discussion some factor that is really not relevant to the relationship between the evidence and the claim.
Not relevant to whether the inference is adequately warranted or not.
It deflects and distorts the argument.
Now, between the last lecture and the first part of this one, we have covered quite a few fallacies under these four general headings.
The important thing, however, is not simply to put labels on arguments and say,
here's a case of argument ad hominem, here's a case of appeal to tradition.
The important thing is the ability to explain how the argument goes astray and why it is not valid.
Now I have to complicate matters, because recent scholarship suggests that many of these fallacies are not always fallacies.
They may sometimes be perfectly reasonable arguments.
So simply spotting them or labeling them is not enough to conclude that an argument is fallacious.
And this can be seen most clearly if I go back to deficiencies in relevance.
Let's consider the argument from ignorance.
We said that appeals to ignorance are a fallacy if we make decisions based on ignorance.
And yet there are lots of times when we have to make a decision without knowing everything that we really need to know.
And so we create a presumption that says, in the face of uncertainty, the decision ought to be weighted one way or another.
When we're engaged in environmental impact statements, we are saying we don't exactly know, but there is a danger of this kind of harm to the environment.
Therefore we should take precautions against it.
We're making an argument from ignorance.
We're saying because we don't know X, we should do Y.
And yet I suspect that very few people would be inclined to regard that as a fallacious argument, whether they agree with it or not.
The use of the argument from ignorance in a reasonable or valid way is even clearer with respect to the effect of terrorism.
By its nature, terrorists operate in secret.
There is much that we don't know about their capabilities, intentions or plans.
This became evident in 2002 and 2003 in considering whether or not the Iraqi regime under Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction.
Then National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice in 2002 said, we're not sure but we don't want the smoking gun to be a mushroom cloud.
Suggesting, because of the great risk of being wrong and thinking that Saddam Hussein did not have nuclear weapons when in fact he did, we ought to act preemptively.
In an earlier lecture we looked in some detail at then Secretary of State Colin Powell's speech to the United Nations Security Council in which Secretary Powell argued,
we don't know that Iraq has destroyed the weapons of mass destruction that it once had.
Therefore we should conclude that it still has them.
Again an argument from ignorance.
These are reasonable positions given the magnitude of the risk that is involved.
I don't mean to suggest that Condoleezza Rice or Colin Powell was right or that there weren't other problems in their arguments.
Indeed there were, but the fact that they were arguing from ignorance did not by itself make their arguments fallacious.
What we saw with the argument from ignorance can also be seen with the argument ad hominem, the attack on a person's character.
Is this always fallacious?
No.
A contemporary Canadian scholar of informal logic Douglas Walton has devoted extensive study to the ad hominem argument and he identified several different types of this argument.
Let me mention three of them to illustrate his point.
There is the bad character type of ad hominem that asserts that the person is an untrustworthy source for the claim.
A simple form of this argument.
Smith is a communist so don't believe anything he says.
But there's a very different kind of personal attack that is called the circumstantial ad hominem.
This is an argument that asserts that a person's own conduct or a person's own beliefs and commitments are at odds with the claim that he or she asserts.
The classic case of the circumstantial ad hominem occurs when a parent who is a smoker tries to convince his or her teenage child not to start smoking and talks about how dangerous smoking is and how harmful it can be to your health.
And the child responds, but you smoke two packs a day.
And of course the implication of the child's response is you must not take your own argument very seriously because your circumstances contradict what you have said the argument works against you.
Circumstantial ad hominem was used by opponents of the Supreme Court decision that settled the presidential election of 2000.
That decision overrode state regulations.
And yet the court that made that decision was one that was traditionally very deferential to state legislatures and state courts and state decisions.
And so some opponents said, well it clearly reflects their partisan desires because their own rulings on federalism would contradict what they've said in this case.
And there's a third kind of ad hominem argument, the bias type.
This is an argument that says that a person has a particular prejudice or vested interest in an outcome.
And for that reason what he or she says ought not to be taken seriously.
If the secretary of defense holds stock in companies that do business with the defense department, he or she could have an unconscious motive to favor those companies in awarding defense contracts.
Well if the argument were made, you're favoring this company because you hold stock in it, that's an attack that's different from the bad character type and different from the circumstantial type.
It says there's a particular reason, a prejudice, a bias, a vested interest that prevents that person from making an impartial judgment or being an impartial source.
A lawyer who says we ought to create new courts to take care of the court backlog, fully understanding that if new courts are created he's likely to be appointed one of the new judges.
Would likewise be said to have a vested interest or bias.
Now if we think about it, we can imagine circumstances in which each one of these forms of the ad hominem, far from being a fallacy, is a perfectly legitimate and reasonable argument.
If a claim depends upon the judgment of a source, for example, then questioning the source's trustworthiness may be highly relevant.
Not just saying well Smith's a communist therefore don't trust him, but a personal attack that says this is not a trustworthy source to make a claim that depends upon that source's judgment.
Maybe perfectly appropriate.
Likewise, if one's sincerity is in doubt, or if one takes an inconsistent position, as in the case of a candidate who says he supports a policy that he previously has voted against, then the confidence that somebody gives to that position will and should be reduced.
And while I certainly don't endorse just issuing epithets, establishing that a source is biased or prejudicial or has a vested interest may discredit a claim that is based upon the testimony of that source.
Now what is true of the argument from ignorance and the ad hominem argument is true of most of the deficiencies of relevance and for that matter many of the other fallacies as well.
They might be fallacious or they might be valid depending on the context in which they are used.
One of the things that Douglas Walton has done is he's taken these fallacies almost one by one and unpacked what is encompassed by the fallacy and tried to suggest lots of situations in which the argument's not fallacious at all.
Now what that says to us is that if we really want to appraise correctly arguments as they are used in ordinary discourse, we can't simply have this list of 15 or 16 or 20 names of fallacies stick a label on an argument and say now the argument's clearly fallacious and it ought to be rejected.
We've got to do something beyond that.
And another contemporary approach to validity and fallacies suggests what we may need to do.
There's another approach that appraises arguments by focusing on the function that the argument serves, how it contributes to a particular process or procedure.
A common assumption of this line of thought is that arguments take place in an interaction whose goal is resolving disagreement.
That is people engage in arguments when they disagree with each other, when the disagreement matters to them, when they want the other party to agree with them.
So their goal is resolving the disagreement.
Although this doesn't mean that all disagreements actually get settled or that an argument's necessarily unsuccessful if it doesn't.
But according to this view, a valid argument is one that contributes to the goal of resolving disagreement and a fallacious argument is one that detracts from the goal.
This way of thinking changes how we look at fallacies.
For example, before the Civil War, many Southerners believed that states' rights were sacrosanct and took precedence over federal authority.
But when slavery was threatened, they argued that the federal government should override the objections of the northern states and act affirmatively to protect slavery in the western territories.
Now on the view of argument that I'm now discussing, the problem here is not the inconsistency of these positions per se, but the fact that the inconsistency wanted the goal of resolving disagreement about what were the powers of the federal government and the powers of the states.
Of course, one could say that really wasn't the goal of the Southerners, but if we assume that they were engaged in an attempt to resolve disagreement, then the problem with the inconsistency is that it thwarts that goal.
Also, according to this view, some of what we normally call fallacies would be acceptable arguments because they do contribute to the goal of resolving disagreement.
For instance, let's suppose you and I are engaged in a dispute and you say, fixing the problems with Social Security will just introduce new problems, and suppose my response is, does the sun come up in the morning?
Now logically, one would say this is a non sequitur. It doesn't follow. There's no connection between the two. But if we think about this argument within the context of our interaction, we can see that what I'm saying is, of course there will be new problems.
We have to expect that there will be new problems, just like we'd expect that the sun comes up in the morning, and therefore we shouldn't be deterred from fixing Social Security.
Or suppose you say, fixing Social Security will create new problems, and I reply in the words of a television commercial from many years ago, why trade a headache for an upset stomach?
Again, this rhetorical question on the face of it doesn't have anything to do with the matter at hand. But conversationally, it does.
When I'm saying why trade a headache for an upset stomach, I'm saying, why should we take an action that will solve this set of problems if all it does is create this new set over here?
These examples illustrate that if we look at argument in interaction and appraise it in its relation to the goal of resolving disagreement, we've got a different standard for argument appraisal.
And if we think of fallacies in this way, we would say that our fallacies are errors of procedure, not errors in form.
One could then formulate principles that would identify what sorts of behavior in an argument would be procedurally correct and what would constitute violations.
This has been done in the work of two contemporary Dutch philosophers, Franz von Ameren and the late Roeb Grootendorst.
We'll consider the specifics of their principles in the next lecture in a different context.
But if we don't want to remember the individual principles, there's a general idea that I want to extract from them here.
And that is, the question to ask of any argument to determine whether it's sound or fallacious is, does it serve the purpose of helping to resolve disagreement?
Does it help take the conversation further along to make it more likely that the disagreement between the participants in the interaction will get resolved satisfactorily?
If so, we regard it as a reasonable or valid argument, if not as a fallacious or invalid argument.
Well, let's look then at some examples of fallacious arguments if we think of fallacies as procedural violations.
Here's one example. Declaring a standpoint sacrosanct removes the necessity to defend it and is thus fallacious.
We can't resolve a disagreement if I don't have any obligation to defend my claims once you've questioned them.
If I declare them to be sacred, to be beyond the pale of questioning, or in the language that we typically find parents and very young children engaged in, why?
Because I said so. I've declared the standpoint out of bounds for questioning or challenge, and that would make it a fallacious kind of argument if we assume that we're in an interaction where our purpose is to resolve disagreement.
Of course, in interactions between parents and young children, we realize that isn't always the purpose.
Second example of a fallacious argument. If I put pressure on you to come up with an answer quickly, or to make some decision because you know it will offend me if you do otherwise,
or in some other way I put pressure on you, I may stifle an objection that you would have to my claim that would require me to present evidence for it and warrants for it and so on.
And so pressuring the opponent may be a fallacious form of argument because it subverts the purpose of the critical discussion.
It subverts the purpose of resolving a disagreement. It simply induces or coerces a certain sort of response from the opponent.
Suppose I introduce irrelevant matters. This would be a fallacy, not because we could say, hey, that's a straw man, but because we could say, I have caused the discussion to lose focus on the standpoint on the disagreement that we were really trying to consider.
Suppose I present as if it were self-evident what is in reality a controversial premise.
Well, doing that, I've made it appear that this premise is not really open to challenge at all, when in fact it is.
And so I prevented the possibility of challenge and thereby undermined the purpose of the critical discussion of resolving disagreement.
Suppose I exploit your prejudice. I know that you have some particular value that you believe in very strongly.
And so I develop an argument that panders to that value because I know it's your prejudice, and I know that you'll be quick to agree if I appeal to your prejudice.
Well then, what I've done is I've diverted the discussion from the standpoint at issue and from its careful examination, and I've diverted it instead to your prejudice.
And I have thereby violated the procedural norm of a critical discussion that we should act to resolve our real disagreements.
And if I use language to confuse matters, to obfuscate, I want to make something ambiguous, something hard to figure out.
I've violated the rule to be clear so that you can understand my argument as I intended to be presented, and so we can thereby resolve the disagreement.
You notice that what these examples have in common is that they're fallacious not because of the inherent form of the argument,
nor even because of accumulated experience with an argument pattern, but because they violate procedural rules.
They frustrate the goal of resolving disagreement, which it's assumed to be the goal underlying a critical discussion between arguers.
So what Van Ameren and Grootendorst are suggesting is a different way to think about what makes an argument reasonable or unreasonable, or why a fallacy really is fallacious.
Now before we leave this topic of argument appraisal, I want to just add one other thing.
Arguments are appraised both by analysts of argument and by the arguers themselves.
An impartial analyst can reconstruct the dispute and examine arguments in relation to the principles of critical discussion or in relation to any other principles.
But the arguers also can be careful as they construct arguments to appraise their own arguments, to be critics of their own position,
and to make it less likely that they will present weak arguments and to be open to the charge of fallacy.
They won't just pander to prejudice and emotion, but they'll pick arguments that audiences will accept freely and dissent to convincingly.
And with that we conclude our discussion of the appraisal of arguments.
Next time we will take up a new topic.
Lecture 21, Arguments Between Friends
Hello again, I'm glad to be with you.
Having considered the structure of simple and complex arguments, case construction, attack, defense, and the analysis and appraisal of individual arguments,
I want now to turn to the different settings in society in which argumentation takes place and the ways in which those settings affect the content and the practice of argumentation.
Now this as you probably realize is not a matter in which formal logic has any interest at all.
It's unconcerned with content.
We could just as easily substitute symbols like X and Y, P and Q for any specific content.
And it's unconcerned with context because validity is purely a matter of form.
But as you know, our focus all along in these lectures has been on everyday informal argumentation, and that argumentation does take place within different spheres of activity.
A contemporary scholar of argumentation, Professor Thomas Goodnight, who for many years was one of my colleagues at Northwestern, has written about the spheres of argument.
And what he's suggesting is that because we have no universal standards of argument, because argument is dependent upon context, we need to recognize that there are different sorts of context because we live our lives in different spheres of activity.
What the spheres do is they identify accumulated expectations that we bring from our experience and that provide the specific context for arguing.
Goodnight distinguished among three different spheres of argument, and they can be arranged along a private to public continuum.
We start with the personal sphere.
An argument in the personal sphere is of concern only to the people who are actually involved in it.
These are the sorts of arguments that take place informally between friends or between marital partners, for example.
It has no broader implications, and the people who are involved in the argument are also the people who resolve it and evaluate it.
The arguers and the judges are essentially the same people.
Then there is what Goodnight called the technical sphere.
And in this sphere argument is conditioned by background and training and expertise in a particular subject matter area.
And the argument is accessible to people who have that background training and expertise.
It often takes place within a specialized language, sometimes with specialized rules and conventions.
So we have the personal sphere and the technical sphere, and then there's the public sphere.
An argument in the public sphere is concerned with matters that affect people very generally in their role as citizens.
And it's accessible to anybody.
It doesn't require special expertise, background, training, standing, or anything like that in order to participate.
So we have the personal, the technical, and the public spheres of argument.
Now what makes all this interesting for me is that it's often not clear cut in which sphere a given case of argument might fall.
And indeed, migration of arguments across spheres is a fairly common condition.
Let me mention a number of examples.
And I think even before we look at the spheres in detail, we can see how it makes a difference in which sphere we place a given subject or a given case of argumentation.
First example, there are a number of matters that, until fairly recently, were regarded as residing in the personal sphere.
For example, child care, spousal and child abuse, sexual harassment.
Until the last 20 or 30 years, these were not regarded as matters that concern people beyond those who were directly involved.
But more recently, they have become public issues.
It's no longer the case that sexual harassment is a private matter.
We've enacted laws to deal with it.
It's no longer the case that spousal abuse or child abuse is of no concern to anybody except those directly involved.
So the migration of this kind of argument from the personal sphere to the public sphere has changed considerably how the discussion takes place and indeed our level of awareness and attention.
Another example.
There are some matters of economic and defense policy.
Just to pick a couple of examples that have been widely suggested to be technical concerns that need not engage a broader public and indeed that a broader public may not be competent to evaluate even though they affect public policy.
Whether it's measuring throw weights or determining how much interest rates should be allowed to rise or fall, we've been inclined to defer to experts and place a good deal of confidence in their judgment about these matters that we see in the technical rather than in the public sphere.
Another example.
The proposal for school vouchers really represents an attempt to redirect an argument from the technical sphere to the personal sphere.
Who should make decisions about education policy?
Well, traditionally, those have been regarded as matters for education professionals and experts.
But out of a concern that confidence in the quality of those decisions and confidence in public education have dropped, the proposal for school vouchers essentially says let's move this question of educational policy out of the technical sphere from decision making by education experts
to the personal sphere decision making by individual families, by individual parents who will vote with their children's feet, and the vouchers make it possible for them to do that.
One of the reasons that vouchers is such a controversial proposal is that it's proposing to shift the sphere in which this argument takes place.
Or a final example, a very controversial one.
One of the most hotly contested social policy issues over the past generation has been the issue of abortion.
And the very heart of this dispute in my judgment is whether this subject belongs in the public sphere or whether it belongs in the personal sphere.
Advocates who regard themselves as pro-choice are not saying that abortion is a good thing as a matter of policy.
What they're arguing is that the decision properly belongs not to the public, but to the choice of the individual woman.
And those who label themselves pro-life advocates are arguing that the issue has broad public dimensions because it relates to concerns about how society sets moral standards and so it involves everyone.
And of course how we look at the controversy is very different if we see it as a personal or if we see it as a public issue.
So, one of the things that makes controversy so interesting, it's not always clear in what sphere a controversy falls.
And they migrate from one to another.
And that more than anything else should make us aware of how important it is to examine spheres of argument.
So that's what I want to do.
I'm going to proceed in the order that we described and start in this lecture with the personal sphere.
This sphere has several dominant characteristics that it's worth briefly mentioning.
First off, the focus is on how people conduct and resolve disagreements that concern themselves.
They're not standing in for any larger group of people or anything like that.
And the people who are arguing are also the people who are trying to settle or to resolve the disagreement.
A second characteristic of the personal sphere is that the contents of it, the messages that we would identify to examine, consist of naturally occurring talk.
That is to say, their conversation with all of the informality that we associate with conversation.
The messages are not formal speeches prepared in advance.
A third characteristic, it's naturally occurring talk in which opposition is present.
Anybody playing the part of an observer could listen to or look at an exchange that's taking place and recognize that people disagree.
The people who are involved in the conversation maintain what they take to be incompatible claims.
And yet the disagreement matters to them.
They don't just walk away from it.
Each person is seeking to influence the other to accept his or her position.
Now, if this is taking place in conversation, we could say that the dominant mode of discourse is dialogue.
And scholars have studied dialogue.
They've actually recorded lots of conversations and analyzed them, laying out the moves that are taking place and identifying the strategic choices.
And one of the things we know is that dialogue follows a number of conventions that are learned through the socialization beginning of children.
One of the most obvious of these conventions is taking turns.
People don't try to speak at the same time, usually.
One doesn't try to monopolize the conversation.
When one has said his or her piece, the assumption is the other person has an opportunity to say something.
These are conventions that are implicit.
They're never formally stated, but they're applied instinctively.
Dialogue is socially conditioned from early childhood.
Now, the relationship between people in a dialogue, how intimate it is, how long-standing the relationship is,
how confident each person is that he or she understands the relationship,
that will all influence what must be said, what must be left unsaid, what can't be probed too far, what can be explored openly, and so on.
So the content of the dialogue is intimately bound up with the personal relationship of the individuals.
And the exchange is private and ephemeral.
There are levels of understanding between the participants that are not accessible to others.
Even though I said a minute ago that there are scholars who record conversations, most conversations never get recorded.
It's not like the text of a speech or a debate that we could go back and examine later.
The content pretty much disappears when the dialogue is over.
And any outcome, any agreement, any result is preserved only in the memory of the participants.
And of course, we know that memories are such that different people can recall differently the same interaction.
But the outcome of the dialogue is preserved only in their memory.
And finally, we would say about the personal sphere of argument that its materials are drawn from what readily comes to mind, in the mind of the participants.
And that, of course, is shaped by their own experience and by the history of their relationship.
There's no advanced preparation.
Lawyers will sit down and develop briefs for a legal argument, as we'll see in the next lecture, but there are no briefs for argument in the personal sphere.
These arguments occur spontaneously.
These then would be the key characteristics of the personal sphere of argument.
Now let me ask this question.
What should argument in the personal sphere be like?
What should it be like?
And let me point out the obvious fact this is a normative question.
I'm going to be focusing on ideal notions of argument in the personal sphere.
I'm not claiming that most arguments actually measure up to this ideal.
In fact, I'll say the opposite.
But let me answer my question.
Ideally, argument in the personal sphere should be like a critical discussion.
Now you remember I used this phrase critical discussion in the last lecture.
It comes from the contemporary Dutch philosophers Frans van Ameren and the late Roob Grootendorst.
What they've said is that a critical discussion is a problem-solving discussion in which the participants mutually desire to resolve the disagreement that they face.
So a critical discussion would proceed in pretty clearly identifiable stages.
First, the disagreement is identified.
That is, the participants agree about what they're disagreeing about.
And of course, that's intended to prevent the situation where their comments just go past each other and they're talking about completely different things.
Then the second step would be to agree on how the disagreement is to be resolved, to develop criteria for what would be a solution.
Then third, the positions that each of the parties advocate would be presented and explored and attacked and defended, extended, reviewed in as much detail as necessary so that they're clear and comprehensive to everybody.
And then finally, the disagreement is resolved by one or the other of the positions becoming mutually acceptable or by the parties thinking outside the box and coming up with some new position or some synthesis of their positions
or some different way of looking at the matter, or the parties conclude that no agreement is attainable and hence they agree to disagree and take it from there.
Now those would be the stages that a critical discussion would go through.
To enter into this kind of discussion also implies a number of normative standards.
First off, it's assumed that both parties wish to resolve not merely to settle the disagreement.
That is, they don't just want the other party to capitulate.
They don't want just to win.
What they want is an outcome that will satisfy them both.
People feel that way because they value their friendship.
Second, it's assumed that each party has an equal opportunity to influence the other party so that in a friendship variables like power and prestige don't influence the argument.
It's not a superior to subordinate conversation like those in the workplace when the superior says I want your opinion and everybody understands that the superior really doesn't want the subordinate's opinion but wants the subordinate's agreement.
Each party in a critical discussion has an equal opportunity to influence the other.
Third assumption is that each party is willing to resolve the dispute on its merits without reference to other considerations.
So claims like if you really loved me then you would agree with my position.
Or you owe me one so go along with this are out of bounds.
Each party is willing to resolve the dispute on its merits.
It's also assumed that there are no artificial constraints like time limits.
The dispute doesn't take place under crisis conditions or conditions of urgency.
It's also assumed that the participants share a group of values which the Speech Act philosopher H.P. Grice has summarized by calling them the cooperative principle.
These are the values of sincerity, the assumption that we mean what we say, efficiency that will be direct rather than indirect in saying what we mean, relevance.
We assume the comments that we make are germane to the subject matter, clarity meaning that the comments can be easily interpreted and understood.
These things come together and the cooperative principle means simply the parties assume that they're bound by this desire to cooperate.
And finally, the participants share commitments to nonviolence.
They won't resort to force if they don't get their way.
To freedom of speech, the others free to say whatever he or she wants.
And to intellectual pluralism, by which I mean there's no one right answer.
What's to be arrived at is the best possible solution as the participants themselves see it.
Now these terms characterize ideal problem-solving discussions between equals.
Remember that in the last lecture, I said that Van Ameren and Grootendorst had formulated a set of principles to identify what kinds of behavior in an argument would be procedurally correct
if the goal is to resolve disagreement, as in a critical discussion it is.
Let's look at a few of those principles now, as I promised we would.
First, a party who advances a standpoint who makes a claim is obliged to defend it if asked by the other party to do so.
That sounds simple enough.
Where does this obligation come from?
It comes from the purpose of the interaction.
If that weren't done, disagreement couldn't be resolved.
Second principle, a party's attack on a standpoint must relate to the standpoint that has indeed been advanced.
If I'm going to attack your argument, I've got to respond to what really is the argument that you made,
not to some other argument that you didn't make that I'd rather answer or not to a misrepresentation of what you said.
Why?
Because if I don't respond to your actual argument, then our interaction is not going to proceed very far toward the resolution of our disagreement.
Third example, a party may not falsely present a premise as an accepted starting point,
nor deny a premise representing an accepted starting point.
Why?
Because disagreements are based ultimately in agreement.
In an interaction, one person can't misrepresent that because if the parties don't understand what their agreements are,
they can't resolve their disagreements.
Four, a failed defense of a standpoint must result in the party that put forward the standpoint retracting it.
You take a position I respond effectively, you have nothing more to say,
you have an obligation to retract your original position and say,
no, you convinced me that I was mistaken.
Conversely, a conclusive defense of the standpoint must regard in my retracting doubt about it.
Now, Van Ameren and Grootendorst go on with five or six more examples of principles like that, but you get the idea.
The kind of argument that takes place when these assumptions are met has been called coalescent argument.
And I want to distinguish that from the kind of adversarial, combative, zero-sum notions that we sometimes mistakenly equate with all argument.
Coalescent argument recognizes that everybody in the interaction has goals and it tries to find a way to meet as many of these goals as possible
so that all the participants feel that they're better off and have accomplished something from the argumentative exchange.
It emphasizes commonality and agreement, but it recognizes that each party has goals and each party wants to prevail at least on the goals that are most important.
So it doesn't favor agreement just for the sake of agreement to get the easiest or quickest agreement that one can.
Nor does it favor holding out for every last goal that a person might have, no matter unreasonable some of them may come to seem,
no matter how much the parties might be unwilling to compromise.
Now, if you think back to one of the very first lectures, you'll recognize that this kind of two-dimensional nature of coalescent argument
is just what I was talking about when I said that the arguers are in a posture of restrained partisanship.
They are partisan, they want to prevail, they want to influence the other party,
but they're restrained by their respect for the other party and the conditions under which they want the argument to take place,
the very normative conditions that I have mentioned.
The procedure of coalescent argumentation is just another way of articulating how a critical discussion takes place.
First, the positions of the dispute partners are identified. It's clear what they each believe.
Second, the points of commonality between their positions are identified and removed from further dispute.
In other words, the disagreement is narrowed. The stasis of the dispute is made clear.
And then, from what's remaining, people will have different goals. Some of them will not be in conflict, so those can be set aside.
And then finally, the question is finding means to satisfy those that are in conflict to the degree that is reasonable.
This means not coming up necessarily with what either party will regard as the very best solution from his or her point of view,
but to find a solution that reasonably meets the needs and the interests of both parties.
Now, I've been talking for quite a while here about normative standards and the ideal argument in the personal sphere,
saying that it ought to be like a critical discussion and it ought to employ coalescent argumentation.
It should come as no surprise that in practice, argumentation in the personal sphere often falls short, sometimes very short, of this ideal standard.
If we were to describe actual arguments that take place between close friends or between marital partners' arguments in the personal sphere,
we would observe that utterances in context, not formal claims, are the basic units of discourse.
So there are a lot of incomplete sentences. There's a lot of filling in the other person's thought.
There's a lot of reliance on what we think the other parties know, whether they really do or not.
And all of these factors make it possible to introduce slippage or mistakes or errors or misunderstandings or confusion into the argument to make it fall short of the ideal.
We would also see that the interaction is often devoted not to resolving disagreements in the sense that a critical discussion does, but simply to ending them.
Compliance, rather than resolution, is often the goal.
And in order to get compliance, non-argumentative means are often used, psychological pressure perhaps being the most obvious example.
And that, of course, falls short of the ideal.
We'd also quickly observe that people usually are not disinterested in the outcome.
That is, they're not willing to resolve the dispute just on the merits of the dispute.
They have a heavy investment in one result or another.
The very fact that people are in the personal sphere in close relationships means that they also evoke strong emotions and that prevailing in the dispute may be important to their own ego, their own self-identity.
People also bring baggage to the argument that should be extraneous, but really affects the course of the controversy.
They bring the residue of previous disagreements.
They bring unvoiced resentments and frustrations, magnified over time.
They bring their own anxieties about the personal relationship, and these seep out into the argument as straw men and red herrings.
But try telling that to an emotionally involved participant in the heat of a controversy.
People also often tend to universalize their claims to make statements like,
You always put me down. You never let me finish without interrupting, and so on.
And these universal statements that people don't really mean universally, but they say them anyway, raise the stakes of the disagreement and divert the subject matter of the discussion from the specific issue at hand.
We'd also find in actual argument that people often treat certain beliefs as so fundamental, so sacrosanct, that they cannot be challenged.
They simply will not brook disagreement.
And of course, that means that there are things beyond the pale of examination through an argumentative encounter, and that falls short of the ideal.
We'd find that the arguments are often incompletely developed.
They don't satisfy Grice's cooperative principle, and they'd have to be read between the lines.
And we'd find that there often are inequalities in skill, social power, and resources of knowledge, of control over the outcome that are available to the disputants.
This is not news.
As a consequence of all of these factors, argumentation between friends, argumentation between spouses, is often dysfunctional.
It's not too far off from the stereotype in the comic routine.
I get as a gift a red tie and a blue tie.
I wear the blue tie.
I get the question, you mean you don't like the red?
Okay, I'll go wear the red tie.
So now you don't like the blue either?
You're always setting me up.
You never like my gifts.
And we can quickly see how such a dispute would escalate out of control.
The question then is, why formulate normative standards and talk about ideal argument when actual argument is so far from it?
And the answer is, the study of argumentation enables people to bring their practice more in line with the ideal.
We ought to try to get closer to it and approximate it as much as we can.
And so we take actual arguments, flesh them out, reconstruct them so they can be analyzed,
and the analysis can be used to identify violations of norms to assess their seriousness and to point the way to improve practice
so that the goal becomes not to win over the other person, but how to conduct a different and better type of exchange.
Now next time, we will focus on the technical sphere.
Lecture 22, Arguments Among Experts
Welcome back.
In the last lecture, we introduced the concept of spheres of argument, different realms of human activity in which argumentation takes place.
And I spoke at some length about the personal sphere of argument in both an ideal sense and an actual practice.
And I talked about how we want to try to make actual practice resemble more the ideal.
This time, I'd like to look at the second of the three spheres of argument that we've identified, and that is the technical sphere.
It's in the technical sphere that argumentation takes place within specialized fields.
Now, I realize I'm mixing metaphors here talking about fields within spheres, but those are the terms that the theorists and the literature have given us.
So what is a field?
Well, the same contemporary philosopher, Stephen Tullman, who gave us the idea of a new argument diagram to replace the syllogism, as we saw much earlier,
has also written about argument fields, and while he's defined them a little bit differently from one work to another,
the basic idea is that a field is a kind of intellectual enterprise that has its own conventions about discourse.
Sometimes fields have been defined by their subject matter, as in the case of academic disciplines.
So we have the field of economics, the field of medicine, the field of psychology, for example.
And sometimes fields have been identified by their general orientation or worldview.
So we have the field of behaviorism, or the field of postmodernism, or the field of Marxism, for example.
But either way, whether we focus on academic disciplines or on general orientations and worldviews, each field will have its own norms and conventions of argument,
shared by the people who inhabit that field, and often somewhat inaccessible to others.
Others may be able to read the results of the dispute, but not to participate in, not being privy to the norms and conventions that help to define the field and shape the context.
So if we ask, is this a legal or a medical issue, as often happens, for example, when there are personal injury cases in courts of law,
whether it's a legal or a medical controversy will profoundly affect the norms for conducting it and who will be qualified to do so.
Deciding whether some question is an empirical matter or an interpretive issue would do the same.
I think we can see very clearly how fields work and how they differ if we look at a number of examples.
And I'd like to do that in this lecture. I want to begin, however, with the disclaimer that I am not speaking as an expert or as a member of any of the subject area fields that I'm going to describe,
but simply as somebody who tries to look at argument and to characterize discourse within a given field.
So let's begin with a fairly obvious case, and that is legal argument as an example of an argument field.
Much of legal argument is about what we have talked about earlier as reasoning with rules. What does one do?
One determines what are the facts in a given situation. That's the role of the trial. One then applies the relevant rule to the facts.
And where do the rules come from? They come from the accumulated body of statutory and case law.
So one determines the facts, applies a rule to the facts, and then one will derive a conclusion as to what should govern the case at hand.
It almost seems deductive, even mechanical. But as we saw in lecture 18, it doesn't work like that.
There are matters of interpretation and judgment at every level and claims that therefore must be warranted.
First off, what are the facts? What the facts are is influenced by our own perception and our own judgment.
That is to say, the facts do not have a completely independent existence apart from our perception of them.
And so different people will look at a situation and see different facts in the same set of conditions.
As for the rule, there may be multiple relevant rules that could be applied, or there may be a situation where there's no applicable rule and we have to formulate one.
Or the rule itself may require subjective interpretation and it may be capable of multiple interpretations.
So legal argument requires careful reasoning, interpretation, judgment, and justification.
For example, rules that specify zero tolerance for various sorts of unacceptable behavior require interpretation as to what really fits under the heading of the acceptable behavior for purpose of the rule.
And zero tolerance may not literally mean zero tolerance, depending on how one interprets the rule.
So the simple model of find the facts, apply the rule, draw a conclusion is at best normative and maybe not even that.
And it's most likely not an accurate description of how legal argument proceeds.
It requires exercising and defending judgments.
If we were to look at accumulated cases of legal argument, we would find that there are certain patterns of reasoning that are emphasized.
For instance, there usually are clearly defined standards for what counts as evidence that are specific to the field of law.
So a person who has eyewitness knowledge, who has seen something take place, that eyewitness knowledge or direct observation would count as evidence.
But what one heard from another person here say would not count as evidence.
That's an example of a specific rule or standard.
Another pattern, literal analogy is used quite often in legal reasoning because it's literal analogy that enables us to say that the case that we're confronted with, the set of facts that we're dealing with is basically like a set of facts that were envisioned when the rule was formulated.
That one case is like another case.
And so the rule that governed the particular case ought to govern the case now at hand.
Literal analogy is used to establish precedent, and precedent is very important in reasoning in law.
Cause, as a warrant, is used particularly to structure stories of what happened.
This led to this, to this, to this.
And it's also used to establish responsibility for actions.
That is, the view of cause as human action that answers the question, who's to blame?
Why did something happen?
This is used heavily, both in civil procedure to establish where liability lies and in criminal procedure to establish where guilt lies.
Jurors and jury deliberations have been studied by lots of scholars.
Jurors particularly tend to reason narratively, to reason in a story form where there is a causal sequence of events that takes place.
Authority is used heavily to defend warrants.
If a warrant is questioned and we need to provide additional support for the warrant,
that support typically takes the form of authority.
And the authority is found in legal statutes and in the previous rulings of higher courts.
Stasis in place plays a very important role in legal argument.
You remember when we discussed stasis?
We said that the stasis in place asks, is this the right forum, the right place in which to discuss the situation?
And I said, this characterizes legal argument and it pretty much drops out from general argument.
But in legal argument, it does play a very important role to determine first off whether the controversy even belongs in the legal system.
If you remember the Supreme Court ruling that ultimately settled the presidential election of 2000,
one of the reasons that that ruling was controversial was that those who disagreed with it tended to feel that there wasn't a legal case that had been presented.
There was no violation of law.
It didn't properly belong in the courts.
It was just a political matter.
The majority of the Supreme Court held otherwise.
They said that there was an equal protection question that was at issue.
And that was a legal standard that made it the responsibility of the courts to enforce.
Well, that whole dispute was a dispute about stasis in place.
Does the controversy even belong in the legal system?
Likewise, there are questions about whether the participants in a particular legal controversy have standing.
That's the legal term, whether they have standing to bring the case.
Have they been injured?
Are they entitled to seek a remedy?
If not, the dispute is in the wrong place.
Final example, stipulations of presumption and burden of proof.
Such as the presumption of innocence in a criminal trial and the stipulations about what has to be proved in order to find a defendant guilty.
These are all specific stipulations that characterize legal argument.
Well, all of these patterns that we've been talking about, the use of literal analogy, the use of cause, the accumulation of precedence and authority, stasis in place, stipulations,
these are all patterns that we find in legal argument that we don't necessarily find in other fields.
And of course, another feature of legal argument is that specialized knowledge is required.
One needs to know how to determine the relevant rules.
That's a good part of what legal education is about.
One needs to know the special meanings in the law for such general terms as persuasion, burden, and prima facia case and presumption.
And some of the other terms we've talked about in a more general setting.
Many of them have precise meanings in legal argument and one needs to know those.
And of course, one needs to know the procedures for making inferences from the rules.
Now let's look at a different case.
Let's look at scientific argument.
It's another obvious example of an argument field.
The goal of science is often said to be to describe, to explain, and to predict important aspects of experience.
And this is done in order to account for individual phenomena.
What can we say about those things?
But it's also done in order to develop theory which enables us to predict and make reliable statements about things we have not yet observed.
Now just as law could be thought of in a simplistic way with a deductive model,
classically science was also viewed that way.
The data, the facts, were seen as constant, unchanging, and undeniable.
The facts were compelling.
And the job of the scientist was to observe, to describe, to explain, to account for the facts.
But if the facts are unchanging and undeniable, then the observations of a scientist could be right or wrong,
but there's no space for legitimate disagreement between scientists.
This view no more accurately describes how science actually is done than the stereotypical simplistic view of law describes how law is actually done.
Challenges to this view emerged fairly quickly.
It became obvious that scientific generalizations are inductive.
They're not deductive.
They're probability driven.
So they can be wrong.
And moreover, that statements that scientists make about empirical phenomena are themselves cast in language,
so that reports about observation are already theory-laden.
This is very clear if one thinks for a minute about how the terms are used in the controversy between evolution and intelligent design.
Casting them in language affects the nature of the positions themselves.
Philosophers of science have described how scientific discourse actually takes place.
And again, it's quite different from the very simple formal model.
I want particularly to mention the work of a philosopher of science named Thomas Kuhn,
who distinguished between normal and revolutionary science.
He said, if you want to think about how scientists actually conduct their discourse, there are two different kinds of science.
Normal science goes on most of the time.
It applies and refines theory.
It takes a given theory that's been established as its warrant,
and it expands the reach of theory by showing that it covers new situations and explains anomalous cases.
How do scientists do this? By hypothesis testing.
They state a hypothesis driven by existing theory.
They predict what will happen if the hypothesis is true.
They test it out, and they see what actually does happen.
They observe the results.
If the results are consistent with their prediction, they count them as support for the hypothesis.
If they're not, they count them as weakening the hypothesis.
Now, remember when we talked about fallacies?
We said that could be the fallacy of affirming the consequence.
If the hypothesis is true, it'll give us results X.
We get results X.
Therefore, the hypothesis is true.
But we know we could have gotten X for entirely different reasons.
Now, what does this tell us right off the bat?
It tells us that hypothesis testing is a form of reasoning that while it looks like deduction is not.
It's what we call a quasi-logical argument.
And in fact, there are judgments that are being made in order to decide
whether we ought to consider a given set of results as confirming or weakening a hypothesis.
And the judgments often depend upon whether the scientist has controlled
for all the alternatives as much as possible.
The claims in normal science are factual statements about what we're observing.
The evidence is factual statements about the theory, what the theory actually says.
And the warrants are the regularities that are implicit in the theory.
The warrant gives us the theory, and what the argument is doing is using that warrant
to cover additional phenomena extending the reach of the theory.
In contrast to normal science, revolutionary science occurs when a fundamental theory
or a paradigm, a way of thinking, is itself called into question and can no longer be assumed.
Rather than using an existing warrant, what scientists are doing when they argue
in revolutionary science is trying to establish a new warrant.
The most obvious examples, of course, in the natural world would be things like the Copernican Revolution
or like the experience of Galileo when a whole way of seeing the world
and thinking about things is called into question because somehow it doesn't seem to fit anymore
the facts that it tries to describe.
Some have said that the Information Technology Revolution is another example.
There are anomalies that develop, things that an established theory can't adequately explain,
and the anomalies increase, they pile up, and eventually there are enough anomalies there
that people begin to say, wait a minute, maybe the theory's not right in the first place
and we ought to change the way we think about it.
This occurs not only in the natural world but in the human and social world as well.
For example, race was seen for a long, long time as primarily a biological variable
and determinative of personality and individual experience.
Anomalies developed and piled up and that whole paradigm, that whole way of thinking about race
was eventually brought into question and the argument was developed
that no race is instead primarily a cultural phenomenon.
Well, you see in this example what takes place in revolutionary science.
There's a kind of meta-argument, if you will.
The argument is about the theories, at least as much as about the underlying phenomena.
And the claim is, Theory X should replace Theory Y.
What's the evidence?
The evidence is a demonstration that the proposed new theory, Theory X,
can account for the phenomena that are being examined better than can the current one, Theory Y.
And the warrant is the value of theory itself, such as the importance of explanatory power,
of predictive strength, of simplicity.
These are the values of theory itself that are used to say Theory X ought to replace Theory Y.
Now this kind of dispute is not primarily about facts.
It's primarily about paradigms, about interpretations of facts.
And so ultimately, it gets settled by means other than a strict appeal to facts,
even though science is supposedly about studying the facts.
One paradigm over time may be shown to subsume the other, to incorporate it,
or one paradigm might be shown to fulfill common values better than the other.
It may be seen as simpler, more elegant, less dependent upon unobservable constructs.
Or one paradigm may be defeated by exposing its self-contradictory nature.
That is, if you accept the paradigm, it leads you to conclusions that you would be unprepared to accept.
This is what we saw as the circumstantial ad hominem.
That's what happened, for example, in the discourse about race,
where a strictly biological view of race led to conclusions that original supporters of that view would not be comfortable with.
And paradigm disputes often take place over extended periods of time that may go on sometimes for years and years,
as is happening in the conflict between evolution and intelligent design.
As with legal argument, we can see from this very quick survey that specialized knowledge is required for scientific argument.
One has to be familiar with relevant theories and their specifications and how to test each of them.
This is meant by the shorthand that one really has to keep up with the field in science.
One has to read the newest literatures, stay abreast of the journals, and so on.
One must understand the design of experiments and the procedures for testing hypotheses.
Just as scientists will not automatically be comfortable in legal argumentation,
legal experts will not automatically be comfortable in scientific argumentation.
In each case, the field depends upon expertise and conventions that are not accessible in any kind of direct way to outsiders.
Now let me talk about a couple of other examples of argument fields, and I'm going to do these much more briefly,
because I think we've made the point that fields differ in their conventions and their assumptions.
Managerial argument is an example of a field.
In management, choices have to be made under severe constraints on information and time.
So what managers do when they argue is they employ a number of simplifying devices
to make the process more manageable, if you'll pardon my pun.
One of these is incrementalism.
So in their discussions, they'll look at a small number of systems and their consequences.
And they'll look at systems that differ to only small degrees from where they're starting from.
And they'll make successive limited comparisons.
They'll compare this one to one that's close to it, and that one that's close to it, and so on.
And they want agreement on what to do, not necessarily on the reasons that favor this one over that one.
So they employ cost-benefit analysis as a simplifying device.
We talked earlier about cost-benefit analysis as a way to assign values to things that may not be inherently quantifiable,
and then to use a numerical calculation to figure out what approach gives the greatest excess of benefits over costs.
And they also use a simplifying device that has been called satisficing.
That's an artificial term, satisficing.
And what it means is taking the first solution that will minimally satisfy the participants.
So the object is not to find the most optimal ideal solution, but instead to set minimum standards that a solution must meet,
and then to accept the first solution that comes across that meets them.
I've sometimes thought of satisficing as a way to ask the question, can you live with this result?
Not necessarily is it the best possible, but can you live with it?
And the first one comes across that the opposing participants will say they can live with, that's the one that's used.
And in management, arguments are usually about means to achieve the stated objectives of the organization.
The mission statement will define the objectives, these are usually not in dispute.
The argument is about the best means to achieve those objectives.
So it will be a causal argument of the kind that we label the pragmatic argument that relates means to ends.
The means ends relationship doesn't characterize science or law to anywhere near the degree that it characterizes argument in management.
Or a final example, ethical and religious argument.
Here it's a field of a very different kind.
The assumption is that what's right should be done, and the controversy focuses on what's right.
And these controversies are typically conflicts between values and between hierarchies of values.
And so we ask questions like, should one tell the truth even if that will destroy the self-worth and the self-esteem of another valued person?
Or should one prefer another person's self-worth over telling the truth?
Should one focus more on social justice than on ritual observance within a religious context, or vice versa?
And what is just from the standpoint of social justice?
And how does the standard of justice get derived?
Should one conduct scientific research to answer questions about the unknown, even if it tramples on some of our values about the sanctity of life and the preservation of even potential life?
Or should our values about the sanctity of life take precedence over our desire to find out about the unknown?
These are examples of the sorts of questions that predominate in ethical and religious argument.
So how does one attack or defend the value judgment in the same ways we saw in lecture 18,
some of which are in terms of other values, or by reference to sacred texts that are accepted as authoritative, or authoritative decisions, or teachings?
The values are not defended solely, or even primarily, by reference to their consequences.
Because the ultimate question is not about consequences, it's about what would we regard as right, as morally right, or as ethically right?
And rather than being limited in time as in the case of management, the time horizon is eternity.
The focus of the controversy, though, while it's ultimately about these values and value hierarchies,
may seem to be how we describe a given situation, because the ethical or religious principles may be implicit in the very description of the situation.
And so we go back to our emphasis on definitions.
Once we call capital punishment state-sponsored murder, we've already brought to the fore ethical principles and religious principles that govern how we talk about it.
That would be very different from those that would govern it if we described it in a different way.
Well now we've quickly surveyed law, science, management, ethics, and religion, not in order to probe in any depth,
but just to see how the conventions of argument are different in each field,
and how each field requires some specialized knowledge and background that may not be available to outsiders.
Now what happens when it's not apparent to what field a controversy belongs?
Is nuclear defense strategy a scientific issue, or is it a moral issue?
Is abortion a religious question, or a question of civil liberties?
Is foreign policy a strategic matter, or a humanitarian issue?
These questions raise issues of how a controversy should proceed and who is qualified to argue in it.
If we're going to get anywhere, we have to figure out some way to talk about inner field disputes.
One option is what's been called inner field borrowing, so law borrows a concept or convention of science,
and the issue is discussed under the same set of conventions or vice versa.
The other option is to transform the controversy out of the technical sphere and into the larger public sphere,
and the larger public sphere will be the focus of the next lecture.
Lecture 23 Public Argument and Democratic Life
It's good to be back with you.
In the last lecture, we were talking about argumentation in the technical sphere that occurs within specialized fields.
And at the very end, I alluded to the problem of inner field disputes when it's not clear what field a matter is in,
or it could be in more than one.
And I said one possibility for dealing with that was to transcend the question of fields by taking the argument from the technical to the public sphere.
And although that's not the only use of the public sphere, it immediately raises the question of what the public sphere is,
what are its characteristics, and that's what I want to focus on in this lecture.
Arguments in the public sphere have two principal features.
The first is that they're addressed to and offered on behalf of a general audience, so they're accessible to anybody.
They're accessible to all citizens.
They're addressed to a general audience, not a specialized one, and they're offered in behalf of that audience.
The second feature is that they affect the community at large.
Remember in the personal sphere, we said the arguments are limited in their effect to the people who are actually participating.
Well, the clear opposite of that is the public sphere, where the arguments affect the entire community, even those who are not involved in the dispute.
Arguments that have these two features, that are offered in behalf of and addressed to a general audience and affect the whole community,
typically concern the future.
They typically involve deliberation.
They're action-oriented, and they raise the key question, what shall we do?
So public argument is most typically about resolutions of policy and the issues concern choices to make.
The controversy starting in the late 1990s and renewed in 2005 over the future of social security is a good example of an argument in the public sphere.
It's addressed to everybody, to all potential social security recipients, not just to experts.
And the issues are discussed in terms that permit a general understanding, such as the bankruptcy of social security.
The issues affect everybody.
They're concerned with policy and with the future.
Now where does public argument take place?
Traditionally, these arguments were addressed to people in classical Greece in large assemblies.
People would come to a place known as the Forum, where discussions of public issues occurred.
The idea of the public forum is modeled by the New England town meeting, where deliberation takes place in a meeting,
and all the citizens of the town come together and decide important policy questions.
But to really understand the public forum, I'd like for us to think of it not as a physical place,
but as a metaphorical place, an imagined space that exists whenever people have the freedom to exchange ideas and when certain conditions are met.
What are those conditions?
Well first, the problem being discussed involves people collectively, as well as individually.
Second, cooperative action is needed in order to resolve the problem.
Third, information is incomplete, and there's no self-evidence solution, so people have to exercise judgment.
Fourth, however, a decision nevertheless is required. We simply can't evade the issue.
Now let's talk about a couple of obvious examples of argumentation that fit within this model of the public forum.
One is deciding what to do about health care.
Health care emerged in the latter part of the 20th century as an important public policy issue, because first it's been recognized that health is not just a matter for individuals.
There are external effects of one's health or sickness, their cost to the economy, harms to other people, losses in productivity, and so forth.
So it's got general collective as well as individual significance.
The problem in public health can't be addressed by any one person or any number of people acting individually.
There's a need cooperatively to make decisions.
We don't know everything that we conceivably might or would want to about what would best promote public health and what are the consequences of different choices, and yet we have to do something about it.
Another obvious example is how to respond to acts of terrorism.
These affect people not individually but collectively.
They're directed against a large collective audience.
People can't solve them one by one.
Cooperative action is required.
There's no way to know, particularly since terrorism is usually the result of secrecy, all of the possible information, either on problems or on possible remedies.
And yet one simply can't sit by, one must do something.
These are characteristics then of public arguments.
They take place in such obvious venues as legislative bodies, whether local, state, or national, and political campaigns.
But they also take place in locations as diverse as the PTA, city council meeting, television talk shows, certain discussion groups on the internet, and letters to the editor, among others.
These are places where people engage in the kind of argument that affects everybody, is directed to everybody, and involves matters of collective judgment.
Our project for this lecture then is to see what we can say about the public sphere of argument, just as we did with the personal and the technical spheres.
I want to look at some of its key characteristics.
And I want to start this time by asking the question, where do the warrants in public argument come from?
And what I'm really asking when I say that is, what is it that authorizes the kinds of inferences that people make when they engage in argument in the public sphere?
The warrants come from the social and political beliefs of the audience, of the general public, rather than from technical understandings or documents or specific observations.
They are common places, as we describe that term in lecture 17, and it's easy to see why.
Arguments addressed to the general public best justify their claims by appealing to beliefs or values that are widely shared by that public.
These are the most likely to engender the agreements on which resolving disagreements depends.
So what kinds of common places serve as warrants in the public sphere?
For one example, widely shared beliefs and values.
For instance, in the contemporary American culture, we all want what's best for our children.
There's a commonly accepted belief or value.
It seldom requires explicit statement.
It could generally be assumed in just about any kind of discussion.
Or, the market mechanism generally works.
Not that it's perfect, of course, but that the market essentially is an appropriate and good means to allocate costs and benefits, goods and services.
A higher power governs our destiny is a belief that in contemporary America is generally, not universally, but generally held and is sometimes appealed to explicitly, sometimes taken for granted.
So this kind of social knowledge can serve as the warrants for arguments about particular policies or particular actions affecting the general public.
Besides widely shared beliefs, another kind of warrant is that we all engage in what I'll describe as naive theories of attribution.
That is, how we assign or attribute responsibility for things.
There's a fairly general tendency, if things go right, to attribute it to one's own efforts.
If I do well in my job, it's because I'm good at it.
For example, and to interpret unfavorable outcomes to factors beyond one's control.
If I got fired, it's because the economy went sour, or it's because the boss didn't appreciate me, or was misguided in judgment, or some such thing as that.
So favorable outcomes we tend to attribute to our own efforts, unfavorable outcomes we tend to attribute to factors beyond our control.
Well, the result of that kind of attribution theory is that arguments can reinforce our personal efficacy, our personal sense of worth, or accomplishment.
And that personal sense of accomplishment or worth becomes one of the warrants that arguments about public matters are often intended to appeal to.
So take fiscal policy or tax policy, and an argument that says, you earn the money, it's yours, you ought to have control over it, is not just an ideological argument about individualism versus collectivism.
It's partly that, but it's also an argument about personal attribution for favorable outcomes, the money belongs to you, and that becomes a warrant.
A third example of a commonplace, another kind of naive theory that people carry around with them in their heads, naive theories of motivation, why people do things.
We generally assume that people do things for reasons, that is, events are not random or chaotic, and we develop theories of motivation explaining why people do things.
One of the clearest examples of such a theory is a conspiracy theory.
Now by a conspiracy theory, I don't necessarily mean that people imagine dark and evil and sinister forces, sometimes they do, but rather that people assume that others have a plan, that they've planned out what's going to take place and then events unfold accordingly.
So for instance, at the height of the Cold War, there was a widespread assumption that there was an international communist conspiracy centered in Moscow and with a specific plan for world domination.
Now what's especially interesting about a conspiracy theory is it explains events, even those that would seemingly disprove the conspiracy's existence.
So a country goes communist. What does it prove? It proves that there is this international conspiracy out there working to bring it about.
A country resists communism. What does it prove? It proves that the conspirators are so conniving that they'll let a few victories sneak away from them in order to delude people into thinking that they're weak
and lull people into complacency and then the communists will come in for the kill.
You see the idea here is that if you believe in a conspiracy, you can imagine a plan that would encompass events that seem to support it and events that seem to refute it.
So it would make the argument self-sealing and non-falsifiable.
But the power of conspiracy arguments is that we find ambiguity and uncertainty disconcerting, uncomfortable.
And the conspiracy theory provides a neat package in which to explain what's going on, to predict what will happen next so that one is in the know.
And if an opponent makes an argument that might seem like it weighs in against you, you could dismiss it as being tainted by the conspiracy so that the motive for the argument is not pure.
Now if you think about these examples, widely shared beliefs, naive attributional theories, motivational theories, you realize that these are warrants that don't always follow the rules, the norms, and the standards that we establish when we spent several lectures talking about each of the different warrants.
They may violate normative standards for strong arguments, and yet they're very common in discourse in the public sphere.
So the answer to where warrants come from, they come from the audience's social and political beliefs.
Now another thing we can say about argument in the public sphere is that it has to deal with the fact that the public is heterogeneous.
It's highly diverse.
Whether by socioeconomic or demographic variables or political beliefs or ideology or cultural experience, the very idea of a public forum is that it brings together people with diverse backgrounds and from diverse communities.
Now let me talk about just one example of how this heterogeneity affects arguments in the public sphere.
The public will contain elements of both liberal and conservative presumptions.
Professor Thomas Goodnight, whom I referred to in an earlier lecture, has also written about liberal and conservative presumptions.
Of course the terms liberal and conservative mean something different than the early 21st century from what they meant in the 19th century, but let's leave that for another time.
The liberal presumption in a contemporary context regards change as inevitable and believes that it should be guided, regards human nature as basically good,
venerates reason and is willing to use government to promote the common good.
In contrast, the conservative presumption favors maintenance of existing social relations and practices, it venerates tradition rather than change,
it believes that human nature is not necessarily good or selfless, and it regards reform as often short-sighted and misguided, so it's much more cautious about change than is the liberal presumption.
Now these beliefs, these different presumptions, will coexist within the public.
Indeed, they'll sometimes coexist within the same person.
It's not uncommon, for instance, to have a person say something like, well, I'm a fiscal conservative, but a social policy liberal.
Meaning, I'm cautious about approving the spending of money, but I recognize a responsibility to a larger society and to other people and to do something to ameliorate various social problems.
How else might people combine a liberal and a conservative presumption?
Well, many people generally oppose government programs, but support those that benefit them personally.
Or they're an individualist on civil liberties questions and a collectivist on matters of social or economic policy.
Or they object to government power when they don't like the outcome for which the power is used, but support it when they do.
And if people individually could combine these presumptions, certainly when we imagine the whole general public, we're imagining a situation in which an audience is composed of people with very different political presumptions.
What does this mean for argument?
It means that successful public argument will typically find a way to draw on both the liberal and the conservative presumption to find ways to mix together the elements of both.
For instance, public argument may describe innovations as returns to tradition, so that change will be described as restoration of bringing back conditions that existed at some time in the past.
The best example I can think of is the New Deal during the administration of President Franklin Roosevelt, which as we know significantly expanded the size and the scope and the reach of federal government and public policy.
But the New Deal was described as a return to the conditions that existed under Jeffersonian liberalism in the early 19th century, in which there was an equilibrium between people and government.
And what Roosevelt and the New Dealers argued was that the development of big business and big labor required big government as a counterweight in order to protect the individual and to restore a much older equilibrium.
It's not at all uncommon to find innovations being talked about as returns.
Or another example.
Mild and moderate actions are sometimes described in excessive rhetoric, so that putting more policemen on the street becomes a bold new initiative against crime.
The mild action is intended to appeal to the conservative presumption.
The rhetoric in which it's all cast is intended to appeal to the liberal presumption.
This is one of the reasons, for instance, that the war metaphor has figured so prominently in public policy discussions about domestic matters, so that we have a war on crime, a war on drugs, a war on poverty, and now a war on terror.
Well, the war metaphor suggests a total mobilization, bringing all the resources together and having government coordinate, and that appeals to the liberal presumption.
Relatively small expenditures, limited actions, and limited interference with people's daily lives appeal to the conservative presumption.
Sometimes this is a highly successful mix, and sometimes it blows up in our face.
When the liberal becomes dissatisfied with the pace of change and the conservative becomes overly frightened by the bold rhetoric, so it doesn't always work, but sometimes it's a strong combination.
Or another thing that happens to appeal to both presumptions is to package arguments in such a way that the proposals contain appeals to both.
So, for example, what are we going to do in an economic slowdown?
Well, we will both lower the capital gains tax, and we will increase spending on social programs.
Lowering the capital gains tax in the short run will bring in more revenue, and we'll dedicate that revenue towards meeting social purposes.
And so the reduction in the capital gains tax appeals to the conservative presumption, the increased domestic spending appeals to the liberal.
There are other possible ways to combine them as well. These are just illustrative.
But in contrast, a validly ideological argumentation rarely succeeds in the public sphere.
The ideologue represents a small minority, usually at odds with pragmatism, and will not be able to appeal successfully to these competing presumptions.
That's why, incidentally, political campaigns usually play to the middle, not just because they're trying to appeal to undecided voters,
but because the middle, in terms of liberalism and conservatism, is where most people feel that they are.
Well, we've talked about warrants. We've talked about audiences.
Let me also describe some of the ways that arguments in the public sphere are presented.
First, there's often a use of what have been called condensation symbols.
These are symbols which condense, hence the name.
They condense a whole range of different emotions and reactions into veneration of or opposition to a common symbol.
One of the best examples may be the American flag. People support the flag for all kinds of different reasons.
It doesn't make any difference what the reasons are as long as they converge or condense in the ultimate result.
And the condensation symbol achieves strategic ambiguity. It represents a show of unity in the face of diversity.
This is a case when ambiguity is not a fallacy.
Another thing that happens in presenting public arguments is that persuasive definitions play a significant role.
We talked about persuasive definitions in an earlier lecture.
I suggested they are definitions that conceal arguments.
They involve the use of terms that have a whole substructure of argument that it never is made explicit.
Now, in a public controversy, if one can get a term to be accepted generally, that's a persuasive definition,
then it's as if one had made the whole underlying argument.
For example, those opposed to abortion have talked about late term abortions as partial birth abortions.
Now, if the term partial birth abortions generally prevails, then people are predisposed to view late term abortions in a particular light
that would regard them as unacceptable because birth is something that comes beyond, obviously, the fetal state.
Or when it was proposed to repeal the estate tax.
Those who favored repealing the estate tax referred to it as the death tax and said death shouldn't be a taxable event.
If they can succeed in having the term death tax characterize this proposal in the public sphere,
it's as if they had made a whole substructure of argument that would itself be rather controversial.
Another thing that happens in presentation is that policy proposals are linked to ultimate terms.
That is, terms that are highly charged with positive or negative valuation that represent the hierarchy of values of a society.
In the 1950s, we could say that the ultimate positive term was progress or something like it and the ultimate negative term was communist.
It's not so clear in the early 21st century what the ultimate terms are, perhaps freedom as the positive and terrorism as the negative.
And yet we can see frequently in public argument linking policy proposals to terms that have a strongly positive or negative valuation.
For instance, when former President Clinton referred to stem cell research as a pro-life policy,
what he was trying to do was to identify a controversial proposal for the federal government to spend research money on stem cells
with a value that not only was strongly positive pro-life, but it was particularly positive for people who thought they opposed funding of stem cell research.
Because they said it involved the destruction of embryos.
What President Clinton is saying is it ultimately promotes life by giving us the opportunity to develop means to treat and cure a variety of diseases.
Or another example, it was fairly common in the 1980s and 90s to hear policy proposals referred to as promoting family values.
Family values was a term that was originally coined on the conservative side of the political spectrum.
But by the 1990s liberals were talking about daycare and the Family Leave Act and measures to control child abuse as promoting family values.
So the idea here is that the term family is a very positive term.
And so if one links one's proposal with this very positive term, one will enhance the chances of its being acceptable to a broader public.
Now why do we find condensation symbols, persuasive definitions, and linkages to ultimate terms playing such a large role?
Precisely because the public is so diverse and heterogeneous.
These become, if you will, tactical means, stratagems, approaches to deal with these problems of diversity and heterogeneity,
and to prevent it from creating an impasse that makes it impossible for arguments to proceed.
Well now, just as with the personal and the technical spheres, we've not talked about every single aspect of the public sphere.
But it seems to me that talking about warrants and their origin in common places,
and about the heterogeneity of the audience, the need to appeal to both liberal and conservative presumptions,
and talking about presentational choices gives us a pretty good sense of how argument in the public sphere differs from argument in the technical sphere,
and argument in the personal sphere as well.
Now I must tell you that my interest in the public sphere is not just an interest in describing the argument that takes place there.
The public sphere has normative dimensions, just as the other spheres do.
A robust public sphere is vital to democratic life.
It encourages citizens to participate.
It encourages civic deliberation.
It encourages people to make discerning judgments about matters of general importance.
And it should come as no surprise that there are grounds for real concern about the state of the contemporary public sphere and public argument.
Surveys show increasing numbers of people who claim to have little interest in public affairs.
They simply separate themselves from them.
Many are put off by the complexity, the difficulty of important public issues.
Others are satisfied with simplistic slogans.
Large numbers of people think that they're powerless to bring about any kind of change, or that it makes no difference what they do.
And there's growing distrust of politicians and other public figures.
Now these are signs of a weakening public sphere.
The picture's not all bleak, however.
There are some encouraging signs.
Many of the same people who show disdain for traditional politics are involved actively in their own communities on issues that affect the local good.
New forums for discussion are emerging at the local level, as well as in non-governmental organizations.
The internet can also strengthen the public sphere by promoting dialogue and deliberation.
It may be that rather than disappearing, the public sphere is becoming more localized and more diverse,
and that what it means to be a citizen may be changing but not eroding.
These may be signs of hope.
I hope so, and I hope so because of the vital importance of the public sphere to active democratic civic life.
Now in the next lecture, we'll reflect on what all of this adds up to and what the ultimate purposes and ends of argumentation are.
Lecture 24, The Ends of Argumentation
Hello again. This is the 24th and last of a series of lectures on argumentation.
In the most recent group of lectures, we've been looking at the different spheres of argumentation,
the different aspects of human activity in which argument takes place,
and we've looked at the personal, the technical, and the public sphere.
But in this last lecture, I want to raise an even more general question.
What are the ends of argumentation?
And I'll use the term ends in several different senses.
To start with the simplest, we've considered in lecture five how controversies begin,
and throughout the series we've talked about how arguments are conducted, but how do controversies end?
Sometimes they end because the participants in them reach a common understanding or judgment,
as in diplomatic negotiations, when the people who are arguing directly with each other come up with a conclusion.
This is the ideal for a critical discussion or for arguments that occur between friends.
Sometimes controversies end because time runs out and a third party renders a judgment that the arguers have agreed to accept.
This is what happens in an election campaign.
The issues in an election could be argued about indefinitely, but the controversy ends by virtue of the calendar.
Or a judge or jury renders a verdict that the parties have agreed they will accept.
Or binding arbitration.
All these are examples of how a third party or a time limit can end the controversy.
Sometimes the controversy is overtaken by events that render it moot.
It's just no longer important.
In the years immediately before World War II, for example,
there was a great controversy about whether the United States should be involved in the affairs of other nations in the world
or whether it should take an isolationist position.
Pearl Harbor rendered that controversy moot and isolationism was not seriously discussed thereafter.
The end of the Cold War likewise has rendered some argument positions moot.
Sometimes controversies end because there's a conceptual breakthrough that results in looking at the situation in a whole different way,
such as whether or not a tax cut is a good thing or a bad thing as economic conditions change.
But sometimes the controversy will continue for a long time, particularly if previously accepted assumptions are challenged.
This occurred, for example, in this country when we changed how we thought about the relationship between the races.
Between much of the 19th century and the late 20th century, it took a long time to make that change.
Sometimes it will take a long time simply because there are some controversies that are timeless,
like the one between states' rights and the federal government or whether human beings act with free will or whether their actions are determined.
Concepts like these are said to be essentially contested.
They gain meaning only in relation to their opposites.
In that case, the controversy is perpetual.
Incidentally, just because some controversies go on for a long time, that's not necessarily a bad thing.
Controversies, after all, open up alternative possibilities.
They remind us that things that we think are true could be otherwise, and they open up new ways of thinking.
They make clear the implications of taking one choice or of taking a different choice,
so that when we reach conclusions, we don't hold them too rigidly and we're open to new information.
So those are some quick thoughts about when, how, and even whether arguments end.
For most of our remaining time, though, I want to consider a different sense of end.
What are the purposes that argumentation serves? What's it all about?
And I'm going to try to develop an answer to that question along three different lines.
Let me begin by noting that, most obviously, argumentation is a means of collective judgment and decision making.
Here, let me simply remind us of some of the implications we've explored throughout this series of lectures.
First of all, that much of human affairs is uncertain and contingent.
We can't reach conclusions with the certainty or the precision that we would associate with deductive or formal reasoning, and yet decisions are required.
So argumentation is a means of justifying decisions under conditions of uncertainty.
It does so by subjecting ideas to rigorous testing.
One tests ideas through an adversarial process, a seemingly adversarial process, by asking another party to bear the strongest doubts or the strongest grounds for objection that one can imagine.
But contrary to some misconceptions, the purpose of this seemingly adversarial process is not cutthroat competition.
The goal is to find the best possible outcome.
Rigor is the means to do that, so the goal is shared, and the activity is fundamentally cooperative.
The result of that activity is to ground our decisions in good reasons.
By good reasons, I mean reasons that withstand the scrutiny of careful and critical listeners.
We realize also that the tests that we make of claims through argument are successive, not final.
When we say that something is true, we don't mean with a capital T finally and for all time.
We can always revisit, we can always reevaluate the conclusions that we reach.
But the outcomes of argumentation are commitments that people are willing to make and defend, even though they're also willing to revise them as circumstances change.
So we can say that argumentation is a means of collective judgment and decision making.
I hope that one outcome of these lectures is that we have a clearer awareness of what the skills are that enable us to test claims carefully and rigorously,
and of how one develops those claims, and that you have the motivation to practice doing so.
That's one purpose of argumentation, probably the most obvious.
Another purpose of argumentation, another end that it serves, is that it is a way of knowing.
The late 19th century pragmatist philosopher Charles Perse asked, how do we know what we know?
And he identified four different ways of knowing.
He talked about tenacity, which is really the method of chance.
You just stick to the first beliefs you get, the first impressions that you form.
And there are aspects of human life in which we do this.
There's authority in which we come to know things by uncritically accepting the judgment of a prominent person, accepting his or her beliefs.
There is a priori correspondence.
That is, we come to know things because they correspond with other beliefs that we've already held, a priori.
We can deduce what we know from beliefs that to us at least have been self-evident.
So Perse discussed tenacity, authority, and a priori correspondence.
And against these, he mentioned the fourth method, the method of verification, which of course is the method of science.
We come to know things by verifying them through what we can observe and test.
Verification has some obvious advantages over the other three methods that Perse identified.
It's open to public inspection.
It can be replicated by other people.
It's not a secret or chance event.
The results are obtained by design, not by accident, as the outcome of a particular procedure.
These benefits, of course, explain why society has placed such emphasis on science and given such a high priority to verification as a means of knowing.
This priority was captured very well in a famous anecdote.
The semanticist Wendell Johnson, in the early part of the 20th century, noting that one of the great medieval disputes was over the question how many angels can dance on the head of a pin,
answered it by saying, bring me the pin, and bring me the angels, and we'll see.
Now, what he was suggesting, of course, was that if there isn't a way to actually verify, to observe, and test out an answer, then the answer is not as good, not as acceptable as if there were.
But here's the problem.
As we've seen throughout these lectures, if verification were the only acceptable path to knowledge, then we would be unable to know anything about some of the topics that concern us the most.
There would be no way to know about values, because we can't verify values.
We can't measure beauty or goodness or righteousness, for example.
There would be no way to know about probabilities.
We'd be in exactly the same position as the formal logicians who had only the terms all, some, and none to deal with it, and all of the gradations that are encompassed within that term some would be lost to us.
There would be no way to know about predictions, about the future.
There would be no way to know about recommendations for action, about what we ought to do.
In brief, there would be no legitimate space between what was necessary, that is certain, and what was arbitrary, that is totally dependent upon chance, caprice, and whim.
And most of us, I think it's safe to say, would find that an unacceptable state of affairs.
I know that I would.
So what's the alternative?
The alternative is to look for analogs to verification.
That is, methods of knowing that achieve many of the same purposes that verification achieves, and yet apply to the topics about which verification is not applicable.
Now if we think about it, these lectures have implied what I now want to state explicitly, and that is that argumentation is such an analog.
It's a means of coming to know about things that are inherently uncertain with many of the same protections and benefits that we associate with verification.
Now why do I say that?
I say it because in argumentation there is mutual agreement on the procedures to be followed.
We know how to look at an argument, what it consists of, how an argumentative discussion takes place.
There's a common mission and a common set of norms.
The goal is reflective judgment, not just compliance.
We know that in an argumentative exchange, our views may be challenged.
The other party may argue against them, may seek to discredit them.
And when we formulate our views in the first place, the very knowledge that they may be challenged creates an incentive for us to search for the very highest quality of claims that we can make.
And it's in this sense too that the adversarial or competitive aspect of argument has a higher constructive purpose.
What is that higher constructive purpose?
To provide for argument, the rigor, the care, the replicability that we associate with verification with the method of science.
So we could say that argumentation is a way of knowing.
It's a way of coming to an understanding of what we believe and what we accept is true with regard to matters that are inherently uncertain, inherently contingent.
Now this view has a couple of important corollaries.
It means that within the realm of argument, truth is relative to the argument that is advanced for it.
When I say that truth is relative to argument, I don't mean a vicious kind of relativism in which anything that anybody believes, however he or she believes it, is true for that person.
It simply means that within the realm of the uncertain, we decide what we'll accept as true on the basis of the argument that's made for it.
And a second corollary of this view, if we ask the question, how do we know what we know?
And we answer it by saying we know through interaction with other people, through the kind of interaction that we call argumentation.
Then we're saying that we form our judgments of truth and knowledge in connection with other people.
Now if one's self is seen as a composite of what one knows, if our self is defined by all the things we know, then our sense of self is developed through argumentation with others.
And these are corollaries of saying that argumentation is a way of knowing which is a second purpose that it serves.
But there's yet a third objective that argumentation serves. It's a means of governing.
Argumentation achieves the goals of a democratic society.
It was Aristotle, as it often is, who was among the earliest of thinkers to identify the social function of argumentation to address the question of what does argumentation do for society?
And here was his answer. He said, first, it prevents the triumph of fraud and injustice because people are able to see through them and counter them.
Two, it's a means to instruct audiences when scientific instruction is of no avail. That should sound quite modern.
Third, it makes us argue out both sides of a case, thereby discovering the strength of each position.
And finally, Aristotle said argumentation is a means of self-defense.
He said if it would be a disgrace not to be able to defend oneself bodily, all the more so if one's not able to defend oneself with good reasons when one's beliefs or opinions are challenged.
Well, that's probably the earliest answer we can find to the question, what's the social function of argumentation?
Today, argumentation is often described as a necessary instrument of a free society by cultivating a vital public sphere.
Unfortunately, that statement, like other statements, can have the character of a platitude. It sounds good.
We can agree to it without necessarily understanding or thinking about it.
So I want to take a little time to unpack this statement that argumentation is a necessary instrument of a free society.
I'm going to engage in a very quick historical summary of the U.S. experience in order to make clear what I think that statement means.
We know that the United States was created in the late 18th century under the influence of the philosophy of the Enlightenment.
And Enlightenment philosophy valorized reason.
People commonly thought at that time that the mind was divided up into different faculties, almost like different compartments of the mind.
There was the reason, there was the imagination, there were the passions, and there was the will.
And the idea was reason governed critical thinking.
Imagination governed our ability to be creative.
Passions were the seat of our emotions.
And the will is ultimately what led us to act.
The Enlightenment philosophy accepted this idea of faculty psychology with the mind divided up in these different faculties,
but exalted reason as the dominant faculty.
Reason was the one that controlled the other faculties and that ultimately guided the individual.
Now if you believe that reason is the dominant faculty, then expressions of opinion are a very good thing.
They're the path to truth for the individual and for the society, as some of the Enlightenment thinkers argued.
Now what was not so obvious at that time, but has certainly been realized since,
is that the public sphere of the Enlightenment project, the people who exercised their reason,
it was a highly limited public sphere.
Lots and lots of people were simply dealt out from consideration on the basis of race,
on the basis of gender, on the basis of wealth.
So that the people that talked about public matters could be seen as propertyed white males and not even all of them.
What took place during the 19th century was a gradual enlargement of the relevant group of people who composed the public.
The opening up, if you will, of American society as a result of a whole series of movements.
The Jacksonian movement that brought the lower class laborers together with the farmers.
The Transcendentalist movement that held that anybody could have transcendent experience and knowledge of the divine.
The Populist movement that focused on orienting policy toward average working people.
Each one of these movements essentially widened the bounds of the relevant public in American society.
And they did it in three ways.
They gradually removed restrictions on voting so that more and more categories of people were eligible to exercise the franchise.
They widened access to education so that it was brought to the people generally.
And they increased the stress on grassroots democracy, on active citizens at the local level.
We know that the 18th century founders of the country distrusted the judgment of the common people.
They recognized it as an ultimate basis for government, but they were careful to filter it through the judgment of people that they regarded as more like themselves.
That is more discerning, more capable to think clearly and carefully.
And that's why they devised representative, not direct democracy, and why they devised instruments like the Electoral College.
But over the course of the 19th century, there was growing emphasis on removing those filters, on grassroots democracy, and active participation at the local level.
But while this was happening, the same exultation of reason that characterized the 18th century enlightenment by and large continued.
There are exceptions, of course, but I'm painting this in a very broad brush.
As the boundaries of the people who were capable of governing were enlarged, the earlier commitment to the power of reason was maintained.
Until the late 19th and early 20th century, when the power of reason underwent a series of shocks that shattered trust in reason as the dominant faculty.
Just to mention a few examples.
The social sciences were developed really in the late 19th century, before that they had been subdivisions of moral philosophy.
And the social sciences dealt more with empirical realities than with normative claims.
They dealt more with how people actually behave than with how philosophers had said they should.
And as we know, social science discovered that there were great differences between the normative and the empirical.
Freudian psychology, developed during these same years, emphasized the role of unconscious motivation and suggested that in large areas of our lives, we really were not guided by reason or by rational principle.
That much of our motivation was unconscious and we sometimes couldn't even make it explicit.
Crowd psychology, which developed during this same time, focused on how people behave differently when they're grouped together from the way they do individually.
And the conclusion of most of the crowd psychology work was that somehow a crowd releases inhibitions that lead to civility.
So that in a crowd, people exercise more animalistic instincts than they do individually.
They are less guided by reason.
And the national disillusionment that set in following World War I, which did not turn out to be a war to make the world safe for democracy.
This disillusionment fueled awareness in the 1920s and into the 1930s of the power of propaganda, of the ability of emotional, non-rational appeals to sway a public and to influence people.
Social sciences, Freudian psychology, crowd psychology, national disillusionment, all of these things were real shocks to the assumption that people were by nature reasonable, that reason was the dominant faculty and the basis for good decision making.
And indeed during the 1920s it became fashionable to argue against the competence of most people to make good judgments about matters of public concern.
As an example I'd cite the well-known journalist Walter Lipman, who wrote two significant books during the 20s, Public Opinion in 1922 and The Phantom Public in 1925.
I oversimplify Lipman's argument, but basically he suggested that public opinion has been disastrously wrong at the critical junctures of history.
He asked why and his answer was the false ideal of the competent citizen who could exercise reason about public matters.
This he said was a false assumption and a commitment to that false assumption is what led public opinion over and over again at the critical junctures to be wrong.
He suggested that in trying to achieve this ideal of the competent citizen, what actually resulted was a kind of Gresham's law in which bad arguments drove good arguments out of the marketplace of public discussion.
And so he and others ended up concluding that we should abandon the ideal of the competent citizen, we should abandon the project of enlarging the public sphere and defer matters of public judgment instead to the expertise of specialists in the fields that were directly involved.
Now the pendulum swings over time and expertise itself came to be distrusted and in recent years scholars and journalists including Lipman by the way in the 1950s have suggested that it's possible to revitalize the public sphere by cultivating a public philosophy that emphasizes the place of effective reasoning about matters that are uncertain and contingent
but where decisions are required.
The public philosophy requires an awareness of the principles of public life that we submit to as conditions for living together.
Our shared interests and values, our aspirations, our systems of thought, truths that have been expressed in philosophy, politics, literature, the accumulated wisdom of our past, all of these things that shape the beliefs that we accept is true.
So the public philosophy requires knowledge of that. It requires advocates who are able to stand in for the public and speak on its behalf drawing on this social knowledge. It requires making claims in behalf of the public.
The advocate has to make strong claims and defend them ably.
And the assumption is that training in argumentation helps one to present strong claims and to prevent weak ones from triumphing over them so that argumentation legitimizes freedom of speech and makes it work to a constructive purpose.
It prevents it from leading to a Gresham's law where bad arguments drive out good and it thereby permits a free society to function. And that certainly is a very important purpose.
So to recap, argumentation serves three basic ends. It is a way of justifying decisions under conditions of uncertainty. It is a way of knowing. And it is a way of governing a necessary instrument for a free society, noble purposes indeed.
There's one more sense of the term end, I want to mention, and that is that our time together is rapidly coming to an end. So a couple of concluding observations are in order.
First, even the most mundane activities of argumentation will achieve these lofty purposes I've been describing to greater or lesser degree. It's an activity in which we can all participate.
Understood in this light, a culture of argumentation is something to be embraced rather than despised. Rather than condemning the argument culture as bickering and quarrelsome, we should cultivate the skills and attitudes that enhance argumentation.
And that's what this series of lectures has attempted to do. We focused on argumentation to emphasize the kind of thinking and acting in which we engage every day, and therefore this is, as I said at the beginning, the systematic study of common sense.
Hopefully, these lectures will help you to develop skills, values and attitudes that will all increasingly practice and that lead to improvement in the realm of everyday public discourse so that we can reaffirm that argumentation is the study of effective reasoning.
We genuinely hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our Great Courses series. Our courses are available to order online. Visit our website at www.teach12.com or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12. That's 1-800-TEACH-12. Thank you very much.
