Hello all.
Due to a crushing work schedule, Kyle wasn't able to do the sound engineering for us this week.
And unfortunately, we didn't learn about this until the last minute,
so this episode is basically the unedited, raw audio of us talking.
We apologize in advance for the lowered quality.
But you said you and Rachel were talking about something before you got here?
Or is that like for the podcast and we should wait?
Um, I can mention it and if it sounds interesting enough, we can talk about it.
I don't know if I could do a position justice, but at least I didn't wait hearing about it for
a while. Should that Facebook post that was something defending the use of inclusive terms
for people, as opposed to exclusive terms when you're like, oh, like all guys are shit or all
white people suck or something. Right. Yeah. And so putting my cards on the table, I agree
with Enosh's response that like painting with a broad brush like that isn't probably the path
of success for various reasons. Or is it moral probably? And I think her perspective was that
if you don't, if you paint with a, if you say some people rather than all or just don't even qualify,
therefore implying all, then like it's easy for people to dismiss it and be like, oh,
they're not talking about me. Which is true. I've actually seen that sort of behavior from people.
And I'm sure that we can. And you know what? I'm okay with that. No, you're not. I'm okay with
people saying that is probably isn't about me. If it's probably not about them. And if it is about
them, then maybe someone should tell them. Why? Because then they know it's not about them.
If they, if you look at, if you look at a thing and it says like all women who wear black
are blah. Hey, hold on. Do you guys want to do this on the podcast? Because this sounds interesting.
I feel like I'm learning. Okay. Well, I'll include it. Starting at 17 minute mark.
Okay. Make a quick note. Text me with 17 minutes or something. You got it. Cool. All right, go on.
Okay. So say for example, that I as a white woman wearing a black dress see something and it says
all white women who wear black dresses are blah. I can look at myself or yeah, or whatever. I am gay.
So yeah, but something pejorative or something unpleasant or something. I can look at that and
say, am I this way? And if I self reflect and say, no, that's not me. And I can be like, that's a
generalization. It probably is talking about these other people who do have this particular trait
that do behave in this particular way. And I can go on about my day because I know it's not about
me. How often do you got to hear all women are naggy bitches before it starts to really weigh
down on you instead of being like, Oh, am I a naggy bitch? No, I'm not. So I can go about my day.
Like zero times. I don't have a problem with people saying that it just tells me what kind
of person they are. Okay. So I do have a problem with people saying things like that sometimes.
Yeah, but I have my own sense of self identity where I'm like, Okay, this is who I am. This is
how I perceive myself. I can self reflect and be like, this is obviously not about me. So
but if you're still affects you, but hold on, but if you're assessing that it's not about you,
wouldn't you be doing that? Even if it said some women are naggy bitches? I don't like the example
but running with it. Yeah. If it's some are all like, I think the distinction is, are you
implying that it's everybody or not? So we can keep running with that example where we can run
with other ones. But well, okay, so real ones that I've seen are like, there's a great problem
with men or something. A real one. Yes. That is that is a very big one. I've written about that
one before. A similar one is black people are criminals. Right. And what are now black people
supposed to say? Am I a criminal? No, I'm not. So I just go along. That's actually something
that's quite different. How so? I was saying different is it's punching down, not punching up.
I'm sorry. Okay. I am familiar with the concept, but please explain it out loud. So I don't think
I am. So okay. So when you say punch up, don't punch down, you're talking about challenge people
in power with privilege, instead of picking on people who don't have power on privilege and who
are usually criminalized or otherwise, you know, put in a place where they suffer for that place.
Why are we punching people at all? It's a phrase. But it seems to be chosen that way for a reason,
right? Yeah, because I can say challenge power, but don't hurt people who have less power. Challenge
power is different because that's basically what it means. No, I think punch up is much more
appropriate than challenge power, because then that points out that some people are powerless.
There's a lot of white people that are living in poverty. And if you punch up by saying all white
people are shit, you're really punching down on a lot of white people. No, because if you say all
white people are shit, because I hate this example, but I'll run with it, because they tend to treat
black people poorly, or all white people are shit because they have racism problems. That's not
saying, that's not picking on poor white people because they're poor. Oh, but it is. No, it's not.
Well, not because they're poor, but it's picking on poor white people. Yes, because they still have
privilege, and that privilege involves their status as white. I understand there is some privilege
for being white. Yet, if you go to one of these rural areas where people are living in poverty
and tell them that they're privileged, they will be very upset at you, and rightly so in my opinion.
No, because the reason they have privilege is not because it's not like a monetary thing, like oh,
every white person is rich or whatever. You guys don't get monthly checks.
No. I'll keep that to myself. That's because I'm a woman.
You get a fraction of a check, right? I don't get monthly checks because I'm an immigrant, so.
Oh, okay, that does not make sense. Wow. But if you take a poor white person and a poor person of
color, you put them in the same exact circumstances in the same exact city, who's going to be less
privileged? I think that depends a lot on their situation. No. Okay. Well, if we're stipulating
that they're identical, then yeah, you can say all else being equal, the black person's worse off,
because so I think then the question is like, are you encompassing people in a better, like you
could say, man, talking about race stuff makes it dicey, but do you want to talk about sex stuff
instead? We could say all men have privilege because there is male privilege as well. Yes,
and if you take and yet try telling that to a man who is suicidal because of toxic masculinity and
the culture that expects him to be in certain ways and tell him that he's got male privilege
and see how happy he is about that. I think you're talking, you're confusing feelings and
circumstance. Okay. Because you say, tell this, like for example, take your example of tell this
white cis male who does have problems rising from toxic masculinity and say, fuck you and your
privilege. Yeah, it's going to hurt their feelings, but it's not going to change the fact that they
do have privilege. They do make more than women. They do have more power than people of color.
Statistically, white men do. Yes. If you're reducing an individual person to statistics again,
then you might as well say that the black person, you know, if there is a criminal,
since criminality is higher in the black population, it's different though. There's a lot
of reasons for it. Yeah. And some many systemic reasons. But if all we're doing is looking at
statistically white people are more privileged. Yeah. But it doesn't, it's a, it's not something
that hurts them. Oh, yes, it does. Being reduced to statistics. No, privilege doesn't hurt people.
Oh, privilege. Yeah. Okay. I'm sorry. I thought you were talking about being reduced to. Yeah,
sorry. My face is like, okay. But no, if you're talking about privilege and you're saying this
person has more privilege than this other person, you're talking about this person's societal status
and the benefits they get from it are different than this person's. And it's not saying, you know,
it's not talking about what is, let me rephrase that. It's not causing them damage.
So as a man, I am assumed to be more violent than you. Yes.
Do you don't think that causes me any damage in relationship to you in certain situations?
It actually, okay. So statistically, men are more violent than women. Exactly. But it's something
that affects how you live your life and how I live my life. But if I say all men are violent.
Yes. I'm talking from a place of, I am afraid of, of dealing with men because men are violent.
If you were to phrase it that way, that'd be wonderful. And that is something that builds
compassion and allows people to relate to each other. If on the other hand you say all men are
violent, I say, well, that's great. That's one of the reasons I hate being a man.
Okay. So but the difference is, is you're asking, you're asking a lot of emotional labor from people?
All I'm asking is for people not to reduce an individual to the stereotypes of their group.
Yes. But when someone says- Which I thought was a progressive ideal.
Yes. But when I'm, when I, for example, if I post on Facebook and I say all men are violent
and like post a meme or something that underscores my thought process there,
I'm not saying Inyash Brodsky is a violent motherfucker.
Hold on. Wait, let me think. Just a logical tautologies. Inyash is a man, all men, therefore
Inyash. Yes. That's, that's how it's read, I think. I mean, that's like, worth great logic.
I think that only the two people in this room read it this way because I definitely don't.
Well, it is simple basic logic. If you say all something is X and someone is part of that
something, then they also are X. The classic example of all men are mortal socrates is a man,
draw your own conclusion. I think going back to the emotional labor thing because I got sidetracked
and forgot about that. So I think this ties into it. So bear with me. Okay. When you're asking people
who have been victimized, when you're asking people who don't have privilege, when you're asking
people who, whose circumstances have caused them to have pain or suffering because of something
they are. When you say, I need you to do all this emotional labor and qualify everything so my
own feelings don't get hurt. That's a shitty thing to do. You don't think that men have ever or white
people or you don't think anyone in the world has ever not experienced pain and suffering because
of what they are? I think it depends. Mike Pence. Is he representative of the overwhelming majority
of people in the United States? He got voted in. That doesn't mean he's a pro.
Well, for, no one votes for the vice president. I'm joking. I'm really joking. So no one votes
for the vice president and people don't vote for people that are representative of them as people.
Yeah, no, I was completely joking on that. I'm sorry. No, so I mean, like, I just, I don't want to
grab a non-central example and say, well, look at this person and like that person could be one
in 300 million, right? So I mean, I think we're talking about like broad strokes. Also, can I
get a clarification point? Yeah. I have come to understand a bit of what privilege means.
They might be clear that I'm kind of an idiot. But you're talking about it like it's a number
between one and 100. But I don't think that that's the best way to think about it. So like,
you have so much privilege. And then maybe you could, to me, it looks like it's like a, however
many boxes you want to put people into, they get points per box of privilege or anti-privilege
or however you want to measure it. And so maybe you could average out those and say, look, we've
averaged out these 60 boxes, you would look like you have two out, you know, let's say 67 total
privilege points out of 100. Now, I'm being simplistic, but like, to say that this person has
more privilege than this person, just by looking at one factor doesn't seem like enough. Okay.
No, it's not like a numbers game. But like, you can, if you're, if you're saying one has more
than another, then there's not, there's a comparison game. No, there is a comparison
game. Like, for example, I as a woman have less privilege than you as a man.
In some situations. Because I get interrupted when I'm trying to talk about things.
I've been interrupted on the show before too. I'm making, I'm making a really snarky point.
Okay. I'm making a very snarky point. But that happens because I'm a woman. I don't get interrupted,
but men don't get interrupted nearly as much as women get interrupted. I have seen that.
That is privilege. That's privilege in case in point is men have more, and I don't, I don't really
know if it's a respect thing, but I want to say respect. Men respect other men more in order to
give them the time and the space to express their ideas. Or we're equally afraid of men and that
the same reason that women allow themselves to be interrupted is the same reason that men
don't interrupt other men is because we're afraid we're going to get our asses kicked because
Enos is bigger than me. So I think that actually is kind of a poorly, poor way to say stuff.
And that was a somewhat flippant, free-spot. Yeah. You guys can't see the smiles in the room.
So I also want you to ask how much privilege does the man have over the woman or vice versa
when dealing with a police officer or in a court of law? Because women get preferential treatment
in those cases. They get lesser sentences for the same crimes. Their storage facilities or
jails or whatever aren't as bad. Storage facilities? Yeah. I'm not a big fan of prisons.
Okay. Yeah. I just hadn't heard that phrase before. So okay. High five. Thank you. They get help from
officers as opposed to get aggression from officers much more often. But the reason why is because
they're perceived as helpless. And that's not a privilege thing. That's like a bad stereotype.
It's like saying, oh, you're helpless. You couldn't help yourself. And you know,
we're going to let you off easy because you're just a stupid woman. You know what? I'd be
willing to take that societal judgment if it led to less prison time. Yeah. But I feel like
I'd go years of less raping. But it doesn't because say, for example, I'm 34 and I get sent
to prison for whatever reason. But I get a lesser sentence than a man. That doesn't mean that I
haven't spent the rest of my life dealing with the effects of privilege on me. It's like saying,
it's not a get out of jail free card. It's a, this is the circumstances of my life. And I have to deal
with not only the, oh yeah, I get out of jail free, but I have to deal with men interrupting me. I
have to deal with getting paid less. I have to deal with every single thing, the fashion standards,
everything that comes with being a woman that makes me have less privilege than a man.
You aren't expected to violently defend yourself. You aren't assumed to be a sexual predator.
You aren't assumed to be a child molester. If anyone ever sees you with a child other than
your own, there's a lot of privileges that also come with being female. There's a difference
between privileges and privilege, though. All right. Can I, and those, I would argue, those
aren't privileges. Sorry, Stephen. Go ahead. No, no, you're good. I kind of want to just,
if you don't mind completely derail that line of conversation, or at least ask how useful it is.
We're getting into the oppression Olympics here, and that's obviously never useful.
I mean, that might be, that might come up, but I want the point of kind of the episode to be more
about like fruitful conversations. So if it's not going somewhere, we should, right, we're talking
in circles now. Well, no, no, I mean, it might not be a circle. I guess just at least take a meta
step back and say, is this the kind of approach that will lead to a good conversation? Or is
this actually getting us anywhere? So is it going in circles? So like the, like,
raising up data points, like, well, this person's more privileged here, this person's more privileged
here. So like, I am factually curious as to whether or not like, you know, a black person who came
from, you know, two Ivy League graduate parents and was born with, you know, all of the, the societal
benefits of being in a nice neighborhood and with a retirement fund. No. I'm joking. Yeah, sorry.
I don't think, his parents Ivy League grads, I thought that he was. No, I don't think so.
Yeah, he had nice and humble origins. Yeah, he was an Ivy League grad. Yeah. But yeah, so maybe
his kids, our Barack Obama's kids less privileged than, you know, somebody with some, some white
kid with kids, if we were to have kids, sure. I would argue, yes. That they're less privileged
and more privileged. Less. Yeah, okay, good. So that's, that's what I was thinking. Yeah. So
that's, that's what I was getting at, that it wasn't just like a sliding scale based off of one
factor. It's an amalgamation of a number of factors. Yes, exactly. Okay. I think anyone who
argues that Barack Obama's kids are less privileged than my kids would be is insane.
But they still have to deal with the societal consequences of being persons of color.
Yeah, sure. But then they can snap their fingers and send the secret. That's what privilege is about.
Then they can send the secret service out and with a snap of their fingers, which is a privilege
most of us don't have. But those are privileges versus capital P privilege. Yes, that, that exactly,
that exactly is a difference. They, they even have capital P privilege more because capital
P privilege isn't just about your skin color. It's also about your class. Yes. But I'm talking
about skin color and gender, most specifically in my arguments. This is a thing which the, the
left or people like to call intersectionality. Yeah. And it's important to keep in mind that
people do have different privilege in different ways, which is basically all intersectionality
is. It's a fancy word for that. Oh, sorry, go ahead. I interrupted you. That's okay. Go ahead.
Check your privilege. One of the things that I run into when I'm discussing this sort of stuff
with you in particular is that you always tie it into the way that it sounds. And this is,
this is, okay, this is going to sound horrible. I apologize listeners.
You make it sound in a way that it's like, it's kind of a pression olympics. Like, oh,
well, you're a woman. So you, you don't go to jail as often or all this kind of stuff.
But it makes it seem like you're disregarding the experiences of people at the holistic
experience of the person as their specific status in society by pointing out like, well,
they don't go to, they don't go to privileges often. They don't go to jail as often because
they're women or they don't, they're more rich than this one white family. So therefore they,
they have this better thing going on and we can erase, this is, I'm extrapolating,
I don't think you're actually saying this, but we can erase all their other
lacks of privilege because they're rich. I think that is literally what people are doing when they
say all white people, all black people, why, or all men X or all women Y, they are erasing
individuals. They are reducing the holistic experience of being a person to your statistical
group sucks in this particular way. Okay. I can see what you're saying and it does for the individual,
but it, it does for the individual with privilege because it sucks for people without privilege
too. Because if I say all men scare the shit out of me, that is something I can legitimately say
as a woman because the vast majority of my experiences with men, the people in this room
excluded are fucking scary. Yeah. No, there's a big difference between saying all men scare the
shit out of me, which is a fact about you and your experience in life and all men are violent
predators. But this returns to the previous argument I was trying to make. And then again,
I got sidetracked of expecting people to always qualify their statements to make you feel better.
I expect everyone, regardless of who they are, to not be,
I don't want to use the term racist because it's not just a race thing, paint with a wide brush,
to not be stereotyping assholes. I don't care if you're a white person talking about black people
or a black person talking about white people or anything. There's, there's just no excuse for
saying all people are acts. That's actually a matter of privilege. And the reason why is because
it's emotional labor that a lot of people may not have the ability to go through because of their
circumstances. It's like extra labor to type the word all. No, it's emotional labor. It's not just
like actual like, I can't type three letters, blah. It's the, I have to take a step back from
the circumstances that have deeply hurt me to make sure I'm not hurting other people's feelings.
And I have to go through all the emotional rigmarole to make sure that I'm being as open and as
honest and as perfect as possible. When all I want to do is say, men have fucking hurt me.
And you're expecting a lot from someone like a rape victim, for example, to say,
um, you know, like make some post or something. And they're coming out, they're doing all this
stuff. They're like, this, these are my fields. And these are the things I'm experiencing.
And men are fucking awful. You're expecting that rape victim to qualify. Well, not all men are
awful. Yeah, the thing is, I'm not actually expecting that because you take individual
circumstances. If it is a rape victim talking about their experience, I'm not going to jump in
What's that? How do you know? If, say, for example, I'm going to get really, really personal here,
guys. Woo. Only if you're comfortable. No, it's fine. That's I prefaced it for the reader or for
the listener's comfort. Say, for example, I post this meme on Facebook, and I'm really bad at coming
up with memes. So I'm not going to try that. And I prefaced it with all men are fucking awful.
And it has to deal with like something to do with rape or sexual assault or something like that.
And you come and look at it. And you don't know me. I mean, or we're like,
10 gentle friends or something. And you say, well, fuck that person. How dare they make that
judgment? I'm a rape victim. I'm not going to be like, well, how about don't make all my men,
all my male friends feel when I'm coming to this place where something is resonated with me?
And wait a minute, I have to make sure I'm not hurting their feelings. And all of this stuff.
When all I want to do is say, I have been hurt. This is my experience. I want to share this. And
I want to share this experience that I have had in a way that makes me feel like I'm not alone.
And you swan in and go, well, not all men. Yeah, or a worse version of being actually does that.
So yeah, exactly. Sorry, I didn't mean to be like, and you and I have come in and personally
hurt me as a rape victim. No, that's not correct. So like, I know somebody who's raped
by somebody who is Persian. And if she had said all Middle Easterners are pigs,
she would have probably been rightly shit on for that. But like, and then, you know,
like I've been the victim of I've been I've been physically assaulted by black people and white
people. And if I were to say black people scared the shit out of me, I think people be okay to
call me out on that. Okay, like, and just to be clear, they don't. This was 10 years ago. Yeah.
But like, and I think I count the number of times I've been I've been physically assaulted. It was
more times are white people. But that's also a numbers game. But yeah, that aside, Fort Collins
is super white, right? So it's hard to this is one of those things that, like, I feel like I'm
unable to get my head around it, because like, I might just be missing the piece of the machinery
that people have when it's so like, but in this case, it's like, I can see the hole where it is,
whereas like in other places, I can't. So I think it ties back to like the unfortunately phrase
punching up not punching down. Because you as a person of privilege in your race, for example,
you say black men fucking scare me. Why? Well, even if it was true for me, would I would I be
called out for saying that? I think so. Probably. And I think so. Yeah. But like, because by saying
that you wouldn't be like when I say all men scare me, I'm punching it. But black people some
men are black. Did those men scare you too? Yes. So but not because they're black, but because
they're male. So the sweeping statements that you make matter, like it matters what group you're
sweeping. Yeah, kind of. Okay. I think that because I guess it's hard, like maybe I'm missing, like,
this is this is what I was getting at. Let me try to rephrase this, because I think I think I know
what you're missing. But I'm not quite sure if this is going to help or I'm just going to confuse
you further. You've interacted with me twice, but I want to hear what you're saying. No, no.
But okay. So if I were to say all men scare me, that would be me as someone who has again,
this is going to be a numbers game kind of thing, but someone who is traditionally less privileged,
saying that people in power frightened me. Sure. If I was to say black people scare me,
I'm in a position of power over them through to my privilege of being white,
that would be punching down. What if you said black men scare you who have privilege over you for,
see this, this spot like that numbers game is just weird. So like, you can, you can miss,
you can skip all this arithmetic and just say, don't paint with a wide brush.
If you just don't do that, right? So and I understand that. And I like in a perfect world,
we wouldn't do that. But you're also talking to people, you're, you're basically telling victims
how to behave. So to be clear, I think I want to pull up one thing, because a lot of your examples
are saying, I feel this way. And that's, that's me personally. And that, and I, I'm not the kind
of guy I've never gone on to someone's common board and said, not all men or whatever. But
like, I don't, I imagine the people who would say, your assessment of your feelings is wrong,
and here's why, are probably smaller than the people. Like if someone says, all men are rapists,
and like, they're not just, you know, they're, they're, or kill all white men or whatever the
hashtag that's going on a few years ago. And it's like, Oh man, I'm a white guy, I don't want to get
killed. You know, I think I have a problem with that, that hashtag. So those people aren't saying
like, Hey, I've come from this hard spot. And this is, you know, me talking about my feelings,
they're, they're making it like more of like a policy statement rather than like an expression of
their, of their internal feelings. And that's like a, that's a very different ballpark. And I
think that you're playing two different sports. So like, that's like one, one's hockey and one's
booze ball or something. Sure. And I think people, I'm not sure which one's which, and you're out of
but the, I think that telling somebody that they're feeling wrong is different than saying, Hey,
your policy, your, your proposed policy here is wrong. Yeah. So you're right. There is a different,
there is a different experience in saying all men are rapists versus kill all men.
One is a statement, the other is a call to action. Right. And like, but both I think was a one,
one can be wrong and the other one can be just bad. So yeah, I mean, those are true. But like to
say, I'm afraid, like if the, if the sweeping statement is inclusive saying, I feel this way,
like I can't tell you how to feel. And like, you know, if someone said, I'm, you know, I'm scared
of all whatever, like that sucks. I'm sorry. Like that's the only reply that you can have to that.
You might say, Hey, if I can help, let me know. I don't know, you know, whatever. But like the
correct response to that is like compassion. If, if someone's thing is like,
you know, get all men are rapists. And so like me as a non rapist would be like,
I draw objection to that because I, I, my existence validates your position, your, your claim.
So, you know, there's also like the political move of like, how are you going to win hearts and
minds by calling all your allies, your potential, not all of your potential allies, but the majority
of potential allies rapists. So like, or maybe not the majority, well, maybe the majority. There's
a lot of white people. Yeah. Oh, we're talking about white people or men or whatever. Yeah,
it's hard to keep track. But like, if you're, if you're going to shit on all of them for the sake of
the like, of the problematic subsector, you're, you're not, I guess it doesn't strike me as a
politically savvy move. There's something that's kind of bothering about this because I sort of
agree with you, but I sort of don't. And I'm, I completely want to acknowledge that I, like I
said, I think I'm missing something that I can get around to articulate what I think I'm missing
in a second. So yeah. Okay. Um, being an ally isn't something, it's something that you personally
choose to do. And I understand if you, if someone says like, if I were to say fuck all men, I hate
you all or whatever, um, I would, and then still expect, oh, how am I going to put this? It's not,
I'm not putting this well. Um, here, go with your thought and I'll try to gather mine. I'd be happy
just to give you the principle of charity if you want to hack your way through it and just
say that if you, I'd be happy to go with my thing, which was, yeah, go with your thing and then I'll
get back to my thing. So I think I'm like, the example that I came to a few years ago,
realizing that I'm missing, like that I just, I literally can't get it is, uh, when people,
I met people who preferred non-gendered pronouns and I'm like, well, how come? And they're like,
oh, I don't like what comes with this. I don't feel like a she or he. And I'm like,
what does that even feel like? Well, so I was like, I think at first, I can't remember where my
confusion came from, like, why not? Or what's that mean? But I came to realize that they have a sense
of like their gender that I have no idea what they're talking about. I look inside for my gender
and there's just, there's not even an empty box. There's not a box labeled gender in my brain.
So I, my position is like, okay, you guys have a sense, you guys have an aspect of your sense of
self that I do not have. So I'll just, I'll take your word for it and let's do what you guys want.
So I'm wondering, so this isn't the same kind of like there. So I think there's,
running with the analogy of boxes in my brain, there is a box that has like,
that's labeled like understanding of this kind of stuff. And it's just like dusty and full of
spider webs. And I can't really figure out, I don't have a flashlight. So,
as someone who hates being male, I absolutely understand the non gender people and why they
want to do that. Because I dislike everything that comes with being categorized as male. And
I would love to see a world where we didn't have genders and we didn't see people that way. But
I can't be non binary because I don't think it fucking matters. I can ask my friends to call
me they them. And sure, they'll do that to indulge me. But literally, everyone in the world will
still look at me and see a male and I will still get all the stereotypes that come with being a
male. So why would I put that extra burden on my friends for no advantage? I think your experience
is different from theirs. I mean, it probably is different from a lot of people. Because I know
quite a few but non binary people and they don't express their sense of gender and self in that
particular fashion. And so for them using like they them or Zasia or all those other non traditional
pronouns makes it a different expression of experience than just hatred, just necessarily
hatred for your current gender. So not to discount your experience but to kind of elucidate other
people's experience as well. So back to what I was thinking because I think I finally gathered my
thoughts. People who are less privileged, who are suffering, who are experiencing societal
consequences for their intrinsic selves have zero obligation to pander to allies feelings.
That I think I can agree with that while still having my position that it's politically not savvy
move. But the thing is, is as an ally, say for example, I want to support people of color
as a white female. And I have the privilege of being white and being able to have certain
things in our society because of that. If a black woman came up to me and said, fuck you whitey,
I'd be like, okay, I'm still going to be an ally to people of color. But not to her.
There's a difference between being friends and being allies though. Yeah, do you support
freedom of speech? Sure do. Yeah, you support freedom of speech, even if it's fucking Fred
Phelps out there saying burn the gaze, right? So you can be an ally of freedom of speech without
liking Phelps. Yeah. And yet, like, if enough people, like, let's run for Fred Phelps example,
if enough Fred Phelps has told me to go fuck myself, like, you know what, maybe this free speech
thing isn't all of all that was cracked up to be. Yeah, I really like the free speech thing,
which is how I always think of it. But I no longer think of myself as an ally with anyone.
I will I will work for principles. I am an ally to principles. And if that puts me on the same
side as some people, great. But if not, fine, whatever, I'm working for the principles. And
if they want to say, well, you're not an ally, I'm like, fuck you, I don't need your approval
to continue pursuing these these principles that I wanted. I think that's like what Vivian was
saying was that there's a difference between being friends with the person and an ally to their
goals. I just find the word ally toxic now. Things like, well, this person hurt my feelings
because I am, how am I going to phrase this? This is the thing that you have to phrase delicately.
And I'm probably going to do it wrong. So yeah, saying I don't want to be an ally to
LGBTQ people because this one person was mean to me is the same as taking is this is really
hypocritical when you go in and say not all men. And I wasn't saying that it would be one person.
I'm not saying I'm not saying you guys are doing this. And you know, if somebody was whatever
beaten up by whatever group that they were previously working for, and then they're like,
okay, you know what, I'm going to stop going to those marches because I got my ass kicked
to the last two of them. Then it's like, you can't really blame the person. But in general,
I think the response to like enough criticism from the side that you're trying to support is like,
okay, well, if you you guys clearly don't want my help, it's kind of like the feeling that it's
hard to avoid. And I'm not really speaking from experience because I sort of don't go outside.
So I want to I want to briefly talk about Scott Alexander here. When I first found out that he
was not a feminist and actually anti feminist, I was like, what the fuck is wrong? He's absolutely
the sort of liberal, pro equality sort of person that I would always assume as a feminist, right?
And it wasn't until much later that I realized it was because of his experiences being attacked by
groups that call themselves feminists. And it's gotten to the point now where I, I am still pro
equality, but I also wouldn't call myself feminist anymore because of the types of people that have
taken over that movement. And I've made it really unwelcoming and toxic to almost everyone. I'm
feminist. I am feminist in principle. I am not feminist in being related to the political group.
Which one? Exactly. And the thing, the thing is, is you're, you're doing the same thing you
kind of decry other people for doing. Okay. You're lumping. I am. I am happy to say that I am pro
women's rights without calling myself feminist because enough baggage comes with that word now
that I don't want to be associated with it. For you and for your experience, though. Yeah.
And so you're saying that if I were to say I hate all men from my experience, would that be just
as valid? As saying what I don't want to be labeled a feminist? Because of all the experiences that
I've had with feminists. Yeah, that's just saying I don't want to be labeled a feminist. Whereas
opposed to I hate all men is actually you could say I hate all men. That's fine. That's just the
expression of your opinion. Yeah, I keep doing this like I statements when I should be doing
non I statements. Well, no, that's the thing. I statements are fine. Yeah, I know. But it's when
people say all men are shitty. Those are you statements and those are the ones that are not
necessary. Yeah, and for the sake of the argument, I should be using you statements. I'm just really
bad at them. Which shows that you're not the archetypal example of the person who makes.
I'm not going to high five you. High five. I don't want this room to leave without high five.
Okay, I'll high five you later. No, I mean, I'm just thinking like I don't want anyone to be
so miffed in disagreement here that we can't still be super friendly afterwards. Yeah. Or even
super friends. So I just mean like, I think that this is super not where I wanted the conversation
to start. And that's why we haven't even done the intro yet. But it's just worked out to where
we were talking about this and it came up. So because I think that this is like, it's hard.
The meta level I want to have this conversation at is like, how do you have conversations like this?
Because I think we're doing a pretty good job. We're not going to have someone like Steven in
here to help us. Yeah, exactly. We just have to like carry around with us.
Well, and maybe I'm, you know, if I, I'm not really in this, I'm more like interjecting rather
than being part of it. So I've been in difficult conversations like this and that's tougher.
No, but what you're doing is you're doing this really interesting thing that I would like to
see more people doing that I see people doing poorly in conversations like this.
What you're doing is just saying, I don't understand. Can you reframe that?
Yeah, I, well, really, because my goal is I want to understand. And so like, I think,
you know, one of the ingredients is to go in with an honest wanting to hear what your opponent,
not just hear, but to really see where they're coming from. And by opponent, I mean, like,
conversational partner. Yeah. But, you know, I just got me choked up about using the word
interlocutor because apparently I use that a lot earlier. That's a great word. I hear it a lot
nowadays too. Oh, good. Well, you can thank me for that. So there's this really interesting
article I read today by Ferret Steinmans, who if you're not familiar with him, he's an amazing
blogger and an amazing author, not a rationalist, but go look at him anyway. He's awesome. But he
was writing about how there's a tendency to, and I'd have to pull this up or link it to like,
really get it right. So I apologize, Ferret, if I'm getting this wrong. But to nowadays,
there's this concept where we have to win arguments instead of have discussions. And
especially on the internet, you go in, you wait in to like your friend's friends while we're
selling to said something stupid about abortion or something. And you're like, well, I'm going to
win this argument and prove everyone that I'm right and get all the social points. And I'm
going to come out the victor with all these like currency of social blotty blah. And what really
happens is you waste three hours of your time sitting on your friend's friends Facebook while
arguing with someone who is never going to listen to you, who is never going to change our mind.
And you're just in your own echo chamber screaming at the void.
So I think that's that's true. That's how people, many people will approach conversations and they
feel like that's the wrong way to go about it. But I don't think it's a new thing. I think we've
been doing that since debate. So since like the ancient Greeks, at least. And it's just louder
when we have the internet and everyone can do it. Right. And I guess the only thing, because I'm not
a fan of like the debate format, where two people who will never change their minds get together
and pretend to argue. But really, when they're just like laying up, you know, they're
laying out arguments and the other person lays out other arguments that never really like
go back and forth. I watched a really annoying debate 10 years ago-ish between Dinesh D'Souza
and Peter Singer. And it was super fucking annoying. First of all, D'Souza is a scummy
arguer and I think a scummy person. But the whole time, it was about the problem of evil was
supposed to be the point of the debate. Dinesh was like pointing at like, Oh, yeah, well,
Singers utilitarianism leads them to like say it's okay to kill babies and whatever other, you know,
he says you guys, you know, you guys should be giving way more money to the poor and yet he
doesn't live in poverty. So he's a hypocrite, you know, whatever. The whole point was like,
No, we're here to talk about the problem of evil. Let's talk about that. And the entire like 90
minute debate, Peter Singer was willing to grant that, yes, sure, humans, including babies deserve
to die because for whatever original sin, I'll grant you that. But why did God kill all those
animals in the flood? And he could he they spent 90 minutes dancing and Dinesh never addressed
that point. So like, I don't like debates for mainly that sort of reason. But the only reason
that I can get behind them. And maybe this is the steel man of that person arguing on Facebook
about abortion. Is that by the way, that was me like two years ago. So you're good to still man
your position two years ago on the internet is that if you do one thing, if you direct message
that person had that argument, then it's kind of pointless. But if you're doing it on a conversation
that other people can see, at the very least, you might get somebody who like, initially saw that
and they're like, Oh, man, you're right. Whatever good pro argument, pro choice or excuse me, pro
whatever good anti abortion argument they made, that almost does that's kind of convincing me.
And then they see someone else challenge it, you can you could swing somebody back, right? So
that's why you should always do direct messages, because you can actually have
a interesting debate of no or dialogue if no one else is listening in anything that's done in a
public forum, like a debate or a, you know, Facebook wall comment is always done for the
audience. I guess it depends why you're not going to change your position. Well, I guess it depends
on are you are you expecting a conversation or are you just yeah, that's the goal of the conversation
at that point, right? If you're watching, it's always done for them. So like there are people
at CSU that come by every semester and scream about like how you're all fornicating sinners.
Oh, those guys are funny. I love them. So we invited, I forget the guy's name,
but he invited him to like the I went to two of the lift meetups, they were called leaders in
free thought, it was like the atheist group. But when I went there, the first thing I noticed
that they're 32 people and thus 32 different versions of how they were atheists. Like they
introduced themselves with like super, you know, long, so, you know, many syllable versions of
philosophical positions of like, basically how they're atheists. So they didn't agree on that.
But we invited this guy to come talk about it. And in person, he was objectionable in what he said,
but very polite. And I thought it was actually really valuable. And so he wasn't performing.
But when he was performing, there are other people out there performing against him. And I
thought that was valuable. So it depends on how you're modeling your, your, your political, your
conversational opponent here. Are you are they performing or are they putting forward like,
you know, hey, I've been thinking this lately, what do you guys think? And if that could still
be performance, but if they're being genuine, then you can, you know, respond on the wall or,
you know, they might be worth talking to via direct message. But if, if they're not,
if they're this Reverend guy, I can remember his name on his performance day, then he's not going
to be forthcoming to like debate in private either. So I think just knowing what kind of conversation
you want to have slash expect to have before you get into it is my very long way of saying that
point. Sorry. Well, and I think I'm going to use Facebook as an example, because I don't really
interact on Twitter. So it's harder for me to say Twitter is like this. But on Facebook, you
aren't really there, or at least I'm not particularly there to have in depth, complex
conversations. I'm there to share cat memes and like randomly piss off any ash. It's only happened
once. Twice. Twice. Yeah. Oh, sorry. But when I do post things that are vaguely controversial on
my wall, I make it clear through how I model my behaviors. And this is going to make me sound
super holier than that. That I expect mostly civil conversation. I would like to think that
everyone would like that. But not everyone does. Every time I go to someone else's wall and they
posted something like this, or for goodness sake, read the comments on any of the original posts.
It's like a morass of vitriol and grossness. And I'm like, how does anyone live like this?
Like every time someone gets into an argument on my Facebook page and they're really offensive,
or people that I eventually unfriend because I just can't handle them. It's like every time
I get the notification, I flinch. Because I don't want to deal with that kind of behavior.
Yeah. So then that makes sense. And I mean, I wouldn't want that either. I was on Twitter,
like actively for two months and realized that it's impossible to have a nuanced conversation
with 140 characters. So I remember I was arguing with somebody about female genital mutilation
versus male circumcision. And they were trying to make some argument and like weighing the total
uterlines of men circumcised versus female circumcised. And that's how he kept putting
those female circumcision, which I don't like. Then again, you could use male genital mutilation,
whatever. But the point is my shit still works, even though it's been slightly lopped off when I
was a kid. And that's a large difference in scale. That's what I was trying to convince to him.
But it's really hard to do 140 characters. So I kind of just gave up the platform.
So I should get back into it and just follow people that I want to see what they have to write.
I mean, I want to say like breaking someone's nose is bad and
breaking every bone in someone's legs is bad. But one is more bad than the other.
And that's the argument I made. I was like lopping off the last digit of your pinky is bad.
And no one should do that. But no one should top off your whole hand either. And so
the point was that we were unable to come to a mutual, like,
I don't remember how long this debate went on, probably most of an afternoon or something back
and forth. And nobody changed their minds or whatever. It's hard to articulate a point in 140
characters. And now whatever 280, but that's not enough. If they're not willing to sit down and
read, you know, a couple of paragraphs, and they're not willing to really engage in conversation
anyway. So I guess Twitter could be fun. I guess that was my short history of Twitter for trying
to use it for probably not intended purpose. I got onto it to coordinate at a conference,
and it was great for that. So if I want to see what Neil deGrasse Tyson's up to,
I'm sure it's a great thing for that, too. But the really quick back out Scott Alexander,
I think just I want to just voice my thought on that, even though it was 10 minutes ago.
His whole not a feminist thing sounds like not women's rights, but it's not. He just doesn't
like theist and everything that comes with it. And I think as it exists. Right. And that's why
that the reason I thought of that was because I mentioned Neil deGrasse Tyson, and he likes,
he doesn't like atheists, he doesn't like anyists except scientists. And you know,
how much that's true for him really, who knows, but there's somebody out there who, you know,
I think that that makes sense that when you say, yes, I made this, then people are allowed,
or not just allowed, they're expected. Basically, that's the whole point of having a shorthand
to bring all this baggage with him back. Oh, so you believe all these things.
That's like, I don't believe many of those things. I don't know why you would think that I'm,
you know, I'm an atheist, I'm okay with killing babies or whatever. Right. So I guess I wanted
to free people who aren't familiar with Scott Alexander. He's not anti women's rights. No, no,
not at all. He's, he's, he's way too articulate to, to let that go so quickly too. And there's a
couple good posts on that that we can dig up if we want. So one of the things that's kind of
bothering me about the not a feminist thing is that I can only think of one person out of my
like 600 social media followers that identifies as feminist who is an offensive person
who has said things like all men should die, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, whatever.
Which means that if half of my friends are female statistically, that's around 300 women,
most of whom who I know identify as feminist are, are being lumped in with the one person
who is basically misusing the label. But that makes it seem like to me, your argument is, well,
that one person ruined the bunch. So all these other women who are feminists, I'm just not going
to side with. No, it's, if they claim they're feminist, you know, I, I, again, I'm still
siding with anyone who is fighting for women's rights and women's equality. It's the, the,
are we thinking about the same person? Yes, we are. Okay. All right. Yeah. When I went up to
Michigan to visit my in-laws, I still identified as a feminist and I was going to go to one of
the conventions up there and I got crap from the super conservative in-laws. And like, I sat down
and I schooled them and I was like, no, this is why I'm a feminist and really everyone should be.
And they're like, oh, okay, well, all righty then. And they did the same thing about it. I was like,
oh, huh, that was kind of neat. And then a few years later, I dropped out as well. And I,
I think it's because when the people who speak up that way and are toxic that way,
they do grab ahold of the movement and it can be hard to rest it back. The,
everyone nowadays who thinks about the Catholic church thinks basically pedophile priests, right?
Because the entire church supported them and hid them and very few people said much against it.
Even the laity after the whole scandal broke was like, well, okay, that was kind of shitty,
but well, what can we do? It was, there was no one saying, no, this does not represent us. And
actually now there are some people and I've regained some respect for Catholics because
of that. But the institution as a whole, I still find pretty corrupt. And it's a lot of that, well,
okay, this person is going to the extreme, but they're, they're fighting for us ostensibly. So
we're not going to say anything to them. I can think of plenty of people to use that same person
as an example. I can think of plenty of feminists who've stood up to them.
Oh, well, that's awesome. And there are plenty of feminists who say, say, okay, take for example,
and this is something I kind of wanted to bring up as like an example. So yay, opportunity.
Turfs are trans exclusionary radical feminists. Hold on.
Trans exclusionary radical feminists, they basically say that turf. Yeah.
So they're trans exclusionary so that what they, they're feminist, but not for trans women?
This is going to be, yeah, basically, they, they, yeah, it's, it's literally one of the most
horrible things I've heard in a while. Because I can, my mental model of what I'm, I don't know
this person you guys are talking about, but mental model of the extreme feminist, I could
totally imagine saying, you're not really one of us, you know, you didn't go through what we went
through. I'm making up again, these are not my positions, make that perfectly clear. I'm saying
I have an accurate model of I think the kind of psychopathic position that it takes to
hate on people that way. Okay. And this person in particular isn't a turf,
but I'm using turf as an example. There are people that stand up to them and say,
this is not what feminism is. This is horrible. And we should be able to include our trans
sisters as well in our community and in our uprising. But it's really a shame
when we have people like that in the movement, we have feminists who are
basically horrible people. And for allies to say, well, this one person is a horrible person. So
I'm not going to support this movement by lending my voice to that movement. I'm going to be over
here doing my own thing for women's rights. Yay. It's completely different. And it's,
we need as many voices as we can get to help cover the voices that are not representative of the
whole. And so when people are like, well, I'm not going to play anymore, because my feelings got
hurt. And you're not doing that. But that's kind of how it's coming across and how it's
come across from other people as well. It's like, but we could build something together.
And now you're refusing to because there's one bad apple. You aren't really an ally.
There's some organizations I won't support. But feminism isn't an organization. The Catholic
Church is an organization. Feminism is not. Well, no, it's an ideology. It is an ideology.
But when it embraces things like it is okay for women to say all men are violent.
I'm not okay with that. And, and yeah, the turfs say that. But a lot of other people are like,
you know, I don't support the turfs and their trans exclusionary thing. But yeah, they're
allowed to say that all men are terrible and all men are violent. That's punching up. So it's
all right. And no, don't I will fight for the the laws and the social attitude adjustments,
I guess, that I would like to see in the world without having to identify with the people who
say that I am terrible and they don't want me around. So I think you don't want me around. That's
fine. I won't be around. I think it's like it's less like you're going to take your ball and go
home and not play with them because they were mean, or one person on the field is mean. It's
like, you know what, I'm going to take my ball and go play somewhere else and not call it soccer
because you guys are you guys playing soccer being dicks or something, you know, whatever,
whatever it is, right? So you're behind the goals just you can't get under the umbrella term.
Right. And that's I think I can see that. I think that I'm for free speech, but I'm not going to
join Fred Phelps's church. Sure. I think that's a kind of a bad example. It's definitely his church
is a lot worse. I'm sorry, not a bad example, bad comparison. Okay. Because people who are in
support of free speech are not saying that you have to support everyone who's how am I saying
this because that's kind of not what I wanted to say. I'm sorry. Where you have like, to be
someone who supports free speech doesn't mean you have to agree with everything.
There's no party line. Well, the party line is that everyone can say what they want as long as it
doesn't cross into actual violent threats. Yeah. And so there's no the party line for feminism
isn't we hate all men fuck you men. It's we would like to be recognized as people we would like
to have the same rights as men. We would like to have the same privileges as men. And that's why
I still support feminism, but not capital F feminists, because a lot of those are people that
attack people that I like, even other women. And there is I was also exactly where you are
right now a few years ago, where I called myself a feminist. And now I call myself like,
still believing in feminism, but not in the feminist movement, because I feel like it has
been hijacked enough that I cannot be part of that movement in good conscience. Just jumping in,
I use the frames, I use the phrase women's rights activist. Yeah. Because I mean, then that's,
that shows exactly, I guess, activist is an isteword, but that's kind of cheating.
But that that says, Oh, okay, I know what they're for women's rights. Whereas like,
you know, I remember a few months ago, someone asked me if I was an atheist, and I'm like,
I gave the question some serious thought. Because like, yes, on paper, do I believe in God, but
I didn't know what else they assumed came with that label. And so, like, poisoning the well
is a logical fallacy if used in some ways, but it's also a thing that actually happens.
And if you feel like the well's been poisoned, you're like, Okay, well,
I don't want to be branded in with those other atheists to keep whatever eating babies, I'm
going to go ahead and, you know, call myself something else, not nonbeliever, maybe that's
why I would like to not be lumped in with men. But I can't not be. And I think that that's why
it makes sense that you're having not just you, but why you're able to articulate, like,
the position of people who don't like the inclusive language there pretty well.
Like, I remember I was at a friend's house a few months ago, and things were pretty rough. And
like, they were talking, it was two people, and they were talking about like, how men suck,
and you know, whatever. And I'm like, you know, man, hear me sitting quiet, here's a guy with
self worth issues, you know, being told by two people I thought were friends that I suck, you
know, great, I'll name you guys in my suicide note. Thanks a lot. Like, you know, you are excluded,
you are their one male friend. Well, actually, one of them was a guy too. Oh, so it's just like,
it, it's hard, especially if you're not in a position where, you know, you're able to just
dispassionately engage it, like how do you, well, how do you, you know, respond to somebody,
including you, and in slanderous ways that don't, or not slanderous, like, bad labels that don't
apply to you, you respond poorly, you don't like it. It hurts your feelings. And it's okay to say
that. Like, yes, not everyone has to, has to, you know, kowtow to your feelings all the time or
whatever. But like, to the extent that you can, and it doesn't take that much work, you should.
I get like, if you're coming from a position of crisis, or talking about a trauma or something,
then yeah, you voice your stuff. But if you're having a casual conversation around coffee,
like, you're not, and assuming, especially if it's a casual conversation, you're not coming
from one of those positions, you don't need to be shitting on everybody that, you know, you've
never met. That's my, that's my two cents on it. Granted, I'm in a better place now, I can have
those conversations than I could before. But it did sort of illuminate to me, like, oh man.
Okay, well, principle of charity is giving your opponent like the, whether they phrase something
the right way or not, giving them the best, best interpretation that you can really think of.
Or asking them what they mean. Right. So that said, this gave me some insight into like,
why people with tiki torches were marching with swastika flags. It's like, they've been told by
people like, you know, imagine being, imagine being one of these guys, and not obviously like
every racist shitbag is marching with them. But some people who aren't necessarily racist
shitbags are marching with them. And I think they get there because they're going through
some shit, and they go try and tell their friends about it. And half their friends are like,
good, you deserve it, you white piece of shit. And the rest of the friends are like, oh man,
well, you can't be going through that because you're a man, you shouldn't, you don't have those
problems. They're like, well, fuck me, these guys aren't telling me that shit, I'm going to go hang
out with them. So like, I would actually argue that the, I would say that's maybe a 0.001% of
that group. And I'm, and I completely, I'm totally willing to concede that. I don't,
I'm not willing to put numbers on that, but I imagine there's somebody marching with them.
Yeah, like one dude in the back with like a tiki torch from like Target instead of Walmart.
Because because because they found a group that wasn't putting them down. Yeah. And so like,
I think it may, maybe more, it was probably started out with 0.01%, but I think that's how
they accrued enough people to be able to swing the general election. Well, and that's the whole
MRA thing, right? That's, it's part of it. Yeah. With like the, I don't know my history of this
very well. So I'm going to just kind of slide over that, but it's my impression, and again,
not history, impression that a lot of this rose out of the like depths of the internet,
where you do have those echo chambers that are telling you these things. And for, and
there is a tendency when you tell people who have privilege that they, that their privilege
is hurting other people for them to react in a nitric fashion that says, well, fuck you.
I think that is more of a tendency for people who are actively being hurt and shit on.
It doesn't, if your life is miserable, it doesn't help you at all to be told,
well, you have privilege. So suck it up. Okay. So I dated this guy in high school,
who is probably he torched up by now, I'm sure. But he was your 4chan kind of person,
your Reddit kind of person, not like the good parts of Reddit, but like the rest of Reddit.
Not like the slash, the Bayesian conspiracy subreddit. Exactly.
Or animals being bros or wholesome memes, or the other ones that I said.
The deep depths of the Reddit continent that touch 4chan.
And he was one of those people. And so I, when I see people when, for example, when I look at
Gamergate, I see him as one of those people online that's like, women shouldn't be involved with
video games. Fuck you. How dare you even try to touch our video games? These aren't your things
to touch. There's a lot of people out there like that. A lot. And he wasn't doing this because
he was hurt. It's because he didn't want me playing with his toys. Can I make two quick
points on that? Yes, please. So one is that I was having a conversation today about cultural
appropriation. And I think that's kind of where gamers and the filming at the mouth,
morons who are Gamergating, we're coming from, where they're like, this is our stuff.
We got shot on this for decades. Now that it's cool, you guys be part of it, that's lame.
So I think that I can put a steel man on that very hollow straw man position that they're all,
I think, let me rephrase that. Also, I need to clarify that I do not sympathize the tiki torch
wielding white supremacists. I think they're wrong. I'm sympathizing with the occasional
person who probably wanders into the group to find somebody who won't tell them that they're a piece
of shit. But the, I guess, my mental model of the straw man, excuse me, steel man position
behind the people who were, I don't really know what happened during Gamergate. Like I said,
I don't get outside and that means also I don't get online. So I guess the idea that like, oh,
now nerd culture is cool. So now, you know, I endure it swirly through all of primary school,
but now that, you know, there's a TV show, Big Bang Theory, now nerds are cool, now it's okay,
screw that, you guys suck. So I think that I made a, I'm making a very vague comparison to the
my vague understanding of cultural appropriation and saying maybe there's some common nodes there.
That's not cultural appropriation. No, it's literally cultural appropriation.
No, it's not, though. They're the totally same thing, except that it's now white guys being
appropriated. No. No. No. Okay. So before we get bogged down by that, I'm going to say from my
understanding of what cultural appropriation is, which we can talk about later, if we feel like it,
that's a whole nother topic. Yeah, that's a whole nother. That's fine. So it's a pushing past that.
I just wanted to say that if my understanding of like, you're taking somebody who's been oppressed
for doing something that the way that they've been doing stuff, and then as somebody from the
outside, you're like, Oh, I'm going to take this and make it my thing now. And then you're not
suffering any of the penalties for it. If that's what cultural appropriation is, and that's what
happened to these gamers, maybe whatever, not maybe not these gamers, but some gamers,
somewhere, hypothetically, maybe, past all that. What was the other thing I was going to say? Oh,
about people. So that's, that's not, Gamergate is sort of a totally different. Yeah. Well,
it's sort of totally, it's not the inciting incident is at this point, I think almost entirely
superfluous. Someone got cheated on, there was a bad relationship, whatever. What it is, is an
emotional reaction to literally what you're saying that the gamers used to have their own culture
and community, and now everyone can play games, and they're very mad about that. I disagree about
that principle, though, because I grew up as a gamer. Yeah. But I was excluded because I was female.
So does that mean that it's not my culture? That is a good question. Yeah. And I'm not like trying
to say, you're a gamer, gay fucking. No, no, no. Well, I mean, that's the thing. I am very much pro
cultural sharing. And I think 98% of cultural appropriation claims are bullshit. And, and
this isn't, for what it's worth, this is not cultural appropriation. It's a completely different
thing. So, but the definition is completely different, and it deals with other things that
we aren't addressing, and we'd have to address in order to actually make that argument. Okay,
we should get that to another day. So, but when I say, Hey, you know, I want to,
I want to have this thing that I've been doing all my life, that I've been enjoying all my life.
And then someone comes up and says, Hey, you're female, you don't get to have that.
Mm hmm. That is horrible. Mm hmm. And that, and it's like, Oh, I have this part of my culture
and my part of my identity. But I'm not allowed to have that because I'm female. And because you
with your TT torches and your Pepe the frog and what the fuck ever say that I can't fuck you.
And the thing is, is it's not just the problem with this kind of discussion, not this particular
discussion, but the discussion online about Gamergate is that it doesn't have any real life
consequences for the people who claim they're being persecuted, the MRA people, the Gamergate
people. But it does have real life consequences for the people that they're persecuting. I was on
a panel at Worldcon in 2016 with Briana Wu. We had police officers outside the door. Because
of people that had done death threats, given like sent her death threats. Who is Briana Wu?
She's one of the main players in Gamergate. Okay. So I opened the Gamergate can of worms
without having read the label. You want to recan it now? I don't want to let you finish your
point, but I want to be clear that everything I said about it came from my position of like,
I heard it was this video game related thing. So that's, if anyone says it was actually about
this piece of shit. And I'm like, well, I didn't know that I'm talking about something else then.
So scratch the whole label and just talk about the appropriation quote unquote of nerd culture.
Maybe is what I was more making a point about. And the thing is, is saying like, hey, I was hurt
for this kind of stuff. And now you say it's cool. Yeah, that sucks. But there's also the opposite
part of that coin that says, you know, I was picked on as a kid for this, but hey, you over there,
you aren't being picked on for that. Can we talk about this? This is cool. I'm going to go talk
about Superman with that guy and not get punched on the face for it. That's awesome. And being able
to look at stuff like that is awesome. We're having this like persecutory persecutory. That's why I'm
a huge part of this cultural sharing stuff. A persecutory complex and says, well, you aren't
allowed to have nice things because I wasn't allowed to have nice things at some point in my
past. That's bullshit, right? Yes. Yeah. But the people that are saying you're not allowed to have
nice things because they're my they're the only things that I have. And they're the only things
that I'm going to hold on to with the death grip. Like I'm still talking about Gamergate. So,
but when they say you as a woman cannot have these nice things that I've had all my life,
you know, I was shunned for liking them earlier. I'm not shunned for liking them now. And I have
this huge community. That sucks. Especially when it turns into I'm going to send bomb threats to
your house. Yeah. Oh, that happens. Brianna Wu is what you're saying. Okay. Yeah. And we had to have
a freaking police officer outside our door at a convention. I agree 100% with everything you've
said. Sorry. I think we're agreeing. I think I'm just ranting at this point. Okay. Sometimes it's
good friends. You got to get those things out for sure. That's why I have a blog.
And that's why I'm here. So I think the other thing I was going to mention was you said that
there was this. It was a while ago that I got us on the video game thing. But
you had said something about like presence online or something ruining stuff or being so toxic.
And I just I had this sort of like realization a couple weeks ago that
so I did this thing for mental masturbation for like trying to imagine counterpoints to like
things I agree with and what the world would look like if I was wrong. Or if I was one of
the people that I disagreed with what their world looks like and what could change their mind.
And so I was trying to imagine what it would be like to talk to somebody who's
to get political a full on like Donald Trump supporter not necessarily Republican or I guess
necessarily Republican but not just every Republican but like someone who's like Donald
Trump's awesome and here's why. And you know all that shit that they're saying about him all the
shit that he said about himself well that's just all fake news that's conspiracy that's that's
that's slander to try and you know diminish this awesome guy. I'm trying to picture what their
worldview looked like and to them like all of the you know lame stream quote unquote previously
mainstream media that says yeah I remember that time that he said grab him by the pussy and he
said that you know it was locker room talk and I was saying he never said it so it's fake news.
Their position is like yeah that that never happened you know whatever or the tape was
doctored or something like that right hypothetically whatever. So I was trying to think of like
I sort of put myself in the position of someone who thinks that way. And then like all right well
what could change their minds to make them like realize no a lot of this is propaganda that is
making you believe what you believe and a lot of the stuff that you say is propaganda actually
isn't. So then I had this kind of like moment or like my heartbeat went up and I was like wait
how would I know if I was in that situation what if everything I believe is propaganda and
you know all the stuff that I don't believe is the actual truth. And then I realized the world
looked a lot like it actually does in that you would get like so the cool thing about being
online is the anonymity one of the cool things quote unquote cool. It has its perks but in
situations like this you can be arguing as somebody. Are you saying there's privilege to going online?
Moving past that as one of the things that you can do is say you're somebody you're not and so
you know you get like leading up to the election you got a lot of stuff on the internet that you'd
come across in your news feed via Facebook Twitter whatever of stuff that just wasn't
true from people that we've now learned well we learned two years ago but every intelligence
agency in the world who's looked into this agrees like yes there are people in Russia
going online making accounts and retweeting or making up stuff grabbing pictures putting you
know fake headlines over them and signing them along. These are these are actually
going to exist doing just this sort of dismiss information campaign to sow disharmony and
I sort of realized that or I guess I anticipated that this is probably happening on the left too.
This isn't just fueling fire to the far right this is also sowing disharmony on the left
and so like the number of people that you disagree with online that you see like oh there's some
idiot who you know thinks this absurd thing I can't think of an example right off. The shootings
that just happened there was a slew of articles recently there's been 18 mass shooting or 18
18 school shootings since the beginning of the year the numbers nowhere close to that and yet it
got massively shared I saw it like three or four different times I think and I bet the reason that
it got shared is because then people who look into it for a second say that's not true this must
all be bullshit and so it's a great way to like make people question what they see and make people
hard to unify well no it gets shared a lot because it tells people exactly what they want to hear
they're like yes this is horrible we should ban all guns and do exactly what I've been proposing
the whole time because look at how many school shootings there are I don't think it's necessarily
just that though and yeah that's also shocking which helps and I think it also speaks to the
fear that other people have so it's not just I'm going to share this to further my social agenda
it's the oh my goodness I'm scared let me share this yeah that's exactly what it is but people
don't bother sorry go ahead no no you're good I think I just wanted to add to that that another
consequence of that is that somebody on the right who is you know looking at this and his pro-gun
and they say no way man it's like half that why are you lying maybe there's maybe there's more
yeah so who knows like maybe there's more bullshit to this than I thought and it it
continues to deunify people and so I imagined that like a lot of the insane stuff that you see
coming like you know I'm left of center but there are like there are insane circles of the left
but now I'm considering or I was strongly considering and then I had to confirm a few days later
that the circle is much smaller than I thought that there are people who yes on the left who
believe weird stuff that I can't really get behind but it's a it's a smaller circle than I thought
despite what I've seen online because the stuff I've seen online could be just trolls it could be
paid or bored people trying to just fuck with people but or it could be one person you know
with 10 accounts or whatever right and then we were out to dinner and I saw that thing on your
phone that was drawing you some of the specific headlines it was yeah oh it was out of the Denver
Post I think where it was talking about like these are all the tweets that have been archived
that we've been able to access out of the past I think it was out of 2016 that can be directly
tied to Colorado like about things in Colorado from the Russian hackers hackers are the hackers
I don't know not really hackers I think they're called hackers but they're not doing what people
think of as hacking but they are they're gaming the system well they're social hacking right okay
yeah social engineering or whatever they call that but yeah so yeah one of the examples was
like can you think of any write-off um there was one about how Trump got stuck in an elevator
what else was there because I remember actually seeing that on facebook and the during the election
year um there was one about marijuana and it being like scary or something or like it not being as
profitable and it was just like a bunch of stuff that like on the face of it if you didn't look too
deeply into it or if you didn't know more about the topic would seem real especially if it confirmed
your underlying already established biases sure and I think I remember skimming this but it was a
busy night I can't remember the specifics but I want to post this full article to the website on
this episode but I can find it a couple of them were um specifically the kind of things that I
imagined the far left people saying and these are people just they're just to just to stir the pot
and so disharmony and uh then like I said so it sort of confirmed my my suspicion that like oh I
bet they're doing this for both sides or they could be in this exactly what it would look like
and it was very gratifying to have it have it have my noticing something that actually
confirmed what I was thinking within a few days so there's actually I agree with you and I read
this article that I don't remember I was published and this is gonna sound super sketch because I'm
like so I read an article online um but it was basically maybe it's a Washington post or something
where it was talking about like how the Russian hackers slash scammers slash bots were targeting
Bernie Sanders supporters during the election through memes and through other stuff um and how
they were trying to influence their like to polarize them to make it so that and I actually one of my
friends is the case in point for this he's very young and so he was like well I saw this all this
stuff online that that that they said Hillary did and um Bernie Sanders is the best I'm just gonna
vote for Trump because Hillary's the worst oh and it's that kind of like honest-to-goodness person
that kind of person that this social engineering is targeting yeah for sure I guess the reason I
brought that up is because both right and left social engineering yeah just like it's not just the
right people who are real stupid or are falling for all these tricks it's everyone we do too yeah
and that's the realization that I had that's why like I said when I was considering this possibility
I was like oh shit and then I was like oh that actually happened so that's sort of a drag but it's
at least allowed me to pull like up to a much more peaceful worldview I guess if you can call that with
you know people with malice intent trying to fuck us over but the fact that most of the people I
actually want to ally with aren't uh there isn't this giant pocket of insanity there's a small
pocket of insanity and most of the giant part the perceived giant part is is much of it might be
propaganda stuff so um the reason I bring that up is because you're mentioning like the online
communities that were poisoning people or something and there's some really good segue to that maybe
if someone's losing it no I just like picking on 4chan yeah uh it was something specific about
that kind of thing and I think that uh it's now it seems not just likely but it's it's shown that
a lot of that bullshit that you know you see oh people online are all like this and that it's like
well those people online aren't representative of people in fact they're they're deliberately trying
to fuck with you and for me it worked for a long time yeah and I mean it still will it's hard to
like update everything in two days but um you know I'll be much more skeptical next time I see this
crazy headline on some random subreddit or something and I'm like oh man this is why I can't you know
call myself a far left liberal or something like oh wait no this you know it these people might exist
but they're existing in smaller numbers than what I'm saying or what I previously thought
one of the things that I'm finding very heartening about that that I'm trying to
do myself and that I appreciate when people do for me is like if I like just randomly
shitpost something or if I share a meme that I think is entertaining or that resonates with me
somehow I enjoy it when people say you know these are the facts related to this and this is why this
meme isn't related um instead of being antagonistic they're like hey so this is actually what happened
like I remember I shared this thing about Jack Kirby being told he needed to include more white
people in Black Panther and so he just put in KKK members that Black Panther beat up
and I thought it was funny I'm like this is actually pretty funny I didn't bother to fact check it
and the in the episodes oh the issues of Black Panther where he does fight the KKK we're not
Jack Kirby episode or why do I keep saying episodes it's so weird because we've been in Netflix land
but um and so I was it was actually more interesting to me to have that challenged and to be like no this
is actually what happened and I'm trying to inculcate in myself and in other people that
tendency to question and to be like no this is actually the the facts or whatever and so
for example one of the things I started doing since the election is looking at what my friends
share and seeing what the URL is so it's like you know hard times done that I don't even that just
came up in my head I know it's a website I don't remember what if it's one of the websites that's
untrustworthy it probably is daily news and buzzfeed or some of those bad ones yeah yeah and
so if it's not like the Washington Post or the New York Times and even then I'm kind of squirrely
on it I'm like okay this is probably not actual decent reporting and it's probably meant to just
like shitpost so is this actually something I can trust as a verified source to represent me and
what I actually intend to represent or is it me storing the pot and saying you know I'm just spreading
misinformation I think what it did for me was realized made me realize that I had to up the
level of my skeptical game and in a way that was actually rather than like burdensome was
like uplifting yeah because I'm like oh shit far fewer of my neighbors are crazy than I thought
was my conclusion and I might be wrong but uh I that's that's where I'm at right now and it's
actually a nice place to be so um I will try and you know stay vigilant but uh I know again it could
be more than I thought maybe none of them are Russian bots maybe every Russian bot lives in
Texas and you know they're all Americans but who knows uh deep cover an American posing as a Russian
posing as an American they've been here since the 60s yeah um one of the things you brought up
earlier that I kind of wanted to touch on because I like grabbing about my parents is um the tendency
of people who are more right than I am to believe to maybe be more gullible and that's it's not
when you mean more politically right yeah more politically right sorry um and it's a stereotype
but I think when it comes to people who tend and this is going to sound horrible so I'm going to
say it anyway okay but um people who are religious tend to be more gullible and they tend to be more
further right usually well being religious makes you more gullible because you have to be
it's a tenant of all religion that you have to accept some things on faith yeah and so um for
example my parents are incredibly Catholic like capital C Catholic all caps Catholic um and we
got into this argument the other day because I was like um today actually I had intended to try to
find a march to march with the students and be like we should have gun control and stop hurting
mentally ill people and all this business so I was telling my parents that off hand and
my dad's like well that's really stupid and I'm like oh we're getting into this are we
and he went off about how how did he put it um something along the lines of like yes we needed
more gun control and no that kid had no business having that weapon and we he's like you're not
going to believe me saying this but we need more social scientists to study the issue of mental
illness in America and I'm like okay cool and then he's like but then and he's probably I hope
he never listens to this because he'd be so mad at me he says that he will not abide by the laws of
gun control that are enacted because he doesn't feel they're fair to people who aren't crazy
huh I think it's a very common position it is but I know for a fact he has things in his house
he should not be having legally so dad and he's also crazy so I'm joking I am joking oh oh I see
what you're saying yeah yeah yeah so that's a hard one yeah who makes the exceptions how do we
logically and with compassion say we need to do these things as a society make sure everyone's
safe who makes the exceptions I'll tell you who I do yeah so catch me if you can yeah I think
actually said that by the way um the gun control issue is a can of worms but I don't think that
we're gonna get any big policy changes from more more shootings like I'm not prepared to talk about
it for five minutes but the 32nd version is like there are things that are easy to fix that people
aren't willing to give ground on because they're worried that it's a slippery slope it's like I
went to a class where I was I if I send off the paperwork to the sheriff I can get a concealed
carry permit um and they mentioned probably five times how like the maximum uh clip limit or clip
the um number of bullets you can put in a clip is like 12 or 15 or whatever it is now in Colorado
because a few years ago it wasn't but now it's less yeah and they get real real salty about that
they do and I and I even like made the point of asking them like if you can't do it in 12 whatever
it is 12 or 15 shots then what do you hope to do in 16 like what what the hell are you imagining
where if 15 isn't enough one more is going to make the difference and they're like it's
and they they're articulated that the point is is that we're worried that every inch that we seed
could could be the one that starts the avalanche and then we lose everything so like there's a
charitable position to view that from assuming that you can twist yourself into a mindset where you
can say I can see why they want guns which I admit is hard um but I'm sorry no you're good but I
but I can see where they're coming from so like uh if you're worried about that then you know
like super reasonable things like background checks at gun shows um or like you know if you
sell me a gun and I go kill somebody with it and you're liable you gave me the means um
saying that that should be just standard uh I think it's less that I'm anticipating I'm sure
there's people who are really pro-gun and they're going to say that's an infringement for whatever
reason but I imagine that the bulk of the concern there is not about that particular issue they
might even agree but they'd say I don't think they'll stop there I think they're gonna keep going
and that's what I'm worried about the bomb is coming for our guns yeah that's the I am moderately
pro-gun honestly but I do think there should be a national computerized registry of all guns
and who is their legal owner and no one will ever give ground on that because they're like well
Hitler made people register their guns before he took them away God wins whatever and I'm like
yes I guess he did but this is actually a very good idea and we should have it
mm-hmm so there's a couple of interesting points you just agreed with Hitler
oh I also like dogs oh yeah that's sir German shepherds man they're they're cute sorry
wait the police like German shepherds are we onto something guys grab your tinfoil hat
so speaking of that I used to be a police dispatcher and one of the things that I found very
interesting is during my time doing that for the past 15 years was that um at one point they had uh
on like either it came with your driver's license or something when we got the records back
when we'd run your driver's license on like a traffic stop or something you would say this person
is a concealed carry holder the state of Colorado ruled that that was unconstitutional
so now there's no way to track who has concealed carry permits uh I can falsify that well no not
and like a law enforcement sense that's weird because as a private investigator which is way
easier to get into the law enforcement that comes up on your two dollar and forty cent lexus search
well yes but not like any media oh sorry I'm being unclear but when you're run for something
like on a traffic stop okay so they do something less intense than yeah a detective would be able
to tell or if you had like you know 30 minutes this is a five second you go to lexus nexus type in
their name and get this information back and it shows on one of the subheadings is concealed carry
yes or no I think she's protesting to the fact that they're not allowed to tell the cops in the
field yeah by the way this guy has a concealed and I think they do have lexus nexus on their
mgt's now that's that's why I was surprised because yeah but like back in my day um we would have to
we would tell people we would tell not people we tell the officers hey this person's concealed
carry holder when they ran them so they would just know right and what you're saying is that
whether or not that information still comes back and not allowed to tell them well no it just
doesn't come back anymore gotcha that's interesting and that's weird by the one by the time you quit
yeah I could see that being useful information all right this is going to be totally on the side
but if you can't tell we're kind of derailed anyway um if I was a police officer I would like to know
the approximate probability of the person whose car I'm going to have in the gun or not
and yet like I think the number of people and this could be a wrong statistic maybe somebody
knows I think the number of people with concealed carry permits committing crimes is less than that
if you like the average police officer so like if anything if they have a concealed carry permit
you're like oh this is probably a chill dude they might be a gun in the car but I'm probably good
yeah um so it might even be good most officers aren't that's don't take that point of view right
well no they do oh they do yeah some of them they would feel more reassured if they knew the
guy had a concealed carry permit I can't speak for most officers not being one okay so it's not
necessarily fair but I don't think that it necessarily upped their danger level just made
them aware that there may be a gun maybe a weapon in the car and that factored into
their assessment of the overall situation okay so but that wasn't necessarily my point my point
was that it was taken away because it was ruled unconstitutional by people that are like well you
can't take our guns away you can't track us you can't do all this stuff and it's like but but but we
really feel more safe if we knew who had the guns and of course my father returning back to that
part of the conversation was like well they keep selling AR-15s to drug dealers in Mexico and so
they're just gonna keep coming across the border which is where apparently everyone who has an
AR-15 is getting oh I was trying to figure out what the hell he was where he was going with that
as opposed to walmart down the street as opposed to I think you're saying that if they banned them
it wouldn't slow down the traffic which is just not true it would slow down they would just go to
the next semi-automatic rifle it's it's a very common piece of machinery and like yeah you can get
varieties of that like he said a walmart or your local gun store yeah there's the scary thing about
rifles that it's really easy to get good at shooting a rifle yeah two hours and you could shoot a
target you know 100 yards away with somewhat reliability I'm not sure if that's necessarily
scary like well I think it's great if you practice anything you should get better at it and I would
prefer people to have better aim it's it's the firing and discriminately into a crowd that I really
have a problem with I think well I guess the downside I was getting at is that it's with only an
afternoon of training you know she could become a very successful mass shooter which I would like
to think that it would be a hard barrier to like getting good and it's not with with zero
minutes of training I could be a very successful mass shooter all I need is a large crowd of people
that's yeah yeah uh if you're if you're ambitious all right let's let's let's let's me there um if
I'm an ambitious mass killer and I want to get only headshots but I think the Vegas shooter was
actually doing that no I'm pretty sure he just fired at the maximum rate of fire he could get
maybe it's because he took out a security guard prior to that maybe that's what I was thinking yeah
I'm probably wrong on that don't quote me and please don't put it as a meme on the internet
that's okay there's one other thing I wanted to talk about you you did want to know like
what caused people to get offended I think I have an idea of what causes people to get offended what
I'm curious about is like what that feels like from the inside because I'm pretty sure I've been
offended so this isn't one of those like black boxes right but I'm curious like what the obligation
is once one declares offense what someone else has to do or like I guess really how we unpack
that whole thing and we can taboo offense if we get bogged down on it so offense yeah can we
what what to me I guess being offended means that like I found what you said to be emotionally
repellent yeah is that fair or maybe what you said or did so like your middle finger isn't
isn't something that you said but I think not just emotionally repellent but also an attack upon
my person or or a group that I identify with I think that is personally injurious because I can
find something offensive that's about like black people jokes that's true I find that offensive
my go-to example is like you know some religious people and I'm not gonna say all religious people
because I'm not gonna pay with a wide brush some religious people is that punching up or down I'm
not I don't care to look it depends on the religion so some some some christians in the united states
religious people are the overwhelming majority in the world so it's punch wrap well I'm not I
refuse to punch up I refuse to I refuse to throw punches which is my privilege which is why you
say some religious people actually it is but carry on yeah oh I find it I find to admit that but I
think that everyone has the privilege not to throw punches but in many cases whatever moving
pushing forward as he makes a fist and pushes it forward literally thank you there are religious
objections to like the existence of homosexuals so like if I'm a religious person and if I'm
an example of some religious people and I see two gay people holding hands in the park I am offended
by that yes but they're not obligated to change their behavior because I'm offended so I guess
does offense matter it does if you give a shit about what the other person thinks
so like but I mean it matters as a warning sign it's like if someone got offended then
you have noticed that they might do something to harm you well there's that but I mean like I could
be offended at an inclusive sleeping gesture or sleeping attack at white people or men or something
right but I'm not about to hurt anybody no it's just like it just hurts my feelings yeah but
if you get offended like that often enough you may do something like buy a tiki torch for target
which does hurt people for what it's worth I have no idea if Target actually sells tiki torches
I'm sure they got to it's a standard piece of lawn furniture I do know that tiki torch incorporated
or whatever said that we didn't mean just like we're not we didn't sell them for them to use it for
this reason I thought it was I thought it was a kind of a joke the first time I saw like people
walking with tiki torches yeah I thought it was a joke that they had to say that we didn't mean for
that to happen but there was an official statement released apparently so going back to a fence yes
refocus but someone needs to keep us rained in we can take turns yeah I'm gonna have to take turns
but I think that when someone is offended by something it speaks to their moral and emotional
stance and it's like a it's one of those so I thought I was talking to someone the other day
about like how we as social animals have to oh it's something I was editing sorry how we as
social animals have these responses that allow us to interact with each other and to understand how
we relate to each other and so when we say something offends us it challenges what we
what our stance is and how we observe the world and a lot of times when people say I am offended
by this thing it's the this thing contravenes how I feel the world should be so I think I can get
behind that definition but I guess what does that mean that like I'm supposed to do so like if
I'm holding hands with the guy in the park and somebody says that offends me you should stop I
could just say politely fuck you yeah or no thank you or whatever say that like they go up to you
in a park and they're like you should stop holding hands because that's offended to me and you just
look at them like they're like a homeless person you're like no thank you or I mean you could even
just do it you know I mean yeah however you want to do it but like you could also say like well
you're saying you're offended defend me or whatever let's just let's just get in a circle until one
of us runs out of breath but like if you said something or if I said something that offended you
and he said whoa Steven that that holocaust joke you just made was super insensitive I'm offended
I'd be like oh shit my bad yeah and I think that's appropriate among friends but like
I guess not on everything like like if I said I was offended at hypothetically a version of you
that used sweeping generalizations to say all men are rapists and I'm like hold on I'm offended
are you obligated to change your behavior because of that no right so but like
but what if it's like somebody you respect saying that like a friend so like I would
change I would stop telling you know racist jokes or something about offended people I was around
or people that I cared about like my friends or anybody because I don't talk racist jokes but
the only racist joke I tell is what do you call a what do you call a black person flying a plane
a pilot you racist as well wins before the punchline yes that's why I like that joke
actually it was in Robin Hansen's great book on the chapter on laughter in the elephant in the
brain nice and the whole point is that a court's danger but then safely moves back and that's why
it's funny so I guess yeah what is what is the appropriate response to offense I think it depends
because I think when people say I am offended by this thing they're depending on the social ties
in order to change your behavior so say we're going to use the random people in the park example
again I'm holding hands with my girlfriend in the park we're walking around this you know person
comes up to me and says that's really offensive and I would evaluate instantly because this is
what humans do I'd look at this person and say do I care what they think are they close enough
to me in my social circle to influence how I'm how people interact with me and do I have any
investment in their opinions or feelings the answer is no I'm going to say fuck you and keep
holding my girlfriend's hand and walk off so it's like a constant evaluation of like the social
standing between yourself and the other person as well as how much their emotions and feelings and
sensibilities mean to you and also a lot of times people uh a lot of times always people take into
account do I think that this person's offense is valid yeah like if if someone did get offended
because I was holding hands with a guy or something I don't care if it's my mom really I mean I'd
probably care a little bit because I like my mom I don't want to lose standing in her eyes I'm like
hey mom let's have a conversation now but um ultimately my first impulse is like I am not
going to apologize or change my behavior because I feel that your offense is invalid in this case
and I mean that's that's a tricky line because that's just dictated by social norms right
I think the other thing is like that depends on whether or not you stop too it's gonna
like how important is the thing that I'm doing that's offending them to me so if it's uh
um like having a relationship with someone you love versus eating a hot dog yeah sure or like
maybe eating a hot dog really seductively for a joke and someone's like hold on that's that's you
know you're making me uncomfortable for whatever reason or like you know what this round orthodox
Jewish guy or a vegan or vegan or like someone who knows what goes in those things everything
everything anyone with good taste so um wasn't Oscar Meyer everything but the squeal so um including
the hooves and snout and stuff like that brain eyes uh that aside um as somebody who's eating
hot dogs I'm okay owning that we all feel so like ready to eat hot dogs one person's one person's
listening to this and they're just like looking at the hot dog that they're about taking another bite
of them they're like fuck me to you no judgment I've eaten hot dogs somewhat recently probably
anyway um like if you don't care about like how funny that joke was or something that you're not
going to stand on principle and tell the person to fuck off so like you're weighing a lot of factors
but um like so like you said you wouldn't stop if I said I was offended at uh excuse me the hypothetical
you wouldn't stop making sweeping generalizations about men if I said I was offended about that
even if we're friends so you like your stance on how important it is to make sweeping generalizations
is more important than like not offending me slash possibly losing my friendship I think it's the
hypothetical me that's a bitch right and that's because I honestly don't know what kind of stuff
you post on facebook so um so I tend to preface things as has been obvious through the majority
of this discussion with I feel and I statements so I'm very unlikely to be like well all men are
fucking stupid sure or whatever but so that's why I'm having a hard time being like yeah because
so if you were like all you said like I did this a while ago remember that wonder woman article
uh probably so I posted a thing from I don't remember who's huff post or something about
um how it said dudes on the internet are getting offended by the alumna draft houses
female only wonder woman viewing or something like that yeah I remember that one
and I posted it because I was like yeah there are some people on the internet that are getting
really pissed off about this and I think it's fucking hilarious and other people took it to mean
all men right because I was like I'm a dude on the internet by other people you mean me yeah I was
trying to be nice yeah it's okay before we make this personal I think I can quickly paraphrase
both sides you were saying well hey I think it's a great idea why you're saying I don't like it yeah
and so that's why I like sweeping generalizations just in general you're because you you immediately
you're guaranteed to paint people in the wrong box and that particular one was kind of tricky
because it was like you didn't write the headline no I didn't view the headline as all men because
it didn't say all men are being stupid on the internet it was I read it as there's some dudes
on the internet who being jerks and I thought it was hilarious so I shared it um but other people
took it as all men are evil and no and that one seems like a muddier example yeah it was if you if
you wrote it and you use the word all then it'd be much clearer case so like um maybe I could pick
a better different example so like I know vegetarians and vegans who are probably offended when I eat
meat and I don't eat that much to be clear that doesn't really matter I eat less than I used to
I was vegetarian for a few years I eat meat very much before that I was a vegetarian for like four
years and fell off the wagon and I've been eating much less meat than I historically did for the
last several years and I'm kind of like in the camp of like I'm doing better than I was so it's
better for the world etc but um if I got to lunch with somebody and they order tofu plate I order
the chicken one um they're probably offended by my order but like I've I've not yet met a vegan
or a vegetarian that's actually been offended by someone else eating meat near them oh I have a
story and I I think is it about the same person not the same person we were referencing earlier
okay um so I was in a class with a person and for the for a particular reason for that class
we were we'd go around the room and say whether we had any like medical or anything kind of things
going on and so some super personal what kind of class was this I'll tell you later okay but um it
was it was something where it was actually part and so I was my turn and I'm like well I'm intolerant
of meat it makes me very sick so I won't be eating meat and that's cool because I don't care
and this person sitting immediately next to me goes I'm also intolerant of meat because meat is
murder and I just kind of went head desk because I was like okay and then then this person went on
to say and because of that if you're eating meat I refuse to sit near you or talk with you
well I know the kind of people you're talking about and like you and to be fair and so I I'm
sorry I was pausing to let you talk dramatic there was a very dramatic pause and so later on I was
talking to this person we were sitting and not eating and talking and I had seen a recipe for
something that was um it was like stuffed bell peppers or something I thought it looked really
cool it was like it was during Halloween and so they were cut up cut up like little jack-o-lanterns
and so I showed this person the recipe and I'm like oh this is really cute we could do this with
like vegan food and they came to me two days later after not talking to me saying that because
there was chicken in the recipe how dare I I'm like I completely phrase that to be like we could
substitute this as a vegan meal for you but they found a defensive that I had shown them a recipe
that mentioned using chicken as an ingredient that just blows my fucking mind that was weird that's
one of those I'm participating I don't know this person but like those like professional victims
that they're going to find the smallest thing that they can get like upset about and just go to the
moon with it and stay there for two days until they're ready to talk to you again and that like
and you couldn't have been more forth hey let's do this like as a vegan meal they're like oh my god
I saw the word chicken on that thing and I was just so freaked out I couldn't talk to you for
half a week that just this person also I had a discussion with them about one of their friends
dying and took me five minutes to figure out the friend was a chicken oh my god that's like
sobbing discussion and you know so this person sounds like either they're really upping their like
you know signaling their like how much they care let the world know how much you know like
just to the highest extent that they can or they've got some actual problems that's a bummer so I feel
bad yeah I mean to be fair my mom grew up on a farm and she actually was really upset when they're
family cow died after being in you know on their farm for I don't know 12 13 years this was a
chicken she stole from a farm I know you're talking about I remember the story I'm just saying
sometimes people can be upset about their pets dying yeah my dad grew up on my dad spent his
summers on farms and he doesn't eat chicken now because he fucking hates those things and their
dicks he had to kill a bunch of them as a kid shouldn't he eat lots of chicken then if he
he's so refocusing refocusing so this person was offended by the fact that I the point of this
long arm building story was this person was offended by the fact that I'd shown them a recipe
including chicken but I do think most vegans are not like that and so I hate to paint that broad
brush yeah I'm not talking about vegans I'm in general I'm talking about this particular person
yeah so vegans are cool I like vegans most of them except for this person so but the reason I'm
talking about this is because I had offended her and so I was like you know I was like well this
I didn't mean to offend you and I really apologize for that but in my and I actually did apologize
and I was very sorry for it because it obviously hurt her feelings and I felt bad for doing so
but in the back of my mind I'm like I didn't mean to offend you and it was something completely innocent
for you to react in such a way seems very shocking to me yeah and I think that's a I don't know if
that's a good example case just because this person sounds even if they have all their ducks in a row
they seem they they're for modified so far they behave as if they're not mentally stable
but that's how people act on the internet well that's that's another whole kind of
awareness I'm talking about people I know and real people not real people okay so everyone
listening people like that are just exhausting to be around I don't want to be friends with them
because it's so much effort to constantly police every single little thing you say or do in order
to not offend them and like especially when they're ready to be offended so hard by so little and so
like you know I know vegans who and imagine like I mean if you're a peter stinger style animal
rights activist you watch somebody order a burger and you have some knowledge like the suffering
that went into their plate and you're like well fuck and you know they don't necessarily know
that the person ordered it or they know and they don't care or whatever but you know it I think it
makes sense to like not love the fact if you're vegan or vegetarian to like love the fact that
eating you're watching your friends eat meat because like you you kind of have a feel as to why
you're not doing it and they don't sympathize with that so like they don't share that value
um but to be that blown away by it I don't know if that's a good representative case
no because I have another friend who's vegan who is amazing and every time I I'm a vegetarian
not on purpose obviously and so every time I have cheese or something around her she's like
she doesn't say anything but every time we go out I'm like hey can we go out to this place
does it have vegan stuff for you which is completely different than trying to figure out like how I
had offended this person you know yeah I think um I guess maybe there isn't a quick easy answer to
this I was just curious like what one's obligation was to say to someone who says I'm offended um
like I mean one answer is like okay sorry that you're offended not necessarily sorry for what I'm
doing um if if there's a conversation to be had there like hey I'm offended because are you aware
that like this coffee house they're ordering this from you know employees uh you know uh whatever
sweatshop labor etc or whatever right um that could be like oh shit I didn't know that I'm gonna stop
ordering from that place or whatever um so like the fruit toys have the conversation but I guess
I don't know like what one's obligation is to someone else's offense I guess there is an obligation
it's it's how you feel like you should respond to it like taking the coffee shop thing for example
my parents hate Starbucks because it apparently apparently donate money to plan parenthood I don't
know if that's true or not but that's the war on Christmas in the war on Christmas actually they
don't care about that they just care about the dead babies got each cup of coffee supports one
dead baby apparently oh hey I'm it's cooler they got a one-to-one ratio there I'm completely being
facetious Starbucks is very popular dude I hate babies I'm gonna order a lot more Starbucks
but every time I visit with them I bring Starbucks because I like Starbucks coffee and I don't care
that they're offended by it because it's a to me a really stupid thing to be offended by
but they're my parents and so I don't like I do code switch in other ways to not offend them
like if I have someone in my life who I'm attracted to who's a different uh the same gender as
myself or someone who's non-binary I'm not gonna we call them up and be like hey so I totally had
sex with so-and-so and I hold hands with them and I'm gonna bring them up and I'm gonna make out
with them in front of you um that's not something I'm gonna do because I code switch in front of
them to preserve their feelings in some ways I'm also never made out with anybody in front of my
parents but that's that's actually a good point but I actually made out with someone in front of my
parents but your point's taken and I think like so the general takeaway just explaining to me like
I'm an idiot alien because I don't get how people work so that the general version is like uh
I guess way the it's like you're not obligated to do anything if someone says I'm offended what you
what you probably will do instinctually and what you maybe should do quote unquote should is think
okay what should I or what should I up to my behavior based on this information um how important
is to me like the thing that I'm doing how offended do I think they actually are how much I think this
will ruin our relationship or risk it um so like your thing is I don't think that if you know someone
well doing something like that is really going to change your relationship all that much I mean
not bringing Starbucks won't change your relationship that much but like not telling your like uh say
if you came out to your family that you're gay and they're like well that offends me because I'm
a Christian or something um then like you would have to change your behavior a lot to like correct
for that right yeah well I think I think the bigger effect for most of these things is because
you're still gonna for the most part remain friends with people maybe you'll be slightly
better friends maybe it'd be not as good friends but things aren't going to change all that much I
think the bigger effect is that uh how you respond to someone's offense signals which social group
you are part of and if you do are not offended by the correct things and if you do not make the
correct apologies when people are offended you're like you're saying I am not part of this group
in society that you think is important like I am not a feminist or I am not a men's rights activist
or I am not a whatever the group is that is you know that is being slighted I suppose I think I
think that has a much bigger effect than just one-on-one relationships I would disagree to a
degree but I think because I have something that I feel is trumps that a little bit um so for example
I was in a relationship with someone who made racist jokes and I would tell that person that's
not funny and they would laugh and be like it is and I'm like no actually that's really offensive
and I would prefer you didn't do that and it made me think less of them because it was showing me
that they didn't care about how other people felt and so it's at least in that specific regard and
in that specific regard but it's like one of those like you know you have this like high
esteem of a person and it slowly drops yeah and that's I guess that's the the social capital
in your guys' relationship that he's willing to pay to keep telling those jokes which I you know
to be fair he probably wasn't those jokes were probably super important to him what he probably
enjoyed was like in some ways it's funny to watch some people be uncomfortable like that's why like
that's why I like that that joke I told earlier about the pilot was kind of funny for me not for
you no it was actually pretty funny after the punchline but beforehand watching you guys get
watching your faces be like what is he doing it's kind of funny yeah that's fair so like the only
person in my life that I have a lot of contact with who uses the word gay pejoratively is my
older mate who's gay and I never got around and I don't think it's worth bringing up like you
know I don't like it when you use that word he's like he gets to use it I think yeah but it's like
I don't I it's not my favorite word and I'm sure he's gonna convert to Judaism too for the jokes
for the jokes it's a Seinfeld reference okay I was I was giving them both a very odd look funny
funny throwback the the dentist to convert to Judaism in that show was Brian Cranston
no uh toads oh shit yeah okay guys got range as an actor yeah um so uh I would totally love to see
all the like bros out there who I don't think these exist anymore but all the 12 years ago
bros out there who were complaining about not being able to use gay as a word that means lame
anymore if they would have just hooked up with another dude for one night I think I think that'd
be a price I'd be willing to pay like all right if you explore your sexuality enough
to fuck another dude for one night you're okay using gay for the next few years
however you want see you're giving me this look like you don't think that's that's fair
I think okay so what that's triggering for me and I'm not being triggered by it but okay stupid
whatever um is the argument that all people who are homophobic in public are secretly gay
oh that's not what I meant at all no I didn't I didn't read that way either and that's what I
was getting out of that so that's why I was making that face okay yeah can I re re say what I think
you're trying to say and see if I had it right you were saying that like if you want to use this word
there's a cost to entry and go for it okay yeah okay fair um speaking of as long as we're a way
off topic but I actually wanted to go back to your old roommate oh good okay yeah because um you said
that him using gay in a way that for example people from 12 years ago would made you uncomfortable
yeah a little bit did it offend you I don't I so I'm not I don't know if I'm ready to jump on that
or like to remember that well enough or not I think because I'm also not sure like if offense
applies in the situation because I don't know if I can be offended on behalf of other people
like I didn't but it depends no I don't think he means he personally does not have the physical
capability oh yeah I could barely be offended for myself like yeah I barely yeah like for me to be
offended on behalf of gay people because this one gay person using the word gay was like you know
I don't think that occurred to me okay I was more just like I have this association that like
jerks are the ones who use that word that way and you don't seem like a jerk but
you think you get licensed to use it so it was just this weird dynamic that I had with him in that
word well it's like how I call myself queer which is it was a pejorative yeah so it was
pejorative and it can't well and it can still be if I mean anything's pejorative you've put
enough stank on it right yeah I think it was there was a comedian who had that line about uh
you know Jew is both the like appropriate and pejorative word for people on earth
depending on how you say it so I'm not sure what the the most political politically correct term
is for somebody who's not straight but you could use that in a pejorative way right yeah but it's
not a particular it's not using self-identifying is not necessarily politically correct it's just
whatever label works best for you sure okay oh yeah no I just meant like if if uh if someone's like
I'm uh I guess homosexual is that the most preferable term it depends on the person yeah on
on on a standard gay person the most neutral term I think that you just used yes the standard gay
person I use that on purpose to mean somebody to mean somebody I think gay means guys who likes guys
right well and see and I used for a while I went through a phaser I was using gay to describe persons
who are not heterosexual see I always thought it was like a lesbian gay uh lgb by trans right so
lesbians and gays were same-sex people who liked the same sex but not the same they weren't themselves
the same so there's queer intersex lesbian transgender bisexual asexual gay questioning
and like five other things I was gonna say I saw the I saw the 13 or 16 character version of this
on Wikipedia once and I thought it was too many yeah at that point you guys so which is why a lot
of people are going if they don't identify as one of the big four really they go towards queer and
me being like the privileged person from the outside with like no vested interest in this
like other than like I want everyone to be happy yeah but like no personal dog in the fight is
which I hate that phrase but whatever skin in the fight I don't know skin in the game and that's the
one um is like you know go for the politically savvy move you don't if you draw yourself into
26 different boxes then you've got 26 different groups of people campaigning and however small
your group already was that divided by 26 is never gonna stand a chance so well and I think that um
the reason why a lot of us started using gay was because of how people were using it like you have
the far religious right that's like that was gay they're sending us all to hell they're like yep
us gays are totally doing that they feel his brother Jed was the guy at CSU I forget his name
but I think they I think these were homosexuals and that's yeah that can't be like that's
that's the textbook okay version kind of yeah it is like again however brother Jed the crazy
dude yeah I think I think you're right I think that's his name yeah it might very well be
but you knew the same guy yeah oh yeah he was a presence on CSU's campus every semester
uh with his huge freaking sign and shouting and before we continue we are right about our two
hours I don't think we're gonna get to listener mail or rationalist picks this week which is really
unfortunate because we had some all right I got this up in 90 seconds uh did any closing remarks
from anybody I guess other than like thanks for having a good cultural conversation about a very
difficult topic yeah we didn't resort to name calling us pretty good nice if we had I feel happy
about everyone in this room still yeah I've never anticipated this resort to name calling and if it
did I would have been very unpleasantly surprised so what is the topic we covered today we never got
around to it so maybe we'll do it again another time for the record this was supposed to be Steven's
idea of like the tools or I guess the elements of a good conversation and how to overcome some of
like this the the tripping moments like uh like offense and uh misinterpretation or something
and I wanted to talk about things like talk you know when you're arguing with somebody you argue
with their beliefs not with them um and that's where that never happens in real life but it can
if you set it up right so um yeah all right so that topic once again we pushed off for another day
and this was just our fun SJW interview not exactly for the record I'm a social justice mage not a
warrior I think I think what the conclusion I have drawn from today is I need a pocket Steven
to follow me around yes because that really helped or sometimes if I get in like get in it with Steven
I need a pocket Vivian I just need a pocket neutral third party to be like you guys are going around
in circles and spinning your wheels let's step back and well I think that's really important for
any kind of discussion because if you have two sides that are really getting vehement about stuff
there's no real easy way to back out of it without losing face and even though we're not like really
losing face at all it's easier when you have someone else who can be like hey so we were talking about
this can we get back on that or I don't understand this can you explain it to me and having someone
say I don't understand can you explain it to me is not only a really easy way to challenge like
people making horrible jokes but also a really easy way to stop the conversation and make people
reconsider where they're going rather than just like rushing forward into like the knockout drag
out kind of thing and when you get in that death spiral you don't notice yeah you need someone on
the outside to be like hey guys you're in the death spiral you're like oh thank you yeah you can
you can notice that a little bit with like just uh that's where people like who are all into mindfulness
training talk about and being vaguely into that myself I I was having conversations like this earlier
and that's kind of why it came up was like I noticed like oh we're arguing that's not what I was going
for we're just being able to like be meta about your own conversation which actually be very distracting
a lot of the time but has its occasional use like in that specific situation and probably know
all there's um I'm totally gonna try to keep a little mini Steven in my head from now on
ah good luck to me I hope he's nice so yeah this wasn't quite what I was going for but it was a
fun conversation I hope that you guys felt okay about it so um so that's good uh in that case
we don't have time for listening feedback we have time to thank a listener and our sound engineer
Kyle Moore for constantly kicking ass making this random conversation in your guys's ears uh
only sounds bad because of the content not because of the the audio sorry no no I'm I think I think
it was okay yeah I thought it was a good conversation and oh my god did I lose my list of listen
so um for today we are thinking all our patreon supporters yay thank you guys you're awesome
and all of our listeners in general yeah yeah it's true I I hope that people occasionally enjoy
listening to this so yeah that's why I do it you know what we don't need to thank someone every
single time every now and then we should thank all our listeners just for listening and being awesome
inviting us into your lives and hey maybe tell any friends if you find any of these interesting
episodes interesting yeah and hit us up on the subreddit the email or the comment section on
the website where we post this yeah reddit red what do you got against reddit because I noticed
when you said that you were like the four channels the redditors I'm like red it's great no reddit
it's great I just I feel like you get the same impression of reddit as I have of like the the
capital F feminist movement because no reddit is actually really useful I just don't go into it very
often there's lots of camps like I said yeah subreddit wholesome memes animals being bros people being
or humans being bros there's a lot of very wholesome subredditors that I follow because I
need a daily dose of lots of good news in fact there's one uplifting news which is actually
kind of awesome because it gives me hope for humanity so yay humanity yay um as I guess
did you want to plug anything like a wonderful anthology about how awesome humans are oh yeah I
do have one of those so I am Vivian kth I am the editor of humans wanted it is available on amazon
and it is a pro human science fiction anthology yay pro human science fiction that's not like a
rare genre it well that's why I did it actually because there's a tendency in science fiction
for people to be like well humans are like the the base class no one really wants to be them all
these aliens are super cool and there was a tumblr post that um I saw that the author of which allowed
me to use it for the Kickstarter and subsequent anthology that was talking about how humans are
useful and I found that very endearing and engaging because I was like well you kind of are I'd really
like to see more of that and so I was able to kickstart it and then publish it on amazon that's
really cool I didn't know anything about this oh we shall talk more about it as soon as we get off
the air okay all right all right goodbye everybody thanks bye
Vivian says corporations are our jews oh my god
