These lectures are part of the Great Courses series they are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Browse our catalogue or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled Biology and Human Behavior, The Neurological Origins of Individuality.
Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Robert Sapolsky.
Professor Sapolsky holds the John A. and Cynthia Fry Gunn Professorship of Biological
Sciences at Stanford University, where he is also Professor of Neurology and Neurosurgery.
He received his A.B. degree Summa Cum Laude in Biological Anthropology from Harvard University
and earned his PhD in Neuroendocrinology from the Rockefeller University in New York.
He is also a research associate at the Institute of Primate Research operated by the National
Museums of Kenya in Nairobi.
Professor Sapolsky is the author of many books, including Why Zebras Don't Get Ulcers,
A Guide to Stress, Stress-Related Diseases and Coping Third Edition, A Primate's Memoir
and Monkey Love and Other Essays on Our Lives as Animals.
He also writes regularly for such publications as Scientific American, Discover, Natural History
and The New Yorker.
Professor Sapolsky is a recipient of many honors and awards, including the National
Science Foundation Presidential Young Investigator Award, Stanford University's Being Award
for Teaching Excellence and an Outstanding Teaching Award from the Associated Students
of Stanford University.
He is also a recipient of the MacArthur Foundation's Genius Fellowship, the Alfred P. Sloan Fellowship
and the Klingenstein Fellowship in Neuroscience.
Professor Sapolsky prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical
notes and bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
Hello, my name is Robert Sapolsky.
I'm a professor of neurobiology at Stanford University, and I'm very pleased to be doing
this course because, not surprisingly, I think this is a subject that is so important.
Every child and adult in America should be forced to learn about this, and it's basically
trying to understand the biology of what makes us who we are.
The biology of our individual differences, the biology of our behaviors, what I believe
is an incredibly important subject for every one of us to study.
Okay, to begin with, let me give you a scenario that should catch your attention and involves
two hypothetical individuals.
First one is Chuck.
Chuck is in marketing, Chuck is extroverted, charismatic, life of the party and this superficial
sort of way.
He's confident, he's flirtatious, he's having some fidelity problems with his third marriage
right now.
In contrast, we've got Arthur.
Arthur is down in marketing, he's obsessive, he's rigidly ethical, sufficiently so that
people at the IRS wonder what's up with this guy.
He's extremely reliable at work as a result.
He is regularly exploited by his coworkers, he lives alone, he spends his evenings making
model ships and airplanes.
However, there have been some changes in Chuck and Arthur recently.
Chuck, bizarrely, is suddenly getting more introverted.
He's getting more withdrawn, he's getting less talkative, long periods of silence that
are beginning to make his customers very uncomfortable and within a few months is going to cost him
his job.
Most bizarre from out of nowhere, he has developed this obsession with painting.
He is now painting every spare moment and these are dark, brooding canvases that he
can't begin to explain.
Meanwhile, Arthur has been having some changes as well.
He's starting to tell sexual jokes and this is initially sort of puzzling and amusing
to his coworkers but lately they've been getting a little bit beyond the edge, a little
bit inappropriate.
He is taken to stalking women.
Within a month or so it is going to get him into trouble with the law for the first time
when he exposes himself.
What is remarkable is that within a year or so both of these men are going to be instituted
and institutionalized.
What is going on here?
Are they having horrendous midlife crises?
Is there satanic possession?
Are they psychiatrically disturbed?
Remarkably, each one of these men has a mutation, a single gene mutation giving rise to a neurological
disorder where these are among the first symptoms and most amazingly they've got the exact same
mutation.
So we're suddenly stuck with this major puzzle.
Where is this coming from?
What do we make of the fact that we can be so determined by our genes that this could
change these men's personalities?
What do we make of the fact that we are so freed from our genes that the same exact mutation
could produce such incredibly different changes in these two men?
What do we make of the fact that we're beginning to understand the biology of what goes wrong
in a case like this?
And we're beginning to understand the biology of even far more subtle states.
We're beginning to grasp something about the brain anatomy that may have something to
do with our sexual orientations.
Amazingly, there is a type of neurological disorder where one of the most consistent side
effects is you develop this passionate interest in philosophy and religion.
What do we do about the fact that recently scientists have figured out a way to change
the brain chemistry of a male rodent and turn him from being polygamous into monogamous?
It is not clear if this counts as an intervention or if this counts as a therapeutic sort of
issue that we should be trying out on human males.
What do we make of the fact that we are beginning to develop a biology that explains our tastes,
our personalities, how we vote, what foods we like, who we love and how faithful we are
to them?
What do we do with the fact that we are beginning to get a biology of what makes us who we are?
Now in trying to think about this here in this course, we are taking this on in a very
particularly challenging way.
It is trivial, relatively, to figure out how some migratory bird figures out how to get
to Tierra del Fuego at a certain time of year with the biology of migration, or how come
biologically all the wildebeest in the Serengeti ovulate the same week.
That's easy.
That's easy in comparison to what we're trying to figure out here, which is the biology of
human behavior, the biology of why some humans behave differently than others, and most
challengingly, the biology of where do some of our most damaging, most frightening, most
inappropriate behaviors come from.
Now, this is not easy to go after.
And we tend to have a way to deal with a complex subject like this.
What is the biology of our behavior?
We tend to think about it to approach the subject with a certain cognitive style.
Basically what we do is we think categorically.
We try to come up with labels.
We try to come up with buckets of explanation.
Here is a genetic explanation.
Here is an environmental one.
Here is a hormonal one.
Here is a, and we hang on to that bucket as our explanatory model.
And it's not surprising we think that way.
For a very simple reason, categorical thinking helps our memory in certain realms.
Let me give you an example here.
Here we have a diagram of the visual spectrum.
Visual spectrum, the colors we can see starting at violet at one end, red at the other, classic
sort of rainbow, this continuum of color where there's no obvious transition where
you go from yellow to orange or orange to red.
There's no obvious transition, but there's something we do in every single language on
earth, which is we impose an artificial boundary.
We say, okay, here's a category.
Here's another category.
We break it up from this point to this point.
We suddenly change color terms, everything in here.
We call one color, everything in here another.
And what's most important is from one language to the next, the boundaries are put in different
places for these color terms.
Why do we put these color terms with boundaries?
Turns out it helps our memory.
Classic sort of studies, you show somebody a color, and if that color comes from right
in the middle of their color category versus right on the boundary, boundary between two
different colors, people remember the colors better from the middle of their category.
Yes, they showed me that red before.
I'm not sure if I saw that yellowish green thing or not.
When we think categorically, it helps our memory, but there is a downside to it in a
couple of ways.
The first one, as was shown in those same classic studies, back to this diagram, what
you do in this case is you show somebody a pair of colors.
And in one case, the two colors come within the color term in their language.
In the other case, it comes across the boundary.
In terms of the visual spectrum, these two pairs are equally different, but you ask somebody
how similar are these two colors on a scale of 1 to 10, and what you see consistently
are two things.
If the two colors come within a color category in that language, people tend to underestimate
how different they are.
And if they come across a boundary, people tend to overestimate how different they are.
Categorical boundaries distort our ability to see the similarities or differences between
two different facts.
There's another downside to thinking categorically in this way.
And for this one, I need to give you an example, and you need to think this through on your
own.
What you need to do is I'm going to tell you an imaginary word in English, and what you
should do is just think in your head, don't write it down, just think about how you would
pronounce this imaginary word.
Just using the rules of English phonics, here's the word, C-H-O-P-H-O-U-S-E.
How would you pronounce that word?
Don't write it down.
C-H-O-P-H-O-U-S-E.
And if you're like 90% of people out there, including me, what you've just come up with
is the imaginary word, cho-fo use.
And what you should do when you have a chance is write down that word and see what it actually
is.
And what you see here now is our third lesson of Fall of Problems with Categorical Thinking,
which is if you pay too much attention to the boundaries, you have trouble seeing the
big picture, the picture as a whole.
So we've got this tendency, and what the purpose of this course is, is to try to fight
that tendency, instead of thinking categorically, to think in a much broader way.
Okay, what do I mean about this when we look at the biology of our behavior?
What would count as categorical thinking?
You've got some chicken, some male chicken who sees some female chicken on the other
side of some street, and the female chicken does some sexually solicitive thing with
their wings or whatever it is female chickens do.
And he, very excited, goes running over to her.
And thus we have this behavioral biology question, why did this chicken cross the road?
And you could answer this as an anatomist, and you could say, well, because the musculature
and the legs of the chicken have a certain fulcrum and all of that, or you can answer
it like an endocrinologist, aha, if and only if this chicken has certain levels of circulating
hormones, or you can answer it like an evolutionary biologist over the course of millennia, male
chickens who didn't respond to this solicitive gesture, left fewer copies of their genes,
and you could respond to it in a categorical way.
And the challenge of this course is to avoid that categorical thinking.
What we'll be doing instead is to start off looking at what a behavior is, in a particular
category, in a particular class, sexual behavior, aggressive behavior, parental behavior, and
then begin to ask biologically, where did that behavior come from?
What we will start off with is a whole bunch of time on the brain, the nervous system,
which is in a sense a way of asking what went on in that person's brain two seconds
before that parental behavior, that aggressive act occurred, what is the neurobiology of
where that behavior came from?
And for someone thinking categorically in the realm of the brain as a bucket, that's
where you stop.
This is how you explain behavior, the brain basis of behavior.
That's not what we're going to do.
What we will then start doing, working back in time, is to then ask an environmental question.
What in the environment triggered that brain to produce that behavior?
What sound, what smell, what pain, what frustration, beginning to work back in time?
Then trying to understand further the things that modulate the nervous system, one step
further back, what about the hormones in the bloodstream that day of that individual?
How did those hormones make that individual more or less sensitive to that environmental
trigger which causes the brain to produce that behavior?
And then working all the way back in time, what are the early experiences of that organism?
What are the hormones?
Not hormones that day, that week, but hormones back in childhood during fetal life.
What was the nutritional environment, the stress environment of that fetus back when?
And then working further back, what are the genetic attributes of the population that
individual comes from which pushes us all the way back to this evolutionary set of questions?
What are the pressures of natural selection that sculpted that species, that population
to have a certain biology, played out in fetal life, played out in hormones this week, making
you more or less sensitive to this environmental trigger of the brain producing this behavior?
That's going to be our general strategy.
And the critical concept of this entire course is to go one step beyond saying, ooh, it's
important as we look at this chart to not only know something about the neurobiology,
the endocrinology, the early experience, et cetera, the most subtle point of this entire
course is at any given stage, whatever of these boxes, whatever of these categorical
buckets you are sitting in, it is simply a way of saying, this is where we are in describing
all of the biological influences that have come before from one second before in the
nervous system to millions of years back in natural selection.
At any given point, it is merely a way of describing it.
If you talk about evolution, natural selection, you are talking about genes.
If you are talking about genes and their effect on behavior, you are talking about a brain
that works one way versus the other.
All of these are ways of pulling these pieces together.
OK, so that's great.
Officially, we are going to think in a complex, subtle way.
Hooray for us.
You might sit there and say, well, yes, this is a whole lot of verbiage, essentially getting
to the point of saying this is a complicated subject, and we've got to think in a complicated
way.
And obviously, any serious scientist out there knows to do the same.
Let me read three quotes to you to show you the extent to which all sorts of card carrying
scientists out there have not thought this way, instead have thought in very, very demarcated
categorical buckets.
OK, first quote.
His talents, pensions, tendencies, abilities, vocations, and the race of his ancestors.
This is someone categorically stuck, pathologically stuck, in the notion that environment, reward,
punishment, positive, negative reinforcement can control the entire world, and we know
that's not true.
We know that certain individuals have certain biological constraints where no matter what
the environment is, you cannot turn them into anything you wish them to be.
Here's this quote from a scientist named John Watson, early in the last century.
This was the founding father of a field of psychology called behaviorism.
And this is a whole view that you explain all of behavior within one of these buckets
having to do with the environment.
Very interestingly, a few years after this quote, Watson left science completely and
became an extremely successful advertising executive.
I do not think this is by chance.
OK, next quote.
This one is even worse.
As follows, normal psychic life depends upon the good functioning of brain synapses and
mental disorders appear as a result of synaptic derangements.
Synaptic adjustments will then modify the corresponding ideas and force thought into
different channels.
We obtain cures and improvements, but no failures.
Now in a couple of lectures we'll learn what these brain synapses are, but the main point
here is we've got a problem, we've got these synaptic derangements, and then go in with
these synaptic adjustments.
What do you think these synaptic adjustments are?
Some sort of drugs, some sort of pharmacy?
No, you wish it were that, that genteel.
What we have here is a synaptic adjustment is go in with a big old knife and cut out
the front part of the brain, a frontal lobotomy.
And this is a person pathologically caught up in the notion that one of our buckets,
that of the brain explains the entire world, quote, we obtain cures and improvements, but
no failures.
Who is this?
This was a Portuguese neurologist, Agas Moniz, upon the occasion of his receiving the Nobel
Prize for inventing frontal lobotomies.
Final quote, and this is the worst one yet.
The immensely high reproduction rate in the moral imbecile has long been established.
This phenomenon leads everywhere to the fact that socially inferior human material is
unable to penetrate and finally to annihilate the healthy nation.
The selection for toughness, heroism, social utility must be accomplished by some human
institution if mankind is not to be ruined by domestication induced to generosity.
The racial idea as the basis of our state has already accomplished much in this respect
with the extermination of elements of the population loaded with dregs.
Who was this?
Was this Hitler?
Nah, Hitler was a little bit busy with other things.
This was one of the scientists who supported Hitler.
This was a scientist who we all know from those time life specials, a scientist named
Conrad Lorenz.
Conrad Lorenz, we all know from those pictures, this cherubic Austrian guy with his little
suspenders and shorts and the little duckies following around.
Conrad Lorenz, who was also a Nazi propagandist, served time as a war prisoner afterward for
doing so.
This is a man pathologically stuck in a different bucket of explaining behavior, one that happens
to be built around the notion of saying that something's broken which ain't broken and
coming up with the most appalling possible fix.
These are not obscure scientists.
These are not marginalized individuals.
These are some of the most influential humans of the last century.
They have shaped how we educate people, how we medicalize people, how we institutionalize
them.
They have an influence on 9, 12 million people being vaporized by war.
These are people who were pathologically unable to think about the biology of our behavior
in a subtle way.
And that is what we are going to try to avoid doing here.
Now, when we think about this issue, again, it is not trivial to try to approach the subject
looking at the biology of human social behavior.
And there's a bunch of challenges intrinsic in this.
Some of the time the challenge of making sense of humans is recognizing that we are exactly
like every other kid on the block, every other animal out there when it comes to the biology
of our behavior.
One example of this, okay, you are a hamster.
You are a female hamster.
And as is the tendency as a female hamster, what you do is you ovulate every four days.
That's the ovulatory cycle of a female hamster.
Every four days, except under a certain circumstance, somebody has taken another female hamster
and put her in the cage with you.
And over the next couple of weeks, what happens is you both begin to extend your cycles and
you synchronize them.
Within three cycles or so, you are ovulating at the exact same time.
This is this amazing phenomenon.
What's even more amazing about it is it's done entirely with odors.
The odor of one of the females synchronizes the cycle of the other one.
How can you demonstrate this?
You can use the famed nose clip test.
You simply close up the hamster's nose.
It doesn't happen anymore.
Or you damage the olfactory system.
Or in the most elegant version, you don't actually put the second female in the same
cage as the first.
You just pump the air from one cage into the next one and they synchronize their cycles.
It's absolutely extraordinary.
What is really striking is it's not random which female synchronizes who.
The female who is more socially dominant synchronizes the other one there.
And this is really wild and this is very widespread.
You can show this in hamsters.
You can show this in all sorts of other rodents and primate species.
You can show this in pigs.
Apparently, if you were some farm kid out in Iowa or something, you can go down to the
local 7-Eleven and buy some product.
Apparently, it's called Matrix.
And what it is is some big old can of spray and you go back home and you spray it all
over your pigs and they all synchronize their cycle.
I have no idea why you should want to do this.
I grew up in New York City and we never attempted to do this to our farm yard animals.
But for some reason, there's a reason to do this and you go out and you can synchronize
pig ovulatory cycles by taking advantage of these odorants, these pheromone things.
It's remarkable.
And what the most remarkable thing is, it works exactly the same way in humans.
It's called the Wellesley Effect.
Named after Wellesley College, all women's college, we're in the early 70s, a scientist
named Martha McClintock showed this and showed that women who wind up in the dorm together
within about three cycles or so, close roommates are beginning to synchronize their cycles.
Except for one exception.
And this is the same thing you see in the hamsters, take a male hamster and plunk them
down into the cage with these two synchronized females and their cycles scramble and desynchronize
the same thing in humans.
All of these roommates had their cycles tending to synchronize except for the ones who had
boyfriends, close intimate relations.
And this was then followed up with some really high tech science where you would get women
volunteer and they would take little gauze pads and get their armpits and show that just
the smell of one of these things could do the synchronizing instead.
And unless you had a nose cold, once again, it was non-random.
There are hints in the literature that women who were more socially extroverted, more socially
dominant, synchronized the other one too.
This is well enough understood that when I was in college, people would sit around the
dinner table and say, bragging, when we room together this summer, I had her synchronized
by August 1st.
And this is a problem with living with biologists.
But this is very well understood.
And the most striking thing here is we are just like every other animal out there.
And the big challenge often is recognizing that and accepting that.
Now some of the time, the challenge takes a second form, which is recognizing we have
the exact same physiology as any other animal out there.
We have our bodies working in the same way, except we use that physiology in circumstances
that are unrecognizable elsewhere in the animal world.
Let me give you an example of that.
You take two humans and they are involved in this strange human ritual.
They sit at a table, they're silent, they make no eye contact with each other.
And just every now and then, one of them ritualistically picks up their hand and moves a little piece
of wood on the table.
And if these were the right humans and the right circumstance to grandmaster chess players
in a tournament, their bodies are doing the exact same thing as some male baboons just
savaged his opponent and ripped open his stomach on the Serengeti adonis.
The physiology of people during grandmaster chess tournaments approach that of people
running marathons.
In terms of blood pressure, heart rate, in terms of how many extra thousands of calories
their bodies go through each day, and they're doing nothing more than thinking.
And some of the time, what is remarkable about us as humans is we could turn on classical
physiology, the type you would get running for your life, and all you're doing then is
thinking about the fact that, you know what, someday my heart's going to stop beating.
Poo!
Sudden stress response there.
We can turn on classical, boring mammalian physiology with the most abstract of cognitive
states.
And that begins to explain some of our propensity towards stress-related disease.
For example, a stress response system designed to spring you away from a predator, and we
turn it on for 30-year mortgages, we turn it on thinking about tragic events on the
other side of the globe, we turn it on an abstract state.
Some of the time what makes us challengingly human is the fact that we have boring typical
physiology used in the most extraordinary ways.
Finally, some of the time what the challenge is going to be to make sense of our biology
is recognizing stuff that we do that simply has no precedent at all out there in the
animal world.
And let me give you an example of this, a very shocking example from the standpoint
of any other species.
Okay, we've got this human couple, they're together, they come home at the end of the
day, their work day, they talk about how their day was, they have dinner, they talk some
more, they go to bed, they make love, they talk some more, they fall asleep.
They then do the same exact thing the next day.
They come home from work, they talk, they have dinner, they talk some more, they go to bed,
they have sex, they talk some more, they do this every single day for a month running.
Giraffe would be disgusted by this.
There are hardly any other species out there that have sex for non-reproductive reasons
day after day, and we're the only species that talks about it afterward.
And when you look at that, when you look at linguistic use, language use, when you look
at certain aspects of our sexual behavior, when you look at this very pathological propensity
of some humans to confuse sexuality and aggression, you are on turf there that is completely novel.
There are no other species out there doing stuff like that.
So as we begin to approach this course, what we will have to do is expand our notion of
what counts as normal human behavior, how sometimes it is just like any other animal
out there, sometimes this unique way in which we use typical physiology, sometimes the ways
in which we behave for which there's no precedent out there at all, these will be our challenges.
We will start off in the level of how one single brain cell, a neuron, goes about its
business, how one neuron communicates with another one, a pair of neurons, and then beginning
to work our way up, how do small clusters of neurons work, how do large networks, networks
in the part of the brain very relevant to emotion, to behavior, and then finally expanding
from there into how our nervous system can regulate how every cell down to our big toe
works in our bodies.
And throughout that section of neurobiology, we will have two themes throughout.
The first one is to understand why one individual's nervous system works differently from another's,
individual differences.
The other will be to study how all of this function can change over time.
Plasticity, that's the jargon used in the field, how very little of this neurobiology
is set in stone.
What that sets us up for are all of the subsequent lectures asking what are the things that change
how that nervous system works?
What are the things working our way back in time, things in the environment?
How do hormones affect the nervous system, early experience, fetal life, genetics, evolution,
how do all of those wind up producing behaviors coming out at the other end?
That will take us through the first 19 lectures.
What we will then do is try to approach an actual set of human behaviors, try to approach
it with this whole set of strategic sort of ideas here, this business of starting off
looking at the behavior and then moving backwards, what's the neurobiology event, what's the
environmental factors that changes the neurobiology all the way back to where did these behaviors
evolve from?
And we will focus on is an immensely contentious area of human behavior and arguably the single
most important one to understand biologically, where does violence come from?
Where does aggression come from?
This will both be a vehicle for understanding how to integrate these different approaches
as well as give us insight into an area of behavioral biology which we better get a whole
lot of insight into if we want to survive as a species.
So that will be our general strategy for the course and probably now finishing up before
we start, we should probably all raid the refrigerator.
So given that we will pick up in the next lecture starting off with how does a single
brain cell go about its business?
