Butcher 3, How Two Neurons Communicate
Hi, we are back and ready to resume our request to understand the nervous system and how it
produces behavior and how everything on earth that came before that nervous system can regulate
its function, what have we gotten to in the last lecture? We've looked at how one neuron
gets excited, how a neuron pays a fortune to be quiet when it has nothing to say, the
resting potential, how excitation comes in at the dendritic end, how very importantly
that wavelet of excitation is going to dissipate over time, if and only if a whole bunch of
neurons are screaming at this one simultaneously, the axon hillock has its threshold past to
generate the action potential, goes shooting down extra fast because of that myelin and
gets down to the axon terminal and then we've got a problem. And that problem is today's
lecture. We've now made a very important transition. We've now gotten to step number
two of being a neurobiologist, which is to now draw the neurons in this much more schematic
way. We've got one neuron talking to another, we're now up to two neurons in our diagram,
and you will note there, right at the point where the axon terminal of the first neuron
is reaching out to the second, something is happening there. And that is expanded in the
diagram below, what you see, highly magnified is the two neurons don't actually touch each
other. They don't touch, instead there's this yawning microscopic river of extracellular
fluid in between the two of them, something called the synapse. The synapse is the space
between two neurons and the synapse is basically the subject of today's lecture. Now the whole
key thing is people didn't used to know that synapses existed. Back when in the 19th century
the basic view was each neuron connected with the next one, and thus this neuron sent its
10,000 axon terminal projections merging into the next, forming this huge net throughout
the brain, and there was always this sort of cadre, this lunatic fringe of scientists
who said instead, no they don't actually touch, there's a space in between. So there
were the neural net people and there were the synapse people, and their conflict was
actually sort of the central sociopolitical sort of debacle of the 19th century, thousands
of peasants slaughtered, violent brother pitted against brother, and finally what happened
was the whole debate got resolved because somebody invented a microscope that was powerful
enough to see there's actually a space between the two, and thus the synapse was confirmed,
and thus an entire problem was generated, because we've just made this great action
potential in the last neuron, shooting down the line gets to the axon terminal, and that
electrical wave, that electrical signal is not able to jump across the synapse. This
huge ocean of extracellular fluid makes it impossible for an electrical signal to get
across if that first neuron, if that presynaptic neuron is going to talk to the postsynaptic
one, it has to translate its electrical message into a different language, it translates it
into a chemical one. Sitting in this axon terminal on the left in the presynaptic neuron,
there's these little packets, these little balloons filled up with chemical messengers.
Along comes the action potential, and this causes these little balloons tethered to the
very end of the axon terminal to get pulled into that membrane, they merge with the membrane,
and they dump their chemical messengers out into the synapse. What do they do at that
point? They float across the synapse where they have an effect on the postsynaptic neuron.
On this postsynaptic neuron, there's a receptor, a receptor for this chemical messenger. Now
it's absolutely required to be a neurobiologist, you have to use the following cliche, the chemical
messenger that comes floating out, fits into the receptor, here's the cliche, get ready,
it fits like a key into a lock. The particular shape of the messenger and the particular
shape of the receptor, they are complementary, and if and only if this right messenger fits
into the receptor, that causes this dendritic spine to get excited. We have just found a
means by which we go from one neuron to the next, and then initiate all that electrical
excitation stuff from the last lecture. These chemical messengers that go floating across
the synapse are called neurotransmitters. And what you wind up having is when a neuron
gets excited to the point of having an action potential, action potential sweeps to the end
and out of all of its axon terminals, it releases neurotransmitters that float across the synapse
and have their message heard in the next neuron. Now the one additional piece we need to do
here in making sense of this flow of information is in the diagram at the bottom, what happens
to your neurotransmitters after they bind like a key into a lock to the receptor, they come
floating off and there's a critical final step there which becomes very relevant later
on. What do you do with the neurotransmitter? Then two options, you could be ecologically
minded, you can recycle your neurotransmitter and it is taken back up into the presynaptic
axon terminal, repackaged again in those little balloons, these vessels, these vesicles,
that's the term for them. You can recycle your neurotransmitter or you can be ecologically
unminded, you can have some enzyme, you can throw out your neurotransmitter, an enzyme
sitting there in the synapse which rips your neurotransmitter up into little pieces, flushes
it down the toilet. What's your brain's toilet? Your cerebral spinal fluid where it gets into
your bloodstream and eventually into your bladder and you can have either recycling of
neurotransmitters or their degradation, their breakdown, tossing them out. Okay, so now
we come to this question, how many different types of neurotransmitters do you need? You
want to do something very boring with your nervous system, you don't need a whole lot
of neurotransmitters. You've got your arm and you want to pull it up, you want to activate
a flexor muscle, all you need is one type of neurotransmitter that goes from your spine
to this muscle telling you to pull it up. Okay, one neurotransmitter. Suppose you want
to do something more complicated, you've got your heart and sometimes you want to speed
it up, sometimes you want to slow it down, two different directions and messages, you
are up to needing two different kinds of neurotransmitters. Get into the brain and start writing symphonies
and filling out your tax forms and stuff like that and two neurotransmitters aren't going
to do it. Remember, we've got hundreds of billions of neurons, each one making ten
thousand synaptic connections, we've got a gazillion synapses there. Does that mean
we've got a gazillion different kinds of neurotransmitters? Not at all. And all you
need to do to appreciate that is think about the fact that we can generate virtually infinite
number of messages having only 26 letters in the alphabet. All you need are rules for
how you combine them. All you need is some sort of rule that when you take one of those
letters that has sort of two lines that are angled like this and a horizontal line, you're
talking about a letter which if you put it sort of embedded in a C and a T, you're talking
about things with whiskers and embedded in some other combination, you're talking about
existentialism, we learn rules for using the letter A in different contexts. And in the
same exact way, neurotransmitter A in one part of the brain means remember to like turn
the lights off before you go out in another part of the brain that makes your pancreas
do its thing and you've got multiple uses for the same neurotransmitter in different
parts of the brain. And all you need are conventions in this part of the brain, this presynaptic
neuron and this postsynaptic one have worked out, this is what releasing the neurotransmitter
means here and meanwhile four counties over in another part of the brain, it has a completely
different use, there's multiple forms of neurotransmitters. What you then wind up seeing
is an important elaboration, which is different neurotransmitters have different powers, different
strengths in what they do in the postsynaptic neuron. There's some types that are highly
excitatory, what does that mean in ionic terms, what does that mean back to the last lecture?
They cause a huge wavelet of excitation, they're one big boulder that you've tossed into the
pond, there are other neurotransmitters that are only weakly excitatory, you've got a whole
range of the strength of the message. Likewise, you've got neurotransmitters that are termed
inhibitory neurotransmitters that make the postsynaptic neuron less excitable, lock it
in more strongly in its resting state, so you've got a whole bunch of neurotransmitters
that are yelling at the neuron, some of them saying get really excited, some are saying
get only moderate or excited, some are saying get really inhibited, and once again we've
got the axon hillock there integrating all those excitatory and inhibitory inputs. So
we've seen the need here for a bunch of different types of neurotransmitters and the best estimates
are there's a couple of hundred out there, as long as they are used in multiple ways,
they can service your brain with its trillions of synapses.
So now what we need to look at is how do you construct these neurotransmitters? What are
these chemical messengers like? And right at this point, if you're a first year medical
student, the entire point of the lecture now is to completely overwhelm and demoralize you
with these horrendous multi-syllabic terms and these awful biosynthetic pathways and
despite that, all of the neurotransmitters are made or synthesized with some very simple
rules and they make perfect sense. Once again, you want to use your neurotransmitters in
the next hundredth of a second to run you away from the saber-tooth tiger. You don't
want to spend the next three weeks constructing this wonderful molecule that's going to be
the most gorgeous neurotransmitter on earth in your long dead. They're used quickly, they
are obsolete and instant afterward. As a result, you see a whole bunch of rules about their
synthesis built around being as cheap as possible. Today's newspaper is obsolete tomorrow
and all it's good for is paper training the dog. You don't want to put a whole lot of
energy into a messenger that is almost immediately obsolete and you see this played out in a number
of ways, a number of rules. First off, what do you build your neurotransmitters from? What
are the building blocks, the precursors? What you wind up seeing is they are all built from
very simple, boring, plentiful molecules that you get in your diet in huge amounts,
very simple amino acids, very simple constituents of fat so that you are never ever up the creek
and trying to run for your life from the saber-tooth tiger and oops, bad luck, you've run out of
the critical neurotransmitter because you haven't had enough precursor on hand. There's a shortage
this year, very plentiful cheap precursors. What you see is the next step there which
is you make your neurotransmitter out of this precursor just a couple of biosynthetic steps,
nothing fancy, you just make a couple of changes here and there just so you know this isn't
an amino acid anymore, this is now one of those fancy specialized neurotransmitters,
just a couple of steps, nothing terribly exotic, you need to do it quickly, very cheaply.
So you've gotten that far. The next trick you find is for the same precursor, depending
on where you are in the nervous system, depending on which type of neuron you could generate
different neurotransmitters. In other words, you can squeeze multiple messengers out of
one precursor, another way to be really cheap, to be really efficient about your system.
What's the fourth way of being efficient? We saw it a few minutes ago which is whenever
possible even recycle your neurotransmitters, use them over again and that's a great way
to make the whole system very cheap. So you've got these enormously fancy chemicals which
nonetheless are very simple in their principles, they are real easy to make, they're made out
of cheap precursors, you squeeze a lot of different types of messengers out of one precursor and
you recycle them and that's exactly the system you would have to see where you're using
neurotransmitters 20, 30, 50 times in a second across a synapse, these are not fancy molecules,
they've got to be cheap functional ones. So that's a whole lot about their biosynthesis.
What you then ask is, okay there's a gazillion different chemicals you find in a neuron,
maybe even in this axon terminal, how do you decide is this thing a neurotransmitter,
what are the criteria that are used? They make perfect sense and there are four
classical ones. The first one is, you know, no surprise, if something's going to be a
neurotransmitter, you've got to show it's in the axon terminal. In the axon terminal
contained in one of those balloons, one of those vesicles, it's got to be there.
The next thing you have to show is, you've got to release it. Along comes an action potential
and you've got to show that this vesicle full of this putative neurotransmitter merges
with the wall, with the membrane and dumps out the chemical messenger, you send it into
the synapse. The next thing you have to show is perfectly
logical as well, it gets to the other side of the synapse and lock and key-ish into the
receptor there and it does something or other now to the neuron. The next one in line, the
neurotransmitter is released, floats across the synapse, binds to receptors in the postsynaptic
neuron and some excitatory event changes in that neuron.
Those first three criteria show you that something could be a neurotransmitter. The final criteria
shown in the diagram is a critical one, if you mess with the system, things don't work
normally afterward. If you throw in some drug which blocks the receptor, which makes
it impossible for that key to fit into the lock, something important now no longer occurs
in that postsynaptic neuron, what you've just shown is normally it serves a function. Block
that function and something doesn't work anymore, you've now shown this thing as a messenger.
So it's got to be there, it's got to be released, it's got to have an effect on the postsynaptic
neuron and if you block that effect from occurring, something is mighty wrong at that point, that's
how you show something's a neurotransmitter. And at this point there's maybe 20, 25 different
chemicals that have met all of those criteria and there's close to 100 others that meet
a few of those criteria. You go away for a long holiday weekend, you come back the next
Monday morning and seven new things are now puted of neurotransmitters, it's a very rapidly
changing field identifying these messengers. And as we'll see in later lectures, some of
these neurotransmitters violate all the rules we just set up, but these are your basic off-the-rack
neurotransmitters. Now what you begin to see as the next question is, how do you wind up
manipulating the system? How do you wind up beginning to see how the system can change
over time? And that will actually be the subject of the next lecture, how does synaptic communication
change? And you can begin to see exactly what this is about, you change the amount of neurotransmitter
being released, you change the amount of receptor, you change the sensitivity of the receptor,
you change how easily you do the recycling, you change how readily you have the enzyme
ripping up the neurotransmitter, degrading it afterward, this is where we begin to see
all those individual differences out there, we all differ in how readily we make those
neurotransmitters, how readily we make the receptors, we have different versions of those
receptors from one person to the next, and we're beginning to understand where those
differences have consequences for behavior, we can readily see where these individual
differences come from, as we will just as readily see in the next lecture, how you can
change the functioning over time, we'll see it in a special case, the change of synaptic
function that we call learning and memory. Now what we focus on here is one additional
important piece of how these synapses work, and this one's real important because it is
relevant to the lives of a lot of us, how you can use drugs to change the functioning
of synapses, neuropharmacology, the ability of having pharmaceuticals change neural function,
and this is relevant to understanding certain drugs of abuse, and this is relevant to understanding
a huge number of medications out there, and what you have essentially is an array of ways
in which you can manipulate the nervous system, manipulate synaptic communication with drugs.
First example, and this is one out of the realm of substances of abuse, here we have
the synapse, and we've got all our usual components, we've got the neurotransmitters
and the vesicles, we've got the synapse, we've got the receptors, we've got the reuptake
mechanisms, we've got the degradative mechanisms, it just happens that this synapse is completely
silent, there's nothing happening there, the presynaptic neuron hasn't had a creative thought
in its head for weeks, it has nothing to say, it has no action potential, there's no neurotransmitters
coming out, the synapse is completely quiet, and it just so happens, this individual has
ingested a drug, and the drug has a certain chemical structure to it, the drug gets into
your gut, it gets into your bloodstream, it eventually gets into the brain, and gets
into synapses all over the place, and the critical feature is that drug has a chemical
structure that is almost identical to the actual neurotransmitter, and what does it
do?
It comes floating into the synapse from out of left field, gets into the synapse, and
binds to the receptor, and it binds so effectively and looks so much like the real thing that
it fakes out the receptor, the receptor believes it has just bound the actual neurotransmitter
released by the presynaptic neuron.
The second neuron gets excited, gets a wavelet of ionic changes, what's going on?
That second neuron is hearing voices, it's hearing voices that aren't there, this is
how hallucinogens work.
There's a particular class of neurotransmitter called serotonin, and all of the major hallucinogens
chemically, their structures are just like serotonin, almost identical, and that's the
case for LSD, mescaline, psilocybin, all of those artificially activate serotonin receptors
when there's no serotonin being released, and as a result, you've got pathways that
are getting excited when your brain had no intention of doing it, that's what a hallucination
is. Why hallucinations take certain forms, and have certain coherent visual aspects to
them so on, why you hear voices instead of random sounds, nobody really understands,
but that's one way of chemically manipulating the synapse, send a message when it isn't
really there.
What's the next thing you can do? Potentially exactly the opposite. Now put in a drug that
binds to the receptor, except in this case, it doesn't bind in a way to activate the
receptor, it just gums things up, it blocks it, you've blocked the receptor. Two examples
of this, one of them blocks a bunch of neurotransmitter receptors that have something to do with
your diaphragm, and suddenly your brain is not able to send a message telling you to
breathe, and this proves to be fatal. What's this drug? Curari. This is how curari winds
up being a poison, it blocks a class of neurotransmitter receptors, and your diaphragm doesn't work
anymore and you are up the creek. Here's a more interesting example, straight out of
clinical medicine, and this is a drug which blocks a different class of receptors. A class
of receptors for a neurotransmitter that we're going to hear a lot about, a neurotransmitter
called dopamine. Now where does this become relevant? In one part of the brain, it seems
as if dopamine has something to do with coherent, logical, linear thinking. And if the levels
of dopamine are incorrect, you've got a person with a great deal of trouble with coherent,
logical, linear thinking, what are we describing? This is the psychiatric disorder of schizophrenia,
a pattern of very dramatic thought disorder. And during the mid-1950s it was discovered
throw in any of a class of drugs that block dopamine receptors, and schizophrenics get
better. These are drugs, they're called antipsychotics, also termed neuroleptics,
Haldol, Thorazine, any time in some, you know, made for TV movie where somebody has their
psychotic break and the orderlies come down and wrestle the guy down and they get the
syringe into him to calm him down, this is most typically a dopamine receptor blocker
that's being used. Okay, so you look at this, and you say here we have this fluoride psychiatric
disorder of abnormal thinking, of disordered thinking, throw in a drug that blocks dopamine
receptors in this person's brain and suddenly they get less psychotic, I bet you there was
too much dopamine in the first place. And that's the leading hypothesis as to the neurochemistry
of schizophrenia, too much dopamine release. So that's a way of manipulating the system.
Then there are other drugs that you can throw in, which what they will do here is you could
be releasing neurotransmitters when you had no intention of, you can trigger the release
of neurotransmitters. And that's another version of something vaguely resembling a hallucination,
you are forcing the neuron, the presynaptic neuron to send a message when it has no intention
of. Other ways of manipulating the system. In this case what you can do is change aspects
of the recycling of the use of a neurotransmitter after it's done its thing. After it has bound
to a receptor there. What were the two things that happened at that point? One of two choices
that we've heard, you can recycle your neurotransmitter, some pump in the presynaptic neuron grabs
onto the neurotransmitter, pulls it in and sticks it back in a vesicle. Or you can have
an enzyme floating around the synapse that grabs onto the neurotransmitter and tears
it into little paces and flushes it out to sea. So you can use drugs that manipulate
either of those steps. One version of it. Now we manipulate that enzyme that tears up
the neurotransmitter. And this is a neurotransmitter called neuropinephrine. And it's an enzyme
that rips it apart called MAO, monoamine oxidase. And during the early 60's people developed
a drug which inhibited MAO, an MAO inhibitor. What does an MAO inhibitor do? It inhibits
this enzyme from ripping up the neurotransmitter neuropinephrine. You don't rip up the neuropinephrine,
it stays there longer. And what does it do at that point? For lack of anything else to
do it hits the receptor. Second time and a third time and a 40th time you boost up the
neuropinephrine signaling in the system. And what do you see then, what people discovered
in the early 60's was, you take somebody who is clinically depressed and give them
an MAO inhibitor and they start feeling better. Aha, what does your theory have to be at
that point? If you take a drug that blocks the breakdown of neuropinephrine, that causes
neuropinephrine to have more of an oomph to send more signaling than it used to and depressions
get better, I bet you there wasn't enough neuropinephrine in the first place. And this
is one of the leading theories as to what's wrong with that disease. Now the other thing
we could do there in manipulating, as mentioned, is you can stop the recycling, the reuptake
of a neurotransmitter. And there is a drug which these days is probably the most heavily
prescribed in this country which blocks the reuptake of a certain type of neurotransmitter,
blocks the reuptake of serotonin. And only serotonin, what are these things called? Selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors, SSRIs, what's the most famous version of this? Prozac. Prozac
another antidepressant and that causes a whole bunch of people to now think about serotonin.
Aha, you take somebody who's depressed and you make it impossible for them to remove
the serotonin from the synapse and as a result, serotonin stays around longer and works more.
I bet you there wasn't enough serotonin in the first place. And those are the two leading
hypotheses of depression these days, a shortage of norepinephrine and or a shortage of serotonin.
And in both cases, shown with a chemical manipulation of the system. Now there's another manipulation
you can do there, which is quite interesting. How about you change the amount of neurotransmitter
that you make? How about you boost up the synthesis of neurotransmitter? And this is
shown in another disease. Unfortunately, one that's becoming increasingly common, neurological
disease of aging, Parkinson's disease. Parkinson's motor disease, you have trouble initiating
movements, you can have a very fluorid Parkinsonian tremor. The best evidence since the early
1960s is Parkinson's is due to degeneration in one area of the brain that makes tremendous
use of the neurotransmitter dopamine. Dopamine, wait a second, I just heard about dopamine
with schizophrenia. This is a completely different area of the brain. In this part of the brain,
dopamine is about smooth movements. And what you see there is a massive loss of dopamine
for reasons we're beginning to understand, the neurons there die. What do you think?
What's a good way of boosting up dopamine levels in the remaining neurons? Give them
more dopamine to release. It's hard to put dopamine into somebody's gut and get into
the brain. You use a precursor, something called L-dopa. L-dopa is a couple of steps
before dopamine, stoke up somebody on L-dopa and they make more dopamine in that part of
the brain and some of the Parkinsonian symptoms calm down at that point. That's been one
of the leading therapies since the early 60s. So you manipulate the system, you boost up
the levels of the neurotransmitter. Okay, if you are washing closely here and
skeptically you should notice there's a problem. Schizophrenia, too much dopamine, you throw
in a drug that blocks dopamine receptors, schizophrenia gets better. Parkinson's, too
little dopamine in a different part of the brain, you throw in a drug to boost up the
dopamine levels. Where are you putting those drugs and you're not spritzing them into this
one area of the brain, you're putting it in the gut, gets into the blood where it gets
all over the brain. And suddenly you should be having this, aha, what's going on here
in Parkinson's disease, too little dopamine, so you give the person L-dopa and in this
part of the brain there's not enough dopamine and you correct it and the Parkinsonian symptoms
get better. Meanwhile in the other parts of the brain with normal dopamine levels, you
push things above normal. What should you see, one of the most common side effects
if you overshoot your L-dopa level is the patient gets psychotic. And some of you will
have seen the movie Awakenings based on Oliver Sacks and what you have there is a very rare
neurological disease, stiff man syndrome, which has something to do with Parkinson's
and what you saw there was these are people who have so much of a tremor that they are
frozen and what you got there was treating people with L-dopa and you had this miraculous
awakenings, people moving for the first time in years. What you also saw with the Robert
De Niro character there is when you overdo it, you get this fluorid paranoid psychosis.
So try to fix a Parkinson's and a possible side effect is inadvertently generating something
that looks like schizophrenia. Meanwhile, over in the other corner, you've got the schizophrenic
and you give them the antipsychotic to block their dopamine signaling and in this part
of the brain where there's too much, you bring it back down to normal and in the other parts
of the brain, you depress dopamine signaling. What's the side effect of too much antipsychotics?
You start getting Parkinsonian tremors and there's a special name for it in psychiatry.
It's called tardive dyskinesia, kinesia kinetics body movement, dyskinesia abnormal movements
and you go to some state hospital and you go to the back ward and you find somebody trembling
there like that and this is somebody who's been taking antipsychotics for a long time.
So what we see here inevitably is there's no free lunch built around the fact that the
same neurotransmitter is being used in very different parts of the brain. So that gives
us a sense of the workings of this. The last thing we need to do is as usual look at the
individual differences. We've already heard about it. We differ as to the amount of neurotransmitter
released, the amount of receptors, etc. There's increasing evidence of a type of neurotransmitter
system very closely related to a class of drugs that decrease anxiety. Drugs like valium
and librium and we have our own versions of those inside our brains and it's been identified
that certain rodent strains, rat strains that differ in their levels of anxiety differ genetically
as to how well the receptor binds to this valium like compound that begins to explain
those individual differences. Ok so what have we gotten to at this point? We have now graduated
from one neuron, we're up to two neurons and how they talk to each other. Our other
theme here, plasticity, how these neuronal functions change over time will be the subject
of the next lecture. What I see now is the big hand is approaching six so it's time for
us to shut down. What we will see after this is how synaptic communication changes in response
to experience. What's the biology of learning?
