Lecture 8 The Regulation of Hormones by the Brain
We're back.
I have changed my shirt since the last lecture and thus feel wildly invigorated.
And that's a great thing because we are talking hormones today.
Okay, where were we at in the last lecture?
We have now taken this grand expanding view of how the nervous system works, starting
with one neuron and then a pair of neurons and networks and whole areas of the brain,
the limbic system, and where we left off, finally seeing why it is everyone in the limbic
system is so concerned about the hypothalamus's opinion.
Why?
Number one, the last lecture, the ability of the hypothalamus to regulate all sorts of
aspects of the body by way of that autonomic nervous system.
Part number two, today's lecture, the ability of the hypothalamus to regulate hormones throughout
your body.
Okay, so we've just introduced some new jargon, hormones.
What's the deal?
What is a hormone compared to what is a neurotransmitter?
Neurotransmitters we're amply familiar with by now and we have a really simple difference
in explanations here and their definitions.
By definition, you've got some axon terminal.
It dribbles out a chemical messenger, thanks to an action potential, and if the chemical
messenger goes floating a thousandth of an inch across the synapse and does something
or other to the next neuron in line, you've got a neurotransmitter.
And just as clearly by definition, if the axon terminal releases the same messenger,
any other messenger, whatever it is it releases, if it instead gets into the bloodstream, you
now have a hormone.
Hormones are blood-borne and what that winds up meaning is they circulate throughout the
entire body.
They could be coming out of neurons and we will see lots of cases for that.
You can have all sorts of endocrine glands throughout the body, ovaries, testes, adrenals,
pancreas, whatever, and once again, if the cells there secrete some sort of messenger
that gets into the bloodstream, you've got a hormone on your hand.
And it can be the exact same chemical as the neurotransmitter.
It could be epinephrine, it could be neuroepinephrine, it could be oregano, whatever it is, it goes
floating across the synapse, it's a neurotransmitter, gets into the bloodstream, it's a hormone.
Now what that sets us up for are some major differences in what neurotransmitters do, what
hormones do.
By definition, the neurotransmitter is affecting events a hundredth of an inch away.
Hormones are affecting events in every cell in the body.
By definition, neurotransmitters are doing their thing in an incredibly short amount
of time.
We saw in previous lectures, you can have 50 action potentials a second.
In contrast, hormones can take minutes to start working, they can take days.
As we will see, some hormones have their effects decades later.
Finally, what the neurotransmitters do is change some excitable event in the next neuron
in line.
What the hormones do is virtually anything out there, they change the function of cells,
they can cause cells to divide, they can cause cells to die, everything in between extremely
versatile.
Now as we already know, a whole lot of the business of hormone regulation is centered
around the brain, centered around the hypothalamus, and we have by now our flow chart describing
the last lecture in this.
You got your hypothalamus there and we know all of those influences up north, the limbic
system, the cortex heading down into the hypothalamus.
We saw from the last lecture, the hypothalamus regulating the autonomic nervous system heading
down your spinal cord, and what we will see today is how for a large percentage of hormonal
systems, the key is the hypothalamus tells the pituitary what to do, the pituitary this
gland sitting right underneath the base of the hypothalamus, the hypothalamus tells the
pituitary what to do, the pituitary in turn dumps all sorts of different types of hormones
into the bloodstream, where they have peripheral actions, they cause some peripheral gland
to secrete something or other, pancreas, sedrenals, thyroid gland, ovaries, testes, what you
have here is termed a neuroendocrine cascade, the brain commands the pituitary which commands
all sorts of peripheral glands.
Now the whole notion of the brain commanding hormonal outflow throughout the body has had
a pretty exciting controversial history, if you have no more exciting things in your
life than the average endocrinologist does, but what you have is a very unlikely pathway
by which this occurs, and you've got the pituitary basically broken into two different parts,
the anterior and the posterior pituitary, and it's the anterior pituitary where all
of this controversy occurred, and it was built around the notion of how does the brain regulate
the pituitary.
Now back around 1900 or so, nobody knew that the pituitary secreted hormones, people basically
did not have the hormone concept then, they sort of knew these peripheral glands secreted
something or others that altered physiology, altered behavior, actually the discovery that
peripheral glands secrete hormones is the oldest fact in physiology, it's probably about
10,000 years old, when some farmer discovered that the bull that was chasing around the
backyard one time too many, if you wrestled that bull down and removed his testes, he was
suddenly a much more tractable guy, and suddenly you realized something or other comes out
of the testes that has something or other to do with what a pain in the neck of males
can be very frequently, aha these peripheral glands release these factors, soon named hormones,
that could change events throughout the body, and the original view was these hormones knew
exactly what they were doing by way of these peripheral glands, which knew exactly what
they were doing, these peripheral glands had all the information needed, and it wasn't
until some decades later people began to figure out, no actually these peripheral glands have
no idea what they're doing, left to their own devices, they can't figure out when they
should be secreting insulin or estrogen or things like that, they are actually under
the command of the pituitary, and that gave rise to the most persistent and celebrated
and incorrect cliche in all of endocrinology, that the pituitary is the master gland, and
that was enshrined in endless reader digest articles, by the time I was a kid the pituitary
is the master gland, the pituitary is making all the decisions as to when those peripheral
glands do their things, and when they release their hormones, and it wasn't until around
the 1950s people began to figure out the pituitary was not a master gland, somehow or other
it was getting its directions from the brain, from the hypothalamus, and somebody at that
time came up with the notion, a scientist, a British scientist, endocrinologist, pioneer
named Jeffrey Harris, and this guy came up with the notion that what you have is the
brain working as an endocrine gland, when you look at the anterior pituitary it is not
exactly connected with the base of the hypothalamus, what you have instead is a tiny, tiny circulatory
system connecting the hypothalamus with the anterior pituitary, and the notion then was
that the hypothalamus secreted hormones, which then went down to the anterior pituitary,
and told those cells which hormones to secrete into the main circulation, neurobiologists
hated this concept, simply because something seemed kind of demeaning and disgusting and
yucky about the brain being an endocrine gland, the brain does this sort of gleaming
calculation stuff for you, and here it is drooling out hormones instead, there was tremendous
resistance to the idea of the brain as an endocrine gland, and it took a number of scientists,
a pair of them in fact decades to prove that this was in fact the case, and they got their
Nobel prizes out of this showing the brain is an endocrine organ, and what you wind up
seeing in the anterior pituitary world is all of the hormone release coming out of there
is directly under endocrine control of the hypothalamus, you've got the hypothalamus
with its hypothalamic hormones secreting neurons there, dumping their hormones into
that local circulation, where they go down and their job is to stimulate, to inhibit,
to regulate what these pituitary gland cells are doing, we have a first pass here of the
brain as the central regulator of endocrine systems, okay, the second way in which the
brain is completely in charge is that the much more conventional reassuring posterior
pituitary, which people had known how that had worked for decades, and none of this sort
of heretical revisionism about the brain as an endocrine gland, this one was much simpler
to make sense of, it turns out the posterior pituitary is really just an outpost of the
brain, the brain in this case just has this little bit of hypothalamic tissue dribbling
down there, and happened to merge with the anterior pituitary, and in this case you didn't
have to come up with this weird scenario of hormones circulating in this tiny little
local system, here instead you simply have the cell bodies of those neurons, sending
their projections down to the posterior pituitary, and it's those exact same axon terminals
that are releasing the hormones in those cases, and there's two principle hormones, the posterior
pituitary, oxytocin, vasopressin, and these have a whole lot to do with giving birth with
milk let down with contraction of the uterus, in this case we have complete control of these
hormones by way of the brain once again, in this case by way of these axons coursing
down into the posterior pituitary. Now this is great, we've got these scenarios here where
forget these peripheral glands knowing what they're doing, forget the pituitary is the
master gland, the brain is entirely in charge of when these hormones are released, and we
will see about some of these hormones in far more detail, for example the anterior pituitary
hormones which trigger ovulation, which trigger sperm production, releasing hormones like
luteinizing hormone, follicle stimulating hormone, do not panic if these are all new
terms, the important ones we will come back to again and again, a whole branch of other
hormones related to the anterior pituitary system regulating growth, growth hormone,
hormones having to do with thyroid function, regulating them, a class of hormones in this
hypothalamic anterior pituitary system having to do with stress, and what you might have
seen is depending on the stressful event, which hormones come out of the hypothalamus
to kick the anterior pituitary into gear, so that you have a different hormonal profile
if you were stressed for example, because you've just had your leg broken, versus if
you were stressed because you were stuck in traffic, in those cases very different stressors
physical, psychological wind up being coded for with different hypothalamic hormones,
we have a system here of great complexity, but entirely built around the brain runs the
system. Now what we have in some cases though are
endocrine systems where the brain has something to say about it, but it's not the only thing
that has something to say where there's partial regulation about the brain. What we have is
one of everybody's favorite endocrine organs in the body, the pancreas. What does the pancreas
do? It secretes insulin, people have known this forever and when it fails to secrete
insulin, you've got juvenile onset diabetes. What you also have is it turns out a whole
bunch of other hormones coming out of the pancreas, but it is most famous, most celebrated
for its release of insulin and people used to think they understood everything about
insulin secretion. Okay, what does insulin do? Insulin tells
your body to store energy, to take circulating glucose and stick it away in various storage
sites in your body. Insulin is this wildly optimistic forward looking hormone. It says
we've got enough energy on board, we've got enough stuff in our bloodstream to keep us
perfectly happy and energized right now. Take the extra stuff and store it away for some
building project next spring. So you ask the question, how does the pancreas
know when to secrete insulin? And it turns out it's got this wonderfully
logical little regulatory loop from the bloodstream. By definition, how does the pancreas know
when you've got tons of glucose in the bloodstream? Good idea to store it away. It measures the
amount of your circulating glucose. There are receptors on pancreatic cells that are
glucose receptors. They measure glucose. Circulating glucose is sensed there and there's a local
little regulatory loop which when glucose levels get high in the bloodstream, that tells
you to secrete insulin. Wonderful, that explains everything, except there's an additional step
in there where the nervous system comes in. And if you are a well conditioned, westernized
human, what happens? You have dinner every night at say six o'clock or so, and what
happens in addition is right around a quarter of six, you start secreting insulin. Is that
because your blood glucose levels have gone up? Absolutely not. You're not eating yet.
Blood glucose isn't going to go up for at least 15 minutes. You start secreting insulin
in anticipation. How do you pull that off when circulating glucose levels have not changed
yet? In this case, it's your brain doing that. And back to the last lecture, which branch
of the autonomic nervous system is all about calm, vegetative planning for the future,
parasympathetic nervous system. There's a big old axonal projection from the parasympathetic
nervous system going into the pancreas and forget circulating glucose levels when you
are sophisticated enough of a primate to know, ooh, 15 minutes until dinner, your PNS is already
working to cause anticipatory insulin secretion. So in those cases, we have an endocrine system
only partially under control of the brain, but no surprise the way in which it's controlling
there is the most cerebral events. We're one of the only species out there that can sit
there and anticipate a Thanksgiving dinner. Okay, in some cases, though, you've got endocrine
systems that are completely independent of the brain. And this is one that once people
got on board with a notion that the brain is the master gland and it even does unseemly
things like secret hormones itself, people were really quite surprised to discover that
organs in the body in cases could get along just fine without the brain putting in its
two cents of endocrine regulation. We've got all sorts of versions of this. And one
of them is a hormone called ANF, which has so many syllables in this actual name. I'm
not going to actually say it, but it comes out of all places what turned out to be one
of the most unlikely endocrine glands anybody could imagine. Your heart, your heart turns
out to be yet another endocrine organ. What do we mean by that? It secretes something
or other which gets into the bloodstream and affects events someplace else in the body.
It secretes this hormone ANF and it secretes it at a wonderfully logical time. So you've
got high blood pressure. By definition, the problem with high blood pressure is your heart
is pumping too hard. Resistance in your blood vessels is incorrect. Whatever it is, there's
too much blood pressure. What's the way to solve it? One way which your heart thinks
of is let's get rid of some blood volume. How can you do that? You can get rid of red
blood cells and that's not a clever thing for your body to do. Or you could decrease
the amount of fluid, the amount of water in your circulation. How are you going to do
that? I know those kidneys down there, they're all adept at this sort of thing. What ANF
does is it is sent down into the circulation and it has effects at the kidney. It is a
diuretic. It makes your kidneys make more urine and your blood volume goes down. And
when does the heart secret ANF, by definition, if your heart muscles are getting extended,
that means you're slamming blood with too much pressure into it. Stretching of heart
muscle triggers ANF release, which goes and talks to the pituitary. You go in P, blood
pressure goes down, everybody's happy. And here we've got this wonderfully logical endocrine
loop that's got nothing to do with the brain. This diagram on the body shows, on the bottom,
shows another example of this. And this one completely caught people by surprise. Because
it turns out another branch of your body contains endocrine glands. In these cases, these are
individual cells of your immune system, white blood cells. And you talk to immunologists
and they do not, in their classical form, think a whole lot about hormones. And suddenly
it turns out your immune cells secrete hormones as well. Now one of the things your immune
system has is a major challenge, is it's not a single organ. You've got your thymus gland
and your bone marrow and your spleen and all sorts of immune cells in the circulation.
By definition then that's going to be a system that has to involve secreting a whole lot of
messengers that go all over the place. There's a whole family of these immune messengers that
send information from one type of white blood cell to another. That sort of thing. And it
turns out a whole lot of these immune messengers have effects elsewhere in the body work as
hormones. And in some ways, the most shocking example was the discovery that there's a whole
class of immune messengers that work as hormones affecting brain function. And this is an immune
messenger called interleukin-1. An interleukin-1 does all sorts of nice logical things to other
white blood cells. It triggers them to divide and proliferate and mount some whole immune
defense against some sort of pathogen that's gotten into you. And meanwhile interleukin-1
gets into your brain where it does all sorts of interesting stuff. It makes you sleepy.
It's called a somnogen. It makes sleep onset more readily occur. It changes your threshold
of temperature regulation. It is a pyrogen. And those of you who are pyromaniacs or pyrexpans
will know pyro temperature fire, it makes your body run a temperature. It changes pain
threshold so that your body aches, your tooth roots and your eyeballs throb. It triggers
a stress response. What is interleukin-1 doing? It's making you feel terrible. Interleukin-1
is the messenger that makes you feel crummy when you're sick. It makes you sleepy, lethargic.
It makes you run a temperature. It makes you feverish. It makes everything ache. It turns
out it decreases appetite. It decreases sex drive. All sorts of things built around this
logic. You feel awful. You have some pathogen hunkered down there. Forget going out hunting.
Just lie still. The pain is probably a way to make you decrease your activity as well.
You've got this whole branch of the immune system which turns out to be able to direct
events all over your brain. A couple of interesting additional implications of that. It turns
out interleukin-1 can affect aspects of learning and memory. Basically along the lines of disrupting
LTP, you remember from umpteen lectures ago, LTP synaptic plasticity. Interleukin-1 tends
to inhibit LTP. Aha, you're running a high fever. That's not a great day for being at
your cognitive best. In addition, it's looking as if a whole lot of interleukin-1 can increase
your risk of a depression. That has something to do with all sorts of chronic immune-activational
diseases increasing the risk of depression there as well.
We've got this enormously varied array of endocrine systems entirely under the control
of the brain via the anterior pituitary, the posterior, partially under the control
of the brain, entirely independent of the nervous system, independent and of all outlandish
things actually then regulating the brain by way of peripheral hormones, the subject
of next lecture. What we see here is an enormous range of ways in which hormones can operate.
What we now need to shift to is what are the actual hormones involved? There are two broad
classes and you are going to recognize some of the exact same themes as from the neurotransmitter
lecture. First off, you've got a class of hormones called steroid hormones. Steroids,
you've heard of steroids. Steroids get you thrown out of the Olympics. Steroids get
you in trouble with Congress. If you're a baseball player, steroids is just a way of
describing the structure, the chemical structure of a class of hormones. There are five different
families of steroid hormones. Once again, do not panic. If these are important names,
we will come back to them. Estrogen-related steroid hormones, progesterone-related ones,
testosterone-related ones, androgenic anabolic hormones are the other terms for those. Ones
that are related to stress, and we will hear about those plenty, and a class of them that
are related to kidney function. Five different classes of steroid hormones. That should already
give you a hint of where we are heading, the same exact themes of cheapness that ran all
through our neurotransmitter lecture, the same rules. In the case of steroid hormones,
we start with a cheap, plentiful precursor. In this case, cholesterol. You should not panic
and suddenly say, oh my God, if I cut down cholesterol in my diet, I'm going to run out
of estrogen and androgens and all that. It is such a tiny percentage of the cholesterol
that is used to make these hormone messengers that you don't need to worry about it. No
dietary changes in cholesterol intake is going to have an effect on steroid production.
You've got a plentiful cheap precursor, cholesterol. We fulfill our first requirement, the same
one as with the neurotransmitters, cheap precursor, just a couple of biosynthetic steps, and
you've made your steroid hormones, and we already see our next principle straight out
of the neurotransmitter lecture, generate multiple messengers out of the same precursor.
What you have in that case is, from that same cholesterol beginning, a couple of steps here,
a couple of construction steps in the opposite direction, and you've produced estrogens or
androgens or progesterones or different classes. The remarkable thing is there's hundreds
of different types of minor steroid hormones in the body, all of which fit in those five
classes. Look at that efficiency, that cheapness you've got going on there, one simple precursor,
and you can generate a gazillion different messengers. That's great. However, it comes
with the downside. If you are going to be very cheap in producing your hormone messengers
so that you produce testosterone that structurally looks almost like estrogen, it's just a couple
of steps different, and great, you've generated two messengers from different sort of pathways.
Very easily, suddenly you've got a problem, which is you never, ever, ever want to have
your testosterone receptor, for example, mistake estrogen for testosterone. You don't want
to have your receptors get fooled, and suddenly you've got a no-free lunch scenario. If you're
going to have very structurally similar hormones, you've got to have very fancy, expensive receptors
that can tell them apart. You don't want your receptors to confuse androgens and estrogens.
So we see at one end, generating the messengers, this very simple rule, once again, of economy
generating lots of different messengers out of the same precursor, and then we see steroid
hormone receptors are some of the fanciest ones around. Then we have our other class
of hormones, and these are ones that are protein-based, and by a couple of lectures from now, we are
going to see in great detail what does it mean to have a protein, and how do you construct
it, and what part of your body gives the instructions. But what we have here are hormones made out
of protein precursors, and the exact same logic, again, plentiful precursors here, amino
acids, just string a bunch of them together, and you've made this type of peptide protein-based
hormone, growth hormone, string another version of them together, you've made insulin, another
version, you've made follicle-stimulating hormone, same principle, again, plentiful
precursors, relatively few steps, and you can generate a whole bunch of hormones that
are structurally quite similar to each other based on just a few synthetic steps. And once
again, you've got the same downside, you definitely want receptors that can tell the difference
between a hormone that tends to stimulate ovulation versus a hormone that tends to inhibit it.
If you're cheap in generating your messengers, you are going to have to be very expensive
in designing receptors that can tell the difference. Okay, so that brings us to the point of receptors,
and a big theme throughout endocrinology used to be just tell me how much of a hormone is
in the bloodstream, and that tells me what's going to be happening in the body. What people
have since realized is how much hormone in the bloodstream is half the story, the other
half is how many receptors and where they're working, and how well they're working, that's
the other half of the deal. And that became clear when people began to identify some wild
endocrine disorders where there was nothing wrong with the levels of the hormones in the
bloodstream. What there were instead were mutations in receptors. In one wild example,
you have a syndrome of someone who appears to be a girl, and who appears to be having
a problem because she's not hitting puberty yet, and she's really quite delayed, and the
physician checks her out and discovers the great shock that this girl is a boy. This
individual is a boy genetically, XY chromosomes. This individual is a boy in terms of having
testes. This individual is a boy having those testes way up, undescended, those testes secreting
boatloads of testosterone. What's the problem in this case? They can have testosterone being
poured out to the cows come home, but there's a mutation in the testosterone receptor that
testosterone's doing nothing. And in this case, the hormone signal is just fine. The
response to the signal is impaired. We're really wild endocrine disorder. So what we've
got there are two halves of the story, how much of an endocrine signal, but how much
tissue-tissue sensitivity there is to it, are critical. Now, this gives us a broad picture
of endocrine systems, but it's a very, very artificial one. It's basically saying, okay,
in the brain, you've got your neuroendocrine pathway having to do with ovulation, with
these hormones getting into the ovaries. Meanwhile, you've got your neuroendocrine
cascade having to do with stress, and then here's the one with temperature regulation,
here's the one with growth. It's this very artificial picture of separate branches. And
what you have instead is enormous amounts of crosstalk between these endocrine branches.
And let me give you one really interesting example of this. And this is asking the question,
why is it that if you were female mammal and you were under stress, you tend to be less
likely to ovulate, you tend to have more fertility problems? What we have here is starters in
the diagram is the boring straightforward neuroendocrine cascade. The brain secretes
its hypothalamic hormone LHRH, luteinizing hormone, releasing hormone, which then triggers
the pituitary to release luteinizing hormone, which gets the ovaries to make estrogen and
progesterone, and progesterone causes the uterine wall to mature. Great, we've got one
of our classic neuroendocrine cascades. But then you throw in some major stress, physical
stress, starvation, psychological stress. And what you see is there's a whole family
of stress hormones that work to disrupt this pathway at different levels. One stress hormone,
a hormone secreted in response to stress prolactin. Prolactin works up at the level
of the brain to make you less likely to secrete this LHRH. Another hormone that's responsive
to stress, beta endorphin, works up at the hypothalamus to do the same thing. Aha, some
of you may be saying beta endorphin, endorphin, runners high, you're endorphin high. It is
secreted by the physical stress of large amounts of exercise. This is a hint as to why individuals
who do massive amounts of exercise, and this is not the government recommended go out to
30 minutes of aerobic something or other every day. This is the ultramarathoners. What you
wind up seeing is this can occasionally have anti-reproductive effects. Meanwhile, down
south at the pituitary, another class of stress hormones called glucocorticoids make the pituitary
less sensitive to whatever LHRH is coming out of the brain. Down at the ovaries, glucocorticoids
working there to make the ovaries less sensitive to LHRH. Meanwhile, down at the uterus, prolactin
works to make it less likely that the uterine walls are going to thicken, and you've got
chest effects all over the place here, less hypothalamic hormone, less pituitary sensitivity
to it, less pituitary hormones secreted, less ovarian sensitivity to it, and then a hormone
working down at the uterus to block the effects of progesterone. And what you have here from
the reproductive standpoint is a whole bunch of ways that stress can affect the system.
From the learning about endocrinology standpoint, obvious punchline, it is far more complicated
than one hormonal pathway, tremendous amounts of crosstalk. Now what this sets us up for
is our next lecture looking at in some ways the most interesting outpost of endocrinology,
neuroendocrinology, not how the brain regulates hormone release, but how hormones regulate
the brain in return. So that will be our next step in the next lecture.
