Lecture 10 The Evolution of Behavior
Hi there.
I've just had my batteries changed.
I feel wonderful and energized, and it is just in time because we are having a major
shift now in this lecture.
Okay, let's go back to that chart.
We began this whole course with our big grand scheme for thinking about the biology behavior.
And what we had was, on the far right, the behavior is produced.
And what we've just spent umpteen lectures on is looking at what's gone on a second
before that, how did that brain, how did that nervous system produce that behavior?
And we've got a pretty good sense of it by now.
We've got a feel for the basics of neurobiology from the level of a single neuron up to the
level of whole parts of the nervous system, how the nervous system regulates the body,
and how the body, in turn, by way of hormones, can regulate the nervous system.
We've got this bucket now well in place.
And as you remember from the song and dance in the first lecture, another major goal of
this course is to avoid thinking in terms of buckets, categories, to think that, okay,
we've got neurons in neurobiology under our belt.
That's all you need to do to explain the whole world.
What we now devote much of the rest of the course to is seeing all the other factors
that give rise to how the brain functions.
As shown here, again on this diagram, what in the environment a second before made that
brain have its responses that trigger that behavior to occur?
As we had a first pass at in the last lecture, what sort of hormone levels that hour, that
day, made the individual more or less sensitive to that environmental trigger, which caused
the brain to produce the behavior and so on, this being our strategy working back over
time.
And what we are going to do in this lecture is transition to a detailed look at the first
of those things that came beforehand that regulate how the brain regulates behavior,
starting at the basics, starting at what in lots of ways is the central concept of all
of biology.
You could not think of biology without thinking about the role of evolution.
How has evolution, how has natural selection given rise to the sort of fetal life, the
sort of hormones, the sort of brain, which has something to do with understanding our
behaviors.
And what we'll focus on in the next couple of lectures is basically the evolution of
behavior.
Now what is embedded in that concept is any time you talk about evolution, evolution
of behavior, evolution of kidney function, evolution of anything, what you're talking
about is the evolution of genes that have something to do with those behaviors, that
kidney function and so on.
Following these lectures we will look at a very different aspect of the story, very molecular.
How do genes get affected by evolution on one hand?
How do genes have something to do with the sort of brains we have?
So how have the events, how have the events of evolution, the natural selective pressures
over millennia, over millions of years sculpted the sort of brains and behaviors that we have.
Now in introducing the subject of evolution, that's straightforward, we all know how evolution
works, we all learned about it in ninth grade biology and when we learned how come giraffes
have long necks and we all know the basic rules of evolution built around a couple of
key points.
The first one is certain traits are heritable.
Certain traits are passed on from one generation to the next.
For example, length of your neck.
The second key point is there is variation that can occur in how those traits are passed
on.
Variation we now understand in modern genetic molecular terms, there could be mutations
in genes passed on from one generation to the next.
And the third critical point is there is then selection.
Some of those genetic variants are more fit, are more adaptive than others and those individuals
leave more copies of their genes.
And as shown in this chart, this is the basic sort of logic of evolution.
You've got multiple generations of one pedigree here and passing on whatever trait, whatever
trait is heritable, whatever trait has a genetic component.
And we see in pedigree B, there's a mutation, a source of variability and this happens to
be a wildly maladaptive one.
And as a result, by the second generation, B pedigree goes extinct.
They don't reproduce, they don't survive, they don't pass on copies of their genes.
Meanwhile, you can have a beneficial mutation, a beneficial source of variability.
Selection does its thing then and as a result, this pedigree, this version of this trait
becomes more plentiful.
That's the basic building blocks of evolution.
We understand all of that and all you do now in the next couple of lectures is substitute
how the giraffe evolved along neck and all its adaptive features to that, how we evolved
certain behaviors.
That's all there is to it.
The whole notion that the way our behaviors occur is as much sculpted by evolution by
the forces of natural selection as how our heart has evolved to pump blood and how our
necks or whatever shape and how our kidneys do whatever they do to retain water, the same
rules for behavior.
Except there is one hell of an inflammatory concept tucked away in there, the notion of
genes of heritability having anything to do with behavior.
And that is immensely controversial in certain quarters.
And in other quarters, that's taken as a, well, of course, and it's perfectly obvious
what we will be doing a lot in the coming lectures is wrestling with the issue of how
do you tell if a certain behavior has a genetic component, how do you figure out if ever how
much of a genetic component, and does that tell you anything about inevitability genetic
destiny very, very rarely.
So we begin to think here about the evolution of behavior.
And we all learned about how evolution applies to behavior.
We all learned this thoroughly back when we were kids or only if you were the right generation.
And we all got taught our evolutionary biology by Marlon Perkins.
Okay, remember Marlon Perkins, maybe you're not of the right age group, but Marlon Perkins
was the host of this wildly successful show that I watched all throughout my childhood
called Wild Kingdom.
And they would cruise around and film animals in different interesting places.
And he had this, this poor toadie of a guy named Jim who always had the job of having
to wrestle the grime, the giant boa constrictor.
And Marlon Perkins would sit off in the side there and tell us what was going on.
And Marlon Perkins taught all of us about evolutionary biology.
And here's the sort of scene where we all learned the subject.
Okay, it's dawn on the savannah and you're sitting there in East Africa and there's some
herd of a gazillion wildebeest, wildebeest travel around in these huge herds of a million
animals following the rains.
The rains move across the plains of the Serengeti and the wildebeest follow it around after
that.
What you wind up seeing is the wildebeest are always trying to find the grass that's
greener on the next field.
And they head over there and mow it down and move on.
And you've got a problem here today, which is you've got this huge herd of a gazillion
wildebeest and there's this wonderful field over there just full of grass and they can
taste it right.
And the one problem is right in front of them there's a river, a river teeming with crocodiles
who are just ready to shred one of these wildebeest as soon as it gets in the water.
And they're all there and hemming and hawing and a panic and what are they going to do?
And suddenly a Marlin Perkins solution emerges from the back of the crowd of the wildebeest.
This elderly wildebeest fights his way up to the front and he says, I sacrifice myself
for you, my kinder.
And he throws himself into the river and he's instantly ripped apart by the Crocs and while
they're busy with him, everybody else tiptoes around the other way.
And why did he do that?
Why did he get killed?
And why did he fling himself involuntarily and Marlin Perkins taught us the answer because
animals behave for the good of the species.
And this was the central concept that we all got hammered into our head and this was wildly
incorrect.
This got discredited in the early 60s in scientific circles and stuck around with Marlin Perkins
and sticks around to this day in the general notion behavior has evolved for the good of
the species.
And it has not at all.
This old notion of what is termed a group selection argument, behavior is driven by ways
to increase the likelihood of the species surviving and multiplying makes no sense at
all.
And all you have to do to appreciate it is if you watch those wildebeest a little bit
longer than Marlin and his film crew did because something else was going on.
So you look at all these wildebeest and they're all in a panic and how are we going to get
across the river and they're all milling there and suddenly up comes this elderly wildebeest
to the front.
Why is he up there?
He did not push his way to the front.
He got pushed up there.
They said, yeah, get the old guy up to the front.
He's the only one who couldn't be sort of withstanding.
He gets pushed to the front and he gets pushed in the river, volunteering no way.
He gets pushed in by everybody else and he gets done in at that point.
There is no sacrificing himself for the good of the species.
Evolution is not about evolving behaviors that optimize the survival of your species.
And by the early 60s, what got ushered in instead was now what is the central concept
to the field, what is termed individual selection.
Animals behave not for the good of the species.
Animals behave to optimize the number of copies of their own genes they pass on to
the next generation.
Evolution is not about survival of the fittest.
Evolution is not about optimizing the survival of your species, the good of your species.
What evolution is about is passing on as many copies of your own genes as possible
into the next generation.
And we will see some very important implications of this individual selection.
Now in lots of ways, probably the best way to think about it are the one that's most
caught the public's imagination and one that is somewhat erroneous is the notion of the
selfish gene, the notion that your DNA, and we will see shortly what DNA is all about,
what your DNA that makes up genes, what your genes are about is not helping the species
to survive, but the purpose of your genes are to maximize your own ability to reproduce,
the pass on copies of your genes.
And a far better way of summarizing this was this wonderful quote by an early evolutionist
late in the 19th century, a man named Samuel Butler, and he came up with this great aphorism.
He said, sometimes a chicken is just an egg's way of making another egg, and that's like
a wonderful way of viewing it.
A chicken is just an egg's way of making all of this behavior stuff and all of this social
interaction stuff is just this epiphenomenon to get some mating and to get a copy of the
genes into the next generation.
Sometimes an egg in order to make another egg produces this chicken with its behavior
stuff, sometimes behavior can be thought of as merely a way to optimize, to maximize
the number of copies of genes that are passed on to a next generation.
And this really has become the central concept in the field in lots of ways.
This notion of individual selection, animals do not behave to enhance the survival of their
own species, they behave to maximize the number of copies of their own genes.
As we will see, this is not so straightforward and it is not so selfish on either the gene
level or the individual level.
It has a whole lot of interesting elaborations, but this is the building block of the whole
system.
And what this winds up producing is an explanation for an awful lot of animal behavior.
There's a lot of versions of behaviors that don't make any sense until you frame it as
individual selection rather than group selection.
Let me give you one very grim example of this from the world of animal behavior.
And this is one that makes no sense at all, is wildly pathologic if you were schooled
in Marlin Perkins and makes wonderful, horrible, tragic sense if instead you think in terms
of contemporary evolutionary biology.
Okay, you have a species, gorillas for example, or lions or langur monkeys, a whole bunch
of species that show this pattern.
What you have is a stable social group made up of a whole bunch of females and their kids
and typically just one male in there.
What is typically called a harem structure, but it's just as readily called a gigalose
structure.
You've got a single male doing all the mating with the females.
Where all the other males, they are often the periphery bachelor herds is what it's
called in some species, a bunch of these males off by themselves or individual isolate males
and what do they want out of life?
Of course to take over this harem, to boot out the guy who's resident and every now and
then one of them manages to do that some big aggressive interaction and boots out the previous
guy.
Okay, what happens at that point?
What happens was first discovered in the 1970s and people still imbued with sort of a group
selection notion simply did not have any idea how to make sense of this.
This new male comes in, becomes the resident male in this all female group and what does
he proceed to do?
He goes about systematically killing all of the infants he can in the group.
This floored people, number one because there was a dominant notion at the time that oh
my God, you're not aggressive to infants.
Infants have all sorts of features that inhibit aggression and here you are having infanticide
going on.
This is totally bizarre until you begin to see a pattern and this was one that was first
identified by a primatologist named Sarah Herdy studying this first in Langer monkeys,
a type of monkey found in India, seeing there's a pattern to it, a whole bunch of species now
where you see this infanticide and they all have the same population structure.
Okay, suppose the female gives birth to an infant.
What does she proceed to do as a good monkey mother?
She nurses the kid often for a year, for two years, a long nursing period and as is a feature
of nursing, thanks to stuff we learned in the endocrine lecture, you boost up levels
of prolactin, prolactational, a hormone having to do with nursing and prolactin inhibits ovulation.
While the female is nursing for that period, she doesn't ovulate.
Shortly after giving birth, the resident male, the male who fathered that infant gets
dumped by a new male who comes in and takes over and the key point is on the average,
the length of time this new male is going to be in this group before he himself gets
dumped, the average length of time is shorter than the amount of time that female is going
to be nursing.
What does this wind up meaning?
What this means is this guy has spent the last six years going down to the gym and working
out and he's finally all buffed up and tosses out this guy and he's going to be long gone
and forgotten by the time this female is ovulating again.
And what is the horrible selfish evolutionary logic for this guy to do at this point?
Come in and after he becomes a new resident male, kill the infant.
The female stops nursing, ovulates a short time afterward and he fathers the next kid.
And this grim piece of evolutionary logic that makes no sense if you're Marlon Perkins
makes perfect sense from the standpoint of this male trying to maximize the number of
copies of his genes in the next generation and there's a dozen species now that have
this social structure where you wind up seeing this infanticide.
Now naturally the female is sitting there and she's just as interested in evolutionary
biology.
She's not thrilled about losing her copy of genes into the next generation and what
you wind up seeing is females resist like crazy trying to protect their kids.
This all makes perfect sense from the individual selection level and the greatest way of seeing
just how much this is the case, how much animals do not behave for the good of the
species is that you see exactly this pattern of competitive infanticide in one of the most
endangered species on this planet, a species that's probably going to be extinct within
our lifetime, the gorilla.
The gorilla has this social structure and they are close to extinction for a bunch of
reasons, habitat degradation, warfare around there, hunting of them, killing of them for
trophies, all sorts of tragic things and on top of that every now and then a male gorilla
kills the infants there, animals do not behave for the good of the species.
So we have this first building block of modern evolutionary biology, sometime a chicken is
an egg's way of making another egg.
Now we shift to the second building block and it has to do with a very important notion
which is you are related to your relatives.
What does that mean in biological terms, you share genes with that?
With that individual and the whole notion of the second level kin selection inclusive
fitness is the simple idea that sometimes the best way to pass on copies of your genes
as many as possible to the next generation is to reproduce as much as you can but sometimes
the best way is to help your relatives reproduce as much as they can and this notion of kin
selection begins to describe a central feature of every social species out there including
us which is an obsession with kinship.
Who do you cooperate with, who do you fight with, who's them, who's us built around lines
of relatedness.
Now the important thing to appreciate here is some relatives you are more related to
than others, a full sibling you are more related to than a half sibling, a parent more than
a grandparent and that could be stated mathematically what percentage of your genes you share in
common and ignoring the details of the number the simple fact is the more steps away a relative
is the fewer genes you share in common.
And the logic and for most part the data support this logic what you wind up seeing in this
kin selection notion is you will be more cooperative with relatives as a function of how related
they are to you, the more genes you have in common.
And what kin selection inclusive fitness is about is sometimes the best way to pass on
a copy of your genes is to reproduce once, sometimes if you have a full sibling who shares
half of your genes with you, if you help that sibling in a way that allows them to reproduce
twice to hand on two copies sets of copies of their genes, mathematically one set of
viewers or two copies of someone sharing half of your genes with you, it's identical
from a genetic standpoint and either of those behaviors have the exact same impact on evolution.
And this was wonderfully summarized in a quote by this geneticist Hall Dane early in
the last century who apparently was sitting in a bar once and trying to describe this
concept to the other guys there and did some calculations and said I would gladly lay down
my life for two brothers or eight cousins and mathematically that's exactly how it
works.
And what this begins to explain is this wild obsession with relatedness, with kinship
with relatives throughout the animal world.
You get some social anthropologists and they spend their entire careers trying to understand
the kinship terms of this one tribe in the Upper Volta River of West Africa.
This is nothing compared to animal obsession with patterns of relatedness because it completely
determines who you cooperate with and who you don't.
A couple of examples, there's lots and lots of species out there and there's lots of
human cultures that have polygamy where one male will mate with multiple females, where
one male will pass on copies of his genes with multiple females far rarer in the animal
world and in the human world of human cultures is polyandry, a single female with more than
one male.
Among animals, it's found occasionally in lions, it's found in marmoset monkeys in
the new world, there's a bunch of bird species.
Among humans, there's a number of cultures in Asia, particularly in Tibet and Nepal,
where you see this pattern in every single one of these cases.
It's a very special type of polyandry.
It's something called a Delphic polyandry.
Who are the two males, who are the resident males in this lion pride, who are the two
males who are the husbands of this woman in Nepal, they're brothers.
They're brothers, that's the pattern you always see.
This Delphic polyandry makes perfect sense.
Why should these two perfect stranger males cooperate in a marriage?
They're not perfect stranger males, they're sharing 50% of their genes.
This is exactly the sort of thing that's predicted by kin selection.
Some more examples of how to think about kin selection and this one is so obvious it doesn't
even count as an interesting observation.
Until you think about it, you got some food, you're some baboon, you're some whatever,
and you share it with someone.
Who do you share it with, and food sharing and all sorts of species goes along lines
of relatedness.
Well yes, obviously mothers feed their kids and all sorts of species, but even things
like you've got a kill and who do you allow to feed off of it as well, and in lots of
studies you see the degree of relatedness is a wonderful predictor of how much you
share food with another individual.
More examples of this, and this is one that you wind up seeing which will seem terribly
familiar to anyone who's a parent, and this goes by the official jargon in the evolutionary
biology world of parent offspring conflict.
Basically built around the following math, which seems bizarre to apply almost economic
terms to thinking about stuff, but you are this mother, you are this primate mother,
you are this bird mother, you are this any mother, and you've got this offspring.
You are doing your evolutionary calculations, and this brings up an important point.
No animal is sitting there consciously aware of any of these principles.
These have evolved, been sculpted by evolution.
When I say what this bird wants to do, what this brine shrimp maximizes at that point,
there's no conscious volition there, this has simply been sculpted by evolution.
So you're that parent sitting there, and what you want is of course your offspring to survive.
Are you willing to give up every bit of your future reproductive potential to help this
offspring survive as well as possible?
Absolutely not.
You are balancing the survival of this offspring without a future individual.
In contrast, what does the kid want?
They want all of the investment, and that's actually the economic term that's used by
these folks.
They want all of the investment possible.
What you wind up getting is conflict between the kid wanting more care from the parent
than the parent offers.
Where is the scene in animals when mothers try to wean their kids?
And you get parent offspring conflict.
You look at some baboons, and there will be a mother walking along, and there's the year
old kid who she's trying to wean, who is literally throwing a tantrum, and she's pushing the
kid off.
Stop nursing, stop nursing, because once I stop nursing, I'm going to ovulate.
Again, not a conscious strategy.
This is what you wind up seeing.
However, suppose it's an older female who's not likely to have more kids.
You don't see the weaning battles then, and you see the selection between generations
in a sense and a battle for energetic investment.
This makes no sense until you think about it in evolutionary terms.
Okay, so that gives us the second building block.
First one, forget Marlin Perkins and group selection.
Individual selection, sometimes a chicken is an egg's way of making another egg.
One level, kin selection, sometimes the best way to pass on copies of your genes are to
help relatives do so.
I'll lay down my life for two brothers or eight cousins.
The third final building block is what's termed reciprocal altruism.
Even amongst non-relatives, sometimes it makes sense to cooperate.
And we've got all these great, you know, proverbs for many hands.
Make the task light, or who knows what amongst hunters, for example, if you all share the
kill that distributes the risk each time when it's something that has a low success rate.
Reciprocity is a very, very common thing in all sorts of social species, even among non-relatives.
And what you then have are all sorts of rules for when does reciprocity evolve.
And this is a subject we will return to in some subsequent lectures in tremendous detail
because this turns out to be a whole field that mathematicians work on.
All sorts of mathematics of games, and this is a formal term in economics and math, of
game theory, when do you cooperate, when do you fail to, very complex mathematical models.
So when do you wind up seeing this, and we will look at this again in far more detail,
but as a first pass, what sort of species do you see reciprocal altruism, patterns of
cooperation among non-relatives?
Well it makes sense.
First off, you've got to have a social species.
You're not going to see it in orangutans, for example, where these are very solitary
animals, nomadic in many cases, you've got to have a social species.
Next thing you have to have is not only social groups, but stable social groups.
It makes no sense at all to lend you the money to buy a hamburger today and you'll pay me
back next Tuesday if our social group is fluid enough that I'm going to be long gone
in the next valley by then.
What else do you need?
You need to have species that are long lived enough that you're actually going to be alive
next Tuesday.
Then you need to have a certain amount of social intelligence so you could recognize
who the individual is.
You remember who it is, you have to see this in more socially complex, more cognitively
complex species, and remember that finding we had in an earlier lecture across 150 different
primate species, the bigger the social group, the bigger the relative size of your cortex,
and the argument has been that has evolution sculpting our brain to keep track of social
economics, social commerce, social interactions, and reciprocity being a big piece of it.
The final thing that you see, and this is the basis of all the mathematics, all the game
theory, the final thing that goes on in these games of reciprocal altruism is you want to
cheat whenever you can, and you want to be incredibly vigilant against other individuals
who might cheat against you.
We will see all sorts of mechanisms, ways in which this has evolved in animal species.
What we see here though are just a very few quick examples of how this reciprocity works.
One example is with vampire bats, which despite their horrible reputation, are actually warm
affectionate mothers who go out each night to get blood from cows typically, fill up
a throat sac full of blood, and come back to their nest where they discord the blood,
discord it to feed babies, discord it to feed babies, not just their babies.
All the females feed each other's babies, even among non-relatives.
This is a system of reciprocity.
How can you prove it?
You engineer experimentally away in which one of the females fails to do that and her
kids are not fed the next time.
Reciprocal altruism in this sense.
Other versions of this, you find amongst baboon males, males will occasionally form
coalitions, partnerships, backing them up in fights, and you look across years in a
social group and the coalitions are not random, who forms the coalitions with each other,
partners who have reciprocated in previous settings.
It's a structure like that as well.
Another example, this is a great one that you see with stickleback fish.
Of all things, a species that you can study this complex mathematics of behavior and cooperation
in, turns out sticklebacks have been evolved to do this as well.
Okay, you make a stickleback fish believe it is being threatened by another stickleback
fish.
These are not some of the smarter animals around.
So it's done quite easily.
You stick a mirror up on the side of the fish tank and before you know it, the fish is bashing
its lips against the glass to keep this other guy away and doing this whole defensive thing.
Now make it think that it has a partner.
Take a second mirror and put it perpendicular to this fish so it's glancing over there.
It sees its reflection.
It sees its reflection of its reflection of sitting there saying, okay, I don't know
who this guy is, but he's really backing me up here because there's a second fish attacking
and every time I attack this guy, he's there.
I can really trust this guy.
Great, I got a partner here.
Now, make the fish believe he's being cheated against.
Take the mirror and angle it a little bit so that the reflection is set back a few inches
and he's sitting there saying, that son of a bitch, I can't believe that guy.
Here I am blistering my lips, protecting our territory and sure he's pretending to
go forward but I see him hanging back a few inches there.
He believes he's being cheated against and the next time he fails to attack his image.
He is reciprocating against the cheating there, cheat against me and the next time I will
cheat back and we will see complex mathematical models which have often been exactly the ones
that animals have evolved.
So with this first pass of thinking about the evolution of biology, we have moved past
the notion that animals behave for the good of the species to survival of the fittest,
instead individual selection, maximizing the number of copies of your genes.
Kin selection, sometimes the best way to do that is to help relatives pass on copies
of theirs.
Reciprocal altruism, sometimes one of the best ways to do it is to set up systems of cooperation
even with non-relatives but with very strict rules of vigilance against cheating.
This whole structure and this is essentially the structure of modern evolutionary biology
thinking about behavior is highly explanatory.
What we will now do in subsequent lectures is look at more detailed examples of this beginning
to frame it, how does all of this sculpted by evolution to maximize this or that passing
on your genes, how does this translate into the sort of brains we have evolved.
