Lecture 14 What do genes do? Macro Evolution of Genes
Welcome back. I assume you've spent the break looking for your receipt to try to get reimbursed for this course
after all of the last lecture was nothing but shameless lies to you.
What we need to do in this lecture is see what is actually going on.
Okay, what have we gotten to so far?
We know how the brain works, and now we've seen something about how the brain has evolved,
how the brain and its genes relevant to behavior have evolved,
first from the perspective of those big evolutionary models,
mathematical models to optimize traits, the evolution of sociality,
and now in the last lecture we've switched over instead
to try to answer this very irresistible question of what are these genes after all,
and what do they have to do with behavior?
And what we finished up with in the last lecture is this micro evolutionary view
of what mutations are about, mutations, the building block, the grindstone of evolution.
What mutations are about are tiny little changes in DNA sequences
and thus protein sequences and thus protein function, tiny little changes,
and then evolution, natural selection does its thing,
deciding whether this protein with a tiny small little difference in shape
is more or less adapted than the previous version.
Evolutionary change is slow and gradual incrementalism, micro evolution.
Now what we need to see today in this lecture is how that's nothing like what's going on,
how there's all sorts of other realms of evolutionary change,
and as the building blocks of the way the genes work and the way the genes change over time.
Okay, what was the model we had in the last lecture?
A very straightforward one.
You got your stretch of DNA, and here we have right here in this diagram,
the beginning of gene A, and as soon as you get past your little stop sequence,
you finish gene A, and then you start right after that with your next start sequence
in gene B and C and D, and they're right there in a straight line,
the end of one gene leading to the next gene and so on.
That is not what you actually have,
and this is initially going to seem like just sort of nitpicky semantic stuff,
but this is going to be the core of what's actually interesting today.
Let's look at gene A in more detail,
and rather than gene A being coded for a continuous sequence of DNA,
what's shown in this diagram instead on the bottom is gene A is broken up into separate parts.
Separate parts so that we have A1, A2, A3, A4, as you can see, different lengths,
but collectively it codes for the entire gene A coding for protein A and so on.
You've got these intervening sequences between the genes,
intervening sequences of DNA that doesn't code for anything,
and these intervening sequences are called introns,
and the part that codes for the DNA itself is called exons,
and you would say that this gene A is made up of four exons,
and this is weird.
This is weird for two reasons.
Number one, how are you going to stitch together these four separate parts of gene A
to get one protein A at the other end?
The other weird thing is this astonishing finding that came out of the discovery
of these genes broken into pieces.
95% of your DNA doesn't code for anything.
95% of DNA is this little intervening intronic stuff between chunks of DNA.
Most genes are broken into separate parts with these little intervening sequences in between,
and then there are vast distances of junk DNA in between each gene.
What is this junk DNA about?
Is this just like styrofoam packing material or something?
This immediately generated this huge issue.
Why is 95% of your DNA not transcribed, not coding for a protein?
And as we're going to see, very interesting reason for it.
We start off with the first challenge, though,
which is how do you stitch together those four separate pieces of the gene for protein A?
How do you stitch them together to form an entire protein out of it?
Back to last lecture's central dogma, the sequence of DNA,
codes for RNA, codes for protein sequence shape function,
except we now see we've got one extra problem in here,
which is your RNA photocopies, your stretch of gene A,
and you're now going to wind up with RNA coding for those intervening sequences of junk DNA.
That does nothing.
Now you've got these intervening sequences of junk RNA,
and your actual protein signal now in the form of RNA is scattered, is dispersed.
And what you then have in this diagram, carefully drawn as a little pair of scissors,
is a splicing enzyme, an enzyme that comes along and cuts out those intervening sequences
and pulls your RNA, you're now spliced RNA, edited with these parts taken out,
and now you've got a stretch of RNA that codes for A1 followed by A2, A3, and A4,
and then it goes and does this thing, you've got a normal protein out the other end.
So you've got this weird additional step in the system at this point, making no sense at all,
but you've got these stretches of DNA that code for nothing,
and often when you then generate your RNA, you've got stretches now of RNA that code for nothing,
and along comes your splicing enzyme that edits out the nonsense parts,
gets rid of the junk styrofoam, and stitches together the real RNA stretch, and you've got your protein.
Dramatic foreshadowing here, what are those splicing enzymes?
They're made of proteins, coded for by genes.
And thus you might be able to see where we're heading,
what happens if you have a mutational change in a gene coding for one of these splicing scissors?
We're beginning to see here a mechanism to amplify to have some big dramatic effects.
Okay, well let's begin to explore the implications here in another realm of the fact that these genes
are not continuous, but instead you've got these intervening sequences that code for nothing.
What might be some of the implications of that?
I'm thinking about this realm of what we now will term macroevolutionary change.
Okay, up on top we've got our gene, and in this case it's broken into three separate exons,
A1, A2, and A3.
And over in one domain you've got the splicing enzyme,
which what it does is it cuts out the intervening pieces,
just like a splicing enzyme is supposed to do with RNA, it edits it,
but it edits it without the A3 part.
So you wind up with a protein being made of A1 and A2.
Meanwhile in the next county you've got an enzyme that works differently,
and that works on the same RNA, and now edits it so it's A1 and A3.
What if you just generated two different proteins,
two different messengers from the same precursor, from the same gene,
and now suddenly we've got our central dog, we're tottering here,
a stretch of DNA, a gene codes for a single RNA sequence, codes for a single protein.
Here we have a stretch of DNA depending on how it's spliced,
coding for two different proteins, two different neurotransmitters,
two different hormones, two different types of receptors.
So we've got one gene here or two genes, and by juggling the splicing,
you're generating multiple messengers out of the same gene, the same precursor.
What's deciding it? Is it the gene as the starting point?
Determining everything with protein destiny down the line?
No, in this case it's what kind of splicing enzyme you have.
What kind of gene elsewhere codes for that splicing enzyme?
And this winds up being a very common theme.
In one part of the nervous system, you will have splicing done to produce one messenger
in a different part that spliced a different way.
We're now beginning to see a more complex level of control.
And we've now transitioned.
The last lecture, micro-evolutionary change, you do your little point mutation,
and what you've got is a protein, the same usual protein,
that simply works a little bit better or a little bit worse.
Little incremental changes.
Now for the first time, thanks to a macro-evolutionary change,
suppose you've got some little point mutation that changes the way some of those splicing enzymes work,
and now you could generate an entirely new protein that has never existed before.
Instead of changing pre-existing proteins, things can suddenly jump in a much more dramatic way.
We're getting mechanisms for stuff to move much faster.
What we see here could be exactly that sort of scenario.
Suppose you get some sort of mutation in one of your splicing enzymes.
Here in this case, we start off with how it's supposed to be.
Gene A broken in in this diagram as usual into parts, exons A1, 2, 3, and 4,
and the splicing enzyme doing its usual thing, stitching the pieces together,
and you now produce protein that's coated for by the amino acid parts corresponding to A1, 2, 3, and 4.
Great.
Now suppose you've got this mutation in your splicing enzyme,
and what we see here is you drop out A3 and you produce a protein A1, A2, A4.
You've just invented an entirely new protein.
This is a mechanism for producing big dramatic changes,
at which point all the usual off goes natural selection,
but now it's not natural selection for this receptor that has a 1% change in its binding affinity.
This is now natural selection for an entirely new gene,
an entirely new world of function.
Okay, so that's interesting.
Now we're about to jump to an even more bizarre step in the system.
We've just seen the splicing stuff, the fact that genes are not continuous,
that you could do these combinations, this combinatorial business of you take this part,
and this part, and this part, and you put them together,
or you put them in a different version,
you've invented a new protein, and mutations in the processing enzymes could be quite relevant.
Now we see a whole other level of things changing fast.
And this one throws everything we thought we knew about genes out the window,
because of how heretical this is.
And this even comes with a great history of science story.
This is all built around this famous revered scientist named Barbara McClintock,
and one of the reasons why she is so revered is because for a long period,
she was just completely despised and ignored,
and this is, you know, it's hard to guess who's going to play her in the movies,
but somebody has to at some point, because this is a wonderful epic story.
Okay, Barbara McClintock, a giant in the field of genetics,
in the 1940s studying corn genetics, and people study corn genetics a lot,
because for reasons I don't understand, it's easy to manipulate,
she came up with this totally bizarre observation,
which she could see again and again,
and the only way to understand how certain traits of color in the different kernels of corn
was being passed on from generation to generation.
It didn't fit the rules of Mendel,
and what she wound up deciding was the only possible way to explain this
was if big chunks of DNA picked up and moved elsewhere
and got spliced into a completely different part of the stretch of DNA,
if genes jumped around,
and literally these things wind up now being called jumping genes,
although scientists take that term,
these are called transposable genetic elements,
so she announces to the world,
sometimes entire chunks of DNA somehow can be cut out
and shipped off to a different chromosome,
and inserted there, and this happens.
And without exception, everyone in the field said,
oh, Barbara McClintock, too bad, really great scientist,
guess she's gone crazy now, they totally ignored her,
and as part of the legend of her wandering in the wilderness,
nobody listened to her, and she said,
I don't care, this is what I see, and I know I'm right,
and I don't care if anybody else agrees with me,
and she spent her next 40 years locked up in a very isolated lab
doing her corn genetics, getting more and more evidence for this,
and it wasn't until the 1980s that the molecular biology caught up
and showed she is absolutely right.
Chunks of DNA can be excised and moved somewhere else,
there are these transposable genetic elements,
and everybody said, oh my God, Barbara McClintock was right,
and she became just this legendary figure,
and there were like Barbara McClintock cookbooks,
and Barbara McClintock exercise videos,
and everybody thought she was the greatest,
and she in her late 80s at this point says, well, that's great,
I'm glad people like it, but you know, that's fine,
I don't care if they don't, I still knew I was right,
and just leave me alone so I can do my work,
and after stopping briefly to get her Nobel Prize,
she continued to work out in her Maze Genetic Lab
up into her early 90s, and this is this irresistible story
showing genes jump around.
So naturally at that point, you wonder,
why should genes jump around?
And it turns out they jump around most readily in plants,
and for reasons I don't understand,
since I'm not a plant biologist,
that's a very clever thing for them to do,
but it turned out this was relevant in the mammalian realm also.
For a very specific reason, another type of creature
that can do a whole lot of jumping gene stuff
are all these little bacteria, these little pathogens
we get infected with, and they can juggle around their genes
so that they evolve faster.
They evolve faster just when our immune systems
are figuring out how to take these guys out.
They do this rapid evolution stuff
so they keep being one step ahead of our immune systems.
And thus, what parts of our body
have the highest rates of these transposable genetic events?
Our immune systems.
It's this arms race of juggling genes
in the hopes that during an emergency,
uh-oh, pathogen invaded me,
or in an emergency, uh-oh, all I am is a bacteria
trying to pass on copies of my genes,
and this guy's immune system is about to whiten me and my babies out
during a crisis like that.
Quick, take a stretch of my DNA
and just juggle the stuff and shuffle it
in the hopes of coming up with something more useful.
And suddenly you see these transposable genetic elements
as this arms race,
and it's this mechanism for moving big old chunks of DNA
around from one place to another.
And what are we talking about there?
Down the drain once again goes the notion
that all genetic changes are about
are these little micro-evolutionary changes
of changing the function of a pre-existing gene.
Now we've got a mechanism for inventing a whole novel type of gene,
getting one that simply didn't exist there before
and now coding for a protein that never existed before.
And just to give you a sense of this,
how one of this works, there's this infectious parasite
called trapanosomiasis.
No, actually it's called trapanosome.
The disease you get when you've got is trapanosomiasis.
And this is not a disease I recommend you get.
It's an awful tropical parasitic disease.
So you get a trapanosome in you,
and on its surface there's certain proteins
that it uses to go about its business.
And within a couple of weeks your immune system is figured out.
This thing is not us.
This thing is not my liver or my eyebrows.
This thing should not be here.
And how do I recognize it by the surface protein?
And quick, let's start making a whole bunch of white blood cells
with antibodies that are going to recognize this thing
and take this guy out.
And two weeks into it, what does the trapanosome do?
It withdraws these proteins and it's juggled its DNA
that codes now for an entirely new protein.
And just as you've got your spanking new addition of antibodies
out to recognize this trapanosome,
it is invisible to your immune system.
And you've got to start all over again
to come up with a new antibody.
A whole bunch of pathogens do this.
So it winds up being a very clever world of competition
built around anything other than little micro-evolutionary changes,
big jumps.
And when these occur, not in your white blood cells,
but instead in an egg or a sperm,
your offspring may have an entirely new protein
that's never existed before on this planet.
So that's another mechanism for big, exciting changes.
The next one, in some ways, is the most important one.
Okay, we've now graduated from this view
that a gene is coded for by a single continuous stretch of DNA.
And instead, we've got this picture of intervening sequences
and the splicing enzymes and combinatorial stuff.
And you take one from column A and three from column B
and you combine them.
And when you put on top of that, the fact that a whole bunch
of genes may have been jumping around in stretches of DNA,
the Barbara McClintock world,
we've got something very dynamic.
But now we go back to that weird fact we got a little while ago.
95% of your DNA does not code for anything.
And the first consequence of this in the jumping genes is
we've invented an entirely new gene
thanks to this stretch of Z1 coming down between A1 and A2.
So we've invented an entirely new gene
coding for an entirely new protein,
but we still have that problem of,
what about the 95% of the DNA that codes for nothing whatsoever?
And people began to figure out in the early 60s or so
what this was about,
and this opens up an enormously important picture,
because the stuff is not junk DNA.
What is that 95%?
Very often, it's your instruction manual
for when to turn your genes on or off.
And specifically what you get is shown here, for example,
we've got a nice simple gene,
and our diagram gene A broken into two parts, A1 and A2.
And just before A1, there is a stretch of DNA.
And what's that stretch about?
Does it code for RNA, which turns into protein?
Absolutely not.
What it does is bind some protein floating around the cell
called a transcription factor.
And what does the transcription factor do?
It throws a switch.
It turns the gene into the on position.
That's the instruction to start making an RNA copy of that gene
and splice it and turn it on.
It's the instructions when to turn it on or off.
And along with transcription factors that turn on this sequence
and the term given for the sequences, it's a promoter.
It promotes the copying the transcription of that gene.
The transcription factor comes and turns on that promoter.
There are also factors floating around the cell that turn the gene off.
And suddenly we've got a world not of a gene sitting there
at the centerpiece of all of life deciding when to direct a protein.
Now suddenly we've got proteins turning genes on or off.
We've got various factors turning genes on or off.
We're suddenly in this world where genes are not the starting point
and the commanders, but other things command them.
They're not the beginning of it all.
They're just part of a circle making proteins
that splice this way or that way, which code for transcription factors
which turn genes on or off.
What we now have on a very local cellular level
is the proteins in the environment of that gene
determines when genes are turned on and off.
Rather than genes determining everything,
nature and all of that, environment regulating genes.
Now let's look at three increasingly dramatic versions of this
and by the end of this diagram,
the notion of genes determining anything should go down the tubes.
The first example is the one we just saw.
We've got our cell and we've got in the center our DNA in this diagram
and we know that the DNA here has a little stretch coding for a gene.
Just for simplicity, we've made it a continuous stretch
and just before that is a promoter.
And here floating around the cell is transcription factor X.
Bines to that promoter turns on the gene.
Exactly what we just saw.
The cellular environment of the cell determines when that gene is turned on.
Now we go to our next more complex example.
Now we take something utterly familiar to us,
some messenger coming in from elsewhere from the next neuron over,
a neurotransmitter from some gland at the other end of your body,
a hormone, a messenger comes along and binds to the receptor
and thanks to calcium rushing it or who knows what,
you establish a whole cascade of events which activates transcription factor X,
which goes on and turns on the gene.
What have we just introduced?
Now we have genes being regulated by the extracellular environment.
Now we have genes being regulated by events in another cell and another organ.
So we've taken one step more expansively here, moving away from a gene sits there
and with its own sort of head decides when it's doing,
now it's being regulated by the environment,
including the environment of other parts of the body.
And now our third example, how a gene could be regulated by the environment,
the real environment, the outside world, outside that organism.
And let's build on an example that we've already seen the building blocks of
and here we have, you smell something.
You smell something and as shown in the diagram,
you've got your nose sitting there and it's a very special smell.
You're some male wildebeest and you have just smelled the odor of some rival male
who has shown up and is scent marking all over your bushes and your trees
and you smell this guy and thus that pheromone, that chemical messenger,
gets into your nose and excites an olfactory receptor there,
which triggers the olfactory part of the brain and as we know,
you are now one synapse away from the limbic system, right?
So the limbic system now gets excited and tells your pituitary what to do,
back a number of lectures, how's it doing it?
It releases its hypothalamic hormone, which travels down to the anterior pituitary,
which releases its hormone, which goes to a peripheral gland,
which releases its hormone, blah, blah.
What hormone have we just released?
We've just released a stress hormone.
You've smelled this guy and that smell pathway is wired up to parts
of your limbic system built around anxiety, fear, anger,
which among other things is now turning on the secretion of your stress hormones.
You better bet also through a separate pathway,
it's diverged and is kicking your sympathetic nervous system into gear,
but off you go in that case and you've now secreted a hormone.
And this hormone goes floating around to another part of your body
and binds to a receptor, which causes an intracellular cascade,
which does something or other to a transcription factor and you turn a gene on or off.
Look at this, an odor in your environment has just changed how your genes function.
Some guy's showing up and spraying something or other with his urine
and your genes work differently.
Anybody sitting there saying genes are the be all and end all
and the starting point for deciding how things work,
some guy spritzes some pheromones in your neighborhood and your genes work differently.
We've just seen a very dramatic version of environment regulating genes.
And what we've gotten to here are mechanisms by which there are dramatic changes in DNA over time,
mechanisms by which you can invent entirely new proteins
and most of all seeing that none of this is utterly independently under the control of genes,
instead very dramatically under the control of environment.
And thanks to that you can produce some very dramatic differences here.
Let's see an entirely hypothetical example.
And here we've got a gene which codes for water retention.
There is no such gene, but we can imagine something like that.
It has something to do with some hormone that does something to your kidney and that sort of thing.
Fine.
And sitting in front of it is a promoter and its promoter has a rule.
If and only if I haven't drunk much water recently, turn this gene on and this gene helps you to retain water.
How does that promoter work?
Something about if you're getting desiccated, there's some messenger that's released that binds to a receptor.
We've just seen how we can get from a dry environment to retaining water.
What do you have some nice genetic mechanism for retaining water during the dry season?
Good.
That's great.
That's nice and adaptive.
That's a good thing to do if you live in the desert or if you have seasonal dry seasons.
Now let's take a macro evolutionary event.
You've moved some big old chunk of DNA.
You've changed some splicing enzymes, whatever.
And now suddenly that promoter is sitting upstream, is sitting next to, is controlling a completely novel gene.
And suppose this gene says, time to ovulate.
This gene releases some luteinizing hormone.
What have you just invented an entirely new if then clause?
Our first if then clause, if and only if it's really dry and it's the dry season, tell your kidneys to retain water.
And then suddenly you've got this new weirdo if then clause, if and only if you're desiccated and it's dry season.
Ovulate?
What you've just invented seasonal mating.
In one single tiny mutational event, you've created a new genetic if then clause, a new way of turning the environment into regulating a novel gene.
And maybe that's a good thing to do.
Maybe in your species that's a disaster.
Evolution, natural selection takes over at that point.
The main point being, number one, this is a way in which you can get a very rapid evolutionary change and one that could be enormously important to behavior.
Species, speciate, they turn into two separate species if they start mating at different times.
Inventing things like seasonal mating is a way of moving evolution real fast.
Number two, in order to understand how that occurs, you cannot ignore the environment, environment here regulating genes.
So what you wind up getting in addition to last lecture's picture of slow incremental micro evolutionary changes are a bunch of mechanisms for big fast changes where you can invent a new species in a couple of generations.
And the term given for that by people in the field is something called punctuated equilibrium.
The notion that there are long periods of genetic equilibrium, genetic stasis, and then these periods of punctate changes, big jumping changes.
This was a theory proposed some decades ago by evolutionary biologist Steven J. Gould and Niles Eldridge, and initially a lot of resistance to it.
But then there came all of these molecular mechanisms for something other than these little diddly micro evolutionary changes.
The consensus as long as why can't we all get along and live happily with our differences is probably a mixture of micro evolution and macro evolution going on.
But the main thing here is these are mechanisms for big fast dramatic changes.
So what are the big punch lines here?
Number one, macro evolutionary change, big fast changes.
Evolution is not just about these little things, but instead inventing entirely new proteins.
And some of these new proteins can transform the entire social structure of a species in a generation.
Number two, you can't understand any of this genetic stuff outside of the context of environment regulating genes.
And thus, by definition, if 95% of your DNA does not code for genes and instead is very heavily built around the instruction manual for when to turn those genes on or off,
and if you've got these mechanisms for randomly inducing mutations or transposable events or things like that due to carcinogens,
due to ultraviolet radiation, due to just the typo, as long as you've got 95% of your DNA being related to instructions and random mechanisms for mutation,
there is a staggering implication of this.
Most of evolution is not about the evolution of different types of proteins.
Most of evolution is about changing the regulation of those genes.
In other words, most of evolution is about how genes respond to environment.
And what we were seeing in the subsequent lectures in a completely different bucket, a different field called behavioral genetics,
is very subtle ways in which that nonsense of isn't nature, isn't nurture, isn't genes as an environment is completely gibberish as medieval science.
You cannot remotely understand genes outside the context of the environment which heavily regulates them and out of the context of evolution working on environmental sensitivity of genes,
mostly rather than working on the genes themselves.
So that's what we'll transition to in the next lecture.
