Lecture 16 Behavior Genetics and Prenatal Environment
We are back understanding the biology of human behavior.
So we now know about brains, we know about thinking about the genes that gave rise to
the behaviors that are made by the brains, thinking about genes in the context of evolutionary
theories, evolutionary models, thinking about genes in the context of molecular biology,
what actually is a gene, what actually is a change in the gene over the course of evolution
mutations.
And in the last lecture, shifting to this field of behavior genetics, how do you understand
what genes have to do with behavior in the context of traits that are more or less similar
among individuals who are related in the same environments, in different environments,
and so on.
What we saw in the last lecture was this is potentially an extremely powerful approach,
especially with things like adoption studies, identical twins, separated at birth, all of
that.
But what we also saw were two major confounds.
One running through them was the notion that an environment can be absolutely controlled
in an adult setting, in a childhood setting that you can make for two identical environments,
for twins, for example, that you can have two absolutely non-overlapping environments.
In an adoption study, we see those as confounds.
The other confound is one that's going to dominate today's lecture.
And it's built around another notion throughout behavior genetics, one already alluded to,
but probably most straightforwardly just stated that if you have a behavior and it's demonstrable
before there has been any experience with environment, then you're looking at a behavior
that's genetically influenced.
If there's no environment for it about if these two individuals have the same environment
or different or partially, if there's a behavior that occurs in the absence of environment,
you got nothing to blame it on except genes.
So obviously in this realm, what we're talking about are behaviors that occur very early in
life or behaviors that occur in a very artificial circumstance where some environmental experience
has not occurred.
Okay, so in that approach, behavior genetics has come up with some interesting examples.
In the animal realm, for example, there are these studies where rhesus monkeys have been
raised in social isolation.
And in these studies, this is a monkey, a male rhesus monkey who has never encountered
an adult male rhesus and he's going about growing up and it's a juvenile, you sit him
down one day and you play a movie for him.
And this is a movie of the face of a big, terrifying, dominant looking male rhesus monkey
giving some unmistakable threat yawn displaying his canines, except by all logic, this should
be mistaken because this guy knows nothing about adult male rhesus monkeys.
He's never had a learning experience trial and error that guys like this who you don't
pay attention to trounce you through no experience with an adult male rhesus monkey giving a
threatening gesture yet what you will see in this individual is his expressing a subordinate
gesture.
Aha, without any prior exposure, we're looking at something genetic here.
Okay, another example of that.
You take some laboratory rat and lab rats these days are the descendants of scores and
scores and hundreds of generations of lab rats.
In other words, it has been lots of generations since the ancestor of this rat was out in
the real world dealing with real world scary things.
So you take this rat who knows nothing but the world of a laboratory and expose it to
something that no ancestor has experienced for a gazillion generations, the smell of
a cat.
You take some cat urine and this rodent is going to dislike the smell.
It is going to be averse to it.
It will go out of its way to avoid it.
No learning, no environmental exposure, ooh, better watch out the sort of folks who make
these urine eat me, that sort of stuff, none of that in the slightest.
In this case, again, the argument being with no prior environmental exposure already an
aversion to.
Now there are some examples that are interpreted the same way in humans.
For example, babies who are congenitally blind begin to smile at exactly the same age socially
as do infants who can see without experience that, oh, look how nice people look when they
smile or when that individual smiles, they get treated better or any interpretations
you might give, smiling in the absence of any social experience of seeing smiling.
In the same way congenitally deaf babies begin to babble at the same age as do hearing babies.
Again an argument, no experience with sound there, you see the logic here that runs through
this.
This whole notion that if there is a behavior which is there in the absence of any environmental
exposure, any relevant environmental experience and out pops that behavior, ooh, we're looking
at something genetic here.
Now the entire purpose of this lecture is to get at that assumption.
That assumption of if there is no experience with something after birth, then you could
rule out environment and trance again that is the notion that environment begins at birth.
And what we'll look at in this lecture is that is anything but true.
As we heard at the end of the last lecture, there's this critical point.
If you were a human, you spent nine months sharing a very intimate circulatory environment
with your mother and her environment in some ways translates into your own.
The whole point is where's the fetus getting its nutrition from, its blood from, its sharing,
its circulation with its mother, circulation, blood vessels that are transplantal, that
deliver things like blood obviously, like oxygen, like glucose to the baby and among
other things it can deliver other stuff like hormones.
And suddenly we have a world where whatever hormonal events are going on in the mother's
body can influence the offspring.
Glucose and other nutrients as well, so that an extreme of a nutritional state in the mother
can be translated into a state of change for the fetus as well.
Finally, you can have fetal environmental effects without even relying on the circulation.
An obvious thing, you can hear stuff in utero.
Once the kid has a working auditory system, once the fetus does, and that occurs well
before birth, sounds can be heard.
It turns out that the mother's uterus is an amazing resonating organ that you can hear
a lot of stuff in there and we will see some phenomenal studies showing the consequences
of that.
Okay, so what sort of things are learned in a prenatal environment?
What sort of environmental experiences are there?
Starting with that first example, hormones can get into the fetus.
In the mother's circulation, getting transplantally, some of them don't get in very readily.
There are mechanisms at the placental boundary for keeping some hormones out.
Nonetheless, there's a whole bunch of them who get through.
And what you wind up getting then is how can hormonal events change what's going on with
the fetus?
The first example, you don't even need the hormones from the mother.
All you need are the hormones from your siblings.
And for this, we look at rodents.
Rodents who do not have one kid at a time, but instead give birth to 10, 12 enormously
large litters.
And what you've got is a wiring of the circulatory system where it's essentially in sequence.
Blood from one fetus flows into the next, flows into the next, shared circulation.
And this brings up a really interesting question.
And it is, you're sitting there in the middle of all of your fetal siblings, and you are
whatever gender you are, what's the genders of the siblings on either side of you?
And there's three possible scenarios.
One is the siblings on either side are the same gender as you.
Second one, one is your gender, one is the other one.
Third, they're both different from you.
And it turns out that changes the hormonal environment that you develop in fetally in
terms of how much hormones you are exposed to of the opposite gender.
Because the circulation is running in both directions, and you are getting bathed in
the hormones of your closest siblings.
You're getting bathed in the hormones of the further siblings as well, but the further
off, the less of an influence.
And there's a whole literature by now showing the environment, in other words, the gender
makeup of your immediate surrounding siblings has all sorts of effects on rodents.
For example, female rodents, the genders around them, if they are exposed to a lot of male
sex hormones during development, like if they've got two brothers, one on either side, they
will ovulate at a later age.
And the average female, they will become infertile at an earlier age at the other end of the
life cycle.
They will be slightly masculinized in their play, and the jargon for that is rough and
tumble play, amazingly enough, rats differ by gender a little bit with a large overlap,
a little bit in their style of play, when they are rat puffs, how much they are wailing
off and rolling around with each other, rough and tumble play.
Your fetal hormonal environment can influence that, absolutely remarkable.
Here's an even more amazing example.
And in this case, we're talking about shared environment, not you as a fetus with your
siblings, but now the classic example, you with your mother.
And another case here of prenatal hormone exposure, having long term consequences.
This one, extraordinarily long term.
Okay, here's what we start out with.
We've got a female rat, and she is pregnant.
And because of reasons of bad things happening in the outside world, she is stressed.
And we know thanks to all the neural pathways that are utterly familiar to us by now, her
hypothalamus does something to her pituitary, does something to the adrenal glands and
out come these stress hormones, these glucocorticoids.
Glucocorticoids are really good at getting across the placenta.
So a stressed mother equals a fetus who's exposed to a lot of stress hormones.
So what happens as a result of that?
And one really interesting implication is, the fetus's brain develops more slowly.
What's that about?
What's the logic of that?
When are you usually secreting stress hormones?
If you're a basic run of the mill mammal, it's because it's an emergency.
Somebody's trying to eat you, somebody's trying to predate you, that sort of thing.
You've got better things to do when you're running for your life than worry about growing
new neurons and growing new long bones and doing all this long term planning.
If you're not sure there's a long term, you don't bother with the long term planning.
You turn off all sorts of long term building projects during stress.
These glucocorticoids do that, they inhibit growth.
And if you're a fetus and suddenly you're getting bathed in these stress hormones because
mom is being chronically stressed, it turns out you're born with a smaller brain.
And the parts of your brain, areas of the limbic system that are particularly sensitive
to glucocorticoids and that have lots of glucocorticoid receptors are the ones where these effects
are most dramatic.
Okay, so you've got the kid now who's born with a smaller brain, particularly in some
areas, it turns out one part of the brain, and I'll spare you from its multi-syllabic
name, but one part of the brain that's born smaller on the average has a very interesting
function.
What it does is send messages to the hypothalamus, and what it helps to do is turn off glucocorticoid
secretion at the end of stress.
Hmm, let's go through the steps of that.
Okay, so this area which we can metaphorically think of as the break on the system, the negative
feedback break, this part of the brain which helps to shut off the stress response is smaller
than usual, doesn't work as well.
And as a result, you, with that smaller part of the brain, tend to hyper-secrete the stress
hormone, tend to secrete glucocorticoids more and longer after the end of stress, you've
got elevated levels of these stress hormones.
As somewhere down the line, you become pregnant, and everything else being equal, your fetus
is going to be exposed to somewhat elevated levels of glucocorticoids.
And as a result, it's going to be born with a brain that's a little bit smaller, and in
that area, and less of a capacity to turn off its glucocorticoid secretion, so that
in an adult when she's pregnant, is fetus, and what have we just seen?
We are passing on a trait generation after generation, and we're not talking about genes.
We're talking about non-genetic, non-Mendelian inheritance of traits.
That's the jargon given for it.
What could possibly be the explanation for it?
The fact that environment is shared with your mother, and stress hormones get in then, and
can cause long-lasting effects, long-lasting for your entire lifetime, and subsequent begatting
until the next generations, this ripple of change, which with each generation becomes
less and less, but here's a trait that is passed on because of transplacental experience.
As anything like this seen in humans, at least a couple of pieces of it are seen, and this
is one study showing, for example, lots of maternal stress during the third trimester
of pregnancy, and the babies are born with a smaller head circumference.
And that's one of those markers of poorer neuro and neuromuscular development, and this
is not a good outcome, and this is one where it reflects something about the prenatal environment.
Okay, next example we shift to now rather than hormones, going from mom to the fetus,
what the mother's nutritional world is like, and how it can affect the fetus.
And obviously this is transplacental.
What mom wants to do is deliver nutrients to the fetus, and there are some mechanisms
that preferentially feed the fetus at times, but now we look at what some of the long-term
consequences can be of extremes of prenatal nutritional setting.
What we'll see is this extraordinary example, and what is most striking about this is amid
all these examples where it's been studied in lots of cases with rodents, and here's
some primate examples, and here's a hint of what might be going on in humans.
There is a whopper of a human example of this next phenomenon.
Back in the winter of 1944-45, the Nazis were occupying Holland and beginning to lose the
war they were falling back, and in trouble at that point they were running low on various
resources, having been deprived a lot of the areas they had conquered, and they were running
out of food.
And what the Nazis did that winter was divert all of the food in Holland to themselves, what
is known historically as the Dutch Hunger Winter.
In Holland you went from an area industrialized European country with an extremely good healthy
diet, massive drop over the course of this winter.
And during the Dutch Hunger Winter tens of thousands of people starved to death, extremely
miserable period, no surprise, and when the Nazis were driven out, when Holland was liberated,
diet went back to usual, so this very clear-cut period of massive malnutrition.
So you look at individuals who spent the Dutch Hunger Winters as fetuses, who were in the
bodies of mothers undergoing severe undernutrition.
And it turns out something about the brain and the body of a human fetus, somewhere around
the second, third trimester, is making some very important decisions about life.
Once again, we're personifying here, no fetus is deciding what it thinks about the nutrition
world out there, let alone no fetus is pancreas.
What is happening instead, the term that's given, is you're programming metabolism at
that point.
And in some way, the fetus is sitting there saying, well, what's the world like out there?
Well, what sort of information am I getting?
There's not a whole lot of food out there because there's not a whole lot of nutrients
coming in here.
I know a clever thing to do would be to develop now a really, really thrifty metabolism, a
metabolism that's designed to just store everything away.
You take three drops of glucose and put it in my bloodstream forever after, and I'm going
to be really good at secreting insulin to store it away.
You put a little bit of salt in my diet, and I'm going to be really good.
Don't waste it by spewing it out in the urine.
You get what is now called a thrifty metabolism.
You program that for the rest of your life where you are atypically good at storing only
nutrients and storing retaining salt.
So then you get yourself born, and for the rest of your life, you're dealing with a
perfectly adequate, even plentiful, westernized diet, and what do you wind up seeing?
Individuals who were second or third trimester fetuses during the Dutch hunger winter half
a century later are more at risk for metabolic syndrome, adult onset diabetes, obesity, hypertension.
What we see here is simply showing how this is passed on to the children.
Fetal malnutrition, and as a result, the fetus learns, and there are by now understood
mechanisms by which a malnourished fetal environment makes for physiology, energy storage
that works differently forever after, then have lots of food, adequate food and adulthood,
and you are now prone towards all of these diseases.
Now let's take it one generation further.
Now suppose you are that individual who was a fetus during the Dutch hunger winter, and
30 years later you are pregnant, remember now you have a thrifty metabolism.
For typical amounts of food getting into your body, you are atypically good at storing it.
In other words, for typical amounts of food getting in your body, your fetus is getting
less than typical amounts of nutrients from you, because you are much better at diverting
it to your own storage sites, and thus your fetus is going to be ever so subtly malnourished,
and thus be born with a somewhat thrifty metabolism, and off you go with subsequent generations.
So what we see here is a really shocking multi-generational example of how a non-genetic event, aspects
of prenatal environment can be lifelong, and their consequence is multi-generational, and
have non-trivial impacts on disease risk.
This is not some little statistical hiccup.
You could pick up showing, oh, a little bit of an increased risk of diabetes, and these
are rather big effects.
OK, so if that doesn't have you worried enough now about what your fetal life was like, let's
look at the next example.
That third one that I mentioned, which is separate of placental circulation, sounds can get into
you as a fetus.
And there is an absolutely wild literature showing that fetuses of a number of different
species, including human ones, can learn.
Can learn prenatal learning.
Now this is not fancy stuff.
It's the sort of thing you can show where, for example, the mother, like 14 times a day
during the last trimester, reads the same Dr. Seuss book over and over and over, and
then you ask the newborn, can it distinguish between the sounds of the Dr. Seuss book and
Good Night Moon?
Some such thing.
If you ask this of a weak old child, you let them sit there, and if they hear something
novel, if they hear something new, their breathing rate increases, their heart rate increases.
You can tell if something sounds novel, and what you show there is kids who are exposed
to this, back when they were third trimester fetuses, see the, hear the, sound of the Dr.
Seuss book as being less novel than hearing Good Night Moon.
You can detect the difference.
You can even do the control.
They are obviously not hearing the words, understanding the words.
It's the meter.
It's the rhythm of the sound, and it all has to do with the fact that the mother's voice
resonates in there very well.
Now the critical control, and one is the father, which I find to be tragically irritating,
is that it doesn't work with outside voices.
I'm not quite sure how they did these studies.
If they had the prospective father there with a megaphone on mom's stomach and shouting
Dr. Seuss into their kind of thing, it doesn't work.
It's internal resonating stuff.
Okay, so this is extraordinary.
Two main points here.
Prenatal environment can cause multi-generational inheritance of traits, often with some major
disease implications without talking about genes.
Second, even separate of how many generations after this ripple of an effect is seen, you
have absolutely no basis for thinking environment starts at birth.
In every one of these realms, which may be seem not surprising to us, of course, if there's
stress hormones in mom's bloodstream, it's going to get into you.
In every one of these realms, this was flabbergastingly unexpected.
The notion that Prenatal environment is a rich setting with very, very long-term effects.
Okay, so we've seen a lot of ways here of challenging sort of simplistic notions of
figuring out who is this trait genetic that's obviously a silly simplistic way of saying
who is there even a genetic component to this behavioral trait.
Environment is all over the place.
Now the final thing we have to do in this lecture is look at one feature of how people
talk about genetic influences, how heritable is a trait.
And all of these behavior genetic studies produce some sort of number.
This trait shows 60% genetic heritability.
This one shows 15%, this a number or percentage number.
What does this mean when you talk about how heritable a trait is?
And this is sufficiently awful and complicated of a subject that I will not go on at this
point until you take a break.
You need to eat Oreos or something, sugar into you, because in lots of ways, this is
the most subtle concept of the whole course.
You're back.
Okay, so what do we mean here by heritability?
What is it that everybody thinks, okay, some trait, introversion, extroversion, IQ performance,
something like that, we are told there's 60% heritability.
How do we interpret that?
What that means to us is 60% of what goes on is determined by genes.
We already know how ridiculous that is.
Genes don't determine anything.
Genes are regulated by environment.
You can't separate environmental versus genetic influences.
That sort of stuff.
But even the notion of 60% telling us how much of a trait is influenced by genes, it turns
out that's wrong.
That's not what a heritability number means.
The number, how heritable something is, doesn't tell you how much the average of this trait
is influenced by genes.
It tells you how much the variability of this trait.
Okay, hopefully you are still subsisting on those Oreos.
This is an incredibly subtle concept that is pervasively misunderstood.
And what we need to look at here is a more accessible example of this.
Okay, on this chart, we see some trait.
Some trait in some organism you're studying.
And there's three individuals there who are genetically identical except for gene A.
And gene A comes in three different flavors, A1, A2, A3.
And what you do is you measure something or other how tall these individuals grow.
And what you see is everybody with version A1 grows to this height, everybody with A2,
this small height, everybody with A2, a little bit taller, everybody with A3, a little bit
taller than that.
In this setting, all you need to do is know which version of gene A somebody has, and
you can completely predict who's going to be tall, who's going to be short, and who's
going to be in the middle.
Whoa, major genetic determinacy.
In other words, all of the variation in this population and height could be explained by
genes, 100% heritability.
Let's look about how this would work in a slightly different context.
Suppose this is a trait having to do with plant height or something.
And what you've got now on the bottom of this chart is showing the effects of A1, A2,
A3 on growth when you're growing these plants in the desert.
And then we see the effects of those three different genetic versions when you're growing
that plant in the rainforest.
And what we see here are dramatic differences in the average level of growth between the
desert and the rainforest.
In other words, if all you do is look at these three plants, or if all you do is look at
them in a rainforest, genetics, the knowledge of which version of gene A somebody has, gives
you like 100% predictability as to how tall that plant is going to be.
But once you put them in two different environments, what you see are dramatic differences in
the averages.
In other words, combining those two environments, how much predictability do you get about how
tall a plant will be knowing one fact and one fact only?
Does the individual have A1, A2, A3, incredibly small?
If you could only know one fact, do they have A1, A2, or A3, or are they growing in a desert
or rainforest, you get far more predictive power knowing the environmental fact than
the genetic fact.
That's what you wind up seeing with lots and lots of genes out there.
Let me give you one example that we are going to come back to in the aggression lectures.
Okay, there are some genetic features that have something to do with at what point in
the lifetime testosterone levels are highest in males.
And as we will see, there are things that testosterone has to do with aggression, not
quite the things that most people assume, but there's some component of that.
When you look at sort of westernized humans and you ask when does aggression acts become
most common, when are they most common as a function of lifetime, and in males rises
right up through adolescence, peaks around age 20 or so, and declines after that.
Whoa, just knowing about the genetics of when testosterone levels are highest gives you
a lot of predictability.
Are most of the violent crimes in this country going to be committed by 20-year-old males
or 80-year-old males?
Well, we know something biological, but then you look more closely at the data and you
look at this curve for Detroit versus Toronto versus London, and even though in all three
cases there's a peak around age 20, there's tenfold differences, increases as you go from
London to Toronto to Detroit.
In other words, if you could know only one fact, is this person a male around the point
of life where, thanks to genetic influences, testosterone levels are highest, or do you
want to know the fact of which city this individual was growing up in, you get vastly more predictive
power knowing about the environment.
So why is it that we inadvertently come away with the belief that heritability numbers
tell us, reveal just how much genes influence behavior, because scientists try to do careful
controlled studies, let's just study this trait of this plant in the desert, and meanwhile
there's the folks just studying it in the rainforest, and if you artificially rule out
environmental influences, you've guaranteed you're going to underestimate the importance
of the environment, and sometimes it could take an even more subtle form.
And we see this in this diagram.
Here we've got the same scene again, the desert, A1, A2, A3, A1, 2, 3, getting a higher plant.
Now suppose what this is about is, if you have A3, you generate some plant protein which
has something to do with water retention in the desert, I have no idea how plants work,
so I'm just guessing here, and it's in fact appalling, I even talk about plant biology,
but there must be some means by which they retain water, and that must be a good thing
in the desert, and there's no such thing as a free lunch, so the plant has to be expending
energy to do this.
So in a desert setting, having the version of the gene A, having A3, which thanks to
expending energy, allows you to retain water, no wonder you're the tallest plant, great
genetic trait to have.
Meanwhile, those same plants in the rainforest, not only is there going to be a vastly average
difference in height, back to our lesson, the environment is more predictive than the
genes, but in this case, having that same version of gene A is the worst thing to have, because
you're now expending energy on a means to retain water, where retaining water is not
a limiting factor, and what you wind up seeing as a very dramatic example here is, not only
is environment highly predictive of various traits, more predictive in lots of cases than
knowing the genetic profile, but in different environments, genes will work in different
ways.
Yes, we are back to that time-honored, weary, some cliche, it's not genes, it's not environment,
it's the interaction of the two.
Moving from plants to us now, as a final example, we look at an extraordinary recent study,
a bunch of humans, humans growing up from like age three up to around age 25 or so,
and looking at a certain gene related to serotonin, back to our neurotransmitters, and if you
have a certain genetic variance of this gene, it's got something to do with your risk of
depression.
Hmm, does having a certain variant of that gene significantly increase your risk of depression?
No, it increases your risk of depression if and only if you were raised in a stressful
environment, and you can't ask for a more dramatic example of gene-environment interactions.
Okay, so what have we learned here?
We see what the word heritable really means, and we see how easily you underestimate the
environmental component.
You see how hard it is to talk about genetic influences in the absence of environmental
influences, because environment is in some very unlikely places, and finally, you see
even when you factored that in, how artificial it is to talk about the genetics of something
versus the environment, utterly interacting.
What we do in our next lectures now are look at these issues of behavior, often the genetics
of trying to understand environment, the natural environment, the natural setting in which behaviors
occur.
