Here we are again, navigating our last novel bucket, inappropriate of a metaphor though
that may be. What we've been doing is first looking at how the brain produces behavior
and then looking at how a whole bunch of other disciplines would study how their discipline
in turn regulates the brain. Looking at the whole issue of the evolution of behavior from
the standpoint of theoretical models of evolution, looking at the molecular biology of the genes
that influence the brain basis of behavior. In the last lectures looking at the behavioral
genetics approach to understanding, what we'll be doing in the next two lectures now
is trying to remedy something that's run through a lot of these previous lectures. Okay, what
have we been studying? We've been studying humans in some cases, but a lot of times you're
obligatory, ever reliable lab rat, and what these two lectures are premised on is a lot
of studies trying to understand behavior, the biology behavior, using your good old
lab rats, you're not looking at normal behavior. An animal in captivity is not behaving normally.
And what this last field, this last bucket we'll be examining, the field of ethology,
is premised on is the notion that if you really understand behavior, you're going to have
to understand it and study it in the context of an animal's natural setting. Now who cares
about this? Why is this relevant? We already have a hint about this back to the limbic
system. And just as one example, back to when the limbic system was not yet the limbic
system, when we're still the Rhine and Cephalon. Rhine and Cephalon, what's the deal? Why should
this part of the brain be getting so many olfactory inputs? And the aha, it's not until
you know what a rat is up to in its world that you realize sight and sound and touch
is not as remotely as important as smell. And then as we also heard, meanwhile, if you
want to understand a lot of the sensory information getting into the limbic system of an electric
fish, forget smell, you're going to have to understand that what that animal cares about
more than anything is electric messages. And suddenly even to understand what sort of sensory
systems are sending their projections most dominantly into the limbic system, you have
to understand something about what that species is about, the natural setting of that species.
Back to again, the limbic system stimulates, as we heard, the mammillary bodies. And in
one species, the rodent, the female goes and shreds the newspaper and makes a nest out
of it. Meanwhile, the female primate, stimulated in the same area, attempts to suckle something.
And what we have again is utterly irrational behavior, unless you happen to know a lot
about what that particular species is up to. And the central premise of all the mythology
is two ideas. The first is the notion that every species has come up with a completely
unique sense of behavioral solutions, a unique set of these designed to deal with what the
environment has uniquely challenged them with, what the environment over the course of evolution
has uniquely challenged them with. Every species is unique in its behaviors on a certain level.
The second is the notion that if you're going to understand that uniqueness and what the
behavior is about, you've got to think about the animal in its natural setting, the classic
quote as to what ethology is about is, ethology is the process of interviewing an animal,
but in its own language. And you're not going to understand what it's up to unless you are
making the effort to understand what this language is about. Now, the history of ethology
is interesting because it rose up in the mid-20th century and it rose up definitely as a counterbalance
to another very strong trend in thinking about behavior. Okay, 19th century psychology was
mostly about philosophizing about abstract states of behavior and instincts and stuff
like that. And early in the 20th century, there grew up this school of psychology in
the United States, which was in stark contrast, in fact, reflexively sort of flinching away
from earlier psychological views. This became the dominant school of psychology in the United
States throughout the last century, and this was the field of behaviorism. And behaviorism
is personified by, not the person who founded it, that was John Watson, our guy from the
very first lecture, and his quote about, give me any child and I can control the environment
and I can turn the kid into anything I want, but by the most famous adherent to behaviorism,
B.F. Skinner. Probably the most famous psychologist of the last century, B.F. Skinner dominating
the field and somehow in a way that I recognized as completely subjectively unscientific, this
guy just typified the field. Somehow all these behaviorists were these guys and these white
lab coats and they always had these shiny foreheads with these receding hairlines and
somehow the pictures were always taken of them from sort of the rat's perspective. So
you saw this big shiny forehead face sort of looming over you, the poor rat. And all
of behaviorism was, you can tell what I think of the behaviorists, and all of behaviorism
was premised on the notion that all you need to do to understand behavior is very simple
principles, things you get rewarded for, you're more likely to do, things you get punished
for, you're less likely to do, a world of positive reinforcement, a failure of getting
the positive reinforcement, reward punishment, just control the rewards and punishments of
an organism and a la John Watson, I can turn anything into anything I want, doctor, lawyer,
beggar, thief, you can control the environment of reinforcement, you can control who the
individual is going to turn out to be. And Skinner would make these famous sort of inflammatory
quotes to the effects of boy, pigeon, rat, monkey, doesn't matter, just let me study
whichever one is easiest and the rules that I derive of how behavior is shaped by reward
and punishment, the rules are going to apply to all of them. And they're interchangeable,
these are universal rules of behavior. And it was a very teutonic sort of approach to
thinking about behavior in terms of just a couple of rules that explains everything and
equally well for rat, boy, pigeon, monkey, this is how behavior works. Okay, meanwhile
over in Europe, sort of in the backwoods there, literally and figuratively, was emerging
ethology. And ethology came out of a very different tradition. In effect, it was much
more related to those 19th century Parsons who would go tromping around the English countryside
with their butterfly nets and collecting butterflies and wanting to get one of each kind and then
mount them and just reveling in variability and just thinking variability was the greatest
look at this species, a slightly different dot pattern than in that species variability
was everything they were about. Emotionally, stylistically, aesthetically, completely different
from a world of I am going to figure out the two rules that explains all the behavior,
what the ethologists were, were like the Parsons stomping around out in the wild. And instead
of with a butterfly net collecting butterflies because of the variance of their wing patterns,
they were out collecting behaviors, wanting to understand the range of variability and
the behaviors of animals out in their natural setting. And this was as different of an orientation
as you could get. Instead of looking for single unifying rules, just looking at the sheer
variance and with the guiding principle, you're not going to pick up that variance unless you're
studying an animal in its natural setting and unless you are making the effort to talk to
it in its language. And that quote, the notion of ethologies interviewing an animal in its
own language came from one of the founders of ethology and there were three men, central
Europeans who did it. This was a man, Nico Tinbergen, who was a wondrous scientist and
by all reports a wondrous human as well. And Tinbergen, one of the founders of ethology,
one of the three, Tinbergen along with the other two started this whole field. The other,
a scientist named Von Frisch and the third one, our friend from the first lecture, Conrad
Lorenz, noted ethologist, Trubic, bird leader and neo-nazi war criminal, not neo-nazi, Nazi
war criminal. As you can see, I'm very thrilled about Lorenz and perseverate on this guy. Tinbergen
in contrast is one of the founders, was a wondrously good guy and among other things
was the first in the scientific community to vocally forgive Lorenz for his crimes, but
I digress. Okay, so these three guys founded ethology throughout the 1930s, tromping around
the woods of Europe and collecting behaviors, a variety of behaviors. And out of this came
this field of ethology and to many people's surprise, ultimately came Nobel prizes for
these three guys as the founders of the field. And what they had were very different questions
than the sort of behaviorist approach of what are the fewest rules that will explain a boy,
a dog, a pigeon, et cetera, in this case looking at variability. And the sort of approach they
would take would be to ask, what are the factors that have given rise to the unique
behavioral profile of the species? And now instead of asking in the context of evolution
and selection for this degree of sociality and the size of canines and all that sort
of stuff, asking in a very different way. First question that they would ask in their
realm is one that seems mindlessly straightforward, but is anything but what's the actual behavior?
What's the behavior that's going on? And they used the term for the sort of behavior
they talked about and there was a little bit of jargon in the ethology field. They called
a behavior, a particular small behavior, a fixed action pattern. And we'll come back
to that term where they got this jargon from, but a fixed action pattern, a very particular
sort of piece of behavior. And where the ethological challenge came from was recognizing often
you would not know what the behavior was until you could recognize that this species could
vocalize in the ultrasonic range of sound, something humans couldn't hear, or that this
species had some whole sensory modality you'd never heard of. All this business of it takes
a lot of work and a lot of trying to understand a language of another species to begin to
understand what exactly is the behavior just observed, not trivial. The next question they
would ask was a classic Darwinian question, except we will see they asked it and answered
it in very different ways than some of the other folks we've heard about. What's the
adaptive value of this behavior? And this is straight into the realm of does this have
something to do with passing on more copies of your genes? You will see that the ethologists
try to answer this in very different ways than lots of the other folks out there, the
scientists we previously heard about. Now the third question they would ask is straight
out of that chart of ours that's dominated this course, you remember the far right of
the chart out comes the behavior, ethological terms, out comes the fixed action pattern,
and what we know is just before that is the nervous system that produced the behavior,
and just before that the framework we've been using is to ask what in the environment just
triggered that nervous system to produce the behavior? And that last box is one the ethologists
focused on a lot when they would say, okay, out has come this behavior, this fixed action
pattern with this adaptive value, whatever it is, to now ask what was the stimulus in
the environment that triggered that behavior? What was the sound, the smell, the sight, whatever,
what was the stimulus that was the jargon that they used, the releasing stimulus for
that fixed action pattern? The last question they would ask and sort of their initial sort
of approach to something is another box in there, another of our buckets, okay, concentrating
on the right side of that chart, you've got your releasing stimulus, which triggers the
nervous system to produce that behavior, a fixed action pattern. And ethologists, even
back when they were tromping around out in the fields, and all of the ethologists were
these guys who just were hiking boots all the time and none of them had shiny far heads
and they were all great guys except for that Lorenz guy, but the rest of them were swell,
and tromping around out there and even then when they were mostly just sitting out in
the field with some bugs biting their calves while they're trying to study their birds
or whatever, even then they were thinking about the nervous system because they understood
in between that releasing stimulus and the behavior popping out the other end, there
was this nervous system that had to explain everything that went on there, the jargon
they used was what was the innate releasing mechanism, I don't know why they couldn't
just say what was the brain having to do with this, but essentially what they were
asking there is how did that releasing stimulus get turned into the behavior off the other
end and that's our first half dozen lectures or so. So those would be the big four questions
they would ask, what's the behavior expressed in the most objective possible terms, what's
the behavior good for, what in the environment triggered that behavior and how did the brain
turn that trigger into the behavior at the other end? Fixed action patterns, adaptive
values, releasing stimulus and the innate releasing mechanism. The last thing they would
pay attention to superficially looked just like the behaviorists but was a world of difference
which is what does learning have to do with any of this? Okay, learning and behaviorism,
you learn to do things you get rewarded for and you learn not to do things you get punished
for or that you fail to get rewarded for and those are all the rules you need and then
you're just hanging out with Watson and Skinner and that explains the entire world. When behaviorists
talked about learning it was to bring it down to these few simple rules. When ethologists
thought about learning it was in all sorts of different settings and mostly what they
showed what we'll look at are all sorts of examples of learning in animals including
we human animals where it utterly violates the laws of behaviorism. And just as as long
as you function with the entire world is explained by you behave with the good of the
species in a Marlon Perkins view and you can't begin to explain infanticide for example.
If you dwell entirely in a bucket of behaviorism and reward and punishment explains everything
you can't begin to understand some of the things the ethologists point out. One example,
nothing in the world of reward and punishment will begin to explain why so many of us love
people who treat us poorly and why so often we love them even more so for that and that's
a whole realm of explaining child abuse and child abuse making you if anything often more
attached explaining why something which to a behaviorist makes no sense at all makes
a whole lot of sense to an ethologist. Okay, so these were the sort of approaches they
would take. So let's look at them in more detail. Fixed action pattern, what is this
behavior stuff about? What's this jargon? One ethologist would use that term at first
you would think they're talking about instincts. Instincts, 19th century psychologists talking
about instincts but in a very different way in a much more scientific way. And when you
look at sort of this old school of talking about instincts, instincts covered a huge
array of utterly undefined heterogeneous things. You can have an instinct for an aggression
or you can have an instinct for maternalism or an instinct for xenophobia or an instinct
for tap dancing or an instinct for and this tells us nothing scientifically. What the
ethologist tried to do was tame this notion of instinct and put it into a much more manageable
package and in their notion what a fixed action pattern is about is a behavior not
all of aggression which encompasses anything ranging from nuclear weapons to what you do
with your rook and your chess game. What they were focusing on instead were fairly sort
of atoms, components, building blocks of behavior, a small manageable piece of something, a facial
expression, a threatening gesture on the part of a rhesus monkey. Something that involves
a bunch of muscles not just one hit the leg and out goes your leg not just a reflex but
something social, something behavioral in that context but there was nevertheless a
manageable piece of the behavior. The next thing that was critical was them showing that
this behavior this fixed action pattern emerged in a pretty intact state with a minimum of
learning and here we're treading on the ice from the last lectures ooh learning can occur
in a fetus that sort of stuff but the main thing is that they were not dogmatic about
it but nonetheless the behavior was pretty much intact the first time it was done. The
critical thing, the thing that separated them from a lot of these other folks we've been
hearing about was the next observation even though the behavior this fixed action pattern
was pretty much intact the first time it was done experience which shaped it further.
Experience in the form of learning to do it better and even more importantly experience
teaching you when to do it, the appropriate social context. So let's look at some examples
of what would have been fixed action patterns for a vethologist. A classic one you take
squirrels and you raise a squirrel in a lab where every day you feed it on its lab chow
or whatever it is you feed squirrels there and you expose it for the very first time
to a nut and it turns out that cracking a nut open is somewhat of a fixed action pattern
for a squirrel. You take one with no prior experience and you give it a nut and it already
has some means to break it open. It is not doing it by very slow trial or it doesn't
sit there and have to watch an adult doing it 400 times. Squirrels seem to have as some
sort of fixed action pattern the ability to crack open a nut. Not terribly exciting but
nonetheless sort of an impressive demonstration a squirrel raised in isolation from nuts can
kind of do it the first time out. So where does the learning come from? Where does the
environmental experience? What you see is even though a squirrel can kind of do it the
first time as it gets more exposure to it more experience it gets better at it. It gets
faster it gets a greater percentage of the food inside that sort of thing. A behavior
and opening up a nut is much more complex than just a knee reflex. Opening up a nut
is a much more manageable behavior than aggression or xenophobia. It's a fairly concrete sort
of parametized demarcated behavior which is pretty much intact the first time there yet
improves with experience. So both a hard wired and innate if you want an instinctual component
but one that is still very much subject to environment. Okay what would be another example?
We heard one already back in the previous lecture you take that rhesus monkey raised in social
isolation show it the face of a scary rhesus carrying out a fixed action pattern a threatening
display displaying its canines and this monkey already has as a fixed action pattern somewhat
of the ability to give a subordinate gesture. So where does the experience come in here
learning socially who you give that gesture to who you're supposed to do it to you don't
cringe in terror the first time some infant displays it's not even grown in yet canines
to you you learn the appropriate social context for that fixed action pattern. It is not just
some blind reflexive thing that pops out display some canines that some animal and outcomes
its subordinate gesture it learns the appropriate context for its fixed action pattern. Now
here's an example that shows that non-human primates even understand the principles of
ethology. There's a monkey in East Africa called a vervet monkey and there's a couple
of things that are very bad for vervet like snakes or these big raptor eagle birds that
snatch them up and eat them and generally if you were a vervet those are the things that
terrify you and they're very different in an important way by definition if you're scared
of a snake get off the ground and get up into a tree and by definition if you're scared
of an eagle that's swooping down at you get out of that tree and get down to the ground
two very different things and as something that is just fascinated people who study animal
communication vervet monkeys communicate not merely about pure emotion help watch out they
can communicate two different words and word is probably not a sort of an anthropomorphism
at this case they've got one vocalization for get up the tree something scary on the
ground and they've got another vocalization for ooh something up there quick get down.
So these are fixed action patterns in that young vervet can give those vocalizations
fairly readily except there's a problem which is these are fixed action patterns rather
than instincts and suddenly you realize your adult vervet monkey understands the principles
of ethology they understand these dumb kids may not know what they're talking about and
you get some young kid who gives an alarm call and the last thing you want is some kid who
got confused saying help it's a snake or eagle or no no it's a snake or not a good thing
if you go in the wrong direction when kids give off these alarm calls nobody responds
until some adult comes in and gives it as well because they know these kids don't know what
they're doing yet they know these kids are still having their fixed action pattern shaped
by experience.
So that's great what about some human examples of fixed action patterns a few really fascinating
ones one of them is humans smile they smile the very early ages there's evidence that
humans smile in utero as fetuses that's what those things are called we talked about them
a lot in the last lecture humans smile very early on as a fixed action pattern why is
it a fixed action pattern there's some remarkably fancy things you're doing with your facial
muscles stuff like that and it's there it's a fixed action pattern what is it we learn
to do as humans which is to activate that fixed action pattern of smiling only in certain
circumstances as you begin to learn social smiling you begin to smile at individuals
who are smiling at you or making big exaggerated fun faces or you go through a stage where
kids have not yet mastered the fixed action pattern and they go and smile at mannequins
and store windows and seem rather perturbed when the mannequins don't smile they're beginning
to learn what's the appropriate context for doing that and there we have a very innate
set of motor movements with your facial muscles and then a lot of learning as to when you
activate that fixed action pattern another great example of this in humans and you look
at musicians and a subset of them who other musicians always and they have perfect pitch
they can hear a note absolutely perfectly outside of context they know this is always
an A flat and they can hear it perfectly and oh everybody used to think this was a genetic
trait this was a hard wire trait and it turns out there is a big genetic component to perfect
pitch however unless you get music training before the first dozen years of life has gone
by even if you have perfect pitch you are not going to be able to have it work for you
perfect pitch needs to also meet a music environment early in life to work this is another one
of those where we have a set of behaviors that appear to be fairly hard wired nonetheless
they need a certain type of experience so this is how ethologists would think about the behavior
itself and you can see nothing about this is this dogmatic behavior set in stone instead
very shaped by environment now on to the second question they would ask what's the adaptive
value of a behavior and we know exactly how some of the evolutionary biologists would
think about it okay if this behavior increases the number of copies of your genes you pass
on this is an adaptive trait and if you're a male and you're mating with a female you're
never going to see again it's an adaptive thing adaptive is used in a very inductive
sort of theoretical way that's not what the ethologists did they would go out and they
would just do an experiment to show whether the thing made the animal pass on more copies
of their genes and Tim Bergen did this one classic example there's a bunch of gulls bird
species where their egg has some speckled pattern on it and the eggs would hatch and
no the chicks would hatch the eggs would break and the eggs would break into these little
pieces and the outside had the speckled pattern and the inside was pure white and the gulls
would very then carefully go about this fixed action pattern of turning all the pieces of
eggshells over so that the speckled pattern was facing up hmm what's that about that could
produce 14 different doctoral dissertations by evolutionary biologists coming up here's
what Tim Bergen did he goes and he takes some gulls who's just who's just had chicks and
the eggshells are all around and they've turned them over to the speckled patterns is up and
then Tim Bergen shimmies over there in the grass when the gull isn't looking and turns
all the eggshell fragments the other way so that the white is sticking up and what do
you know what's the adaptive value of doing this there's some predator bird flying around
the air and pure white shells are just some signals saying I've got chicks down here that
are perfect for eating you get rid of that conspicuous signal major adaptive value another
example of this and these were the classic studies that Von Frisch became famous for
showing what bees are doing with each other when they're trying to communicate when there's
a food source the famed legendary bee dance where a bee goes and finds some food source
and it comes back to the hive and it does this very complex dance which turns out to
have three bits of information how far away the food is how much there is and what direction
it is okay you could come up with theoretical models how did Von Frisch show this is what
it was like he did an actual experiment and a version of it along the lines of showing
how bees know what direction it is and in this case he had a beehive on something like
a swivel piano stool chair thingy and he takes some bee and takes it out into a field
and exposes it to some great food source some great pollen or whatever it is that bees eat
and I showing here I know is a little about bees as I do about plants but in this case
the bee then discovers this great source comes flying back to the hive and is in there telling
everybody you go this far in this direction and meanwhile there's Von Frisch crawling
along the grass and reaching up and rotating the hive and is shown in this diagram here
you've got the bee in this direction finding the food source flying back to the hive and
while it's dancing its head off there the hive is being rotated and the bees all fly
out in the right direction in the right distance but in the wrong direction the wrong direction
corresponding to how many degrees of movement there was to the hive the bee is communicating
information and that's pretty adaptive this behavior is wildly adaptive it tells you where
you're supposed to go for your buddies in your hive to find the food brilliant elegant
experiments like these showing there is a reason why the gulls turn the speckled part
up and there's a reason why the bee is actually doing this dance it's passing on very useful
information another version of how a study like this would be done getting at the adaptive
value of the behavior of an animal and here you see this in a semi-naturalistic setting
you take some creature like a lizard everybody knows lizards are cold-blooded in other words
if a lizard is going to regulate its body temperature it doesn't do it through the internal
mechanisms that we smug mammals can do what it has to do instead is it moves to a different
environment where it's warmer it's colder that sort of thing so in this one classic
study someone had this huge long lizard terrarium where it was this gradation of it was like 90
degrees at this end and it was like 105 degrees at that end and every couple of feet a drop the
degree and put some lizards in there and the lizards happily sat down right where it was 98.6
and then you give the lizard a nose cold I have no idea how you do this but these poor lizards
is shown in the second part of the diagram we're sneezing their heads off and the lizard has a
nose cold and what does it do it picks up and it moves itself over in this direction so it's
now sitting in a place where it will run a temperature its body temperature comes up to 103
degrees geez you ask I wonder why that lizard is doing that what's the adaptive value of it
crossing the terrarium and warming its body temperature when it has a cold okay you're
some evolutionary biologist and you can come up with some fancy speculations about lizards you
can't regulate their temperature leave fewer copies of their genes blah blah where you could
just do an ethologist sort of experiment you put up a barrier you keep the lizards for moving
from 98.6 up to 103 and you get your answer the adaptation is your immune system doesn't work as
well if you can't raise your body temperature more the lizards die so we begin to get a sense here
of how the ethologist approached this whole study and the whole you know discipline requires you to
think about an animal in its world not in your own an animal speaking its own language so what we've
seen now is something about how they think about the behaviors of animals the fixed action patterns
something about how they think about the adaptive value of them what we now need to do in the next
lecture is go to the next step how do they think about what in the environment stimulates triggers
those behaviors what sensory information causes the brain to produce those fixed action patterns so
that will be the subject of the next lecture
