Lecture 20, The Neurobiology of Aggression, Part 2
Welcome back, continuing with our attempt at an integration of everything that's gone
on before in this course, all of our different disciplinary approaches, applying them now
to understanding, trying to understand the biology of violence.
What we did in the last lecture was, after looking at the remarkable heterogeneity of
what counts as a violent act, a violent thought, looking at the ways in which we're just like
every other animal out there, and our ways of violence, ways in which we are unlike any
other animal out there, and then beginning our first step to the left in our inevitable
chart, trying to understand the neurobiology of violence.
And no surprise, where we centered ourselves in was the limbic system, and in particular,
the amygdala.
The amygdala, its role helping to mediate violence, as we saw the role of the septum
in doing just the opposite, and as we saw at the end, aspects of the brain involved in
arousing the sympathetic nervous system being turned on during aggression, but being turned
on during many other states of arousal, and seeing this critical truism, love and hate
neurobiologically are remarkably similar.
Now what we pick up with in this lecture is a notion that ran through the whole sections
on the limbic system, the limbic system sitting there, and in that sort of schematosized version
of the brain, floating above it the cortex.
And that point back in those lectures, the cortex, the human cortex especially, has
means to regulate, sends projections, sends axons into the limbic system like crazy.
And the particular area of the cortex that is most interesting is the frontal cortex.
You will recall back from the introduction to the limbic system that once heretical view
that the frontal cortex in fact should be thought of as part of the limbic system, crazy.
What is clear now is the frontal cortex is absolutely central to understanding limbic
function as we will see.
It is absolutely critical to understanding aggression, the neurobiology of it.
Critical role for the frontal cortex, sufficiently so that I've spent the last 25 years studying
the hippocampus.
I start and end each day thinking about the hippocampus, and it occurs to me I've been
studying the wrong part of the brain all these years.
The frontal cortex is fascinating.
Now if you want to understand what the frontal cortex does in a single phrase, in a single
concept, the frontal cortex makes you do the harder thing.
If you're in a circumstance where there's the temptation of an easy out, and then there's
the hold on, don't do it, don't do it, you'll regret it in the long run, the harder thing,
it's the frontal cortex that's critical to doing that.
You want an incredibly outdated concept from psychoanalysis, the frontal cortex is your
super ego, the frontal cortex is the part of your brain that prevents you from telling
the host just how awful you thought the meal was virtually inedible.
I loved it.
I need the recipe.
The frontal cortex makes you do the harder thing, and it does this in lots of different
realms.
It does this in the realm of cognition, of just thinking with pure abstract sort of thoughts,
a different realm than aggression right now, of just how to do the harder thing and keeping
straight of facts.
The frontal cortex is playing this role in what's called working memory.
Not a memory of what happened in your childhood, not a memory of what today is, but you've
just gotten a whole bunch of facts in the last 30 seconds, and you need to keep them
going, not only the facts, but what you're supposed to do with the facts, what's called
an executive function of strategically what you're doing with them, the frontal cortex
juggling that stuff.
When a frontal cortex is not working properly, you see a failure of this.
You could see this in a number of different realms, sorts of tests.
The classic one where you show somebody having a problem with reversing a task, a task that's
referred to as overlearned, and you might see something like this with people who often
have damage in their frontal cortex, early stage Alzheimer's patients.
You give them a following task.
You say, okay, tell me the months of the year, start with December.
Tell me the months of the year going backwards.
And the person will sit there and say, okay, December, November, October, September, October,
November, December.
It's as if they've slipped on the ice and gone in the wrong direction.
What is the easier thing?
What is the thing you've been doing since you were about five years old, counting the
months of the year in one direction, September, October, November, December?
What's doing the harder thing, doing it backwards where you need this working memory, okay, we're
at October.
What comes next November?
Don't do it.
Don't do it.
You remember the rule that we have right now.
Go in the opposite direction.
And what you wind up seeing when given a bit of visual information and there's some sort
of task you need to do throughout these examples, what you see is you get a signal, a light
going on saying, okay, we're starting the session where every time this type of light
blinks now, you do this and that type of light, you do that.
What you see is each time one of those examples comes up, your visual cortex gets a little
blip of activity there, but what you see instead in the frontal cortex is the second
you get the signal, here we are doing this task, it turns on and stays on.
And in this case, the visual cortex is responding to a single example.
The job of the frontal cortex is to remember the rule.
Throughout, it's the frontal cortex that makes you do the harder thing.
And what it does in that realm still looking at these cognitive examples is it gets you
to focus in on what the task is right now.
And often what you would then see with somebody with this early stage dementia is after they've
said in the months and ultimately gone in the wrong direction, you say, okay, okay,
that's great.
Now what I want you to do is start with the number 20 and count backward.
And they would say, okay, 20, 19, 18, 17, September, October, November, December.
And this is termed perseveration and intrusion.
The previous task has come in.
By now the easier thing is to just switch back to what you were doing instead of this
working memory demand, do the harder thing, no, we're doing something new, remember we're
doing something new.
The frontal cortex is playing this role in cognitively doing the harder thing.
More and more interesting to us is the role of the frontal cortex in the realm of emotion
and emotionally related behavior of doing the harder thing when the temptation is to
do the easier.
And the first example of this is one of the most famous of all patients and all of medicine,
famous individual, a man named Phineas Gage, about whom there's been books written.
Phineas Gage, a railroad worker in Vermont in the 1840s, a sobriotous, reliable man who
was a foreman there, and one day some horrible accident, dynamite blowing up, and a long
metal rod blew out Phineas Gage's frontal cortex in one side out the other, remarkably
enough, knocked him on his rear, and he got up and dusted himself off and was partially
able to walk over towards the doctor a mile away, who, using current techniques in 1840s,
looked in the empty space there and said, oh my, no frontal cortex, and no work conditions
being what they were then, the guy in charge saying, tell you what, Gage, take the rest
of the day off, and Gage comes back to work and not only figuratively but literally being
transformed overnight, this sobriotous man never able to work again, becoming this profane,
disinhibited, sexually aggressive, socially inappropriate man who died 10 years later
or so penniless, never able to stably work again, all of those, as the doctor at the
time termed it, all of those animal excesses released by damage to the frontal cortex,
and in lots of ways, that is as good as any modern interpretation of what this part of
the brain is about.
You see another type of dementia rather than Alzheimer's, something called frontotemporal
dementia, where damage begins in the frontal cortex, and very often this starts off not
as a disease of memory, but as a disease of inappropriately disinhibited behaviors, and
it is often used as a psychiatric disorder initially, it's the frontal cortex that's
being damaged, people saying things, doing things that the rest of us may think about
on a constant basis, petulant, lustful, angry, childish thoughts where we would die if anybody
knew we were thinking that, and in this case, as you get damaged there, you do those things.
Stroke damage in older individuals, when it occurs there, the same sort of consequences,
and very interestingly you then begin to ask, when else is the frontal cortex impaired?
And it becomes impaired at a very interesting time in every single one of us on a daily basis
when we're asleep at night.
Not during most parts of sleep, but during REM sleep, rapid eye movement sleep, when
much of your brain becomes wildly active at that point, there are parts of your sensory
cortex that are more active during REM sleep than when you're even awake, and meanwhile
the frontal cortex is silent, completely offline.
What's that about?
We've just explained why dreams are dream-like.
You don't sit there and dream about balancing your checkbook, you dream about dancing and
musicals and floating in the air and having sex with strangers and who knows what, and
all the things which represent a frontal cortex gone mad and silent, that's why dreams have
dream content, because the frontal cortex isn't doing much at that time.
Conversely, there's a personality profile, something called repressive personality, where
these are individuals very tightly regulated, people who do not like surprises, people who
have very tight control over their emotions, and what you wind up seeing is under resting
circumstances they have very elevated metabolism in their frontal cortex, squeezing their psychic
sphincter shut all the time, very, very tight control.
Now not surprisingly, the frontal cortex thus plays a major role in decision making, deciding
what's the appropriate behavior and getting you to do the harder thing, and we saw an
example of this a few lectures back and putting up a diagram, the same one as before, showing
a case where if you were going to do the harder thing, it takes the frontal cortex kicking
in big time.
That was that scenario where you press a lever once and you get one reward, press a lever
twice and you get three rewards, ooh, be more disciplined, do the harder thing, it will pay
off in the long run, and what you saw was if the cheap, easy payoff comes four years
from now and the harder one comes three and a half years from now, what you wind up seeing
there is you don't need to have your frontal cortex working much to be able to hold on
a little bit longer, and as the tempter, the cheaper one, the easier outcome gets closer
and closer where you can just smell it and in order to hold out and do the harder thing,
you need to activate the frontal cortex more and more to pull off that bit of gratification
postponement.
Now what this should begin to suggest is another realm of individuals who have frontal cortices
that do not work very well, not just when they're in their REM sleep believing they're
dancing away in some busily Berkley musical or some such thing, but individuals whose
behaviors are wildly, inappropriately, destructively disinhibited, violent sociopaths.
And there's a whole literature by now suggesting two very interesting things.
Under normal resting circumstances, the level of metabolic activity in the frontal cortex
is decreased in these individuals.
Compared to control subjects, even compared to violent criminals without sociopathic tendencies,
this is the opposite of repressive personality.
This is the opposite of someone who's sitting there and tightly regulating all their emotions,
and this is instead the sociopathic profile marked, markedly inappropriate disinhibition.
Now what's equally interesting, get some circumstance where the sociopathic individual is trying
to do the harder thing.
Trying to do the harder thing, not in a realm of tempting behaviors and emotions, but just
give them some very straightforward cognitive task that calls for a lot of frontal activity,
that calls for a lot of working memory.
You're trying to remember these digits while they're also asking you to do some other task
and it's taking this concentration to pull off the same level of frontal control of behavior.
They have to activate their frontal cortexes a lot more than other individuals.
And thus you see under normal resting circumstances, the break doesn't work very well and isn't
being pressed on much, and in order to finally get it to work, they need to slam on to increase
frontal activity dramatically.
Now given this profile, it's not surprising that when we look at the frontal cortex, it
is very different in us than in lots of other species.
It's not until primates that you get some big, well-developed frontal cortex, and it's
not until humans that you appear to get the frontal cortex making up a larger percentage
of the brain than in any other species.
It's not by accident that we're the only species that has come up with social security
and retirement funds and studying really hard in college so that you get great grades and
get into a good grad school and get a good job and get into a good nursing home someday.
This is a very human realm of this long-term planning, long-term gratification postponement.
You take some chimpanzee, and even though they are the kings of cognitive control, when
you look at the rest of the animal world, they don't remotely have our ability, and
it is there in the anatomy, a very different profile.
Now another realm in which you don't see the frontal cortex working very well, no surprise
are in kids.
Now one of the great myths out there is not only that the brain doesn't make any new
neurons once you're a couple of years old, but that the brain is completely wired up
and matured at a very early stage, sort of the magic number that was floating around
recently is the first three years, that sort of thing.
The frontal cortex is not fully functional, does not fully insulate all those axons until
you're about a quarter century old, which suddenly explains a whole lot of fraternity
behavior, and adolescent frontal cortex is not fully there yet.
And certainly a kid's, a five-year-old's is not, and you could see this frontality,
this cognitive disinhibition, this behavioral disinhibition in all sorts of realms.
The cognitive one is so easy to see, you're playing hide and seek with your five-year-old
child, and they go and hide, and then you come into the room and you say, here I am,
where are you, and they can't stop themselves from saying, I'm under the piano, boom, they've
ruined the whole game there, or they're playing the other role, where they're the one who's
now searching, and they're counting up to 10 before they come and look.
And the frontality can't be overcome, this frontal disinhibitory pole that they've recently
mastered up to the number 35, and they're going eight, nine, 10, and they can't stop
themselves from 11, 12, and just counting on because, wow, you've got the sequence,
and no, no, no, you're supposed to stop, and do the harder things, stop counting.
Infants, kids, adolescents are highly frontally disinhibited.
Sufficiently so, that in 2005, the U.S. Supreme Court said it is very, very inadmissible
to execute a 16-year-old for a violent crime because simply that is a brain that is not
mature enough yet to fully control impulsivity, a very important, but in my opinion, a very
partial decision, but recognizing understanding development is understanding the late maturation
of the frontal cortex.
Now of course, what you begin to ask is our usual question, what does the frontal cortex
get information from, and where does it send this projection to?
And we've left out a projection in a chart in the last lecture, where is the amygdala
getting information from, from sensory systems, that slow precise sensory input, that fast
imprecise crude input, pain, frustration, stress hormones, no surprise there is a whopping
great projection from the frontal cortex down to the amygdala, and it's the frontal cortex
which metaphorically sending an inhibitory projection telling the amygdala, don't do
it, don't do it, don't do it, you're going to regret it.
And not surprisingly either when you think about some of the decisions we make, the amygdala
in turn sends projections back to the frontal cortex.
The amygdala's state of incoherent arousal or excitation can play an enormous role in
making sense of the sort of decisions that we make.
And we all know that we think differently when aroused, we decide differently when agitated
and as we saw in a previous lecture, thinking in that trolley scenario, do you pull a lever
in order to sacrifice someone, or do you push with your own hands, you activate different
parts of the brain, we know we make decisions very differently depending on the emotional
status of the setting, the amygdala has a tremendous ability to inhibit the frontal
cortex and make the easier things seem irresistible.
Now making sense of some of the other projections into the frontal cortex tells us a whole lot.
The neurotransmitter serotonin sends a big projection into the frontal cortex and seems
to play some role in getting the frontal cortex to help you do the harder thing.
And what that has done is produce a whole literature suggesting that low levels of serotonin
in individuals, in individual lab rats, up to individual humans, low levels of serotonin
are associated with impulsive behaviors, impulsivity, disinhibited aggression, part
of the frontal cortex derives its power, its capacity to hold on and get you to do the
harder thing seemingly from the serotonin projections.
Now amid that point, there's a very equally subtle point that should be emphasized, ooh
disinhibition, in this case serotonin playing a role in keeping the frontal cortex from making
sure you're not disinhibited and this picture we're developing here of what disinhibition
is about is violent acts, all of that.
Sometimes what disinhibition is about is proposing marriage to somebody you just met the day
before.
This is another realm of doing the harder thing.
This role of the frontal cortex is not merely to keep us from being a serial murderer, in
some cases it's to keep us from being a serial marriage proposal person or who knows what.
There's lots of realms in which we regulate our behavior where there's the temptation
to do the easier thing, frontal cortex and seemingly serotonin inputs into it, playing
this critical role.
Now another projection into the frontal cortex using a different neurotransmitter is even
more interesting and this involves the neurotransmitter dopamine.
Dopamine pleasure, anticipation, dopamine released by cocaine, dopamine as playing
this critical role and thinking this is going to be great.
And there's a fascinating literature by now showing take a primate, a lab primate and
give it some unexpected reward and you get a burst of dopamine in this pathway being
released.
And what you could then show is this fascinating transition from that same exact pleasure that
same exact reinforcement no longer provokes a dopamine rise, it gets smaller and smaller,
you're taking it for granted.
When is there a dopamine rise then, 10 seconds before when the light comes on saying here
it comes.
And what the rise of dopamine is about then is the transition from reward, surprising
reward to anticipation, this is going to be great.
This is going to be great.
Hold on here it comes.
And what is completely built into that idea is gratification postponement.
Hold on here it comes, press the lever once, it's going to be worth it, it's going to
be worth it.
And what gratification postponement is about is in a sense building up the strength of
that pathway, LTPing it, potentiating it in some cellular level so that you can go from
this is going to be great, make the effort, press that lever once to come on, make the
effort, press that lever 400,000 times because retirement is going to be the greatest with
this pension plan.
What gratification postponement, what getting more control is about is in effect your frontal
cortex being able to hold its breath longer and longer and longer and do its job.
Where is the fuel of that anticipatory discipline about seemingly that dopamine projection going
into there.
Now all of this brings up an extremely important, another extremely important subtle point in
making sense of frontal cortex doing the harder thing.
We just saw that one version of do the harder thing is not to be a murderer, another is
do the harder thing, don't announce love to a perfect stranger.
That sort of thing, that realm of what discipline counts as.
But what we've been setting up in here as a subset of that is the notion of doing the
harder thing, keeping you from being violent.
Sure you can't stand this person, do the harder thing, don't lash out verbally at them.
Sure you are in this aroused, provoked state, do the harder thing, don't do a violent act,
restrain yourself, restrain yourself, don't pull that gun out that's in your waist belt,
don't do it, don't do it.
But sometimes what doing the harder thing is about is doing the violent act.
And we can imagine all sorts of settings where by all logic what you want to do is flee.
What you want to do is desert and remarkably enough the officer blows a whistle and all
of you compiling out over the top of the trench with a remarkable likelihood that you're all
going to be dead in 30 seconds.
And because of some set of beliefs, some set of often cultural mythologies that this is
the right thing to do, somewhere in there it's the frontal cortex that's forcing you
to do the harder thing.
The harder thing is not always the avoidance of violence, sometimes it's the carrying
out of violence.
And this insight explains to me a scene which I don't know if it has ever been documented
but seems to me just heartbreakingly inevitable that it occurred that once some 60 years ago
or so, some man came home from a long day of work, tired, exhausted, wanting to take
every easy out at that point, including the moving circumstance of having to tell his
children, no I can't play with you right now, I need to work, I need to work.
And then his family obligations and the tugging at his heart of I'm not oh knowing my children
well enough goes back to work designing gas chambers that release poisons.
And sometimes that's the form of discipline in doing the harder thing and sometimes those
same elements we recognize and the rest of us of making us do the harder thing can be
so intertwined with the violence and damage to other humans.
So we see that doing the harder thing does not always merely take the form of inhibiting
aggressive behavior.
So this gives us a very, very fast overview of our first bucket, the neurobiology of aggression.
And of course what we need to do now on our chart is take one step to the left, what sort
of environmental stimuli trigger aggression in our ethological term, what are the releasing
stimuli for aggression.
And thus you round up all the usual suspects that make perfect sense, stress, pain, frustration,
train a lab rat who's good and hungry, press a lever 10 times you get some food, 10 times
you get some food and change the rules, 10 times nothing happens, another 10, another
10 nothing coming, frustration, frustration, some poor innocent bystander rat walks into
the cage at that point and there's a good chance it's going to be attacked.
To make sense of circumstances of violence of many circumstances, it makes sense to look
at pain and frustration and stress.
And remarkably, and once you think about it perfectly logically, sustained pain, sustained
stress, what does it do?
It depletes that pathway in your brain of dopamine.
And you are losing that fuel that tells your frontal cortex where to find the energy, where
to find the means to hold on and do the harder thing.
Now a couple of other things in our environment or things that we can take from our environment
and ingest, everybody knows causes aggression.
Number one, alcohol, number two, crowding.
Everybody knows this, everybody knows this, sufficiently so that it's even considered
in criminal justice realms of times.
And what the literature shows is alcohol does not cause violence, crowding does not cause
violence, what you see instead is alcohol causes violence in individuals who are already
prone towards it.
And likewise with crowding, they do not create these behaviors, they justify them, they disinhibit
them in individuals who were already predisposed in that direction.
And we will come back to the endocrinology of that phenomenon shortly.
Now that moves us one box to the left, beginning to look at the endocrinology of this.
What do hormones, not hormones back when you were a fetus, but hormones in your circulation
right now, this minute, this hour, this morning have to do with how readily you respond to
pain, frustration, stress, etc.
And do whatever you do in your frontal cortex, amygdala, etc.
What do hormones have to do with it?
And if we're talking hormones, by definition we are going to have to start off with the
most usual of suspects in the realm of hormones and aggression, testosterone.
Testosterone is subject that's important enough that it will take up much of the coming lecture,
but we start off with this very important straightforward endocrinology question.
What's the deal with males anyway?
What's the problem?
Why is it that in species after species, not all of them interestingly, but in the vast
majority, why is it that on the average males are more aggressive than females?
What's that about?
Hmm, maybe something with testosterone and back to the endocrine research done millennia
ago, when you remove the source of testosterone, when you castrate an individual, they become
less aggressive.
That's real important to see because without that it's just correlative evidence.
The gender that has more testosterone tends to be more aggressive.
The time of life when males have their highest testosterone levels is when they tend to be
most aggressive late adolescence, early adulthood, with animals with seasonal mating, with seasonal
bursts of testosterone.
When testosterone is high, that's when you get the most aggression.
Ha, look at that, amygdala, lots of receptors for testosterone, sure looks like testosterone
is important.
And it's not until you do, as shown here on this chart, the classical endocrine manipulation,
the great euphemism used for it is the subtraction approach.
You remove some males' testes, you remove his source of testosterone, and as shown here
schematically, normal levels of aggression, and we recognize that's a crazy term in terms
of what counts as normal, and likewise, what counts as aggression is 47 different categories
of things.
Nonetheless, what you see is remove the testes and down go aggression levels.
The classic endocrine subtraction approach, and then you need to finish that up with the
equally classic endocrine strategy of replacement.
You've removed that source of testosterone, down goes aggression, and now you replace it,
you inject the individual with synthetic, exogenous testosterone, and back comes behavior.
These are the gold standards in endocrinology of implicating a hormone in a behavior.
Take it away, less of the behavior, put it back, it comes back.
What we see at the bottom of the diagram though is the critical, more subtle version of what
you actually see, a point that will dominate the coming lectures.
When you castrate a male of virtually any species out there, including our own, levels
of aggression, our generic umbrella term here, go from 100% not down to zero.
They sure go down on the average, but they don't go anywhere down to zero, as shown here,
a drop down to 25% or so.
In the absence of testosterone, aggression remains, less of it, but it still remains,
and in that literature is the critical, fascinating point.
The more experience an individual has had being aggressive before castration, the more
the aggression is going to persist afterward.
In other words, the more social experience, the more aggression is maintained by social
learning afterward in the absence of this hormone.
A very important point, one that we will come back to in the next lecture, looking more
at the subject, no single part of the brain and no single hormone is the one that is causing
this behavior.
