Lecture 24, a summary.
We have reached the end of the line here and now have the completely impossible task of
trying to conclude anything about what the last 23 lectures have taught us.
What we've seen over and over is the obvious punch line of it's complicated.
You can't explain anything with a single neurotransmitter, a single hormone, a single
gene, and a single childhood experience.
What we've seen are lots of mechanisms by which the nervous system can change its function
over time.
What we've seen are lots of ways of imagining how one person's nervous system works differently
than another, and how that reflects environments and hormones and genes and evolution and
all the things that came before it, we can begin to imagine how all of this works.
And one of the things that happens if you're learning about this sort of material for the
first time, one of the things that often happens is there's suddenly this disquieting sense
of where's the me amid all of this science?
What happens to my sense of individuality as science can begin to explain so much of
this?
And what this last lecture is about is two goals.
The first is to show this whole realm of understanding, for example, the biology of extreme violence.
We are beginning to get insights into far, far more subtle realms of human behavior.
The other point of this stretch is to begin to look at what these findings might imply,
and just as importantly, what these findings don't imply.
Now what we're wrestling with essentially is this issue of when a behavior happens, when
an inappropriate behavior happens, who's fault is it, where's the causality, and we
are a society that very often wants to frame things in terms of culpability, who's responsible.
And very often what we are also framing somewhere in there are public policy decisions along
the lines of what things can be changed, what things cannot, what things should we not bother
expending public funds on, what things cannot be touched by changes in education, where
is the biology, and what are the things about it that are malleable.
And often what we are asking when we're asking that question is, you look at somebody with
some behavior that we societally view as unacceptable behavior where it must be framed
in part in the context of biology, and we know by now biology must be framed in the
context of the environment in which it dwells.
You see somebody whose behaviors are distorted in that way, and you're essentially trying
to understand where is the person, where is the essence of who that person is, and where
is the biology that distorts, that constrains who that person is.
And this is a tough question, where do you draw the line between the essence of the person
and the biological abnormalities?
In some realms we have no trouble drawing that line anymore, or at least we don't currently.
If you had epilepsy, there were biomedical explanations for where epilepsy comes from.
It was satanic possession, it was some sort of divine punishment, it was something that
could be explained along those lines, lines heavily inculcated with a notion of judgment
and disapproval.
And somewhere in the last century or so, most of us reached the point of coming to a very
different view, coming to accept the notion that defines us as modern humans.
We all came to accept a line along the notion of, it's not him, it's his disease.
It is not who the essence of this person is, but it's occasional synchronized storms of
action potentials in this person's brain superimposed on top of who that person is.
And we are now very good at drawing a line between the essence of a person and the seizure
disorder superimposed on it.
We're nowhere near as good at drawing that line between other realms of biological disorder
to behavior.
For example, schizophrenia.
Early in the first Reagan administration, a diagnosed schizophrenic, John Hinckley, attempted
to assassinate Reagan, injured him, grievously injured some other people on the scene, and
afterward at the jury trial with a very heavy emphasis on Hinckley having all the classical
symptoms of major schizophrenia, a jury put him instead of in jail in a psychiatric hospital.
And all sorts of neanderthal-ish elements of our society bellowed long afterward about
how he was getting away with attempted murder.
And more strikingly, a trend that had been going on in our legal systems for the previous
half century of expanding the view of what counts as an insanity defense was dramatically
reversed throughout the country.
Many of our states, in fact, getting rid of the insanity defense, what we proved in that
spasm of reaction and regression was we are very poor at drawing the line between the
essence of who a John Hinckley is and the neurotransmitter disorder superimposed on
top of that.
We tend to be equally bad at doing the same with another realm, learning disabilities
in our children.
And instead of having a clear sign of the demarcation there, what we have instead are
words like blazy and unmotivated and stupid and words that run through our world of parents
and teachers and guidance counselors.
That's not a world where we understand the biological parameters of what has gone wrong
and what has constrained and distorted the essence of who that child might be.
Now what the rest of this lecture is about is looking at a number of realms where that
line between the essence of who we are and the biological storms tossing that essence
about how that line is being redrawn in all sorts of realms nobody ever expected.
One example of that we've heard throughout the course, and that's if you have damage
in the frontal cortex and a number of neurological diseases where that occurs, you don't need
to have finisive gauges, pole blown through your head, the frontal temporal dementia,
some other disorders as well, and the person who is now doing something wildly inappropriate,
have they become evil, have they become childish, have they become undisciplined, they've become
neurologically damaged, they've become organically broken.
And in those cases, that is very challenging for us to make sense of who's the them still
inside there.
These other realms as well, disorders we're now beginning to understand at the biological
level, the sort of analyses that have dominated these last 23 lectures, disorders that didn't
even used to have names.
Here's one example.
I'm willing to bet that virtually anybody watching this at some point or other has a
period of a lot of stress, a lot of anxiety, you're worrying about something, and you
find you start ritualistically counting steps as you go up a flight of stairs, or you get
some inane television jingle in your head, and you can't get it out of your head and
it's infuriating and distracting, or suppose you're sending off some critical application
for something, and you go to the mailbox and you put it in and you check to make sure it's
gone in, and this is really important.
So you go back and you take one more look, and you check again, and there's nobody around,
so you decide you look in the front of the mailbox and underneath and all of that.
We all do this.
Actually, maybe we don't all do this, and I'm embarrassing myself very badly here, but
a lot of us do that, and it's something we do in response to anxiety.
It's something we do during times when the ground feels like quicksand underneath us
to impose some structure.
What we now know is there is a neuropsychiatric disorder, OCD, obsessive compulsive disorder,
where people's lives are crushed by this, by numbers running through their heads throughout
the day, by utterly uncontrollable, blasphemous, distracting thoughts of what they may have
done, what they might do, this anxious uncertainty of having to go back and check and check and
see if you left the door unlocked, if you left the gas on, if you hit somebody when
you hit that bump in the road, what if that was someone I've left to die there?
We need to go back to check to check where your life is just ruined by this.
What is extraordinary about OCD is that we're beginning to understand the neurobiology of
it, the parts of the brain that are metabolically overactive.
There's some hints of the neurochemistry.
There's some hints of some heritable components to OCD.
What is also fascinating is there's even ethylogical insights into what the disease is.
Most of us have seen at some point or other some dog who's ready to go lie down, and what
does the dog do?
It circles around his blanket a little bit, and then it circles some more, and then circles
a few more times.
It's just about to sit down and something takes over and makes it circle once or twice
more, and for a few minutes you could see the dog just caught in the storm of whatever
the circling is about.
And a famed psychiatrist who studies OCD, Judith Rappaport, wants very aptly, poetically
described OCD as a disorder where you are trapped, the dog circling on the blanket for
the rest of time, where you could never, ever stop.
What do we make of the fact that not only have we been trained to think of someone who
hears voices in their head and someone whose thoughts are completely fragmented, a schizophrenic,
who is absolutely appropriate to view as biologically broken by their disease, someone who hears
television jingles going through their heads 20 hours a day, that's a neurobiological disorder
as well, and it absolutely is, and it commands some of the same reflection.
What do we make of the fact that a brain can go awry in that way?
Another example of that, Tourette syndrome, Tourette syndrome which used to be a diagnostic
backwater and now is very trendy in neuropsychiatric circles, people who know about Tourette often
know about the single dramatic symptom of it, uncontrollable cursing that doesn't scratch
the surface.
In Tourette the person curses uncontrollably but facial tics, yips, animal sounds, all
of that, grabbing at their throat, grabbing at their crotch, all sorts of, is this someone
with their frontal cortex blown away and out comes the disinhibited self who's been lurking
there?
Absolutely not, most of us are not sitting there secretly wishing we could quack like
ducks and if only we didn't have a frontal cortex we'd be often doing that.
This is not the essence of that person coming out, this is like some storm, some hiccups
of the id superimposed on top of who that person is and we are again beginning to understand
a biology of what goes wrong in that disease and what goes wrong in the most subtler versions
of it.
Now that notion of subtler versions dominates the next disorder and it's a fascinating one.
Schizophrenia, schizophrenia, massive thought disorder, social withdrawal, all sorts of
delusional thoughts, hallucinations, hearing voices, all of that and many, many lectures
ago we heard about Keddie and colleagues doing that adoption study showing that there is
a heritable component to schizophrenia.
In the course of that study you recall that was that handful of psychiatrists who went
and examined all the adoptive parents, biological parents, offspring in Denmark tens of thousands
of people, what they also did just in passing was something no psychiatrist had ever done
before which was talk to thousands and thousands of relatives of schizophrenics.
What they noticed was a subset of those individuals had something a little bit odd about them.
Not all of them, not even most of them and you can have the same profile without a close
relative who's schizophrenic but at a higher than expected rate kind of a weird profile
and that kind of weird profile was a new psychiatric diagnosis that came out of their study, something
now called schizotypal disorder and schizotypalism is basically a mild version on a continuum
of schizophrenia.
What do you wind up seeing, these are people who are fairly socially withdrawn, these are
people who tend to have what are called metamagical experiences, they feel an aura of something
in the room, they find themselves very intensely caught up in science fiction and fantasy or
astrology or that sort of thing, they tend to have a very concrete interpretation of events
around them thus part of what makes this really fascinating and contentious, a tendency towards
a very fundamentalist belief in religion rather than religious stories as abstractions as
parables that yes the world was invented in seven days, yes it is possible to walk on
water of very concrete literalist interpretation, you see these traits and schizotypals, the
classic schizotypal occupations are the person working up in the fire tower alone, the person
working in the lighthouse, the movie theater projectionist believing that Elvis is floating
somewhere over there, over their right shoulder, this belief in these metamagical thoughts,
the social withdrawal, this is not a mental illness, this is the extreme of normative
beliefs, lots of folks check the astrology columns every day, you can go to Star Trek
conventions and be a perfectly functional normal human, this is not a psychiatric disease,
this is a profile whose biology we're beginning to understand that just describes some of
the extremes of one axis of who we all normally are. Another example of this and one of the
most challenging ones, a disease, a disease, a neurological disease and we've heard plenty
about this already a form of epilepsy, okay epilepsy as we know is a whole bunch of neurons
firing having their action potentials way too often in a synchronized way and that's
the rhythmic firing that gives rise to a seizure, convulsions and epileptic seizures start in
particular spots in the brain, could be a function of some genetic abnormality where
there was an injury, a concussive injury where there were neurons damaged by a high fever,
febrile epilepsy in kids, any case you get epileptic seizure starting in different places
in the brain and there's one subtype of epilepsy, we're seizure starting what's called the temporal
lobe, temporal lobe epilepsy, temporal lobe epilepsy and what's in the temporal lobe lots
of the limbic system, get just underneath the surface, the cortex of the temporal lobe
when there's all our folks there are the amygdala, the hippocampus, the temporal lobe is one
outpost of a lot of the limbic system. So something interesting with temporal lobe epilepsy
and this was first noted some years ago by a neurologist at Harvard, one of the giants
of neurology in the last century, Norman Geshwin, who was the first to describe temporal lobe
personality disorder and what Geshwin noticed was that same theme again, not everyone with
temporal lobe epilepsy, but a significant subset of these individuals developed a certain
personality style. They became very serious. Whoa, big surprise, you get epilepsy, I would
get a little bit less jovial about life at that point, who are the appropriate controls
people with other types of epilepsies. Okay, so that's informative, these people become
neophobic, they don't like new things, they become very closed in their experiences, okay,
likewise that makes sense from the standpoint of suddenly getting this miserable neurological
disease appropriate controls, this is specific to this type of epilepsy. What is most interesting
and most challenging in terms of where's the we inside all this biology is people with
temporal lobe personality profiles after getting this type of epilepsy become very, very interested
in religious and philosophical subjects. Whoa, what does that mean? What does that mean
when one of the realms that most defines who we are as individuals and one of the realms
that many of us often have to have some of the biggest struggles in our life deciding
what we believe and whether we believe and how important issues of faith are, you get
uncontrolled synchronized action potentials in one part of your brain every now and then
and you're more likely to believe in certain types of religious explanations of the planet
around us. What does this mean that we have a brain working this way and even more importantly
in some ways, what does it mean that we are beginning to understand that to describe it
to label it because at some point or other something's going to happen. Most of these
diseases did not exist, did not exist in the textbooks, did not exist in the clinical world,
were not known, were not labeled, not all that long ago. A large percentage of these
subtle neuropsychiatric disorders, let alone neuropsychiatric ways of describing normative
extremes of behavior, a lot of these didn't exist back then. We didn't even have names
to describe some of the unexpected ways in which biology could laid siege to somebody's
life and individuality and crush them. We didn't even have the concept that your life
could be ruined by counting numbers in your head all the time because at an extreme OCD
is a ruinously crippling disease which takes over the lives of these people where they,
by the rules of psychiatric disorders, what qualifies as a major disorder, it ruins your
capacity to function normally. These are individuals who can't work anymore because they're spending
eight hours a day washing their hands. Who could ever have thought that's a way in which
biology can go wrong? We have words for these now. We have ways to describe them and what
is clear given the trajectory of these fields is we're going to have more and more of those
labels in the years to come. What's going to happen when each one of us comes with three
or four of those labels? What's going to happen when, thanks to this understanding, we suddenly
come with this whole array of ways of describing what used to be quirks, what used to be abnormalities,
at some point there's going to be this transition where this is no longer going to be the science
of them and their diseases but this will become the science of what makes us who we are. Our
foibles and our quirks and our strengths and our weaknesses and our vulnerabilities and
our potentials when we have a biology that tells why some of us like spicy food and why
some of us vote the way we do and who we believe in and pray to and who we find we can't and
who we love and who we're attracted to and what's going to happen when we reach the point
where we can be described along those terms. What's going to happen? First off, there's
going to be a huge number of societal implications and there should be and there's every reason
to think some of those implications will be disasters. For example, if you get a whole
bunch of those labels, God help you if you are poor or poorly connected because we have
endless societal proof that that's just the sort of circumstance in which you were then
denied health care and medical insurance and occupations and fair housing, all you're
going to see there is this realm of more ways in which people by being labeled can be stigmatized.
That's not a good thing. Another bad thing and this is one with plenty of precedent
in the history of biology having something to say to public policy, there is going to
be the temptation to fix things that ain't broken and intrinsic and that is the enormously
inflammatory question of what counts as being ill? What counts as being different from everybody
else in a way that needs to be labeled and pathologized and if we can to fix and we've
had no shortage of scientists who have stopped being objective scientists and then instead
become ideologs who have been perfectly happy to align themselves with some of the most genocidal
fixes of what's been viewed as biologically impaired and no shortage of scientists who
are happy to march into hell with the people who have done these things with the notion
that what counts as biological normality is an Aryan profile and we will never have shortages
of scientists or people willing to leap upon those scientific findings and try to fix things
that ain't broken and thus one of the things that has to come out of this world of biology
of our behavior is all of us having to be more and more vigilant to make sure that's
not one of the things that is done with the pseudoscience conclusions of this business.
Now nevertheless, amid all that bad news, there's got to be some grounds for feeling
optimistic and that is all built around the ways in which we should recognize unlikely
realms of kinship in our biology. We're pretty good by now as discussed at recognizing someone
who intermittently has massive synchronized outpouring of brain activity and collapses
at that point potentially injuring themselves. Somebody with severe epilepsy, this is not
them, it's their disease and you need to do things to protect them. They are in need of
comfort and protection and solace and understanding, this is their disease, it's not them. And
in the same way, we're occasionally quite good at doing that for the person living their
on the street hearing voices and having the completely disordered sequence of thoughts,
the schizophrenic, we are going to have to learn how to provide solace and protection
and explanation and understanding and it's their disease, it's not them, to a world of
people who because of their biology are afraid to go out of their house each day, who are
consumed by random thoughts of disturbing images who have the numbers and the sort of
television jingles going off in their heads, we are going to be forced to be compassionate
in realms we never even have to use to think about in terms of the biology of our disorders.
We are going to have to extend some sort of umbrella of protection in directions that
there's not even a word for now in the world of science. What we're also going to have
to have happen with any luck is a remarkable new realm of pseudo kinship. Rather than some
of the ways that we've seen, but instead a notion, there's someone with the same exact
variant of their serotonin reuptake pump as me and there but for the grace of God go I,
if I had had the same miserable upbringing as them, I would be in the same awful state
recognizing kinship and relatedness in realms that we never used to once we can begin to
understand this biology, once we begin to understand how much this biology interacts with environment,
we could recognize how easily I could have been him, how easily it has nothing to do
with discipline and fortitude and good health habits and remembering to floss your teeth
every day and just the sheer random luck of your biology meeting this environment versus
that one. And out the other end of that has to come some more compassion. Out the other
end of that has to come one other thing as well. Over and over here using this sort of
framework of talking about the difference between the essence of who this person is
and the biology that's superimposed on top of them and the barrier between the two and
that's completely false notion of how it actually works. What we see over and over is what we
call the essence of who a person is, is simply the realm where we don't have a good set of
biological explanations yet for how things work. Whatever was the realm of the essence
of somebody back then has been shrinking more and more as we understand, no that's actually
not whatever this magical essence is of the person, that's their monoamine oxidase variant
in there, that's their, this is obviously a simplistic reduction, but the difference
between the essence of who a person is and the biology that constrains it, this is the
realm that we have a biological set of insights about, this is the ones that we probably will
hold 50, 100 years from now. And what that winds up meaning is that notion of a boundary
is a complete bit of nonsense, it really doesn't exist at some point, we will all learn this
truism which is being healthy consists of having the same diseases as everybody else.
And being healthy consists of not only having the same diseases, but the same values as
to what counts as a disease and what counts as healthy. And there was a wonderful example
of this a couple of years ago, and this had to do with a realm not so much related to
behavior, but another extremely hot topic in biology, the biological regulation of
appetite and fat deposition and obesity, and this is important because it's a real interesting
biology and because obesity related diabetes is soon going to be the number one killer
in the United States, interesting important subject. And a number of hormones have now
been identified that have something to do with appetite. We saw many lectures ago that
they come from places like your gut, your liver, your pancreas, your fat cells and affect
appetite in the brain. And one of these was identified tremendous excitement that this
was going to be the hormone that explained obesity. Yes, of course, it turned out not
to be that simple, but nonetheless, there turned out to be some rare cases of people
with mutations, some old, you know, point mutations somewhere along the way or maybe
some big chunk of some promoter of DNA wind up in the wrong place. They got a mutation
and the receptor for this hormone doesn't work. And this is a disorder associated with
obesity, large amounts of eating fat deposition. And along comes the group who discovered this
finding and identified a first family that genetically has this mutation as a pedigree.
And this is great. This was published in a very prestigious journal. Everybody very
excited. And what's the obvious thing to do now? What you got there is give the people
some more of this hormone to overcome this receptor defect injecting with more of this
stuff so you can cure them. And suddenly the story grounds to a halt there. And what happened
is very disappointing problem, which is the people didn't want to be cured. They had
no interest in getting this fix placed on them. They didn't think anything was wrong.
They didn't think there was a problem there. They happened to come from a culture where
the word that was used literally in the scientific journal Chubbiness was considered not to be
a defect, but was kind of attractive. And no thanks. I don't need any of that stuff
shot into me. What was going on there, this incredibly ironic setting that it was impossible
to cure these people of their disease until you convinced them that was a disease. And
we're suddenly in a realm. If that's relevant to making sense of how we deposit fat in our
periphery, it sure is relevant in this world of making sense of what counts as normal behavior
and what counts as abnormal. And what all these lessons are going to have to do when
you see how easily you could have been them is expand enormously our notion of what counts
as normal acceptable behavior. What counts as a world of variants that are not things
to be fixed, but instead that count as perfectly normal. So those are some of the societal implications.
What also happens, of course, is people get a very personal sense of being in some ways
threatened by findings like these. And this is quite often when people are first learning
about this. And as said at the beginning of this lecture, often what happens is this
panicked, cranky sense of enough with this biology already, this is destroying my sense
of who I am. And I simply nothing more than all of these neurons and all of these hormones
and all of these genetic effects and all of this, everything from together. Where is the
me in here? Where is my uniqueness? And intrinsic in this is this wonderful pretense a lot of
us take great pleasure from. This is the notion that each one of us is this un-unseasonable,
and possible to catch and possible to describe flame of individuality. And that is who we
are and what if those damn scientists go and learn more and more about less and less and
inadvertently go and solve everything and inadvertently go and turn all of us into just
a bunch of equations and a bunch of chemicals. And this was caught wonderfully in a classic
science fiction story by Arthur C. Clarke, a story called The Nine Billion Names of God.
And in this story, this was a bunch of Tibetan monks and as the story went in traditional
Tibetan society, there's the belief that there's nine billion different names for God,
a metaphor for so many names, God is unreachable, God is unnameable, God is unknowable and
infinity of names for God. And in this story, they teamed up with a bunch of computer scientists
which had this massive high powered computer which was able to just start iteratively cranking
out all the names of God. And as the story went on, as each new name popped out, one
of the stars in the sky became extinguished. And this is this metaphor for this fear of
science explaining everything as we learn more and more about less and less that flame
of individuality is going to be extinguished and the stars in the heavens will go dark
because of our knowledge. This is often a view and there's not the
remotest reason to think this, to fear this. First off, even if we inadvertently go and
explain everything about who we are, that doesn't make it one bit less moving who we
are. There are biomechanical explanations for gazelles leaping, there are contrapuntal
rules about Bach thundering and there's no less reason to be moved by the world around
us, even if there are levels of explanation, we never could have guessed that. And even
more importantly is the final point here which is we're never going to go and inadvertently
explain everything. What should be obvious from these last 24 lectures is everything
that's answered opens up a dozen new questions that are even better than the first one. This
is wonderfully summarized in a quote by Hall Dane, that scientist who gave us that quip
back when, I'll lay down my life for two brothers or eight cousins. He was the official guy of
generating great sound bites in biology and this was another one he came up with, life
is not only stranger than we imagine, life is stranger than we can imagine. And that's
ultimately why there is no fear of science inadvertently going and explaining everything,
it will never be able to do that, it will just generate more things to be interested
in. In the end, basically the purpose of science is not to cure us of our sense of mystery
and wonder, but to constantly reinvent it and reinvigorate it.
Thank you very much.
