In this lecture, we're continuing to explore the ways in which our underlying brain activity
is deceptive and constructed.
We're moving on now to perception.
For example, in July 17, 1996, TWA Flight 800 crashed shortly after takeoff.
There were many eyewitnesses who reported seeing a missile or a streak of light going
to the plane.
However, an exhaustive FBI and National Transportation and Safety Board investigation concluded that
there was no missile.
Therefore, what did all those eyewitnesses see?
Another very dramatic example, in 1978, a red panda escaped from the Rotterdam Zoo.
The story of the escaped panda ran in the local papers, following which there were hundreds
of red panda sightings all over the city.
However, it was soon discovered that the panda was killed just outside the zoo and that the
bear had died prior to the story and all of the sightings.
Therefore, what did all of those hundreds of eyewitnesses see?
It could not have been a red panda.
Is seeing believing or perhaps it's more accurate to say that believing is seeing?
In this lecture, it's my job to convince you that you cannot trust anything you think you
see or perceive.
There are simply too many flaws in the ways our brain constructs these perceptions.
Our perceptions are not passive.
It's not like a tape recorder or a film camera where details are simply recorded as they
come in.
In fact, our brains actively construct a picture of what is going on around us based upon a
tiny fraction of all the sensory information that's coming in.
This introduces many opportunities for distortions and error.
Brains have learned over centuries really how to exploit the foibles of the brain's
sensory processing.
They have developed a practical knowledge of how to deceive you, how to do things right
in front of your face without you seeing or perceiving that they happened.
They use this knowledge for entertainment.
However, it's certainly as possible for these same tricks to be used for nefarious purposes.
That is another example in which artists, in this case, have learned how to exploit
the ways in which our brain processes information in order to create a specific effect.
For example, they have developed laws of perspective and dimensionality, the ability to create a
three-dimensional image on a two-dimensional canvas.
They do this without an underlying knowledge of the neuroscience, but just a practical knowledge
of how the visual system works and how it constructs what we think we see.
Perhaps the simplest demonstration of the constructed aspect of our sensory input is
optical illusions.
All types of illusions, by definition, are times when the brain constructs a sensory
perception in an incorrect way.
It's a misperception of reality.
Generally, objects in our world appear to be stable and they appear to be accurate with
respect to reality.
That property psychologists refer to as constancy.
Optical illusions, by definition, represent an exception to constancy, a time when objects
are either not stable or they do not accord with reality.
There is some kind of internal inconsistency or paradox in what we think we are seeing.
This is because the brain has to make assumptions.
It makes assumptions about what's likely to be true and then it processes the sensory
information based upon those assumptions.
Most of the time those assumptions are correct, but when they're not correct, that results
in an optical illusion.
Now, constructed optical illusions are designed to specifically exploit known ways in which
the brain processes information.
There are different types of optical illusions.
There are perspective illusions which all exploit the ways in which our brains construct
three-dimensional images out of two-dimensional input.
Visual input is all two-dimensional.
Our retinas are a flat, curved surface.
The brain has to then infer from that two-dimensional input a three-dimensional world with relative
size and distance and movement, for example.
Mostly, it does this with the stereoscopic vision, the fact that it has input from two
different eyes that it can compare.
But even with just input from one eye, and you can test this yourself by closing off
one eye, the brain can make reasonable inferences about the three-dimensionality of the world
around it.
There are optical illusions that are also based upon relative shade and size of objects.
There are illusions based upon ambiguous stimuli where the brain can construct the image in
more than one way, and your brain will tend to switch back and forth between different
constructions.
And there are after-image optical illusions.
The visual system will adapt to lighting and color, for example.
And then when that is changed, the adaptation causes an after-image.
That's not really there.
Some examples of optical illusions that are fairly dramatic, in my opinion, include the
a shading illusion.
In this illusion, a shadow is falling across a checkerboard.
Now the light squares in the shadow appear to be lighter than the dark squares outside
of the shadow, even though they are, in fact, the exact same shade.
You can move the squares next to each other and see that the shade is identical.
But your brain makes the lighter shadows, the lighter squares in the shadow seem lighter
relative to the darker shadows, the darker squares.
And the darker squares outside the shadow seem darker relative to the lighter squares.
That's a brain-processing thing that alters how you see the shade of those squares.
You can't unsee this optical illusion even when you know exactly what is happening.
The same thing is true of size.
For example, the moon horizon illusion.
The moon appears to be bigger when it's on the horizon than when it is overhead.
But this is, in fact, not true.
It is merely an illusion that is resulting from the fact that when the moon is on the
horizon there are objects, trees, and buildings, etc., that give perspective.
When the moon is high in the sky, there is nothing to compare it to, so it seems relatively
smaller.
Some other three-dimensional illusions, again, the brain makes assumptions about size, distance,
and relative position.
These assumptions are based upon what is usually correct, but when one or more of those assumptions
are incorrect, the brain can construct a false three-dimensional image of reality.
The ability to judge distance is especially important.
No one is immune to these factors, to poor viewing conditions, to lack of a clear reference,
for example, so even being a trained pilot or a trained observer does not make your brain
construct things differently or make you immune to these illusions.
Three-dimensional images are a construction.
It is something that is happening inside your brain, and that's important to remember.
There are also perceptual reversals.
This has to do with ambiguous stimuli, your brain constructing images in different ways
at different times.
There is the classic cube illusion, for example, where you have a two-dimensional drawing of
a three-dimensional cube, and either face can be perceived as pointing towards you at any
one time, and in your brain the cube can flip back and forth between facing one direction
or another.
There is also a spinning silhouette illusion, a silhouette of a young female dancer spinning
around, and your brain can perceive her as either spinning clockwise or counterclockwise,
and it will tend to flip back and forth between one direction and the other.
That's because the illusion, the spinning silhouette, is compatible with rotating in
either direction.
Your brain can construct the shadows and the perspective either way.
First looking at how people perceive the spinning silhouette illusion also reveal other influences
such as perspective biases.
For example, we assume that our brains tend to assume that what we are viewing is receiving
light from above.
There is a lighting from above bias in how we construct images, and this does tend to
make certain versions of the spinning silhouette illusion appear to be moving in one direction
more often than the other.
Another ambiguous stimuli illusion, this one is a very classic one, is the old young woman
illusion.
In this you have a picture that can be constructed either as an old woman looking in one direction
or a young woman looking in the other direction.
The ambiguous stimuli can be constructed in different ways.
There is also the horse camouflage illusion.
A picture of a snowy landscape with rocks could appear to be just that.
However, the snowy and the rocky areas are laid out in such a way that it actually suggests
the shape of a horse with brown spots on white fur.
Your brain may or may not put that together into the shape.
When it does, however, then the picture of the horses will snap into place and then you
cannot unsee those horses.
This is also a process of your brain filling in missing information.
The outline of the horse is just suggested by the drawing and then your brain will fill
in the details.
The image again snaps into place.
These types of optical illusions I've been talking about has relevance for UFO sightings,
for example, pilots or others believing they see an unidentified flying object.
For example, in 1997, a military helicopter reported seeing what they thought was another
aircraft that was about to collide with them.
They in fact took evasive action.
However, it turns out that what they were viewing was simply a Mylar balloon.
It was a small, immatallic balloon.
However, the pilot, again a trained pilot, somebody with a lot of experience who you
would think would be able to distinguish a balloon from an aircraft, was unable to
do so.
His brain made wrong assumptions about distance and everything else flowed from there.
Of course, your brain could see the object as being far away, large and moving very
rapidly or it could be close, small and moving very slowly.
Your brain constructed either way.
The pilot's brain thought they were seeing a large aircraft moving quickly towards him
when, in fact, it was a small balloon just drifting by.
Another example, the Stevenville Light UFO of January 8, 2008.
Some witnesses saw a UFO one mile long.
Investigation reveals, however, that these were simply flares that were dropped by F-16s.
However, the witnesses constructed the UFO by connecting the dots.
This is something that our brains do when, again, when it's constructing our perception
of the world around us.
It will fill in lines or connections where it thinks they should be based upon assumptions
about what it thinks it's seeing.
In this case, three disconnected dots were perceived of as being part of one massive
mile-long object.
Another example of how it's possible to think you're seeing something that's not there
simply because of the situation is the Battle of LA.
Now, I'm not referring to the 2011 movie, but rather the air raid over Los Angeles that
took place on February 25, 1942.
Over 1,400 anti-aircraft shells were fired.
Eventually, however, it was concluded that the entire air raid was simply a false alarm,
probably the result of war nerves.
This was towards the beginning of World War II.
It might have been triggered by something as innocuous as a weather balloon.
However, once the shells were started to fire, the soldiers who were manning these anti-aircraft
batteries were firing at something.
They thought that they were seeing planes invading the West Coast of the United States.
Another dramatic example of how our brain constructs a picture in our heads from the
sensory input is the fact that the different senses can actually influence each other.
Our brains will compare different types of sensory input in order to construct one seamless
picture out of all of them.
They will adjust one sense or the other in order to make things match.
One example of this is a 2001 wine test by Moreau, Brochet and Dubardieu.
What they did was they colored white wine with red food coloring.
They then gave the red wine to wine tasting experts and asked them to describe what they
were tasting.
The experts used objects to describe the odors and the taste that was the same color as the
wine being tasted.
In other words, they were describing the white wine as if it were a red wine.
They were fooled apparently.
Their highly developed and sophisticated wine tasting sense was fooled merely by the color
of the wine they thought they were drinking.
In a related study, Brochet placed the same exact wine into different bottles with then
either cheap or expensive labels.
Wine tasting experts were then asked to compare the different wines and rate them.
They rated the wine with the expensive label in glowing terms while denigrating the exact
wine with the cheap label as unworthy.
Here we could see how perception was fairly dramatically influenced by mere expectation,
even among experts.
Gender perception is something else which is also a combination of different types of
sensory input.
You might think that it's purely visual.
Does someone look male or do they look female?
However, there are numerous studies which indicate that what we see in terms of gender
is affected by the voice that we hear, especially when the visual input is ambiguous or androgynous.
We will see an ambiguous or androgynous picture as male if it is accompanied by a male-sounding
voice and as female if it's accompanied by a female-sounding voice.
This same research also shows that we respond better to Congress sensory input when the
voice matches the face we see it coming from and the movements that are being made rather
than in Congress.
Sometimes our brain will have difficulty putting conflicting sensory input together.
Another very dramatic example of how our brain uses different types of sensory input in order
to construct its picture is the so-called McGurk effect after the researcher who first
described it.
The consonants that we hear are affected by the mouth movements that we see.
For example, if you hear someone say bah and while looking at video of someone saying bah
or fa or dah or va, we will actually hear what we see people saying or what we hear
will be dramatically influenced by the mouth movements that we are actually seeing.
Our brain adjusts the sound in order to make it Congress with the lip movements that we
see.
You actually hear different consonants when this is happening.
One very dramatic example of how our brains are modifying, altering, constructing the
sensory input.
There is also temporal synchronization.
Sounds and sights like clapping hands seem to be simultaneous.
However, the light traveling from somebody clapping their hands travels much faster than
the sound waves propagate.
So the two sensory inputs do not arrive at you, at your sensory organs, at exactly the
same time.
It also takes a slightly different amount of time for your brain to process those two
types of information.
And yet, when we look at somebody clapping their hands, the two events appear to be exactly
simultaneous.
That however is a constructed illusion in your brain.
Your brain synchronizes the two events because it knows that they're supposed to occur at
the same time.
In fact, as long as the visual and auditory information are within 80 milliseconds of
each other, your brain will perceive them as being simultaneous.
So therefore, if someone is clapping their hands while moving farther and farther away
from you, and therefore the difference in time between the visual and auditory information
is getting farther and farther apart, they will still seem to be synchronous, seem to
be occurring at the exact same moment until they are arriving at greater than 80 milliseconds
apart, which will occur when someone is about 90 feet or 27 meters away.
At that point, they will suddenly become noticeably asynchronous.
So it's not the kind of thing that happens gradually.
Your brain keeps them synchronous until you're outside of that 80 millisecond window and
then it's suddenly noticeably asynchronous.
It's also true that our brains actually see, or at least infer, a little bit into the future.
When we catch a baseball, the 80 milliseconds it takes for your brain to process the visual
information, would make you miss the ball every time, you would be 80 milliseconds behind
reality.
It may not make a difference in everyday activity, but when you're trying to catch a fast moving
ball, those 80 milliseconds will make a difference.
So our brains evolved in order to compensate for that.
They actually project rapid movement slightly into the future in order to compensate for
this 80 millisecond delay due to processing.
Another example, this one is a so-called pathological example, meaning it doesn't occur in everybody
but it does occur in some people and that is called synesthesia.
Synesthesia is a phenomenon when one sensory modality is interpreted by the brain as if
it were a different sensory modality.
Or people with synesthesia may see numbers or hear light or smell colors, a color will
have a smell to them.
This happens because one part of the brain is interpreting sensory input of a different
sort.
So if you have visual information going to your auditory cortex, the auditory cortex will
interpret it in the way that it knows how as a sound.
You will be able to hear light.
It's not clear whether this synesthesia represents a bleeding over of information from one sensory
area to an adjacent sensory area in the brain or if there are actually specific connections
being made, if this is an alternate type of wiring in the brain.
To some extent, there is some synesthesia even in all so-called normal, neurologically
typical individuals.
Again, our brains do compare and do use the information that visual information is influencing
the auditory cortex as in the McGurk effect.
So there is some cross-processing going on.
With synesthesia, it's just much more dramatic.
Up to this point, I've been talking about the ways in which our brain constructs the
sensory information that's coming into us, makes assumptions, alters it, highlights certain
things, for example, in order for the information to be useful to us but at the same time introducing
artifacts and error.
Now I'm going to shift a little bit to the ways in which we pay attention to that sensory
information.
Information is hugely important to the notion of perception because we are being bombarded
with an overwhelming amount of sensory information.
You cannot possibly pay attention to even a significant fraction, let alone all of it,
at the same time.
So we filter out most sensory information that is reaching us and we pay attention to only
a very tiny amount of it, what our brains deem to be important.
Again, that's something that magicians have learned to exploit.
They know how to make your brain attend to one area or to one thing that's happening
and completely ignore and not perceive at all something else that's happening even though
it's right in front of you.
There are some now famous experiments in which this is demonstrated very dramatically.
Experts are asked to watch a video, for example, in which they are instructed to focus or pay
attention to one type of activity that's happening in the video.
While at the same time, something else very dramatic is happening in the video right before
your eyes and about 60% or so of people who watch the video will completely miss it.
They will be completely unaware of dramatic events happening right before their eyes simply
because they were instructed to attend to a different part of what was happening in the
video.
In fact, our focus, the amount of focus that we have can also shift around.
We can be focused on just one part of our visual field with completely ignoring the peripheral
vision or we can be on the lookout trying to diffuse our attention among a greater percentage
of our visual field.
In fact, only the very center of the visual field is highly detailed.
If you hold out your thumb at arm's length, the size of the thumb is about the area where
you have 20-20 vision if your vision is normal and healthy.
You have very extremely poor vision and you generally can't pay attention to every part
of your peripheral visual field at the same time.
We do tend to shift around to say the upper left or the lower left part of our peripheral
vision at different times.
When you do that, when you attend to one part of the visual field, the objects in that part
of the visual field are actually enhanced.
Your brain will process more of the information coming from that part of the visual field
and it will suppress information coming from other parts of the visual field.
That is an important concept as well.
It's not just that we're paying attention to only one part of our sensory information.
When we do that, we actually suppress information coming from elsewhere in order for our brains
to prevent getting distracted by all sorts of what it deems to be at the moment irrelevant
information.
What I described is what we call inattentional or attentional blindness.
We are blind to things that we are not attending to.
There is another very closely related phenomenon called change blindness.
With change blindness, we do not notice sometimes even dramatic changes that happen in our
environment.
For example, if you're looking at a picture with a lot of elements in it and the picture
flashes on and off so you're not looking at it continuously, very dramatic changes can
happen to that picture, to that scene in the flashes that it will be very difficult for
you to perceive.
You will not notice most of them.
You will be blind to the change.
Subjects have explored the extent to which we can be blind to even significant changes.
For example, now there are several experiments showing that when interacting with an unfamiliar
person, somebody you don't know personally, that person can actually change outside of
your view and about 60% of the time, subjects won't notice that they're talking to a different
person than they were just a moment ago.
Even a dramatic change such as that, changing one person for an entirely different person,
can escape our notice.
An example of our ability to only attend to a small number of things at the same time
is multitasking.
The term multitasking itself is sort of a recent invention used to define doing more
than one thing at the same time.
The research shows, however, that people essentially can't do this.
We cannot attend to more than one thing at the same time.
What people do when they are multitasking is they shift their attention back and forth
between or among the things that they are doing or that they are attending to.
But they only have so much attention.
They can only give attention to just one thing at a time.
In experiments, only about 2.5% of people, for example, were able to talk and drive at
the same time without a reduction in their driving performance.
That's a very small number.
The rest of the people had a significant decrease in their driving performance while they were
attempting to attend to something else at the same time.
In other experiments, it's ironically been demonstrated that people who think that they
are good at multitasking actually suffered from multitasking the most.
Their performance went down the greatest when they attempted to multitask.
Therefore, dividing our attention uses up cognitive resources.
It is exactly as if you, say, have 100% of your attention if you divide it between two
things and each is getting 50% of your attention and performance goes down by 50%.
In addition, it may be a little bit worse than that because you're expending a little
bit of your resources to switch back and forth and therefore both tasks suffer even more
than if you were just focusing on one at a time.
Talking on your cell phone while driving is now a very important example of this and that's
why many states now have laws that prohibit doing that because your ability to attend to
what's happening around you significantly decreases when you're just having a conversation.
Eyewitness testimony is therefore notoriously unreliable if everything I've said in this
lecture up to this point is true.
Eyewitnesses are subject to suggestion.
They have a false confidence in their own accuracy and they're subject to confabulation,
making up details.
Remember I said that our brains construct a narrative, a story.
They construct a consistent reality out of what it thinks it perceives and part of that
construction is to fill in missing pieces.
That's called confabulation and people will do that subconsciously automatically and they
will think that these pieces that they added were perceived or actually out there in reality.
Therefore perception is a construct.
That's the bottom line lesson of this lecture.
It is something that is happening inside your brain.
Each individual sensory stream is interpreted and modified.
The different streams are combined and compared and then altered based upon that comparison
and we attend to a very small subset of that information which we then weave into a whole
story adding in confabulating pieces as needed.
The end result is a story that is largely a fiction.
The brain creates illusions of a continuous congruent reality, fills in the gaps as needed,
makes assumptions that are usually but not always true resulting in illusions that are
dramatic when they're specifically designed to trick the brain.
But this happens to us every day.
Every day as we're going through our lives we don't get this objective perfect view of
reality around us.
We have this very, very imperfect constructed view.
There are also higher order constructions.
In a subsequent lecture I will talk about how sensory input is constructed into meaningful
patterns.
So not only are the components of what we perceive constructed, how we put it together
into a meaningful way is also constructed.
This will often result in unnecessary arguments from what I call an irrational faith in the
fidelity of our own perceptions.
If however we understand the limits of our perceptions then we will not overly rely upon
that.
We will not say, hey I saw it with my own eyes, seeing is believing.
We'll say, I think I saw this but honestly I don't know and I can't really know exactly
what I saw because it was something that was constructed by my brain.
In the next lecture I'm going to talk about memory because as soon as you perceive something
it becomes a memory.
So what you really have are memories which themselves are constructed and altered of
what you think you saw.
In lecture four I will go over in more detail how our memories are also constructed.
