My goal for this first section of the course is to give you an appreciation for the extent
to which what we perceive of as reality is really an illusion constructed by our brains.
In previous lectures we saw how perception is not only highly filtered but also constructed.
Memories are also not only constructed but reconstructed every time we access a memory.
And our brains further assign patterns to what we perceive and then assign meaning to
those patterns.
But the rabbit hole of this constructive process goes all the way down and in this lecture
we're going to see how far down it really goes.
Our very sense of self and what we perceive of as reality is also a constructed illusion
by our brain.
Perhaps the most persistent illusion is that our minds, that we are one cohesive consciousness.
But the reality is closer to the analogy that it is really a noisy committee.
There are little committee members inside our brain all talking to each other and in
the aggregate they form this illusion of this one consciousness that we think of as
ourselves.
There is in fact frequent conflict among these various brain regions as they each undergo
their purpose.
For example the neocortex or the frontal part of our brain has what we call executive function
whereas more primitive parts of the brain are the seats of emotion and instinct.
The neocortex is the most recently evolved part of our brain.
It's involved with social behavior, long term planning and inhibition or restraint.
Often however rather than imposing this long term planning and restraint on our more primitive
desires the neocortex may rationalize decisions that were made for us by these more primitive
regions.
For example let's say you want to eat a particularly delicious looking piece of cheesecake.
More primitive parts of your brain are motivating you with hunger and are telling you that it's
going to taste good.
You're going to feel good when you eat that cheesecake.
You want to eat it.
Your neocortex however might say wait a minute I really shouldn't have those extra calories.
This is not in my long term best interest in terms of my health etc.
And so these two brain regions come into conflict and some resolution will come out of that.
The neocortex will win and be able to restrain your behavior or it may rationalize the decision
made by the more instinctive part of the brain.
It may for example say well I'll exercise a little bit harder tomorrow or I really didn't
eat that much today so it's okay for me to have a cheesecake.
Or I've already worked so hard so I deserve a little reward.
The conflict will be resolved one way or the other.
And when it is our brains will then give us a little shot of dopamine which is the reward
neurotransmitter and it will make us feel good about resolving that conflict.
Throughout this lecture I'm going to refer to a couple of pieces of modern technology
that we use to investigate brain function.
The first is functional MRI scanning using a magnetic resonance imager in order to not
only look at the brain but to see how the brain is functioning in real time.
It is a functional scan of the brain.
The other is transcranial magnetic stimulation which is a technique for either increasing
or decreasing different regions or circuits within the brain.
This way we can tell what they contribute to the overall functioning of the brain.
In essence what modern neuroscience researchers are finding are the neural correlates to what
in some cases psychologists have been demonstrating for decades.
We can see different brain regions in conflict.
We can see the conflict resolution and then we experience that we experience as a decision
or a rationalization.
In other words our decisions seem like they are conscious.
We experience consciously making a decision.
However decisions are often made subconsciously.
They are made by a calculus and evolutionary neurobiological calculus that we are not aware
of.
For example a 2008 study published in Nature magazine used fMRI scanning to look at brain
activity while subjects were undergoing a decision making task.
What they found is that the decisions were often evident in the brain up to 10 seconds
prior to the subjects being consciously aware that they even made the decision.
About 60% of the time the researchers were able to tell what decision the subject was
going to make based upon the pattern of brain activity that was lighting up.
It wasn't 100% and fMRIs are tricky to use but this is giving an indication that there
is this subconscious processing that is leading up to the decision making process and in some
cases may even make the decision for us before we're even consciously aware of it.
Intuition is another form of subconscious processing.
Now I'm not talking about any magical or psychic insight just a sense of a decision that pops
into your head.
For example, emotional processing, social cues or our monitoring of our internal state
these largely are subconscious processes especially for example social cues.
We respond quite a bit to body language, facial expression and other things in ways that we're
not consciously aware of.
We just know that we feel a certain way about someone or about a situation without being
able to consciously deconstruct exactly why we feel that way.
Explanations are involuntary and subconscious.
We don't choose to feel angry, we just feel angry.
We then invent a reason to explain why we feel a certain way with varying degrees of
insight.
Explanations we invent by the way are typically highly self-serving.
We're very easy on ourselves when we're explaining our own feelings and behavior.
This subconscious processing goes beyond emotions however it also extends to other types of
processing like searching for a particular memory or even problem solving.
For example, have you ever had the experience of looking for something that you misplaced
and then at some time when you're not even consciously focusing on the problem anymore
the answer just quote unquote pops into your head.
You suddenly remember where you left your car keys for example.
That's because your brain was continuing to try to solve the problem, to search your
memories for the location of whatever it is you were looking for even though you weren't
consciously paying attention to it and then when the pattern was found, the match was
made that information then popped into your conscious awareness, a good everyday example
of subconscious processing in the brain.
There is one theory that has emerged recently in order to explain how the brain works in
terms of consciousness called the global workspace.
The idea is that while all the different various brain regions are like different committee
members, their own little consciousness, that they all report to some central broadly distributed
network within the brain called the global workspace.
If anything could be said therefore to be the seat of consciousness it is this global
workspace, this part of the brain.
You could also look at it as a final common pathway of all decisions and all consciousness
goes through this one central organizing area.
However, recent evidence argues against the existence of a global workspace.
There appears to be only a committee and no boss or no central location that they all
report to.
They're all just talking to each other and consciousness therefore is just the aggregate
behavior of all of these little committee members all acting together.
For example, research shows that visual perception, that we could be conscious of visual perception
without the visual cortex having to report that information to any other part of the
brain.
The visual cortex appears to be conscious of what it perceives all by itself.
Consciousness can be altered by altering the function of different specific brain regions
as well.
So you could think of this as removing one of the committee members from the discussion
and therefore the aggregate decision of that committee is altered because it's missing
the input of that one piece of the brain.
For example, researchers have inhibited the right temporal parietal junction using TMS
trans cranial magnetic stimulation.
That part of the brain is involved with what we call the theory of mind.
The ability to think about the intentions of other people.
Essentially, this is the part of the brain that gives us the insight, understanding into
the fact that other people have their own mind, their own will, their own agency and
then therefore we can speculate about what someone else might be intending to do.
That would be a very adaptive thing to be able to do in a social species.
When that part of the brain was inhibited, it altered the ability of subjects to make
moral judgments.
Those moral judgments that specifically require a theory of mind in the calculus.
For example, if the intention of another person was important to deciding how guilty they
are, did they intend harm or was it an accident, then the ability to make that moral judgment
was impaired by magnetically decreasing the function of a specific piece of the brain.
Cravings are another example.
The insular cortex is often responsible for translating physical sensations into emotions.
For example, interpreting a rapid heartbeat as feeling anxious.
But also interpreting the symptoms of physical withdrawal into cravings for the thing that
we're withdrawing from.
A study showed that patients with damage to their insular cortex lost these cravings,
lost the emotional desire to engage in drug seeking based upon their physical withdrawal
symptoms.
In many of these cases, patients who had been lifelong smokers who had made multiple attempts
to quit smoking unsuccessfully found that after they had a stroke, for example, in the
insular cortex, that they were able to immediately and easily quit smoking.
They essentially lost all of their cravings.
Let me discuss the split brain experiments.
This is a classic type of neuroscience experiment that demonstrates, I think, very nicely the
manner in which different parts of the brain construct our aggregate consciousness.
These experiments were first done by Roger Sperry and Ronald Myers in the late 1950s
and then later were reproduced by many other researchers.
This research involves patients who have had the right hemisphere and the left hemisphere
of their brain separated surgically, usually to treat epilepsy, to prevent seizures from
spreading from one part of the brain to another part of the brain, decreasing the number and
severity of those seizures, hopefully.
These patients, about 90% of the communication between the two halves of their brain is therefore
separated.
This creates a wonderful opportunity to test the aggregate consciousness of one hemisphere
separate from the aggregate consciousness of the other hemisphere.
This means that the two hemispheres contribute their own bit of consciousness but are not
combining them together.
For example, in one classic experiment, the experimenters would show a series of objects
to the right hemisphere of the subject with the split brain.
The right hemisphere in most people is the non-dominant hemisphere and the one that is
not engaged in language.
The right hemisphere, in essence, is mute.
It doesn't have the ability to speak or to understand language.
The left hemisphere is where language is, but because the two hemispheres of the brain
were separated, they were able to show only the right hemisphere and object and then see
how the individual responded to that information.
In one example, they would show a subject something like a bottle of Coca-Cola and then
just the right hemisphere and then they would immediately after that show the subject a
series of objects, of 20 objects or so, one of which is a bottle of Coca-Cola and they
would tell the subject to pick one of those objects.
The subject would then pick the bottle of Coca-Cola.
They would then ask, why did you choose the bottle of Coke?
Now, the researchers are asking the left hemisphere why the right hemisphere chose the bottle
of Coke.
The left hemisphere doesn't know because it wasn't involved in that decision.
It didn't see the bottle of Coke previously.
It's not privy to that information because of the lack of communication.
What the left hemisphere does is it confabulates or makes up a reason.
The subjects typically say something like, I was thirsty.
That's why they chose the bottle of Coke.
They don't say because I typically do strange things while I'm in this lab and you're experimenting
on me.
They don't say, I don't know.
I just felt like that was the right choice.
They invent a reason that they actually believe is the reason why they chose the Coke.
When we know experimentally that it wasn't, they chose it because their right hemisphere
was just shown a picture of the Coke.
There's more evidence that our everyday sense of reality is constructed beyond this classic
experiment of the split brain experiments.
Everything we take for granted about our concept of existence is specifically constructed
by the brain.
The sense that we are separate from the rest of the universe, for example.
We take for granted that we feel as if we are a self-contained entity.
But infants actually do not appreciate, as far as we could tell, where they end and the
rest of the universe begins.
They feel, in other words, one with the universe.
There are drugs that can inhibit brain regions, like the temporal lobes, that are involved
in this feeling of separateness, that we are a separate entity from everything else.
When those brain regions are inhibited, that can give an individual a powerful sense of
being one with the universe, which is often interpreted as a profound spiritual experience.
But it's really just inhibiting a very fundamental way in which our brains construct our sense
of self and reality.
The sensation of being inside your body, usually we feel as if not only do we occupy
our bodies, but we exist somewhere behind the eyes.
There's also a specifically constructed experience inside the brain, and researchers are developing
a model of what parts of the brain contribute to that process.
These parts of the brain also can be inhibited by drugs, by transcranial magnetic stimulation
more precisely, or more generally by oxygen deprivation.
What we find is that when you do this, this causes subjects to have an out of body experience.
They feel as if they are not inside their body, but they are floating usually somewhere
above their body.
Again, this is just a manifestation of turning off the part of your brain that makes you
feel as if you're inside your body.
That's probably something you didn't realize the brain had to do, but it does.
It's not just a passive thing that automatically happens because we are our bodies.
It's an experience that's constructed by the brain.
We further know this because we can trick the brain into locating our sense of self somewhere
outside the body.
There is now a series of experiments in which visual and tactile or touch cues are used
to trick the brain into making us feel as if we are somewhere else.
For example, subjects can be made to wear virtual reality goggles where they see an
image of themselves.
For example, there might be a camera that's videotaping them in real time and showing
the subject the image of themselves.
Then the virtual image will be touched at the same time that the subject is physically
touched in the same location.
The person will see the figure standing in front of them being touched on the right shoulder
while they feel their right shoulder being touched.
That conciliance of the visual input and the tactile input tricks the brain into suddenly
making the person feel that they are occupying this virtual avatar that they're seeing.
They now feel that they're in the body that appears to be standing 10 feet in front of
them.
There is also something that neuroscientists call the ownership module, again something
that you may not have thought your brain needs to do.
This creates the sense that we own and control the different parts of our body.
What these networks in the brain do is compare sensory information, which is both visual
and proprioceptive in addition to muscle feedback, to our intentions.
For example, the motor planning part of our brain may say that I want to raise my left
arm up and then I see that my left arm is being raised up.
I feel my arm moving through three dimensional space and the muscles are telling me that
they're executing the commands that I just gave to them.
When these all match up, then the ownership module says, yes, I own and control my left
arm.
If, however, there is a disruption in this circuit by a stroke, for example, then we
do not feel as if we own or control the limb.
This will give us the sense that what is called alien hand syndrome, the arm will feel as
if it's moving of its own will, that I am not in control of my own arm.
This is very similar to the phantom limb phenomenon.
In this case, the ownership module still owns a limb, but the limb is either dead or
is even not there.
Amputees often experience this.
For example, that circuitry in the brain that is telling me that I own and control my left
arm might still be functioning even after my left arm is amputated, so I will perceive
as if there's a limb that's not there.
This can result bizarrely in what's called a supernumerary phantom limb.
This is a very rare syndrome that has been described numerous times, however, in the
neurological literature.
What happens is if a stroke eliminates the motor control of a limb so that the limb is
paralyzed, but it doesn't disrupt the ownership module circuitry, then that ownership module
still functions, but it doesn't have a limb to control.
So it, in essence, manufactures a virtual limb that it can control.
It creates the illusion of an extra arm perhaps emerging from the middle of my body.
I will see that extra limb that's not really there.
I will feel it.
I will be able to control it by my own perceptions.
If it itches, I'll be able to scratch it and relieve the itch.
Of course, the only thing I won't be able to do with it is to manipulate external reality
because this limb only exists as a construct in my brain.
There is even one case in the literature of a man after suffering a stroke who had six
supernumerary limbs emerging from his body.
These later did disappear.
The brain is plastic and can adjust to these lesions.
So this is often a temporary phenomenon.
I mentioned previously alien hand syndrome.
This is the opposite disconnection from a phantom limb where the sensory information
does not match the motor intentions.
And this is often a fascinating syndrome.
For example, subjects who suffer from this may feel as if their hand is acting on its
own accord.
There is one case, for example, in which a woman was emptying the contents of her purse
onto the ground and had no awareness that her hand was doing this.
To her perceptions, it was acting all on its own.
Here, however, is a more everyday example of a little bit of a disconnect between our
consciousness and our motor control.
It's called the idiomotor effect.
The idiomotor effect is essentially subconscious motor control.
Little motor movements that serve a purpose but that we are not fully conscious of.
Probably one of the most common examples of this is when you're driving to a location
and most drivers will have this experience.
You arrive at your destination and you can't really even remember having driven there.
You were distracted, you were lost in thought, but you went through all of the motor movements
to drive, which can be fairly complicated without really expending any conscious effort
to do so.
It all happened more in the subconscious parts of your brain.
The Ouija board is another common example where you have three, four, five or so people
all with their hands on a little planchette which then moves across a board on which are
written letters and numbers and the game is that you're supposed to ask the spirits
or whatever a question and then the planchette will appear to move by itself in order to
spell out an answer.
Of course, each of the people who have their hands on the planchette are actually controlling
it, but their control may be so subtle and because it's shared that they may not be aware
of the contribution that they're giving to the movement and therefore it seems like it's
happening all by itself.
Moving is yet another example where people will hold divining rods and they will appear
to move when they get over a target area.
For example, if they're looking for running water when they walk over an underground location
of water, the rods will move together.
But it's been clearly demonstrated over and over again in research that the movements
of the rods are done by subconscious idiomotor control of the person holding them and that
they only really quote unquote work when the person using them knows when they're supposed
to move.
If they are blinded to the target, the effect of dousing disappears consistent with the
idiomotor effect.
Perhaps the most serious example of the idiomotor effect is facilitated communication.
In the late 1980s, some researchers felt that they had hit upon a method of communicating
with impaired children who did not have the ability to communicate whether or not they
were autistic or developmentally delayed or had some kind of a brain injury or developmental
problem that impaired their consciousness, their cognitive function and impaired their
ability to communicate.
The idea was that maybe some of these children actually are a lot brighter than they appear
to be.
They have a much more cognitive function than is apparent, but they simply don't have the
ability to speak and maybe they don't have the motor function to communicate with, for
example, a keyboard.
Therefore, a facilitator was employed.
The purpose of the facilitator was to simply hold the hand of the client and help them
point to letters on a keyboard or on a letter board.
It turns out, after the research was done in a blinded fashion, that it was the facilitator
who was doing all of the communication.
They were pointing at the letters even though they were not aware of it at all.
It was all just a manifestation of the idiomotor effect.
We also gain insight into the fact that our brain is comprised of a lot of different committee
members when we have altered states of consciousness, which might be, for example, a different subset
of those committee members contributing to the aggregate consciousness.
For example, when we dream, when we are dreaming the reality testing part of our brain, that
committee member is less active.
There are other things that we don't do well when we're dreaming, like reading, for example.
Those parts of the brain are just not as active.
We're still conscious, though.
We still have consciousness.
It's just a different consciousness than we're used to when we are fully awake.
Also, we may experience extreme sleep deprivation.
You may have experienced the intoxicating effect of certain drugs, for example.
These are all states in which you're conscious, but your brain is not functioning the same
way.
Alcohol, for example, inhibits all brain function, but especially the frontal lobes, mainly
because the frontal lobes are just a very active energy-demanding part of the brain.
They feel the effects of alcohol more acutely than perhaps other parts of the brain do.
The ability to inhibit our behavior, social inhibitions, all decrease significantly under
the effects of alcohol.
We're still conscious, but the brain is just functioning differently.
Hypnosis is yet another example of a quote-unquote altered state.
In hypnosis, however, we're not in a trance.
It's actually a state of hyper-awareness.
However, the goal of hypnosis is to give the subject some sensory information that they're
not fully conscious of.
They are in a highly suggestible state, and they're not processing all of the sensory
information that is being given to them.
Some of that sensory information is being processed subconsciously, so it can affect
their thoughts and behavior in a way that they're not aware of.
Kind of like the split-brain subjects who reach for the bottle of Coke but don't know
why.
Now, these various brain regions perform very complex processing.
This results in our desires, our motivations, and even our decisions.
The frontal lobes are involved in decision-making, but also in rationalizing those decisions
in order to remove cognitive dissonance, conflict among the various committee members.
But that is also undergoing its own calculus.
It's not simply inhibiting the decisions made by other parts of the brain.
It's making its own decisions that we call executive function.
However, to varying degrees, we can enact upon our will.
We can enact upon our frontal lobe function.
Or there are situations in which we actually can be motivated to turn off, if you will,
our critical thinking.
Research has demonstrated that when subjects are confronted with a very charismatic person,
for example, especially when that person is identified with our own in-group, if we think
that they are quote-unquote one of us, that subjects will tend to turn off their critical
thinking.
In a very real sense, they will surrender their will to the charismatic person.
For whatever reason, we evolved to do just that.
A recent fMRI study, in fact, could see this happening, could see different parts of the
brain being inhibited when confronted by a charismatic person.
In a similar process to being hypnotized, so it may turn out that when somebody uses
the phrase that the crowd was hypnotized by the speaker, they may be literally correct.
That's not just a metaphor, that a charismatic person may be able to hypnotize a crowd by
turning off their critical thinking, making them susceptible to suggestion in the same
way that a hypnotist does.
All of this brings up the question of free will.
This is a tricky philosophical question that I really can't delve into thoroughly in this
lecture, but there are those who use all of this information to question the very concept
of what they call non-causal free will.
Essentially, what they say is that everything we do is deterministic, or the result of a
deterministic physical process.
Our brains are physical, and they are just as susceptible to the laws of physics as anything
else in the world.
They are just machines, albeit very, very complicated machines.
Therefore, everything that we think, believe, and do is the result of these mechanical processes
in the brain, not any kind of extra-causal or non-causal free will.
One example of this, of this notion that we may not have as much free will as we like
to think, is that research overwhelmingly shows that human beings generally have poor
self-control.
We are very bad at consciously changing learned behavior or old habits.
Generally speaking, depending on some details, about 95% of the time people will fail to
alter their own behavior through conscious effort alone, for example, in order to lose
weight or to quit a bad behavior or habit.
It simply takes too much mental energy and vigilance.
Yes, the frontal lobes can inhibit your learned behaviors or your more instinctive or emotional
behaviors, but that's a high energy process, and it's hard to keep that energy up all the
time.
Having said that, we do make decisions, whether or not you believe in non-causal free will
or the degree to which our decisions are made subconsciously versus consciously.
At the end of the day, we are able to make a conscious decision, and understanding our
psychology and the way our brain works will help us do just that.
Perhaps it just gives more evolved, higher parts of our brain better control over the
more primitive parts.
The brain is plastic, and habits of thought can change.
Therefore, if over time you practice and you make a concerted effort to behave in certain
ways, ways that you feel are more advantageous to your long-term interest, those behaviors
will become ingrained and will become easier over time.
Practicing the habit of exhibiting executive control or executive function over your more
primitive parts of the brain can be a learned skill.
This is why we need and can benefit from formal reality testing, critical thinking.
We need formal logic and the methods of science to carefully and reliably sift through the
myriad potential patterns that we see.
This is a central concept to critical thinking.
We have the tools to do just that, and these tools I will cover in more detail in upcoming
lectures.
