I don't know about you, but I get spam email daily.
Much of it is unwanted marketing, but it also contains what used to be called chain letters.
Ask me to send somebody money or trying to change my political opinions.
In one form or another, whether it's spam, traditional mail, telemarketing, or even mainstream
ads or media, we are bombarded with motivated misinformation, trying to manipulate us in
some way.
Pursuasive speech, propaganda, and marketing have probably existed as long as human communication,
but we are also living at the dawn of the internet age.
Without question, in the last two decades, the internet and the World Wide Web have already
revolutionized how we access information.
This has led in many ways to the democratization of information access and creation.
Steadily, the barriers of editorial review and the cost of publication are being lowered.
It's amazing to think where we will be in another 10 or 20 years and beyond.
Already, it's become sort of the wild west of information where every point of view,
every bias, and every agenda can vie for equal access on the web.
More than ever, therefore, we need basic critical thinking skills to survive in this age of
misinformation.
In other words, no one is filtering information for us.
Increasingly, there are no editors or publishers between us and the information that we consume.
Anyone can publish a blog on the internet, and even books can be published one at a time
as needed, so it's a lot easier to create information.
Hopefully, we will be able then to put our own filters into place, critical thinking
filters, to assess which information out there is reliable and authoritative, and which is
biased and perhaps even malevolent.
Let's start by strolling through my spam folder to sample the kinds of misinformation that's
out there.
There are different types of scams.
Some are deliberate and malevolent.
Here is one simple example.
Many people have probably encountered this.
Reading from an email I received, my associate has helped me to send your first payment of
7,500 US dollars to you as instructed by the Malaysian government and Mr. David Cameron
of the United Kingdom Prime Minister after the last G20 meeting that was held in Malaysia,
making you one of the beneficiaries.
The email goes on to say how I can claim my 820,000 dollars.
All I need is a certificate which I can get by sending them some personal information.
This type of scam is known as the Nigerian scam because so many of them originate in
the country of Nigeria.
This is also known as a 419 scam after the relevant code.
It's not new, it dates back in fact to the 1920s, obviously far before the internet.
Initially it was spread simply by traditional mail.
But with the advent of the internet and the spam email, the ability to send out millions
of emails with very low cost, of course these scams have become much more popular and frequent.
In fact at this point in time this is a 5 billion dollar annual industry.
Obviously like many scams they are playing on the greed and gullibility of their victims.
With email they can scan for millions of potential targets, looking for nibbles.
If you answer then they will reel you in as far as they can.
First you will have to pay to get their certificate.
Then you may need to bribe a corrupt agent somewhere.
It will never stop as long as you keep responding, as long as you keep sending them money there
will always be one more thing you need to do before you get your $820,000.
Some scams even try to get you to fly to an airport in a third world country to collect
your big bags of cash.
But the purpose of this is to kidnap you and then ransom you back to your family.
Let's move on to another example.
Were 450 girls under 10 years old forcibly married to men in their 20s in a mass wedding
in Gaza in 2009?
That's the claim of countless emails, blogs and Facebook pages.
This type of scam is more of an urban legend than a crafted deception.
Although it must have started from someone who knew that they were making unwarranted
assumptions or maybe even inventing details out of whole cloth, it spreads mainly by those
who believe the content, however.
It spreads so-called virally.
People pass it along to their friends and acquaintances thinking that the information is genuine.
The evidence for the claim given is several photographs of young alleged brides with their
older grooms.
These emails, etc., were used to stir up anti-Muslim sentiment.
Fortunately, the internet is both a boon and a bane of information.
There are many sites on the internet that expose urban legends and hoax emails.
One site called Hoax Slayer has all the information needed to put this particular piece of spam
email into perspective.
There was indeed a mass wedding put on by Hamas in Gaza in 2009.
The picture itself is genuine.
It's not doctored in any way.
However, the young girls were not the brides.
They were young relatives of the grooms, nieces and cousins, mostly.
And this is the tradition in that region.
Western reporters who were present at the wedding were able to confirm this fact.
The youngest bride who was actually there was 16, and most of the brides at this mass
wedding were over 18 years old.
There were many red flags in these emails that should have raised your skeptical radar.
The tone is highly political and emotional.
There are no linked or authoritative resources given in the emails.
The pictures themselves do not provide any clear context.
Therefore they allow for misinterpretation.
And it seems unlikely that the mainstream media would have missed such a story.
None of these factors prove the story false, but they should just raise the level of skepticism.
It only took me a few minutes of an online investigation to uncover all of the information
necessary in order to put this story into context.
However, most of the people who receive such emails simply pass them along without first
doing that five minutes of investigation to find out if the information is reliable.
Often someone has already done a detailed investigation and can provide you at least
a reason to be cautious before accepting the claims in such emails.
Sometimes misinformation is not political or ideological, but speaks to a common fear
in our society.
We fear, for example, exposure to toxins and chemicals from our highly industrialized society.
We fear that we have to trust others to prepare our food for us whenever we eat out.
We fear invasion of our borders and the watering down of our values.
And we fear the intentions of others.
Those urban legends that spread are often ones that resonate with some fear or anxiety
that's common in our society.
As an example, there is the now classic spam email that claims that there is a kidney thief.
The story goes that a gentleman away on business gets picked up in the hotel bar by a beautiful
woman, only to wake up the next morning in a bathtub full of ice with a scar down his
back and one of his kidneys missing.
The implication here is that he was lured to that hotel room so that the woman could
surgically remove his kidney in order to sell it on the black market.
I always wonder upon hearing these stories though, why wouldn't the organ thief just
take all of the organs, that would net certainly a lot more money, and also leave behind no
witness.
In any case, such stories always happen to a friend of a friend.
When investigated, they never lead back to the original source.
Often they're even spread by reporters in newspapers and in online articles.
The reporters who haven't done the investigative journalism to find out that the story actually
never happened.
Here is a more recent example.
Have you heard that if you leave a fast food hamburger out, it will remain fresh for months
that it won't rot or mold?
The implication is that the hamburger is so full of artificial ingredients and preservatives
that it will not rot as regular food should.
The claim that the hamburger will not rot is sort of true, but the interpretation is
what is suspect here.
The obvious experiment to do in order to test the claim that fast food hamburgers don't
rot is to buy 100% beef from the supermarket, cook it, leave it out, and see what happens
to do a basic comparison.
A good experiment would compare the store bought hamburger to the fast food version
and control for obvious variables such as the thickness of the hamburger, the thoroughness
of the cooking, the presence of a bun or other things, and whether or not it is kept in a
sealed container or out in the open.
When such comparisons are done, it turns out that any thoroughly cooked hamburger, especially
if it's left uncovered, will not rot or mold.
The reason is the lack of water or moisture.
The dried out meat will not decay.
This process is in fact used to preserve meat for a long time.
It's the basis of beef jerky.
In human conditions, however, or when sealed in a container so that the moisture will be
trapped inside and prevent the drying out of the hamburger, the expected molding or
rotting will occur.
Also if the hamburger is thick or not thoroughly cooked so that it's still moist, it again
will rot and mold as you would expect.
There is nothing artificial or strange or scary about the fast food versions of the hamburgers
that make them not rot.
It is merely a factor of the moisture content.
Let's tackle another very common food myth, the artificial sweetener aspartame.
You may have heard that aspartame is responsible for many diseases and symptoms.
Since 1998, there has been a letter circulating claiming that aspartame is responsible for
an epidemic of multiple sclerosis, lupus, Parkinson's disease, and many other diseases.
They further claim that, and I quote, when the temperature of aspartame exceeds 86 degrees
Fahrenheit, the wood alcohol in aspartame converts to formaldehyde and then to formic
acid, which in turn causes metabolic acidosis.
The letter goes on to say that this results in methanol toxicity and that it's actually
this methanol toxicity that mimics multiple sclerosis and lupus.
They claim that many people are misdiagnosed with these diseases when in fact they just
have chronic aspartame toxicity.
It all sounds very scary.
The letter warns readers away from using aspartame and claims that if they are suffering from
almost any symptom, simply avoiding aspartame will cure them of their ailment.
Aspartame, however, has been approved for years by the FDA, the Prude and Drug Administration.
So promoters of these aspartame fears also must claim that there is a conspiracy among
manufacturers, the medical community, the people who do the research, and the FDA to
hide this awful truth about aspartame's toxicity.
Apparently also the mainstream media is either in on the conspiracy or are simply incompetent
because they have not been reporting this aspartame story at all.
What about other regulatory agencies around the world?
In the United States, we tend not to look beyond our borders.
We think that, well, if the FDA is in on it, that's all that's necessary to foist a toxin
on the public.
But there are literally hundreds of regulatory agencies around the world, all independently
evaluating the scientific evidence and coming to their own conclusions.
There are also scientists and academic institutions around the world doing independent evaluation
Every regulatory agency that has looked at the data for aspartame has come to the same
conclusion as the FDA that it is safe for human consumption.
The websites that promote the aspartame fears, however, also contain unsourced or unreferenced
claims and they base many of their claims on anecdotal reports.
So there are lots of red flags for skepticism to this claim.
There are numerous observational and experimental studies looking into aspartame toxicity.
Epidemiological studies have found no association between aspartame use and any disease or symptom.
If you remember from the lecture on the different types of scientific evidence, epidemiological
studies are observational.
They simply observe what's happening out there in the world.
And people who consume aspartame are not at any higher risk of having MS loopers or any
of the diseases it is alleged to cause.
There are also experimental studies where people are exposed to measured doses of aspartame
over time.
In fact, studies exposing subjects to up to 100 times the typical daily consumption by
users of aspartame have shown absolutely no toxicity.
What about the claim that aspartame is broken down into formaldehyde?
Aspartame is a scary-sounding chemical that's the chemical they use to preserve tissue, right?
This claim is true but highly misleading because it's not being put into its proper context.
The breakdown products of aspartame are mostly excreted from the body.
And there are many different types of breakdown products from aspartame.
A small amount, however, is ultimately converted to formaldehyde.
However, what the websites and emails trying to scare you about aspartame don't tell you
is that formaldehyde is also produced by natural metabolic processes in the body.
So just by being alive, your body is producing a small amount of formaldehyde.
The small extra amount resulting from aspartame consumption is negligible and has no measurable
health effect.
Claims like this are seemingly endless on the internet and in popular culture.
I'm asked daily about one such claim or another.
So I can't cover all of them, obviously.
You need to have some basic process or skills by which you can evaluate these claims for
yourself.
In order to assess such claims critically, there are a few basic steps, mostly common
sense, that you can do.
First, consider the source.
Is this source just some guy who sent you an email?
Is it a website that appears to have an ideological axe to grind?
Does it appear to be very emotional and fear-mongering?
Or is it an independent, respected academic institution?
Or is it a government agency who are bound by at least some reasonable strictures of
transparency?
You should also consider the plausibility of the claim, including all of the implications.
As with the aspartame claim, you can consider, well, if this is true, then where are the
researchers, the academic institutions, and the worldwide regulatory agencies on this
issue?
How is it possible that such a thing can be true?
Also, you could just consider the scientific plausibility of the claim.
With aspartame, it's a substance that you consume.
It's reasonably plausible that it could have a negative consequence.
But other claims are less plausible on their face.
And then try to find multiple reliable sources of information to see if there is a consensus
of opinion.
Never stop after just the first source you find on any question or any claim.
Always sample at least a few to see what the pattern is.
Now, on the internet, unfortunately, one claim or one source can be replicated hundreds
or thousands of times.
So you do have to follow sources back to their origin.
Sometimes it may seem as if there are many people or many sources repeating the same
claim, but they all lead back to one ultimate source.
And that's not very reassuring.
But if different independent sources have done research or evaluated a specific claim
and have come to the same conclusion, then you could be reassured that it's at least
a little bit more reliable.
Let's turn now to some common marketing strategies and how to defend against them with a bit
of critical thinking.
In previous lectures, I discussed the psychology of belief, various cognitive biases and enumeracy.
All of these phenomena can be exploited in order to manipulate you into buying something
that you otherwise would not buy.
In fact, there are journals dedicated to marketing research, the science of psychological manipulation
for making sales.
Let's start with a simple example.
Why are so many products priced as $19.95?
This is something that's always bothered me.
Does that really work?
Are people really fooled into thinking significantly differently about a $19.95 price tag as opposed
to just $20?
The answer is actually yes.
We have what is called a leftmost digit bias.
The leftmost digit disproportionately affects our assessment of cost and value.
Some researchers think that it's an inherent limitation in the amount of information that
we can process.
Remember the need for oversimplifying or for simplifying a complex issue.
We tend to just focus on the first digit, process that and not process the other digits
as much.
We see this also with odometer readings and used cars.
Retail prices for used cars drop significantly at each 10,000 mile increment.
So a car with 29,950 miles on the odometer we think is more valuable than a car with 30,000
miles on the odometer.
It really does affect our marketing decisions, our purchasing decisions and what we think
about the value of things.
Marketers also frequently exploit the need for self-esteem, specifically the need to
appear consistent to others.
A salesperson may therefore ask you, do you think this is a useful feature?
Would you say that this is handy, et cetera?
They'll ask you questions about the product they're trying to sell you, getting you to
agree to say, yes, that's a useful feature, that's valuable, I would like that.
Then if you still refuse to buy the product, that would make you seem inconsistent.
You're not purchasing something you just said you thought was valuable.
And this is enough in many cases to emotionally manipulate someone into buying something that
they otherwise would not buy.
The ultimate manifestation of this is a strategy called getting down to the last objection.
Salespeople and salesmen are actually taught to do this in some cases.
If the customer raises an objection, the salesperson can ask, so if it weren't for this one thing,
you would buy my product, then if you say yes, I would buy the product, but this is
the one reason why I just simply won't do it.
What the salesperson does at that point in time is to remove the final objection and
say, okay, I'll tell you what, I will make an adjustment so that concern is no longer
an issue.
So now if you still don't buy the product, you essentially have to admit that you just
lied to that salesperson that that was really the only final objection to your purchase.
Rather than appear inconsistent, we would rather just bite the bullet and buy something we
maybe don't want or don't need.
Many purchase decisions are made subconsciously, in fact, just like most of our decisions.
Remember from the previous lectures about our cognitive biases and the way we process
information, most of that processing is going on subconsciously and marketing research looks
at ways of affecting that subconscious processing as well.
Much of our purchases are in fact impulse buys.
According to one source, about 80% of luxury item purchases are impulse buys and about
60% of purchases made in the supermarket are impulse buys, meaning they are not the product
of a long thought out process of research, but simply a decision that we make in the
moment.
This allows for psychological factors to play a huge role in our purchasing decisions.
For example, the anchoring heuristic mentioned in a previous lecture can make a price seem
low by anchoring to a higher base price.
Another strategy is the guarantee of satisfaction.
For satisfaction is guaranteed, perhaps even with a money back guarantee.
This appears to lower the risk of the purchase, lower a barrier to the purchase, therefore
facilitating the impulse buy.
Another strategy is to make potential customers worry about a non-existent problem.
Do you suffer from X, even if X is imaginary or very, very rare?
You may not even know what it is.
They don't explain what it is.
They don't want you to know what it is.
They just want you to say, oh, there's one more thing to worry about, or I could just
buy this product and not worry about it.
There are other mechanisms of psychological manipulation, one being guilt.
Have you ever received, for example, a request for a donation with the personalized address
labels inside the envelope?
These are address labels that have your name and address on them, so they're only usable
by you.
Or you may have received a survey that contains a $1 bill enclosed, or sometimes it's a check
for $1 or $2.
These free gifts are meant to apply guilt to make you fill in the survey or send in the
donation.
Not be uncommon for a charitable institution, for example, to get up $20 donation simply
because they included 50 cents worth of labels in the envelope.
I mentioned multi-level marketing in a previous lecture on enumeracy.
Multi-level marketing is essentially a pyramid scheme where salespeople need to recruit salespeople
below them.
In order to make back their investment and in order to cover the cost of the necessary
purchases of product, each salesperson has to build their downstream, develop another
layer of five, six, or seven salespeople that pay them money.
Now, I mentioned this in enumeracy because when you do the calculations, you can quickly
see that with seven, eight, or nine iterations or levels to a multi-level marketing scheme,
there would need to be more people.
You would need to recruit essentially every person on earth.
These schemes therefore just mathematically break down very quickly.
Any area will be rapidly saturated by salespeople and, of course, everyone can't be a salesperson.
But there are other aspects to multi-level marketing that represents manipulation.
For example, the MLM structure turns their customers into a sales force.
It's easier to convince someone of the value of a product if they, in turn, are trying
to convince others of those same virtues.
So by turning customers into salespeople, you make them into very loyal customers.
Most MLM salespeople, in fact, greater than 95% lose money.
They do not make money in the endeavor.
They are mostly just deluded customers buying product for their own use or just to make
the necessary quota.
Even though they have no chance of selling what they are forced to buy and they have
no chance, unless you have gotten in very early on or at the very top of the pyramid
in an MLM, chances are you will lose money.
You have no chance of making back your investment.
Some MLMs or multi-level marketing companies, many of them, in fact, sell what we would
now call snake oil, dubious medical products with unsubstantiated health claims.
Snake oil is also sold in many traditional models as well.
These dubious health care products are increasingly common, partly due, at least in the United
States, to lax regulations.
They often make claims that are too good to be true.
Here the manipulation is the appeal to wishful thinking, such as losing weight without effort.
At times they incorporate conspiracy claims to explain away reasonable skepticism.
If it's really that easy to lose weight without exercise or cutting back on calories, or if
cancer, for example, can be prevented or cured with a simple supplement, why aren't I hearing
about this from the mainstream media or my physicians?
Why isn't this something that's much more common?
Well, it must be because there is a conspiracy to suppress this new effective treatment.
The sale of so-called snake oil often relies on testimonials, on people's stories.
There's a very good reason for this, because stories are very compelling.
We have evolved to be very compelled by the things that other people tell us.
We are more compelled, in fact, by a personal story than by the abstract concept of data
being published in a graph in a journal somewhere.
They also frequently misrepresent or misuse the scientific evidence.
Now even though stories are very compelling and some products essentially eschew the scientific
evidence, science still has a lot of marketing cachet.
If you could say that your product is supported by science, then that is a very effective
marketing strategy.
However, many of these products are not supported by science, so they have no choice but to
heavily rely on testimonials or to use what scientific evidence there is out there and
distort it and misrepresent it to make it seem as if it supports their claim.
They do this by many of the things that I discussed in the previous lecture on scientific
evidence.
They cherry-picked the data and they misapplied data, the wrong kind of data, for the wrong
purpose.
For example, they commonly will use basic science data, data about what happens in a
test tube in order to make clinical claims when there is no clinical evidence, studies
and actual people that support the specific claims that they're making.
Cults are another phenomenon that uses significant psychological manipulation.
Cults manipulate the environment to cause disorientation.
They deliberately induce sleep deprivation and even nutritional deprivation in order
to lower a prospective member's defenses.
They also do what's called love bombing.
They make a new prospective member feel unconditionally accepted.
They then build a sense of in-group acceptance and out-group rejection, the saved versus
the unsaved.
They isolate members from their family and friends, creating dependency on the group.
Cult leaders also tend to be highly charismatic individuals.
This encourages the surrendering of critical thinking capacity and free will.
All of these factors conspire together to make a new recruit very susceptible to the
message of the cult, to be enfolded in the arms of the cult and then to be cut off from
any outside information that might make them question the claims or the practices that
the cult is making.
These are just some examples of the numerous attempts to influence your beliefs and behavior
through misinformation by ideological groups, con artists, people wishing to sell you something
or to lure you into a nefarious group, and even by those who mean well but are themselves
just misinformed.
All of the critical thinking skills reviewed in this course can be applied every day to
evaluating such claims.
But you need to be skeptical not only of emails and websites but also the mainstream
media which can be a source of dubious information as we will see in the next lecture.
As we will also see, even experts can sometimes get it wrong.
