What up coordination on this podcast episode. I've got Daniel Schmackenberger. He's returning.
This is my third episode with Daniel Schmackenberger. And I think that I get a DM like once every
other week asking me when the next episode with Daniel is coming out. So I'm finally
really excited to have an answer to that question. He's back. We're talking about the Metacrisis
and how we could use Web 3 to address it, how we can map out the different vertical and
horizontal areas of the Metacrisis. And for those of you who are just tuning in, the Metacrisis is
basically this game theoretic idea of an underlying crisis driving a multitude of crises. So things
like climate change, biodiversity collapse, existential AI risk, existential risk in general.
And basically the idea is how can we use technology in order to help address or start to
address the catastrophes, which is coordination failures, things like climate change, biodiversity
collapse, but also the dystopias that result from using governance systems trying to solve for
coordination failure, creating authoritarian governments through regulation that try to
regulate coordination failures, how to create a third attractor that creates coordination,
but without the dystopia. That's kind of the idea of the Metacrisis or I guess one of the ideas
with the Metacrisis. So if you've listened to episodes one and two, you know that Daniel is
just this incredibly articulate, lucid thinker who cares so deeply about figuring out how to
address the Metacrisis because it's just so important and existential. And I really find
Daniel to be this inspiring thinker and catalyst for thinking about how to think about the
Metacrisis. And so in this episode, we kind of build on the work that was done in episodes one
and two. If you haven't listened to Daniel Schmacknerberger Green Pill episode one and two,
click the links in the show notes and listen to that first. I just give you a quick TLDR, but
the listening to those episodes will be time well spent and definitely advise listening
to episodes one and two before you listen to episode three. In episode three, we talk about
creating an attractor for Web three people to come together and start to build a taxonomy of the
Metacrisis. MetacrisisDAO.com is the launch that we're doing on this episode today. So basically
a discourse forum where people can come together and they can talk about the Metacrisis. Daniel
has given us five prompts at the end of the episode about things that the Web three community could
start doing in order to address the Metacrisis to map out the Metacrisis. And so MetacrisisDAO.com
is going to be this channel for people to come together and for the Web three community to
start supporting Daniel's work. And I'm just so excited to finally bring you this, bring you
this episode. Like I said, Daniel, having Daniel back was one of my most requested audience requests
over Twitter DMs. So I think I've said enough, let's get on to the episode. You are really gonna,
gonna love this one coordination. Without further ado, I give you Daniel Schmacknerberger.
The Glow Dollar is a new stablecoin with a very special property. As the market cap of Glow goes
up, extreme poverty goes down. Glow is a dollar backed non-profit stablecoin that creates basic
income for people living in extreme poverty. Glow is basically the same business model as USDC
with yield generating treasuries on one side and a stablecoin on Ethereum on the other. But instead
of being a for profit company, Glow is a non-profit that donates 100% of all yields from the Glow
Reserve to give directly's basic income program. Give directly is a charity that gives people
money, no strings attached to people living in poverty and is a charity that Vitalik has previously
donated to and supported in the past. With Glow, you can reduce poverty just by holding a stablecoin.
Glow is launching in early 2023 and you can join the waitlist at glowdollar.org slash greenpill.
That's glodollar.org slash greenpill.
Working in Web 3 is awesome, but working outside of the typical W2 employee structure is a deal
breaker for so many. Oplis is helping the self-solving worker focus on what they do best, their work.
Tax time is coming up. Oplis helps professionalize your business by helping you form an entity,
generate proof of employment through pay subs, and receive a W2 at the end of the tax year.
Are you self-employed and forced to spend money on expense of healthcare insurance with limited
coverage? Oplis leverages group buying power through a community employment co-op, helping you
save 20-50% on high-quality affordable healthcare options through SIGNA. And finally, Oplis' member
owners share in Oplis' success and profits based on their work token holdings. You must be authorized
to work inside the United States and select Canadian provinces to receive Oplis' benefits.
Book a 30-minute free consultation with Oplis' experts and join Oplis by March 31, 2023 to get
1,000 work and 1,000 bank tokens. Go to connect.opolis.co slash bankless to get started.
And if you're going to eThemver, make sure to stop by the Oplis booth or attend their
Future of Work Summit hosted by Oplis. Hey Daniel, what's up? Hey Kevin, happy to finally be back
for this episode three. Yeah, yeah, same. Glad to have you. Well, I guess we started off with
doing an episode about what is the metacrisis was episode one. And then episode two, we started
talking about criteria for addressing the metacrisis. We were planning on doing an episode
three and four, which were I think around how things like Web3 or technology in general could
address the metacrisis. And I think that that got a little bit side railed. So I'd be curious
kind of what you've been up to and how your thinking has evolved since we recorded episode two
with respect to addressing the metacrisis with technology.
Yeah. Yeah, so the reason I was excited to do this podcast series with you after we
met at the, you asked me to come to the Schilling Point conferences. There are so many people
in the Web3 community that are focused on things that are pretty core to metacrisis stuff. How do
we do better decentralized coordinations that can either de necessitate institutions or
actually enable institutions or fundamentally new kinds of institutions, deal with the information
singularity, deal with deep fakes, deal with corruption, deal with provenance, like really
important things. And there's a pretty stark contrast from the hopes in those areas to where
the space is at in terms of fulfillment on them and where most of the attention in the space has
actually gone. And I do think that decentralized computing, uncorruptible ledgers, the whole
field of kind of cryptographic tools that you'd call Web3 is extremely important to merging area
of tech. It's not a single technology, obviously, but a suite of technologies where the technologies
do portend really interesting solutions to some deep issues that are not like specific
topic issues, but generalized underlying issues. They also make possible new issues that didn't
exist before. And it's not that common that you get to be at the beginning of the emergence of
an entirely new field of tech, especially, you know, in this kind of post internet era where it
has the capability of having global auto poetic impact relatively quickly and being able to shape
such a space is a big deal. And specifically separating out all of the how can we inflate a
token value from how do we actually identify the meaningful regenerative crypto economics project?
I felt like you did an exceptional job of attracting the community of people who were
interested in the actually interesting things. So yeah, in our first podcast, it was, let's kind
of give this metacrisis frame what what is the whole set of global catastrophic risks and wicked
problems the world is facing and what are the underlying dynamics that give rise to them
to have some sense of what is actually needed, what is worth doing, what is a problem definition
that is deep and rich enough to actually start to think about how one would go about solving it.
And then in the second session, we actually mostly addressed the way that technologies can
affect human values individually, like have psychological effects on people and have cultural
effects. And because the fact that a technology can have unintended consequences physically to
the environment, like you make a pesticide that you intend to be a pesticide and you didn't intend
that it was going to cause cancer or things like that. There's physical externalities,
but there are also psychosocial externalities. And if you really want to ensure that the
development of technologies doesn't cause psychosocial externalities that are negative and
maybe ones that are positive and design it in, you got to kind of understand that. So that's where
we left. And we were going to, like you said months ago, go into part three and start saying, okay,
so what are novel problems that the blockchain space could cause? Because every new type of
technology makes new possibilities, new affordances, new capacities. And there are no such thing as new
types of technology that don't have some harmful applications. So let's think through that and
say, how do we ensure that the positive relative to the negative applications are more likely to
proliferate? How do we bind them as a regulation to put in mind? And whether we're talking about
hard to penetrate fucked up black markets, you know, or
auto poetic social processes that once put into place can never be changed.
You know, there are some kind of serious things to think about. There's also what are the most
important and interesting problems that blockchain could solve that whether or not they are the
flashiest from a token value or like the ones that people who really want to solve global
problems should think about. And we were going to address that. And but obviously, we don't know
all the answers to that. We don't even know close to all the answers to that. And so now I see why
you're asking the what's been new since there are some major global institutions that asked the org
that I work with to write addendums to or help them with their global risk report global catastrophic
risk reports. And we're in the process of doing that. And some of that work will come out later
this year. And being able to think through all of the emerging technology category areas from
synthetic biology to artificial intelligence to, you know, et cetera, and think through both what
are the risks associated and the problems that could be solved. And what is the combo of the
technology, the regulatory landscape, the incentives, etc. that could move it in the right
direction. I asked you if you thought there was a group of people in your extended community that
might want to do deeper research and has already been done on answering those questions regarding
Web three. And so we decided to do this podcast to not actually answer those questions, but to
kind of state what the questions are why they're important as a invitation for people to participate
who are interested in helping,
helping analyze how this emerging field of technology can should be guided in the kind
of biggest frameworks possible, which I think is extremely exciting. And I think it's really,
really rad that you took the initiative to start to put a format together where people could come
collaborate. So that's where we're at here. And I am excited to dive into the questions
today. Yeah, same. So, you know, one of the things that really stuck out from, I forgot if
it was episode one or episode two that we did together, but I think you said something to
the effect of a problem well understood is half addressed. And I think if I could summarize
what you said about where we've been over the last four to six months, you were kind of doing
these risk reports for institutions about the metacrisis and consulting on a one-off basis.
And this year, you've instead of doing these like one-off reports for these individual institutions,
it's about building a community or a resource that's kind of like live updating and can help
understand and address the metacrisis in a way that both respects its complexity and doesn't
reduce it down. And that sort of serves us becoming more, just understanding the metacrisis
a little bit more. And it's kind of like the resource that can back future reports or future
thinking that is with respect to the metacrisis. So, it feels like you're kind of like building
institutions under you or like resources under you that can help enable understanding of the
metacrisis and that'll enable other people to address it. Is that directionally how you think
about it? You know, we talked in the first session about what are some of the things that are
generator functions or underlying drivers of most of the issues. And we talked about things
like perverse incentive, that whether you're talking about climate change or species extinction
or overfishing or corruption of political parties, perverse incentives are underneath that. So,
any work that can do a deeper job of being able to identify where the incentive of any
company, country, department, individual, if is at odds with the well-being of others and
the well-being of the commons, and particularly where people are in important representative
positions and things like that, you can make improvements. So, there's all the vertical
areas, but then there's things that kind of cut across them. And perverse incentive was an example.
Externalities in decision-making processes are an example. There's something inherent to the
nature of the complexity of the world and the way we try to narrow it, right? As soon as we moved
to kind of beyond Dunbar little villages, the little tribes, division of labor specialization,
it was a huge part of how lots of beneficial things came about in coordination. But you also
end up getting a situation where because I'm not focused on the whole, I'm focused on a part,
I'm just making this kind of widget or I'm working in this domain, I can identify the
metrics of success for that domain, optimize them. My incentive and my institutional mandate is to do
that, but it affects other things and it can have harmful effects other places. And so,
you can have places where the solution to one problem is making other problems worse and vice
versa because some people know that they push back on it. And so, inherent to trying to narrow
the problem space is one of the drivers of the metacrisis and yet somebody can't think about
everything and work about on everything all the time. And so, there's a way to have kind of
metacrisis or holistically informed considerations while still focusing on a part, right? I'm working
on something that is not everything, but I am cognizant of the fact that it affects everything
and my goal is not just how do I make this cool tech that solves this problem, but how do I do
that in a way where the totality of the effects are as omnipositive as possible and not other
things. So, in this particular thing that you and I are engaging in here and inviting people into
the idea that people can work on research and development of addressing questions of how
Web3Tech can cause problems that we want to think through how to prevent and how it can help solve
problems that we want to help advance holistically across all the fields. It's still not saying
also then be thinking about that for AI and nuclear and SenseBio. It's still partitioning
into a subset of everything, but a subset that is more informed by how it interacts with everything
else. And so, I would say, yeah, in general, trying to take groups and institutions that are focused
on things and help them do it in ways that are more cognizant of what is outside of the space
of their traditional consideration to improve the consideration set is definitely something that
I'm trying to do. And I guess one other thing I'll say here is most of the time with new technology,
somebody develops and figures out new technology. It can be funded by government or by
non-profit research institutes or by the market, but the market funds a lot of it. And even if
university or whatever figured out the underlying tech, the market usually figures out how to
implement it at scale. And then it benefits something and harms some other things like
putting lead and gasoline or DDT or whatever. And the regulatory process is to say, oh, you can't
actually use that tech in that way. You got to get the lead out of the gasoline, got us up the DDT,
typically follow after the harm has happened by many decades. And so, they don't get to fix all
the harm that's happened. They just are supposed to try to stop it. When you're dealing with
lead and gasoline going in the air, you can do that, but you can't fix the fact that having
lowered the world's IQ by a billion points through the effects of the gasoline going,
the lead going into nervous systems made an indefinite number of really fucking terrible
choices that continue to affect the world forever. But as the speed of tech increases,
if you do the same thing with synthetic bio or the thing that you put out as reproducing,
and if you try to regulate it later, you can just never get it back, right? Or it's just
operating way the fuck faster, the world breaks, you have to actually do a better job of thinking
about the negative externalities and engaging the regulatory landscape ahead of time.
A lot of people here might be bothered by this because they're like fuck regulation,
governments are corrupt. So, okay, that's, but that's not an answer, right? The answer has to
be how does, how do we solve ensuring that people don't have a motive to do something that benefits
something at some short time frame, but harms lots of stuff over some long time scale? How do
we figure out how to do a better job with that? What's so interesting, every rare once in a while,
there's an opportunity where a developing space does regulation first, like there's been this
international treaty that nobody's allowed to mine Antarctica or mine the seabed. And now that
resource pressures are kind of probably going to force that to happen. Before it's allowed to
happen, there has to be this international regulatory process to say how could that happen
environmentally friendly way? It's actually very interesting. It seems like a pain in the ass from
a market capitalism point of view. But if you really think of it from an existential risk
point of view, like, well, of course, that's necessary. So with crypto and with web three,
if we're thinking about, okay, what are all the things that we think are cool that if they really
succeeded could suck and or be not that important compared to the other things, we do a landscape
analysis of how the tech should develop versus how it's likely to develop right now, what that
delta is and how do we close it being able to think through that upfront and then say through
education through culture building of what is cool through formal legal regulation through
investment groups that only invest in things that meet these criteria and not others like
through the whole suite of capacities, how do we help steer that? I think that's a fucking amazing
opportunity. And that's what kind of I'm excited about here is to be able to think through the
steering of a fundamentally powerful technological domain more consistently.
Yeah. I mean, I think it's an amazing opportunity to sort of grasp the whole elephant. You know,
there's this whole idea that, you know, blind men grasping an elephant, whoever grasps the trunk
will think that it's a hose, whoever grasps the tail will think that it's a rope, whoever grasps
the tusk will think it's a sphere, but none of them is truly grasping the whole elephant.
And the metacrisis is kind of like this thing where you have to grasp all of the different
dependencies because, you know, if you tug the rope and then the elephant goes running,
then you fuck over everyone else. And so that's why I think that what's really inspiring about
you, Daniel, is not only can you address the problem, but you're also sort of galvanizing
these resources in order to also grasp the whole elephant and then start to address,
well, hopefully we'll see, address the metacrisis. So it's at this point that I think that
I will name drop metacrisisdow.com, which is a resource that I'm launching, which will be,
it's not a dow in the sense that there's no token or anything like that. It's just a discourse
forum where people who are interested in your work that are web three native can come and try to
grasp the whole elephant. We can start to think about the metacrisis in a systemic way, a holistic
way. And we're kind of working forwards from what is the metacrisis? What are some criteria for
evolving the metacrisis? And then backwards from our knowledge of web three towards how could web
three and crypto being used to solve the metacrisis? And I think those sort of like the a priori
theory, I think, is that the metacrisis is all about avoiding catastrophes, which is basically
like coordination failures, and then dystopias, which are authoritarian governments that are sort
of reacting to coordination failures. And this, this idea of a third attractor, which is finding
a way that is not centralized in order to address the coordination failure. And for me, it feels
like a priori, web three is decentralized coordination. So we should be able to find some
ways that web three eventually will move away from doing monkey jpegs and pump and dump schemes and
solve actual systemic global coordination failures like the metacrisis. And so anyway,
metacrisis style is going to be a discourse forum and a telegram channel in which we all kind of
start to try to support your work as much as possible, Daniel. But hopefully, eventually get
to building web three solutions that that address the metacrisis. So for the listener out there
who's interested in getting involved, metacrisis.com is going to be where we are going to be
coordinating. And it's just going to be a forum post and telegram channel and maybe
eventually weekly or monthly community calls from there. So how can how can this community
support you, Daniel, is the question? Yeah, I mean, I'm super stoked that you're setting that up
and I'm excited for the people that will come. And I am grateful for the way you framed it.
I would frame it a little differently is it's actually not about I don't really need people
to support me. The people who are interested in public goods and regenerative crypto already
interested in the same stuff I'm interested in. It's more like the frameworks of thinking about
these things that we've developed to be helpful to think through the things that the people in the
space are already innately interested in how to do that better. So you know, public goods
interest in the space has to do with the recognition that Commons Management is a big deal. And that
when we're talking about the oceans or we're talking about the totality of pollinators or
biodiversity or atmosphere, we need to be able to do a fundamentally better job of
global Commons Management than we currently do. Are there like, how do we do that? Are there ways
that the affordances of the new technology make that more possible that we can get the
off chain world on chain adequately to be able to do things like actually track externalities
and make it to where the cost of an externality has to be internalized into the equation where
the entirety of the market stops being perverse. And that's pretty humongous where you actually get
to track decision making provenance in ways that will make corruption much harder. I think these
are some of the most important kinds of things somebody could be working on. I think understanding
some of the problem space just a little deeper to be able to really think through adequate
solutions is really valuable. So I know you're already engaged in this, but I would love if
kind of following this, the other people that understand kind of Metacrisis Frame and understand
Web 3 better than I do could come and speak to some of their specific thoughts on this,
like I think it'd be great to have Matan and Primavera and Glenn Weil and Jordan Hall and
Arthur Brock and, you know, all those folks because they've got a lot of very specific
thoughts, Mahayla, on specifically how to do some of those things. I will say that it would be
silly for us to not acknowledge that one of the biggest possibilities that the space may ever face,
it's going to be facing right now. And it's huge, which is technologies emerge in relationship to
other technologies, right? Like I can't without breakthroughs in metallurgy and manufacturing,
I don't get breakthroughs in the weapons that require those toolmaking tools and vice versa,
right? Without breakthroughs in GPUs, I don't get the comparable breakthroughs in AI.
And so we have to be looking at Web 3 in light of the rest of the tool stack, in addition to the
culture stack, financial stack, etc., that the world is looking at. And so at the time of this
recording, chat GPT and mid-journey and the kind of totality of generator tech being available to
the public is not only one of the most interesting stories in the world right now, but one of the
most interesting inflection points in the entire history of humanity. Because when we think about
technological revolutions, we think about how much the world changed when we figured out how to
extract oil is pretty fucking big deal, figuring out how to increase the energetic process that
our body does outside of our body that powerfully. And so we went from half a billion people to eight
billion people really fast. And we increased the total amount of calories per person consumed by
100x. That's huge. Of course, some of the externality is that we're just destroying the
planet's ability to continue to maintain us. So there's a bunch of technological epochs that have
been big, where they're taking some human capacity and kind of externalizing it. AI is obviously
taking the technology creation capacity that is novel to humans itself and externalizing it and
putting it on a exponential self-recursion loop, which is why it's such a unique fucking thing.
It's why singularity is near and the focus on AGI takeoff is such a big thing.
And I anticipate that the very limited capacities that GPT-3 going public has shown
will be shown up by GPT-4 like whether through OMPAN AI or other leading companies in the space,
will be improved upon in the next month and couple months with public releases of technology that
already exists, so much so that it will change fundamental things about the world radically
forever. Very specifically, I think, Turing test passing content generation, where humans
really cannot tell if it was produced by machines or humans across most categories,
and the speed at which that content can be produced is such a humongously world-changing thing.
And so how do you, obviously, the ability to make recursive relationships of those AIs? You
already have the Facebook AI that curates existing content based on personalized data of the person
to maximize behavioral metrics. Now that you can have content creation AIs that are not just
taking the existing content humans are making, but bespoke content based on personal harvested
data about the person and then curation AIs and the intersection of those, and you start to think
about what type of propaganda and cult generation machine taking the humans aren't rational actors
because of behavioral econ and just pushing that to the fucking asymptote of how much we can make
that not the case. Polarization, doubling down on bias, hypernormal stimuli. There is another
direction it could go, right? You could use it to do the opposite, which is personalized education
and development to help people see other points of view and to become more rational actors and
etc. There's way the fuck less incentive currently to do that direction than the other one. Now,
is there a way that the relationship between Web3 tech and AI is particularly interesting?
Yeah, right? If you start having this deep fake, ubiquitous deep fake thing, does tech like
rigorous identity start to become one of the most important things? I think that's a probably
very likely development, right? Do I know at least is this a human or a bot that is developing it?
Things on the provenance of info that goes into something,
kind of info provenance tech, I think become hugely important. So I think this is an area that
deserves a tremendous amount of attention. And I think we'll probably get a tremendous amount of
attention. I wouldn't want it to suck up all the attention in a reactive way because
how do we identify all of the externalities of environmental externalities? Let's say we take
the paper that was published since last time we talked on PFOS levels, fluorinated surfactant
levels crossing planetary boundaries globally, published a couple months ago that showed that
rainwater all around the world, even if you go off grid in the middle of Montana or Canada or
whatever, your rainwater still has beyond EPA levels of fluorinated surfactants that are carcinogens
or whatever. I can't begin to describe what a humongous fucking thing this is. So can we have
sensors? Can we have IoT sensors, etc. that are monitoring where that shit is coming from and
where it is going and actually creating both legal accountability and enforcement of financial
externalization of those costs? Same with nitrogen effluent and phosphorus effluent that's causing
dead zones. This is where guys like Greg Landua from Regen Network are looking at. We use some of
these crypto tools to help the proliferation of soil regenerative technologies rather than soil
depleting technologies. I think all of these applications are so profoundly interesting
and fascinating and frighteningly developed. I think the AI one is going to get going to get
and deserves to get a huge amount of attention right away because I think it fundamentally
portends changes about the nature of open society itself and all paparian ideas and all
rational actor theory and all representative democracy. So I think that would be a really good
kind of clarion call of coalescing the space to deal with that thing but then wanting to
simultaneously generate what is the whole problem set because if you can use crypto as one of the
tools to be able to bind AI for its more positive and less harmful applications, the combination
of those things along with the nature of the social tech is capable of being used in problem
solving technologies across all the areas. I think there's an amazing opportunity to take all
this really incredible technology that's creating existential capacity and use it for the public
good and that's my greatest hope for what crypto can accomplish. I know that we've opened up the
aperture of a lot of possibility here. For me, the thing that I just keep coming back to is
go to metacrisisdow.com, sign up to get the updates and we'll just be having discussions there.
We'll be doing possibly at some point weekly and monthly community calls. We'll see what form
things want to take and then I think that there will be work groups. I call them think
field groups because we're not paying anyone so they're think field groups about different
aspects of this and one of the things that I'm really excited about is that through my work
and through the podcasts that we've done, you've already gotten to know some people in the Web3
space who were like, for example, we talked about Steven Reed and the map of your work that he did.
This is an opportunity for people to get on your radar that who are doing really good work in the
space and I think that the thing that I can do is just shed a shelling point for people to come
and get involved and start using this tech for good. Metacrisisdow.com is where it's at.
You know, I'm curious what else you want to say before we wrap this episode. This was going to
be a shorter episode, just a bridge episode to give people an update on what we've been up to.
I'm curious what the rest of 2023 looks like for you, Daniel, and how what you're up to is going
to ebb and flow with the questions that we're asking at Metacrisisdow.
Yeah. So the questions that I would love to see really well populated,
debated, thought through, I would like to see and kind of learn from.
The first one is thinking about the entire field of web three technologies. It would be good to
even just kind of make a short taxonomy of what that means, what are all the types of technologies
and kind of primary applications that are being thought of. But in that space, what are all of the
possible negative externalities, both physically and psychosocial, that this space could either
accelerate or exacerbate or novelly create? I would like to see some just deep workshopping on
that where you just read team the fuck out of the idea of the positiveness of the crypto itself.
And say, okay, well, let's say we make uncorruptible ledgers for the provenance of
information and science or whatever so that people aren't going to be messing with the data.
So we can do better open data, open science stuff. That seems really good. Where is that not good?
Well, let's say we have a situation like we happen to have in the world today where you've got
people doing viral hunting and then gain a function research on pathogens to make
way more potentially dangerous virulent pathological pathogens, hopefully in the name of how to develop
anticipatory responses, vaccines, medicines, whatever it is. But then publish those gene sequences,
which may be before cheap gene sequencers might have been a good idea. But then say the technological
landscape changes like it has, and you have cheap gene sequencers and getting cheaper to
where we're only a few years out on the current trajectory, if it doesn't change, which hopefully
it will, of the ability to take the information about a genome and actually make it being really
quite cheap and very decentralized. And not something that only state actors have. And that
even if you tried to regulate who are the companies that can make the gene printers,
you could DIY it yourself. All right, well, now if that new technology emerges, I want to be able
to get those fucking gene sequences offline. Well, can I do that if I just made a situation where
it's impossible to do that? Well, now we need to say like, okay, is there some way to have an
uncorruptible ledger but that can have access protocols and various levels of access protocol?
Obviously, if we're trying to deal with government stuff, there is shit that shouldn't be totally
publicly available because it involves national security stuff that saying where the most vulnerable
infrastructure targets are out in the public is stupid. And yet you also don't want no provenance
on information. So how do you think through those things? So I think if one starts to just really
think through what are the technologies that and people have already been thinking through,
if you try to make a trustless system, are you actually making a system that will have cultural
effects of less trust? And, you know, do you on and on? I think a population of all of the positive,
I mean, all the possible negative applications of the tech, including not just the obvious thing,
but second, third order type things, I think that would be extraordinarily useful not to
discourage the space as a whole. It's, you know, if you look at what Bostrom did with super
intelligence and kind of populating what are all the places where super intelligence could go wrong,
I think the web three version of that would be a good idea, right? What are the places it could
go wrong to really think about how to avoid that and how to steer that? That's the first thing I
would really like to see. And the other thing, because if you then take focus on the next part,
which is the problems that can solve in the opportunities, and you haven't done that other
one, you might be wrong, where, yes, it might solve that thing, but make some other worship in
the process, you want to make sure you're not doing that. So that's why I'm making the order
of operations. The next step I would really like to see people engaging in and generating ideas on is
both by vertical topic area, like let's, by topic area, you could say planetary boundaries and
exponential tech x risk, or you can make it much narrower and just say dealing with weaponized drones
and dealing with grid fragility and dealing with fragility of the Amazon coral, etc. For each of
those types of issues, does web three tech by itself or in conjunction with other technologies,
laws, projects, enable solutions that are not currently existent? I think really trying to
populate that how could it be not by itself? How could it be part of a suite of endeavors
that enable new solutions? I think that's an extraordinarily rich, useful process. And I think
in web three folks engaging with topic matter experts in major global risk areas and global
problem areas, not just even global risk, even like SDGs and saying, what are the hardest problems
that you can't fix? What makes them wicked and really trying to see, is there anything about
the affordances of this technology that could help solve that? That would be just amazing to
populate and to kind of taxonomize. And that's kind of the vertical divisions, the deeper horizontal
divisions are things like the generator functions. How could we address perverse incentive writ large
or in different contexts? How could we address commoning writ large? How could we address
internalizing externalities in the decision making processes writ large? How could we address
turning theory of trade-offs into synergistic satisfiers? Being able to think through those
deep things, which is where if someone doesn't have enough of the metacrisis context there,
it's worth getting it. And that's why the things Stephen Reed started to put together
took all those podcasts and made it to where you can just go straight to the point in the video
where the things are talked about, because long-term video is hard to search. That's a really cool
tool right now until we have better resources. But to start to think through, what are the
solutions there? And then again, Red Team, your own solutions in the space. But you'll start to find
like, in the externality part, you might be like, God damn, some of the things we're working on are
actually terrible. Now that we think through it better and should really not happen the way they
are. That would be great. And then simultaneously, there's like, there's actually a couple areas
where we could develop things that are profoundly awesome. And we should really focus the entire
community's efforts on this and really work to get groups focused on capital investment,
focus there, et cetera. The last two things I'll say in this section is, so that's what I'd love
to see people working on. And then so far as contribution really starts to happen there,
then I look forward to learn about it and comment on it. You're mentioning that it's,
you know, there's not kind of paid work. It's more contribution that people are interested in.
I do think being able to have a small number of people who are full-time focused on that
research and being able to find the research that has already been done and some of the good work
that's been done in various places, obviously, Vitalik and Charles and lots of groups have
worked on some of these things and tried to synthesize it and taxonomize it would speed it
up a lot and who can even host the convening. And so I think if anyone listening to this likes
the general direction and wants to donate small amounts to a couple of people being able to do
that that Kevin could help manage, that would be a thing I would be really stoked on. So I'll say
that and yeah. Amazing. Well, listeners can't hear it, but if you're watching the video,
you may see it. I'm furiously typing and ticking notes and there will be a post on Metacrisis
Dow with the five prompts that you just gave us right there, Daniel. So curious to see what the
Web 3 community brings back, but the fact that you've already discovered people like Stephen Reed,
I think is hopefully a sign that there's that there's something here.
Amazing. And I mentioned a few names of people that I think would be really valuable to get on
is obviously a lot more people. I think having Audrey Tang on and a deep discussion of what
Web 3 tech and other tech, what is the what is the whole suite of both tech and like
social and government activities that would need to happen to advance better digital governance
system in relationship to state governments and where could people actually really start to make
progress with that? That'd be amazing, right? I think that'd be super valuable. And also wanted
to say there's a somebody that works with me named Chris Eddie, who I know is engaging in the
calls that you guys are doing to make sure that some of the Metacrisis analytics are available
when people are talking about them. So I'm happy about that. And yeah, I look forward to see what
comes. Amazing. Well, Daniel, I think that this is not the third episode that we were planning to
make when we started this series, but I'm very happy to be continuing to build a channel between
the Web 3 community and your work. And I'm just so thankful to you for continuing to spend time
here. I think that a lot of the world, we're recording this at the end of January in 2023,
a lot of the world has moved on from Web 3 into AI. And the fact that you still see promise here,
I just appreciate your conviction that the Web 3 community is going to be able to contribute here.
And I think that we will. So thanks for taking the time. And I hope that we prove you right.
You guys should get some of the folks from Radical Exchange on, whether plan or matter,
because the relationship between what AI does and what Web 3 can do that is critical and
relationship with it is something that they are working on, have a lot of academics contributing
to that I think would be really, really valuable. Yeah, obviously, where all the attention has a
lot to do with the economic opportunities and there was a bullshit economic opportunities in
some way associated with crypto. And I think, you know, there's the AIs there. But the problem
space that was interesting is still there, the same kind of problem space and the opportunity
space. And so everybody who is still actively focused on it, hopefully is because they're
actually independent of a bubble, really interested in what can be built that is meaningful there.
So yeah. Yeah. Well, I hope that by the time the next market cycle and the attention that comes
back on crypto associated with that arrives, that we'll have something more interesting to play
with than just toy NFTs and that Web 3 can actually have some meaningful examples of things that fund
the commons and public goods and address the metacrisis. So that is a hope. And that is what
I'll maybe end the episode on as an aspiration. Anything that I didn't ask that you want to say,
Daniel? No, I'm just, I really love what you have done with getting all the people that are
interested in the actual interesting applications in an entire space to be collaborative together.
And that's why I'm here talking with you and I'm stoked to see what comes next. So thank you,
man. Yeah, well, it's all about coordination. And, you know, you mentioned Audrey Tang and
she has this quote about how her role is not to be a minister for a certain group,
but to be a channel for greater combinations of strength and intelligence to come together.
So I think that that's an aspiration that we have with the Green Pill podcast. Hopefully,
Metacrisis Dow will become that. And yeah, so if you're listening, then open up metacrisisdow.com
on your phone or on your device and sign up and let's get this party started. And then hopefully
in six more months, we'll have something to talk about when we do episode four together.
Awesome. Thanks again, Daniel.
