Without further ado, I want to welcome Daniel Spachenberger.
I think if there was one person where most people here
were like, we need Daniel Spachenberger
or we need a specific person on, then it
was really you, some super, super happy that you're coming
on and embracing us with your sense of making ability.
And today here, I think there's a lot to cover.
I'm not pretending that we can cover everything in an hour,
but I'm hoping that we can at least
squash the surface and point people in the right directions
if they want to follow up.
And yeah, I am hoping that I think initially when we spoke,
we were thinking of taking this kind of all matter
and talking about the generator function of x-risk
and kind of like what are the, I guess,
like more abstract and long-term consequences from this.
But I think in the interest of time,
we have decided to kind of like, you pick us up
where we are right now, kind of like, what are the threats
that we should be unraveling more.
And then we see kind of like how that affects much
of the generator functions of existentialists
that you're so worried about.
So thank you so, so much for coming on today.
And it's such a pleasure to have you here.
I think you can unmute yourself whenever you want to as a co-host
and interrupt me.
Thank you so, so much for joining.
I would love for you to maybe kind of like fill us in
by just kind of like taking us on a tour of what
are kind of current developments where we are not
paying enough attention to and where the general conversation
may be not paying enough attention to
and that may have major implications down the line
and that we shouldn't be missing right now.
Thank you, Allison, for inviting me here.
This is my first of these to join,
even though a number of the people that you've had on before,
people I respect and our friends and colleagues,
I actually just want to acknowledge first
what an awesome thing that you're doing here.
I look at the list of people that you've had on in the last 10
weeks and only 10% of these people here for the first time.
It's really kind of an incredible online university
and a good use of this time.
So that's really neat.
Because I haven't been in the previous ones
and the poll said people were feeling generally better,
many of them, and you were talking about existential hope
and making opportunities.
Can you just kind of clue me in briefly
what some of the major themes of the COVID related
make things better opportunities are
that this group has been following?
Yes, for sure.
OK, so there's one I think that we may be even pursuing
a little bit after we close out the hive mind, which
is kind of like the incredible opportunities that are currently
popping up for health extension, right?
Because suddenly the whole world is worried about their health
and a lot of the kind of biotech sector money that
was already kind of like available beforehand
is really kind of like funneled into vaccines
but some of that work could later be pivoted also
into general more health and health extension efforts.
So that's on the one hand.
Meanwhile, a lot of people are out of work
and kind of that may slow innovation down
in the long run quite significantly.
Then I think on the other hand what
we talked about were a few glimpses
into the promises of the virtual world, right?
We have everything from telemedicine in India
to kind of like this really kind of flourishing
of global online universities and such
that may actually make it much harder
for the general monopolies of the kind of broken educational
systems that rely on a lot of foreign student payments
to survive that may make it much, much harder for them
to still have this almost predatory hinge on the system.
So it was a lot of what opportunities in the virtual space
are possible right now, now that VR is almost becoming
as good as a brain-computer interface.
And then we also talked a little bit
about the different ways in which culture is shifting
and which people are now kind of stepping up
and really fantastic ways in which people are kind of like
willing to tap into gray zones, gray legal areas
to save lives in which people are kind of like stepping up,
proposing legal defense funds for those who are in those gray
areas and saving lives for those people who are blowing
the whistle and in the sense in which kind of like decentralized
communities are coming together, then a few technologies
that may help us do that much better in the future,
especially from crypto commerce, but then also how many
of those technologies are currently being kind of like
exploited by more totalitarian forms of government
and all the ways in which kind of like, you know,
let's say more predatory states are kind of like seeking
the nooks and crannies in which to expand their power into,
right, and so we usually tackle kind of like always the risk
and opportunities in those areas.
And I mean, then last week we focused more on the kind of global
scale and in the ways in which currently, you know,
we have a ton of people that are really, really good at sense
making, we have a ton of people that are really good at modeling,
metaculous, FHI, they all came out with fantastic modeling efforts,
but it's just so happens that no one's really listening, right?
We have really good prediction tools already,
people are working on them, but it still kind of feels that
they're not really kind of like effectively informing action yet,
but, you know, there are a few ways, like, you know,
we talked about Dow democracy, about future keys and so on,
but they're just not really entering the mainstream discourse.
So, like, my main fear is that there are actually a lot of
opportunities available, but a lot of those people,
like I think many of us that are thinking along those lines
are just not being insulted.
So, one kind of choice that many people do have is that either
we build this kind of like parallel operating system
and hope that we can eventually perform a genetic takeover
and take over the system that is still in the fact,
or we can try to reform, but it just doesn't really seem like
there's much opportunity to put it in right now.
So, those are, I guess, a few things that we've been talking about.
I could go on the laundry list, but then I think I would be
running the salon. I definitely don't want to be doing that.
Yeah, get it. If we can't meet in person, can we meet online
and are there unique opportunities to being able to meet online
if healthcare is fucked up? Can we use it to reform healthcare
at large if education gets totally disrupted rather than have,
you know, just a generation that has major gaps in their education?
Can we reform education?
I would, like a classic example right now is the food supply chain
is we've basically, by stopping travel to stop the movement of the virus,
we also stop the movement of fertilizers and pesticides
and key supply chain dynamics that have led to this massive
culling of animals and throwing dairy away and tilling food back into the soil.
So, we have basically excessive supply that can't get where it needs,
so it's getting ruined while the demand hasn't actually gone down.
It's just we can't route it properly and the perishability
and the thin margins are such that we're actually driving hunger at scale.
So, the food supply system for give or take two billion people just got fucked.
And so, then we're like, okay, well, having a supply chain
that has that many steps of vulnerability and it isn't a good idea.
So, if we have to fix it right now, and we do because otherwise
tens of millions or hundreds of millions of people don't go hungry peacefully,
right? So, you start to get a movement from a virus to broken supply chains to hunger,
to violence, to war escalation. So, let's say we're looking at
the fact that Nigeria has the largest food insecurity population and population density
in the world, 26 million give or take people without food security and that their food system
just got completely damaged and what happened here, plus their economy because they're based
on the price of oil, right? Like almost their entire economy is based on the price of oil,
which just had this massive Saudi Arabia, Russia oil shock kind of thing.
And you look at what that starts to look like in terms of both.
So, Boko Haram is increasing and local gangs are increasing and then insurgency movements.
So, do we start to see a massive exodus Syria style from Nigeria?
Well, after Syria and the damage that happened to the EU, where do those people go?
Because the EU doesn't want to take them, right? And it's under such massive fracture pressures
already after Brexit and after COVID that some places take them and others don't.
What does that do kind of for fracture pressure? So, this is when you can start to see how like
a cascade of events like this goes, we take the damage to the food supply that's happened in India.
India and Bangladesh are particularly interesting because of the population density multiplied
by total population that is near food vulnerabilities. And so, you start to get
a damage to the food supply system there and the total number of people that can be affected is
just unprecedented, right? It's just astronomical. And we were looking at this before COVID from
climate change. So, remember that you're started off with Australia burning, right? And while there
were a number of factors, there was environmental mismanagement that led to too much downed wood
because they had prevented small fires and not dealt with the forestry well. And because
groundwater had been used up irresponsibly and whatever, there were a number of factors,
but increased dryness and heat was one of the major factors. So, then we started looking at
climate change mediated, not just do we have a climate that takes out the ability for people
to live as a whole, which we're not going to get, which is why CSER and FHA and whatever don't look
at climate change that much, but they should when they factor cascade effects, which is,
do you have a climate dynamic that leads to like, for instance, this upcoming summer in
India and Bangladesh are estimated to have 52 Celsius heat waves independent of COVID? Well,
that is enough to actually destroy most of their staple crops. And so, when you don't have food
stores, meaningful enough food stores, you can destroy the staple crops and you have people
that are right on the edge of basic needs being unmet, then what happens? So, then do the people
in like, without groundwater and without food and 52 Celsius heat just die peacefully, right? Or do
they start to try to get access to the limited resources and then violence emerges over limited
resources? So, where do those violence lines cleave along? Well, they cleave along existing
tension lines. So, does that look like Hindu-Muslim tension lines? Sure. And so, then does that look
like India-Pakistan tension that starts to mount? And so, you start to see the cascade that happens
when you have systemic fragility of this kind. So, now we still have that upcoming set of heat
waves to deal with in India on top of the fact that we already just had an unanticipated crop
failure ahead of that. Okay. So, now we're talking about how do we rebuild things? Does anybody want
to rebuild this food supply system the way that it is? Like, no, it's the most fucking terrible
thing you can imagine, right? Because if you're going to do factory farming, nobody wants that near
them because it's gruesome, right? It's environmentally gruesome, it's ethically gruesome,
it's like nobody wants those jobs. They have to usually be the jobs are largely run by
immigrants who have no other option. And so, if you're going to do gruesome factory farms and
they have to be in the areas that will accept them, then you have to ship them to far distances,
then you also have to have a very fragile supply chain that can break from something like COVID.
So, let's say we want to make our supply chains less fragile. That also means we want to increase
locality. If you want to increase locality, you have to have types of agriculture that people
are okay seeing, which is actually really good, right? Because the ability to ship the
horror somewhere else, right? The open pit mining or the mountain top removal mining or the factory
farm or the landfill that we can ship the horse somewhere else where nobody has to see it,
depend on lots of shipping and everybody thinks that life is pretty cool around here because
we put all the ugly parts somewhere else. That is actually one of the things that drives systemic
fragility. So, if we start saying, well, how do we increase food security? Well, one aspect is can
we start increasing locality in food systems? Well, doing that will also require making food
systems that are better for soil, better for animal welfare, better for the environment,
better for human health on and on, right? So, and better for preventing future zoonotic pandemics
that occur in places where you have a bunch of sick animals in a tight environment. So,
it is important to remember that right before China had SARS-CoV-2 emerge,
they had to kill a humongous percentage of all their pigs because of a swine flu that emerged
because of terrible pork-based factory farming and they had another major bird flu outbreak.
India had a bird flu outbreak because factory farms are terrible and they should not exist.
So, that is an example of something that just broke that we have to rebuild because the consequence
of not rebuilding it is too destructive for the world and we need to rebuild it differently.
There is a bunch of other examples like this. So, pretty much the way I see COVID is that it was
just a large enough global issue to set off the cascade effects of systemic fragilities
that would have been set off by something. And so, now the major issues that we are looking at are
we, you know, like, let's say we look at, so we just talked about food supply,
let's say we look at the economy. Well, we already had a situation where the percentage
of global GDP that went to debt servicing was so high that the economy was fundamentally
dead and broken, right? And we needed to restructure it in some deep way because you can't
have that much of total GDP going to debt servicing. Well, as a result of COVID,
GDP dropped everywhere and debt went way the fuck up. And we were already at an existential level
of GDP to debt ratio. So, it's like, okay, so what are the economic effects of trying to keep
propping that system up? And if you play them out, they're terrible. What does it take to fix it?
Can we actually redo global financial monetary policy, central banking policy?
What is the biggest type of step we could actually make in this place?
I think it's important to note, you know, you were mentioning something that might be able to
decrease predatory opportunism in certain places like we've heard education.
I would say since COVID has been happening, predatory opportunism has increased more than
I have ever seen it in any other time or that I can think of in history. Because when the market
gets more volatile, there's a lot more money to be made if you know how to make it. There's a lot
more money to be lost. There's also a lot more money to be made because there's more movement
occurring. So, if you're the one that is at the top of the power law distribution of intelligence
and ability to actuate, then you're going to do very well. And we saw that, right? We saw some
people get stupidly rich during the Great Depression relative to everyone else and also get
more total asymmetry of wealth as at most people are getting poorer. So, the volatility increases
asymmetries. So, when you look at all the private intelligence companies that when people leave
CIA and NSA and whatever that's where they go to work with those capabilities, who contracts them?
Who are their main customers? Well, it's financial institutions are the biggest customer. There's
plenty of other ones, right? But hedge funds and private equity funds, whatever. So,
in terms of who was getting briefings in December and then early January, this is why you sell
senators selling stock in January regarding, oh, this is actually a big fucking deal and this
is going to affect the world. If I run a hedge fund and the market is near the top of what the
market has ever been at and can't keep going like that forever. And I see that there's about to be
a major set of hits. Even if I hypothetically have a lot of money and a lot of power and a lot of
access and I could try to use that to get the CDC and the WHO to do the right thing to save a lot
of lives, that's not my job. And it's not what my incentive is. My incentive is to say, fuck,
this is the time to sell all my stocks at the top of the market. I'm going to get to rebuy them at
the bottom of the market when they are radically decreased in price and consolidate the fuck out
of the total power base. I'm also going to short the market on the entire way down. I'm going to
start shorting airlines and whatever else it is. And because of asymmetric information, asymmetric
intelligence, I'm going to know about oil shock issues and food shock issues and whatever to be
able to know which commodities to short and which ones to put options on ahead of time. Then
there were a lot of pools of capital like sovereign wealth funds and family offices that have big
pools of liquid capital that could not be well deployed recently because we had negative interest
rates on bonds. And so it's like, I can't just leave my money sitting somewhere and have it
make money and negative interest rates are because the market was so broken because so much of the
money was going to debt servicing and the global wealth inequality was so much that you had to
basically just keep pumping free money, which is what negative interest is, to keep the system from
collapsing. And so, and you didn't have very high volatility. So now those huge pools of sovereign
wealth and liquid capital are like, awesome, we get to buy up infrastructure for pennies on the
dime and consolidate power a lot. So the people who have most access to intelligence and actuation
capacity have been busier than ever during this time, not relaxing. If you have less to do,
you know that you are not at the power law distribution at the top of the power law distribution
because those people are seeing this as a maximum opportunity space, but it's the opportunity to
be able to say, oh, you know, lots of volatility, and it's not just volatility in markets. It's also
awesome. This is a great way to roll out the surveillance tech we were wanting to roll out
to get all of that data for surveillance capitalism or to increase the power of states,
if that's our particular thing to do. So that's, and now people will go for it, right? Or we can
at least force it through. Or situations where people won't be able to tend to elections in the
same way they would have previously been able to because of health issues is a great time to try
and manipulate elections. So, or if I'm China and I'm trying to advance the Belt and Road
Initiative, and there were some sticky places that weren't moving through, and it happens to be
that I'm really the only manufacturer of PPE at decent scale in the world, the places that wouldn't
sign the Belt and Road Initiative before will now, if that's the only way that they get to not die of
the plague, is that we come help them out and also not die of poverty as their economy crashes.
Or let's say that we're Russia wanting to get the Eastern Alliance Baltic state back and kind of
weaken NATO forces in EU. So just kind of think about all the power players. They're all motivated
to do the shit they were already doing. But during an equilibrium phase, it's much harder to change
the total relative power. During a time where you break up the equilibrium, you can have much more
radical changes of power coming out the other side. Think about the US coming out clearly the
world leader of World War II not going in that position and Britain coming out radically down
regulated. Everyone who is sophisticated in the game of power is seeing this as that type of thing.
So I would say the fragility has set off like we have increased, meaningfully increased risk of
violence in the US and in other developed areas at the social level of just how many people are
freaked out, right? Like they have very partial sense making in a world dominated by narrative
warfare and information warfare. So nobody feels like they can actually make real sense. So they
just do tribalism stuff. And so they're, and it's tricky, right? So they see I'm a right oriented
person. I don't know particular people that have died, but I also live in a low population density
area. And everything on the news is totally suspect as fake news. And I'm afraid of the idea
that the corruption and conspiracy and whatever would be happening to control things and actually
go down and look at my local hospital and there's nobody fucking there. And it's empty. And I see a
few other things like empty hospitals. No, of course, if you actually have a pandemic going on,
you will try to stop elective processes. And so you will have doctors going out of business and
empty hospitals while also having a real pandemic. But there's some sophistication and nuance to be
able to make sense of that whole thing. And if I don't have it, the partial perspective is pretty
compelling, right? So then I'm like, Oh, fuck, they're trying to take our freedoms away. We founded
this country based on the right to bear arms and, you know, stand up against our government. So that
thing starts to happen, right? And, and then you see simultaneous to that black guy running, get shot,
protest happens, bunch of, bunch of black people doing a protest carrying guns, right? And so you
see the like, Oh, there's lots of sides that are at meaningful tension with each other, increasing
the signaling of violence. Then we see the actual violence increasing in, in certain areas, riots
that happened in London and whatever, and then very meaningful stuff in places like Nigeria. And
then we see bigger things like, I don't think most people pay enough attention. But when you
look at General McChrystal coming out a few weeks ago, saying, I'm going to be using advanced DARPA
technology to counter the fake news that Trump is putting out, people should pay attention when a
four star general who ran covert ops for the US military, whose job was to overthrow governments
from the inside using tools of narrative warfare, talks about using advanced AI semantic capability
developed by DARPA to go against the standing president, like, that should be a signal if people
are paying attention. Oh, what the fuck, that is closer to civil war. I don't know what signals are
closer, right? So you just start looking at all those types of things. And you look at the increased
tension and signaling regarding militarism between US and China, and on and on. So we could go by
sector, whether we're talking about the financial sector, the economic sector, movements towards
violence, grid security, and say, the existing risks that were there just got accelerated by
like a decade in almost all areas. Now, the question is, to come out the other side, not way, way,
way worse, requires dealing with all that, not just dealing with the virus, but dealing with the
second and third order effects that have already kicked off. And if we don't deal with that,
we will come out way, way worse. In order to deal with it, we have to do deep enough changes that
we will say, hey, we don't want to redo food supply this way or monetary policy this way. And we
could come out much better. But that requires that the people who are thinking about how to do it
better have to be as effective at making shit happen at a global scale as the groups that are
currently working on power consolidation. Yeah, I think, yeah, man, there are so many things.
I mean, one of the things, just like, you know, I think echoing word, like,
whipping up a few of the things that you mentioned, one of the things was like being developed
and vote initiative, right? Like, I think in the previous podcast or something, you mentioned
what what if China was actually tying that, you know, kind of like to the, you know, to the
to the condition of using their digital currency, right, then like many of the kind of like digital
currencies and like of the promises of freedom that we're excited about of them previously
would kind of like fall to the wayside then. Right. And I think the same is true when you
look at like, I mean, if I look on, if I think back of how this salon started and how kind of
like optimistic I was that there's a ton of opportunities to do an incredible amount of good.
And we've been thinking about this and I think really, really smart people are on it. And I
think about it and I'm talking about it. But meanwhile, it's like, if I actually look at what's
happening in the world in the meantime, it seems like things are just slowly getting worse and worse
a little bit like on a very kind of like, you know, personal level, like I was out in San Francisco
a few days ago and like, there were like street car like car races on the street, right? Like people
with motorcycles with cars racing out like multiple people like peeing in the park, the police
totally overwhelmed, like police every every five meters wherever I went, like people just like
totally wasted everywhere on the street. And I was like, wow, this is very different to like
the types of worlds that we're thinking about on a daily basis in those global salons. So, you know,
it's kind of like we had to see that delta between meanwhile, like it's kind of painful to see like
we're always thinking in ways in which the system could be much better. But like adjusting, like
we're not taking into account many of the kind of like just very real physical kind of like
physical constraints that are like that that are kind of currently making people move, right?
And I feel like the same is true, like on, you know, if we think about it on a global scale in
terms of what what may happen with oil, like one of the things that we've been talking about is
like on the one hand, it's it's it's somewhat great that all futures are negative, because for
ones we may be able to make the move to like renewable energy, but on the other hand also
totally fucking terrifying, right? Because that may mean like much much more likely that we enter
into like violent conflict between different powers, and especially with the US currently
realizing that we just have a chip in order on a global scale, right? Like we've never seen kind of
like nations kind of like an international order moving peacefully or like switching peacefully,
right? So it's like it's just seems like it's a total weird cognitive dissonance by which
you can dream up those really amazing changes that could be occurring. Meanwhile, things are
moving really quickly in all sorts of directions in really complicated ways with not only second
order effects, but like that's why I mentioned the currency like the, you know, potentially Chinese
kind of like maybe ordering something like, you know, the digital currency if they ever
kind of like enforce something like the development vote on many others. That's on the second order,
that's almost like a third order effect. So my question, so it's a long winded way of saying
there's there seems to be a ton of opportunity. There seems to be a ton of risk. It seems like
we're really smart people together often. And I'm also speaking about your circles that are
thinking really well about this. And you just mentioned how intelligent people within the system
are gaining could make a ton of money by gaming the system with the information that they have.
So what is kind of like the kinds of information that we could be using, and the kinds of kind
of comparative advantage that we may have in putting that to the table to create the
better worlds are not the worst ones of those. Something I was personally really impressed with
and I don't mean impressed in a good way, just impressed upon me when I first started
encountering the halls of power in the world more. So top of government and of finance and
like that is how few people there were actually really good thinkers.
They were smart enough to understand how to execute certain types of things,
not particularly creative, not particularly systemic, not particularly critical, but like
just basically smart enough, they were mostly ambitious, like super fucking ambitious,
and super hardworking, and slanted heavily in the cluster B direction.
Cluster B meaning DSM-5 personality disorders, specifically the power seeking ones that are
willing because like if you don't have something psychologically wrong with you for the most part,
those are really miserable lives to be continuously engaging with people that are trying to fuck you
over and stab you in the back and lie to you so that you can just get more power that doesn't
equate to meaningful quality of life and have no real relationships because the only people that
are interacting with you want something from you. Like there has to be something mostly
psychologically wrong with you to want to gain a lot of power. So the psychological dispositions
that are power seeking, you call it sociopathy, psychopathy, narcissism tend to be willing to
put up with the difficulties and do the fucked up things necessary to win a lot of win-lose games
and get to the top of the power law distribution of power systems. And sometimes you actually need
to not have complex thoughts so that you can avoid looking at the externalities you're causing and
that you can give plausible deniability even to yourself and to be able to just execute on
some simple things which is usually where more power comes from. So then I see people who care
more and have more complex thinking not want to do things that will cause lots of externalities
and think about what the quality of life in their short period of time being alive is and not
necessarily want to be engaged in those types of financial warfare and political warfare or
whatever all the time. And so they just don't ever get much power which also means they don't
influence things very much. So basically there is a disposition, there is a systemic disposition
that makes sociopaths and their like mostly run the world. And until we actually fix that we are
just on a movement towards self-induced termination. Well I mean there is this argument of like you
know why the worst rise to the top and all of like all of those arguments that I think are usually
really you know arguments against the consolidation of power right. And I think that you've in previous
podcasts and in your writing pointed to a lot of kind of like systems that are kind of like currently
being built in the crypto commerce space in which at least you could have better sense making tools
that would make that would make those kind of tendencies much harder. But you know I wonder
whether you know you're proposing that like should we reform or should we exit and build new?
I want to speak orthogonal to that question.
In first just addressing that question I would say there's there's roughly three
horizons of focus that I pay attention to. I pay attention to like immediate triage
which isn't trying to reform the current systems and it isn't trying to build new
ones it's just trying to keep some terrible shit from happening that we can't fix afterwards.
And so like how do we prevent massive death in India right now and massive escalation of
violence? We're not even we're not going to fix capitalism or fix corruption or fix the current
Indian government to do that. It's like can we can we do the right things with supply chains and aid
and shit to be able to prevent because there are some issues that you can prevent but you can't fix
them after they've happened they they are irreversibly destructive. And so one of the things I'm very
focused on is the kind of sense making that shows us the escalation pathways to various types of
irreversible catastrophic risk so that we can identify the most targeted interventions to
stop those things from happening. So that's actually neither fixing the current systems
nor making better ones right that's just keep the patient from bleeding out.
Then there is how do we work with the current institutions to make them better because
we're not going to have post capitalist post nation state post democratic societies running
the world in the next few years we're just there's no fucking way that's going to happen.
And it's not even going to happen in the generation their generational shift has to occur
for the up leveling of systemic sense making and for good systems that start to happen somewhere
to get through the resistance necessary to be the primary operating system. So that means that the
you know 50 to 100 trillion dollars that trades hands every day that is that much
collective human incentive and human behavior is going to keep running through the systems
that's running through for a while. So we have to take those systems and make them less terrible
I'm not even going to say more good just less terrible. And that's kind of the second horizon
of focus is institutional repair. How do we take and most of the institutions we currently have
were better when they were created and then they decayed because predatory opportunism kind of
decayed them. And that's actually if you you know Samo probably spoke about that when he was on here
Michael Vassar might have the theory of institutional decay civilizational decay.
So if we look at the way that the American Republic wasn't initially intended it would
it's it's not a perfect form of governance and it of course doesn't address how to deal with a
decentralized exponential tech world and and Facebook like it doesn't they weren't thinking
about those issues so we need something better than that. But it's so many thousands of times
better than the shit we have right now that is basically like a maximally corrupt kleptocracy
pretending to be a republic and not even pretending all that much because it doesn't
matter what people think because they don't do anything which was very clear in things like
the Epstein case or even covid right now but Epstein case was very interesting to me because
that marked the hallmark in my witnessing in the US where some people still believed in the news to
where nobody actually believed in the news if they're paying attention because when Epstein died
all of the major publications whether they were believed to be right-leaning or left-leaning if
they're major publications continuously and only said when Epstein commits suicide in prison
and I just don't know anyone that actually thinks that he commits suicide in prison
and so what that meant was everyone said
what the fuck is that if the left and the right-leaning and supposedly owned by different
people and different organizations and they're all saying something that nobody believes and then
but still nobody does shit about it because nobody thinks they can do anything about it and
they're all on benzos and opiates and porn and facebook so they're kind of too weakened and
addicted to do anything anyways plus if you think about trying to go do something about it you're
like okay don't revolutions require violence the SWAT team has tanks like what the fuck do we do
against tanks so how do you deal with these things when it seems like there things are actually
relatively comfortable and no matter how upset I get by the time I've scrolled Facebook for five
minutes I forgot right like the hypernormal stimulus is strong enough that I forgot and the
seeming chance of succeeding at something seems so hard that people just it doesn't really matter
so we don't even have to pretend that there is a republic that much anymore
on the Epstein thing it's important to just kind of say here
people who paid attention there said okay wait so Mueller said
when he was trying him the first time said publicly I was told to shut this case down
that he's a Epstein is a US intelligence asset that's above my pay grade okay and then we find
out the things Epstein was involved in and we and then we hear the names it would be
part of the court investigation if it went the next day which involves presidents on both the
Republican and Democrat side let lots of other people say so this is the most important court
case in the history of the US where multiple presidents on both sides and you know people
of all kinds of power are possibly going to be indicted for like some of the worst crimes people
can think about and the dude dies in jail on suicide watch and the cameras go off and everything
the day before and we're like okay wait does that mean that there isn't really a justice system
and there isn't really a police system as a part of a justice system and there isn't really news
and the intelligence agencies are part of are involved in things that involve like child sex
trafficking anyone who's paying attention had all those thoughts and then just started doing
other shit again so the topic that comes up for me here is what does it take to think about
better systems and solutions but then what does it take to go implement them and to be
as effective at implementing as
okay if i want to protect the rainforest in south america i have to be more effective
than the multinationals and the national interests behind trying to cut the rainforest down
which is the ccp major chinese multinationals european multinationals some kremlin forces
from super corrupt politicians doing all those types of things where we lose the fucking amazon
if it continues to be some very incompetent NGOs against those forces so if you want to actually
keep it you actually have to be able to out influence them and that's one of the things
that i'm really wanting to see is typically people only start to engage in the game of influence
which is also the game of power if they are oriented towards power seeking in ways that
make them not good stewards of power and the world is fucked from this for people who are
trustworthy who could be good stewards of power groups who could be they will not for their
own intrinsic reasons be oriented to want to do that but the ones who could for the collective
good be willing to step up into that shitty life of engaging in the game of power because it's
actually good for the whole that is one of the critical things that is needed for the world to
make it right now and that's neither new systems oh so i went off that's neither like there's triage
work there's fix the existing systems there's make new better systems but all of them require
being able to move stuff effectively at a global scale yeah i think uh one thing you know like one
thing about the sense making apparatus like if you like an elephant uh in the brain when henson
kind of points out to why uh kind of like his work on predictions why he thinks that it has never
been picked up and it's basically like people don't want to know uh what's going to happen because
that means that people could have predicted wrong which means you can hope people are accountable
for having predicted wrong and for having made wrong decisions and people don't really want that
they just want to kind of collectively treat themselves and signal to each other that they're
trying to do the best but meanwhile no one actually really cares whether anything kind of like uh
whether anything gets done and like and i do worry you know that even if we had really good
sense making uh apparatus is like you know metabolism and a few other tools already out
there that are really quite fantastic but they seem to not be coupled to actuators right and and you
could say well either way you kind of like wake up the establishment so that they should be using
something like a futile key a futile key um futile governance system or we try to kind of like do
better ourselves which you know then again comes to the point of like who's willing to step up within
our community is to kind of like take the deep forward and do that uh you know and and and i think
actually meanwhile i mean you know just i think it came out today or yesterday or something right
like twitter and facebook just like now cooperating with a cdc and with a who or something to to try
to make sense of like fake news posts um about about covid 19 which then tricks people uh and
having less and less trust in any type of sense making apparatus anymore that's kind of like vaguely
in the mainstream right and people just getting more and more down the conspiracy alley because
you know as you said within the abstein case like it doesn't really seem like anyone can be
trusted anymore of the who and another like you know organs are telling you like one day
like don't wear mask the next day totally wear mask and like it's it's all super confusing it's
really really hard to kind of like figure out who to trust but i do actually think that this community
has this intrinsic benefit of like being able to have have called the shots really really early
um and so you know i i just want to kind of like maybe uh poke a little bit more on that you know
what would it you're already saying well it is almost a property of those people who should step
up to do something that they inherently don't want to um and uh and and that those who want to
may not be the right people who should who should do it so uh how do you incentivize those people
if at all or like you know what are specific kind of like projects that you think uh could
require a leader right now what do you think would be good people to take something on like you know
if you're talking quite locally and quite actionable like what what would you like people
in this community focus on more and then you know maybe we can also set amongst ourselves and take
that on i would be very unheartened if the rationalist community and the community
started to use words like sacred and devotion more
and not as a kind of it intellectually makes sense that there is a thing that we can define
this way semantically and or it's a signally kind of thing but from having experiences of
and i i don't mean to define them in some kind of pre-rational religious way but
sacred what is most precious what is most meaningful to me and what is meaningful to me more than my
own experience in my own life and why is my own experience in my own life even meaningful and
what does that tell me about the value of life and experience as a whole and then in light of that
what am i what is my devotion to and to not just what has the best utility function um
um they move in different parts of us and you have to do both
if you read the Tao Te Ching as a book of leadership it basically says in many different ways
the person who really wants to lead everybody should run away from because there's something
wrong with that guy um and they're probably basically psychologically a child and the person
who really really doesn't want to lead and everyone pushes into the position because everyone
trusts them from how they show up as long as that person doesn't start to identify with the
world too much they can probably do an r.h. job um but you asked how do we kind of push people
there i would say if people meditate on what is actually sacred to you what do you want your
life to be in service to what do you really understand is going on in the world right now
and let that be more of what has your attention than your to-do list or your facebook feed
then there'll start to be a sense of what you can't not do and it's not just for
you know personal disposition but what the greater collective need and what's meaningful
calls you to yeah i mean i think you know the rationist and i've never been there but
have the secular sources for example right and and i do think that that kind of like feeling
is something that i want to tap into with existential hope like as he created this website
with like positive visions for humanity and like it's more like a philosophy um kind of like um
blog really that i think because if you if you talk to many people that have done incredible
things they have done them because they've read very early very inspiring uh stuff that never
that they could never forget about right like it came from this like total uh kind of like
internal admiration for this incredible future that that that they could see or for this you
know really like an incredible kind of like almost like aesthetic flow state uh or something that
that came from an intrinsically positive uh place and i think that's an incredibly um kind of like
stable uh motivator right that it doesn't you know it like it doesn't make you it doesn't make you
stop very very very very quickly right and so i think having that and having that in community
i think is uh is really motivating for us i i would kind of like i i worry a little about you
know like electing like the the global leader i think you know one thing that we also often tend
to talk about in the communities is like well it took us a really long time in history to
kind of like stop asking who should be in power but to start asking more like you know what kinds
of architect decision architectures can we create uh kind of like which empower more people right so
even there i think you know this kind of like um tendency of electing you know the the right person
you know maybe we can we can do a little better than that if we get the right architectures in
place and i'm i'm curious whether you know you could point to a few specific kind of like i guess
like cooperation architectures or ways in which you think people are already cooperating well
that we could model off
it seems to me that you allison are personally working your ass off to make these videos available
to everyone that you're personally taking a bunch of leadership initiative during this time to make
a more beautiful future that you feel inspired to do and that you care about and everybody's
wouldn't be here if you weren't doing that and everyone is appreciating it and they're not all
taking equal leadership and making it happen don't get confused that decision architectures to come
about still don't take people taking leadership action to make them happen like who the fuck
figures out the decision architectures who implements them who gets people involved that's
always like inspiration on the behalf of some people that makes those things happen so don't
underweight that um that is that can be a bridge to people saying i'm going to take leadership
not to hold leadership forever i'm going to try and take some leadership to create things that
help everyone be able to participate in leadership in more democratized and better ways and that is
the healthy right kind of leadership the right kind of leadership is i will use some asymmetric
influencer power in a way that tries to increase everyone else's access to be able to do that as
well rather than to continue to increase my own asymmetry of power over everyone else
that's the what i would call legitimate versus illegitimate power and so what i'm proposing
is that legitimate power has a necessary function in moving us to a post illegitimate power dynamic
world all right taking that and um kind of acting on it by unmuting a participant who has a question
max you had a question i'm gonna meet you now
hi daniel hello um are you going to relaunch the americans project and if so please or if not
please could you present the main thesis thesis slash aims for members of the hive that are
unfamiliar with it thanks the emergence project was a name of some kind of
research and aspirations i was engaged in like a decade ago which is just part of this ongoing
thread for me of how to understand the nature of the problems in a way that gives rise to better
solutions and implement them that was a that was a particular point in time with a particular set
of collaborators and the work the insights advanced a lot since then um so i wouldn't say
relaunch that i would say that was a step in a lot of steps for me
they were you know like i started with activism young and there were certain problems i really
cared about and then i saw that the projects working on solving those problems just moved
the problems and caused other problems and you know like i very personally saw that like we worked
to get fences around to preserve for elephants in africa but it didn't address the underlying
poverty and basis of why there were poachers so the poachers started moving to hunt the mountain
gorilla and the white rhino both of which were more endangered and i'm like fuck we just worked
super hard to make the world worse because we just had more endangered animals get poached and i
started looking at all the places where that happens i'm like it's pretty much everything
because we we defined the problems too narrowly and so our solution to a narrowly defined problem
ends up externalizing harm in other areas so i started looking at more and more of the problems
how they interconnected and then are there underlying generators that give rise to them
and then also how are they are there things that are getting worse which got me in the
catastrophic and existential risk and then i'm like man there's so many fucking catastrophic
risks if we solve the top 10 we'd only buy like 10 years because there's thousands of them they're
all driven by the same generator function so we can't just deal with them all kind of as instances
we have to deal with the whole class so that led me to thinking about why do humans use white
what is it about human architecture human behavioral architectures it has us keep developing
more power and using it badly and what would it take to be able to not have us be bad stewards of
power technological power using it badly on purpose warfare and rivalry and whatever or
using it badly not on purpose meaning just externalities but you know they have cumulative
effects on that scale so that gave rise to this kind of generator functions of existential risk
work and then thinking about are there categorical solutions to those generator functions that make
a new civilization model the kernel of a new civilization those a bunch of years of work to
kind of figure out what are there and can we define a necessary and sufficient set of design
criteria for a civilization that can have exponential tech and not self-terminate
we came up in that research the answer is yes that there is actually architectures that are
possible there doesn't mean we'll get there they're hard but there are possible things
so then there was how do we work on building that and then also the next step was well
that's going to take generations and we don't get there currently if we don't do a whole bunch of
the you know triage work and working to change the current institution so what kind of both
intelligence and influence needs to happen so that's kind of the progression of
interests and projects and emergence project was one kind of step in that inquiry
I just shared a civilization emerging which I got at least quite a work from you from
I'm hoping that is one of them like another let's say data stage in that in your projection
and maybe I mean it's now 7 p.m. so what we usually do is like whoever wants to stay on stay on
but now I always want to give kind of like panelists like an easy way to bow out
and be mindful of your time maybe I mean you're super welcome to stay on I'm sure there's a
ton of questions but you know maybe as the final words or as words to lead on to into a next
discussion kind of like what are kind of like things that are currently on your mind what are
kind of like next things that you will be focusing your attention on tomorrow and the days after
and just for context if people go there civilization emerging was a blog I put up a few years ago
put a few articles on and then haven't put anything on it in several years and there's like a new
economic series part one two three four it was supposed to be an eight-part series so I described
several parts of what's wrong with economics and then never get around to finishing explaining
what to do with it because there's other stuff that became a higher priority
there's maybe still some value in some of it most of the stuff that I've been focused on
doesn't have a particular public face because not all projects benefit from a lot of attention
but there is a project that I'm working to
get over the line that will have a public face and that I would be very interested in this
community's feedback on and participation with which is a
basically a site that will be trying to help correct the information ecology in the epistemic
commons by doing both being able to vet the information space for the information that has
highest confident intervals and most significance and being able to share that in the right form so
kind of not news but meta-news but then also being able to show the epistemic process by which we
come to that so people don't just get better information to do sense making but better information
processing capabilities so sometime in the next month or so beta version of that should be up
and I look forward to hear people's thoughts on it very cool yesterday we had two models out here
one on infinity project which is like a kind of like way in which we could model the whole economy
and then the other one by Jamie Joyce was on here on COVID-19 argument chains from COVID-19
I don't know if you guys have connected but maybe that would be useful a point of touch base on as well
okay I want to give you the chance to kind of like to gracefully bow out here and meanwhile
you're also very very welcome to stay on I'm happy to I'm happy to hop off if people like to talk about
things when the speaker leaves but I'm also happy to stay and answer questions if that's desired
well we'll happily take you okay next one up we had Diego Diva I'm gonna mute you you had a
bunch of questions and I think the last one that you posted here look look quite good and I'm gonna
unmute you now all right so first of all I want to say that I'm a big fan of all the stuff that
I've been amazed by your videos and thoughts and so on Daniel the second my question is
historically the entities that became civilization like and became super organisms they're
religions and I'm curious if you have any ideas of how to create anti-rivorals or a game beish
religion like structures and what advantages and disadvantages there are in kind of co-opting or
hijacking the religious aspect of the brain in order to you know steer a burgeoning civilization
in that way yeah um it's actually really worth studying the religions that had some meaningful
endurance and were less directly violent so studying the Quakers studying the Jews like
there's some very interesting things regarding how those collective intelligence systems worked
Jews specifically being a diaspora not having a physical location to defend or to be able to
rest upon had to create this kind of decentralized collective intelligence system to have synchrony
while being in embedding cultures um so there's yeah there's a bunch of interesting things to study
there and of course we can look at the Jains and the Buddhists and groups that historically had
non-violence as higher principles and you see that like Tibet can stay safe for a pretty long time
until it actually becomes a risk and then it gets taken over by a militaristic force pretty easily right
and so one of the tricky things has been and this is like when you look at one of the things that
blows my mind is looking at the history of Christianity um and saying okay so when we look
at the Inquisition or the witch trials or the crusades or any of the things that said they were
in Jesus's name and then you look at the Gospels of Jesus saying that he who has no sin cast the
first stone like how the fuck did people figure out that piece of mental gymnastics to do that thing
right um so you start to see an evolution and you can see like the Essenes went Jain direction
with Christian kind of ideas and then the crusades went a different direction so it's almost like
the religion is like a memetic complex and it can undergo mutation and some of those will
have it propagate more and defend itself against external forces more typically those are the ones
that move it in the direction of um effective violence not always often so one of the big
questions becomes how does a peaceful culture stay peaceful while not being overtaken by
warring cultures memetically economically or militarily because if the warring culture is
willing to initiate that thing and the peaceful culture loses by default then that doesn't work
but if the peaceful culture to be able to defend itself against a militarized culture
has to reallocate all of its attention to being better at warfare than the militarized culture
it's not a peaceful culture anymore so there is that's a question I spent a lot of time with
and there are some very interesting insights on that but that's like a hole that would take
another conversation right just to mention one thing um I mean the example just cited
they're somewhat isolated biographically so I'm curious if you know are there less
violent militaristic examples or or at least an idea of how to structure a system that isn't
that isolated and still doesn't involve the militaristic ethos this is why I mentioned the Jews
and uh then also even the Quakers when they were say embedded within dominant Protestant
and other religions here in the US so you have ones that were not which is different than the
Amish who stayed isolated ones that stay isolated is one thing but ones that will be embedded within
a dominant culture and interact with that dominant culture and even get positions in the halls of power
while being able to maintain fealty to their um relationships is that's actually a very
interesting study and I will say that none of them I believe are quite adequate you could take the
masons as another example right um which are quite interesting similarly uh and I mean the masons
mostly after the US was formed um so geographic isolation is obviously one factor uh so what religion
we could create on the Mars base is one whole kind of question but the ones that geographic
proximity is one question which is what types of rituals require physical embodiment and the people
to be able to share in that way versus physical isolation which is which ones require not being
infiltrated by other means and other people yeah all right obviously that didn't really answer the
question it just expanded on the question and it's a really interesting topic and we would need
some more time yeah I also I quite like Bert Weinstein's thoughts on uh kind of like on the
evolution of religions and I think I remember um I forgot what I was with uh with Tyler Altman
when we talked about how can we create renaissance from uh from the current uh from from COVID-19
you know we're kind of like going through a few of the kind of like factors that make religions
great and we're trying to kind of like see whether you can kind of like almost uh kind of like
modulate a movement according to those but the problem is that you know like they're really
really hard to kind of like fake you know like many of the things that make them work are kind of
like because we went intrinsically uh kind of like intrinsically by into them it's really
hard to engineer a movement that has the same properties as a working religion I think well
like even the phrasing of can we utilize or hijack that set of dispositions in the brain for some
useful purpose isn't what gives rise to the experience that people have devotion to right
like there is an actual experience of belonging and experience of aspiration to ethics and
numinous experience that is an actual transcendental operator as opposed to simply an omniscient
operator thinking about a transcendental operator um so it's a it's a different thing
someone doesn't have to have sloppy metaphysics to be able to understand phenomenology
um right but you can also design it right like Muhammad probably was less Muslim than whoever
came four generations later because they were raised in it from where they are on so their
phenomenology is more entangled with the system than whoever designed the system and wrote the
so we could be the designers if not the faithful
I think it's very interesting to explore religions that emerged from authentic depth of
insight and experience that weren't seeking to be religions and yet the depth of experience and
insight about the human condition was meaningful enough and compelling enough that it had some
organic growth versus ones that were intended to gain power oftentimes for political purposes
and that were thinking about how to hijack different kinds of group think and belonging
and superstition and the different dispositions that those things will take I think is also
another very interesting inquiry all right thank you we're going to give a few and make
the chance for a few other participants to ask the questions south had another question south
I'm with you hi um can you guys hear me okay yep yeah um so I was just wondering um so Daniel
talks a lot about how you should uh think about the problem in depth to make sure that you don't
by implementing solution you don't cause other externalities um is there is there like a like
a balance to be had between uh between how much time you spend uh thinking about a problem versus
implementing because for example you can spend your whole life thinking about something to
try to implement a perfect solution to it but then in the end you won't be as as effective
as uh if you maybe implement a partial solution then kind of figure things out along the way
yeah so
sometimes the only way to actually figure out what the externalities are is to start to experiment
or to figure out how it works is to start to experiment and but the key is do I need to do
safe to fail probes and safe to fail um type experimental environments and it's going to
depend upon the degree of consequentiality so it's like what is the externality consequence
of this thing and what type of I'll tell you how I think about it it's what is the complexity
in terms of like total number order of magnitude of interactions of the situation
we're trying to interact with so let's say I'm looking at doing some biotech thing in humans
there's going to be a lot more total complexity of biological interactions that can occur than if
I'm trying to change something in a computer chip and so I think about how many what how many orders
of magnitude of interactions are here and what how many orders of magnitude have I considered
so that's one thing I'll think about is the the phase space of likely interactions relative
to what I've thought about and if that's even within rough powers of 10 I'm at least thinking
about it then I think about as best I can what are the consequences at least that are in the
second order and maybe some bit of the third order set that I can think about and the more
consequential those are also the better we want to have thought about it and the more we want to
roll it out in a progressive process so if I'm thinking about oh I just created some
self-replicating synthetic biology let's release it in the backyard and see what happens
that's a dumb idea right because the I I don't know what the externalities are going to be and
it could be that I just released gray green goo and it kills everything do I release it in a certain
kind of BSL for laboratory environment to be able to witness what's happening right like that would
be the the let's actually find out what it does because we can't just think about it we have to
experiment and get into the medium itself now if I'm looking at a hybridized crop where I just
bred a couple crops together the total amount of genetic change on that compared to a genetically
modified crop versus synthetic biology are going to have me want to do different degrees of safety
analysis so like when I think about with COVID and drugs that could help if we take a drug that's
been around for a really long time like hydroxychloroquine or methylene blue or ivermectin or whatever
drugs that we've had for 50 or 70 years and used in millions of people and have a huge amount of
long-term safety data on and now I'm just looking at are they effective I'm doing efficacy studies
I might be willing to expedite to speed up that research more than a new drug that we don't have
long-term safety data on because I might say oh well it didn't cause any major consequences in the
two months I did the trial but it's because it's but it might be causing consequences that have
delayed biological reactions to show up a year or two years later so if I already have long-term
data on safety I can do faster stuff on efficacy so I'm much more willing as from a policy perspective
to expedite FDA authorization on long-term existing drugs than new ones and I'm also more
willing to expedite drugs than vaccines because the like a small molecule drug isn't intended to
have an enduring effect whereas a vaccine is actually intended to modulate the th1 th2 systems
for years or decades or permanently and so long-term safety studies are actually more
important than something that I'm anticipating will have a longer term effect so that's an example
of like based on how much we already know that's adjacent and what basis for concern about risk
is there what degree of appropriate research would need to come in place
um I think that brings me back to like one question that I think we were almost new
into at the beginning of this which is you know given the kind of like
kind of like incredible really failure of response that we've seen I think you know in the U.S.
and you know can we how do you best make sense of that do you think that is just
plain incompetence or do you think that there's kind of like some something more under the hood
than many of us you know like maybe don't don't like to see it
do I think that
everyone who is in a position of influence has maximally good motives and that any lack of
effectiveness is simply a result of incompetence I think that's just silly when you frame it that way
right do I think that every major politician and different countries that are warring over power grabs
and uh everyone working in who would benefit from surveillance tech and who would benefit
from a collapse of the economy do I think that all the people who have major influence and could
influence institutional response really just want to save all the lives they can make everything as good
as they can keep the market from crashing and you know keep all the jobs intact and the only
reason we didn't do a better job is just incompetence I think that's just silly
I think that we have people who are in positions supposedly on behalf of some larger thing but
there is a conflict of interest where it's actually on behalf of whatever their personal
interests are and they're advancing those agendas now does that mean there is one coordinated
cabal conspiracy at the top no it means that there is a decentralized
set of opportunistic power grab incentives combined with having to do enough towards the
thing they're supposed to do that they don't get kicked out of their position and do I think
that there's an even distribution on how sociopathic everyone is no there's a there's probably a
Gaussian distribution on that um but no I think saying that you know obviously very few people
needed to die from COVID had we been paying attention in December and early January and
doing effective responses and we didn't need to fuck the whole economy and the food supply chains
that need to get damaged did all those things happen just because all of the nation states
are super bureaucratic and and the decision-making processes are slow no that's not the only reason
all right thanks I don't know whether you read by Robin Hansen came out with this post a while
ago on group A and group B alliances globally and basically making a point that after this
the kind of like economic world order will be largely defined by those people that
by those countries that have got their shit together and can trade uh like among
you know
You can see that between houses, so currently,
there's a lot of people who don't have access to it.
So, you know,
there's a lot of people who don't have access to it.
So,
there's a lot of people who don't have access to it.
So,
you know,
and those.
You can see that between houses.
So currently,
that.
So currently.
All right.
We didn't hear much.
Okay, that's fine.
Well,
I was just going to say there's a really interesting article by
Robin Hansen where he's basically talking about group A and
group B alliances and they currently like on a geopolitical
scale,
this is kind of shifting in the sense where many countries that
were previously group A lines or countries that were kind of
like more high up in the from like geopolitical order are kind
of like moving down because they're not really not getting
back together.
And the U.S. may also move into,
into a B alliance by which it may not be safe enough to be in
kind of let's say the group A alliance,
which can have flow of labor and flow of goods amongst
themselves.
And if that so happen,
and I see that kind of like on a, on a local level where,
you know,
if you have different parts of people that all have different
safety standards and some of them are keeping their shit together
and it's working really well,
you know,
that trans isn't transitive in the sense that,
you know,
you,
you,
they're,
they're certain performing and they're not all kind of like
interacting well together.
And I'm wondering on,
on a global level if,
if the same holds true in the sense that there will be kind of
like,
which,
you know,
we'll trade more with each other and,
in which perhaps like a lot of employers will move and,
and we'll kind of like entice their employees to move into,
and that won't be the same parts in which they have previously
been living.
Right.
What that may mean on a geopolitical level.
Yeah.
I mean,
we see a lot of alliance shifting already.
Right.
We see
um,
the Italy's curve finally starting to flatten was when China came in
and gave it a bunch of aid,
which included surveillance drones and other things.
So,
um,
and you see
EU and EU adjacent countries thinking that you would support them and
didn't.
Getting Chinese support or few cases,
some other types of support.
So massive alliance shifting.
We see even within the US,
the groups of states that are clustering.
So the,
the California, Oregon, Washington complex and the,
the seven state complex around New York and,
um,
I really feel that the US getting its shit together and being able to
help lead alliance efforts is pretty critical and we'll make a big
difference to the way the world plays out.
And because even though I can't say the US is actually a republic,
it at least,
it at least has that vague idea of having some values or ideals
around a republic around democracy.
Whereas when we look at China and we look at Russia and we look at Saudi
Arabian, we look at Iran and most of the other power players,
they don't even,
that's like a talker.
See is really fully embraced and I don't think,
um, exponential tech empowered autocracy is a world we want to go
towards.
And I think that if those are the players that are offering aid to the
rest of the world and the US isn't because the US is so internally
fighting over its own power because it has,
and this is how big empires die, right?
And democracies make it two to 300 years and we're almost at 250 years.
Um, there's so much power here that you have so much internal infighting
to see who gets that power that you just kind of lose awareness on
what's actually happening in the world and that you're losing relative
position to it.
And it's not that I want the US's position relative to the world to be
something in particular,
but I think that its ability to help participate with alliance efforts
for the values of roughly democratic type western civilization values,
um, having a place I think is super important.
And it's one of the things that I most want to see people engaged in is,
um,
efforts that decrease internal bipartisan warfare and create more,
um,
it more effective national governance that can then do international
alliance building better.
Thank you.
Okay.
We have two more questions from, uh,
Luke Nosek and from Yosha Bach.
Luke, I'm going to meet you.
So, so Daniel, um, you had, uh, you had said,
I'm not sure if I'd misheard you.
I think it's becoming a little more clear with your more recent,
uh, comments, something about, um, empowering people or,
uh, or distributing power.
Um, and, uh, and then you recently alluded to the public or democracy
and these things being good.
Um, can you be more specific about what the,
the problem is with power and, uh, who, uh, should,
you know, who should actually organize it so that we could do things
effectively like do international treaties.
Cause it doesn't seem like, you know,
warring parties in a democracy is a sensible way of doing it.
That's very obvious.
But what do you specifically believe about, um,
how to organize power?
We should have it and so that, uh,
you could effectively run the world and kind of like,
good things happen.
Uh, big question.
Um, uh, could go in a bunch of directions.
Do you mean like, do I think, uh,
moving towards a positive global singleton is what we should aim for?
Or is there some kind of future of democracy that we should aim for?
Or like, how do we make America better currently?
Um, and obviously when we talk about power,
there's power in the markets, which has achieved a certain way,
power in the state, power in religion and culture.
Um, yeah, I would like to be able to address where the question,
what you're interested in better.
Can't hear you currently.
I think Allison, you have to unmute him.
I'm muted for half a second.
I'm muted. There we go.
There you go. Okay.
I'd like you to be as idealistic as possible.
So none of this triage, you know, or incrementalism stuff, just, um,
um, or what do you think is possible, uh, for, uh,
for humans down in, in ideal state?
I'm not trying to get a sense of what, you know,
what your ideal, you know, political or social organization is.
I've got it. Um,
and I actually think all of those different realms are quite important
because they, um, there's, there's sort of, um, uh,
orthogonal ways of looking at, um, at the whole thing.
Some, uh, some governments can be structures that it's, it's,
there's, there's one that's autocratic over the other ones,
but, um, and many times we've had them overlapping in, in, in, in power.
You've had religious power concurrent, um, with,
you had the Catholic church and you had all the, all the kings,
uh, in the, in the middle ages concurrently.
You'll forget that with this system.
Yeah.
I think the distribution of power between those different types of
institutions was actually problematic and important.
Um, and usually became progressively more problematic.
Um, but like when you think about in the US,
the separation of the state and the market,
why we didn't just have a pure libertarian model.
We had the idea of a, of a kind of liberal democracy,
but also the separation of a state and a church.
Um, then we say liberal democracy and kind of leave the role of the church
out, um,
and mostly focus on market and, uh, and state.
And yet interestingly,
you read all of the founding father comments about the need for people to
have some kind of moral education as well as a, um, you know,
formal civic education for anything like democratic process to work.
The way I think about that, and I'll mention the longer term one,
um, but the way I think about that briefly is.
The reason that a state was put in place in this,
in the kind of US experiment, um, was it was seen that markets could
solve most problems or solve a lot of the problems in terms of innovation
and efficiency,
but that they also would lead to organized crime and they would lead to
tragedy of the commons and different types of, um, places where it was
incentivized to do things that really created a shitty quality of life for
everyone.
So there was an idea that there was to be a state that had some kind of,
uh,
ability to regulate the most predatory aspects of markets.
Um,
and so there was this idea of law and a monopoly of violence to be able to
institute law that was based on jurisprudence,
which is based on ethics and which is why the,
the founding documents are kind of existential ethical documents.
And that's actually where the role of the church came in,
which was we didn't want a single church having dominion over that,
but the idea that there was.
Phyllis saw the church and the academy, right?
That there were deep considerations of what is a good life that is informing
ethics. It's informing jurisprudence.
It's informing law to be able to bind the predatory aspects of markets while
facilitate the helpful aspects of markets simultaneously.
And kind of the way I see it is that the markets,
the predatory aspects were designed to be bound by the state,
but the state was to buy designed to be bound by a educated and engaged
populace and where the state was of foreign by the people.
And otherwise you get the watchdog issue where you have maximum incentive for
the market forces to capture the regulatory forces and then just get crony
capitalism, but in order for, and then the people are actually bound by the
market, which means accounting that they can't ask for rights.
They aren't willing to take responsibilities for,
and they can't, you know,
implement shit where the, where the accounting doesn't work out.
And if you kind of think of that, there's a really nice balance in it,
but it's easy to see how asymmetries of power emerge where even though there's
aggregate symmetry between supply side and demand side,
there's more coordination on supply side than there is on demand side.
So you start getting asymmetric information,
warfares that lead to a less educated and plus just natural human weakness at
scale that lead to the population not checking the government and then the
state force, the market forces capturing it.
So I think there's some stuff that can be done to actually reverse this
institutional decay and make a better version of this thing.
And I'm actually very interested in that.
I don't think it meets the sufficiency criteria longterm.
And so then the question of what is a more visionary longterm distribution
of power and choice making look like.
I can say that I don't know because we haven't implemented it and the ideas
that I have about it, I don't know if we'll work,
but I have thoughts on this topic that have to do with one of the ways that
I frame it up.
If you think about,
if you think about kind of Jeffrey West's analysis and scale and the
correspondence of that with kind of Dunbar society limits and the idea that
in general intended groups of people, whether they're companies or
countries get diminishing collective intelligence and productive capacity
at scale beyond give or take in evolutionary tribal size,
then that ends up creating a basis for smaller groups to be more intelligent
relative to the larger group.
And you both have an incentive for defection and the capacity to defect
and get away with it because the larger group becomes stupider and can't do
the appropriate accounting.
So you end up getting niches for sociopathic predatory behavior on this
system.
Whereas if you had linear development or super linear development of collective
intelligence as a function of scale as you go above Dunbar number,
you could have the group be smart enough to actually notice and bind the
sociopathic defections where everyone would do better by being,
by participating with the collective intelligence system and defecting
against it.
Now exactly how do we instantiate that?
Again, I think that goes, it's a conversation I would love to have,
a conversation I'd love to have with you.
That takes a much longer chunk of time.
Okay, wow.
I realized that like the line of questions is just starting to ramp up.
Oh man, okay, how do we do this best?
I mean, would you be able to say them for one more question and then we cut it
out?
Sure.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yasha, maybe you do one more question and then maybe Luke and Daniel,
I can convince both of you to come on and talk it out on the next one
together.
Okay.
Yasha, I'll search for you.
Yasha.
Okay.
I'm meeting you now.
Good evening.
Good evening.
Thank you, Daniel.
This was amazing.
It was very right range.
I think that the, how to find the best system question seems to come down to
something that might be eventually contradictory,
like how can we combine the benefits of competent totalitarianism with the
robustness and self-actualization and nonviolence of a well entrenched
society.
And it's on top of a very diverse and pluralist population in society and
cultural traditions.
So that is a super difficult question and probably won't be able to solve it
tonight.
So a very simple question maybe in the end,
what would happen if we take the present situation where the FDA is blocking
testing and is together with the CDC and some other institutions,
what is their record responsible for the deaths of something like more than
90,000 Americans that would have died?
How can we solve that in a situation caused by forking the FDA?
What would happen if California, for instance,
forks the FDA and the federal agencies will look very grimly at us.
But at the moment,
the situation seems to be a weakness of the federal government that would
allow to renegotiate the distribution between federal and local power and create
therapy techniques.
Yeah.
I will also say I don't know the answer to this.
We'd need to look in at more depth,
but a few thoughts that come to mind.
I think states can do totally fucked up stuff and have people who are very power
seeking at the level of states,
even at the level of cities,
but they don't have like states don't have nukes,
even though nukes might live in a state the federal government does and they
don't states have a national guard,
but they don't have weapons of mass destruction and they don't have the same
types of massive power consolidation.
So I think the 10th amendment is very important.
And I think the movement to an increased like when we talk about things that could
get worse or better right now in the U.S.
The idea that states become more relevant is actually a possibly very good idea
with while having the factor for.
Right and left states moving in further apart directions and increased tension
between them.
So we have to factor for that,
but that's mostly engineered.
That's mostly narrative warfare engineered and could be addressed,
but I do think taking it beyond the state down to the city level is better
because cities are real things and states are fictions just like nation states
or fictions like where the boundary is is was determined in a war or a trade
or whatever,
but cities are based on the actual goods and services and transportation
dynamics that need to be within a particular space of each other.
So I think and this is what Jeffrey West was showing in scale was that cities
actually do have productive capacity that can be linear or super linear as a
function of population.
So I think having more governance at the level of cities is very interesting
and then having coalitions of cities network network dynamics between cities
cities and the surrounding metropolitan areas pretty much defined by
transportation dynamics and.
There are obviously also tricky things where like let's say we're dealing with
a pandemic where let's say an area closes off its border and figures out how
to become a green zone, but the other areas adjacent to it don't.
Well, it doesn't actually get to reopen its border and re issue life without
the other areas doing that or in a one person can cause the infections again.
So this is a place where the rights of individual places and their responsibility
to each other are just so profoundly connected,
which is why this is such a big deal.
I think one, I think there's some stuff that's fucked up about the way tests
have been blocked and rolled out.
I think I think there's a lot about it, but I also think that there's a lot
that's really bad about the tests like I don't think the amino assays are
useful for test and trace or really diagnosis for suppression at all there.
It takes too many days from the time you were exposed in our infectious for
the antibodies to show up and the even even if you have one that had very
low false negatives at that point.
And then there's too much that isn't known about what the antibodies actually
mean yet or how long they last or the decay rate on them or any of those things.
So I think we would need high sensitivity PCR that could be very,
very widely utilized to be able to have testing really become very meaningful
as a suppression strategy.
And so we're not waiting for antibody response in the blood.
We're being able to detect presence of the virus in the mucoso.
So, you know, nasal and oral swabs.
And I think we could roll out specific areas could roll out those types
of diagnostics and be able to show the effectiveness of it mostly commercially
and with local government participation.
And I think if it showed enough effectiveness.
So like we're talking with some people in Las Vegas because Las Vegas is very
focused on reopening because they're losing like a billion dollars a week
per casino or whatever staying closed.
So they really want to reopen, but Vegas by itself reopening could cause the
infection to never go away in the world because people come from all over touch
everything together in a closed air environment and circulated air and then
fly back to the rest of the world.
But they also have all the money to actually do the thing properly.
And the local government gets enough money from them.
They want to really participate.
So they could roll out HEPA filters and PECO filters and nanotech surface
treatments and detection mechanisms and get the security on them right.
And points of contact rapid turnaround PCR diagnostics and actually be able
to invest the capital to show the effectiveness to then be able to
lower the economies of scale and the questions of if it's true or not to
then get them implemented other places.
So I'm interested in some of those approaches.
Thank you so, so much for joining today.
I mean, even though you stayed on for 45 minutes longer almost then
intended, I think we've again just like very special service.
So thank you so, so much for actually joining.
So bye-bye everyone.
See you tomorrow.
Thank you, Daniel.
