You've probably noticed that in the past 10 or 15 years, the popularity of forensic
science, especially as its portrayed in books, television shows, and movies, has exploded.
If you're one of the millions who watch these investigations on screen, have you ever wondered
how accurate the portrayals of forensic science really are?
Popular media has always featured things that we would now call forensic science, from Shakespeare's
poisonings, the great Sherlock Holmes, Silence of the Lambs, and the many iterations of CSI.
But in this course, we'll examine some real forensic casework and the technology, science,
and sleuthing used to unravel it.
We'll see that Hollywood sometimes gets it dead wrong, pun intentional, especially in
some things like timing and looks.
I'm here to tell you that young starlets and high heels are not your typical death investigators,
and we definitely don't get our DNA results back after the commercial break.
I'm Dr. Beth Murray, and I've been a practicing forensic scientist since 1986, and a college
professor since 1989.
Because of that, I like to say I was forensic before forensic was cool.
My main involvement in the field of forensics is as an anthropologist, and most of what
I do involves bones.
But during my many years of experience, I've interacted with and learned from lots of fellow
forensic experts.
I also teach a survey course about forensic science that covers something about all the
specialties you'll learn about in this series.
One of the things I've learned over the years through my many, many different interactions
with others in the field, and from working lots of types of cases, some suspicious and
some clearly criminal, is that forensic science is very interdisciplinary.
I got my PhD through the Department of Interdisciplinary Studies, and I've always been intrigued by
how a single problem is approached from multiple directions.
If you ask most of the general public what the term forensic means, you get lots of different
answers.
But I imagine the most common misconception is that many people think forensic science
is mostly about criminal activity leading to death.
In fact, because of the emphasis on death in today's big and small screen Hollywood
interpretations, plenty of people probably believe that forensic equals death.
But those of you who are my age or older might remember that when we were in high school,
the quotes forensic team was not a hip group of criminal investigators, but rather the
kids in the debate club.
That's because the word forensic actually comes from the Latin word for public, which
is forum.
So to use the term forensic actually means that something is open to public debate or
up for public interpretation.
Because the legal system is founded on debate and argument, what forensic science really
means is to use science to inform legal matters, and that includes both criminal and civil
issues.
But it's important to remember when talking about forensic science that while legal systems
may differ in what is or is not considered criminal activity throughout the world, what
constitutes good science does not.
Good science is universal.
That's because science isn't really a thing.
Science is a process.
I like to tell my students, science is not truth.
If you want truth, go down the hall of the philosophy department.
Science is really a search, a search for information that helps us explain our world.
Science isn't a bunch of facts that are static.
It's really a way of learning about our universe.
Okay, those of you who had horrible science classes in school probably remember something
like this.
The teacher comes into the room and writes a list of 20 words on the board, and your
job in science class that day is to write the definitions of those words on your paper.
Hello, that is not studying science, that's studying vocabulary.
Sure, we need to have common terminology so that we can understand each other, but come
on, that's not the heart and soul of science.
Those of you who had incredible experiences in science class like I did, and maybe that
makes all the difference in the world.
Well, those of you who had a great time, you probably remember doing some awesome lab experiments.
And I have to say that understanding the inner workings behind stuff you see every day is
something that still amazes me.
If you were like me, you ordered the sea monkeys out of the back of a comic book, and you took
your radio apart, and you poked around in the woods every chance you got, because that,
my friends, is how a scientist grows up.
Okay, for those of you who forgot, let's do a quick review of how you do science.
We call it the scientific method, right?
Now come on, wait, don't turn the video off just yet.
I promise this will be as quick and painless as I can possibly make it.
Basically, the first step in the scientific method is to make some type of observation
about something, like a plant growing really well in a certain part of your garden.
Then, the next step is to generate what's known as a hypothesis.
That's your initial attempt to explain your observation.
Hey, maybe this plant's growing really well because it's getting plenty of sun, or in
my case, maybe it's growing really well because that's the spot where I buried my cat.
Next, if you want to test your hypothesis, you're going to have to do some experiments
and collect some data.
That might be simple, or it could get pretty complex.
It depends on the nature of your issue at hand.
Then you have to analyze the results of your experiments and compare them to your original
hypothesis.
If the conclusions from your experiment match up to your hypothesis, then you might have
a handle on the best explanation for the thing you're trying to understand.
But on the other hand, if your experiments don't support your hypothesis, you need to
throw out your original hypothesis and come up with another explanation for the thing you're
trying to understand.
This might sound pretty sophisticated, but think about how often you really do use the
scientific method in your everyday life, whether you realize it or not.
You walk into your house, you flip on a light switch, and the light doesn't come on.
There's your observation.
Now you create a hypothesis as to why the light didn't come on, and then you test it.
The bulb might be burned out, the lamp might be unplugged, or there may be a blown fuse.
All those are testable hypotheses that we automatically come up with, because in general
we're all curious beings, and when it comes down to it we're all pretty good problem solvers.
You can probably think of a dozen more examples of how we're all natural born scientists.
You try to start your car and it doesn't work.
You follow a recipe by the book and it doesn't turn out right.
Your dog refuses to use his front paw.
Your grandchild's unhappy.
These are all typical observations that we generate possible explanations about, and
those explanations could be called hypotheses that we don't usually use that word.
Every day at home or at work, in restaurants, airports, grocery stores, we make observations
and invent explanations for them.
Some of these hypotheses are testable, while others aren't much more than sheer speculation.
So what does all this have to do with forensic science?
Well, as I often tell students who think they're going to be crime scene analysts, but don't
want to take chemistry or physics, in order to be a forensic scientist, you have to first
be a scientist.
I like to say that forensic is the adjective, but science is the noun.
Forensic scientists make observations, but those observations are related to things that
are possibly of legal importance.
Those initial observations may end up being parts of a crime scene or a criminal investigation.
Forensic scientists, investigators, and analysts have to come up with logical and reasonable
explanations for the things they observe.
And if they hold true to science, those hypotheses should be neutral statements, not accusatory
ones.
In order to show whether their hypotheses are good or not, forensic scientists, like
all other scientists, have to ask questions and collect data.
And if the results of their tests disagree with their original hunches, then regardless
of what they would like to believe, honest and competent forensic scientists have to
abandon their initial direction and come up with another plausible explanation for what
happened.
But that secondary hunch also has to be tested and analyzed.
If we're to trust in any form of science, we have to believe that the people doing the
observations, the testing, the analysis of results, and the interpretations of data are
as objective as humanly possible.
I mean, we all know that human beings have our biases, but good investigators and scientists
need to do everything they can to leave those biases behind when they cross the threshold
of the crime scene, the lab door, or when they walk into the courtroom.
That doesn't mean we can't use our heads and consider the most likely possibilities based
on our experience.
But experience isn't the same thing as bias.
It also doesn't mean that crime scene investigators can't act on a hunch or listen to their gut.
There's a big difference between theories and expectations based on training and prior
experience as compared to developing hypotheses that are based on unfounded, preconceived or
ill-conceived notions.
Okay, I'll get off my soapbox now and try to get us back more specifically to forensic
science, which, by the way, is not the same thing as criminology.
Criminology is more of a sociological study of crime, criminals, and victims.
A person might enter criminology through the behavioral sciences to study the sociology
and psychology behind criminal behavior.
Forensic science is also not the same thing as criminal justice.
Forensics from criminal justice programs typically work in law enforcement, including
in police work and corrections, not in forensic labs.
In fact, I sometimes have a difficult time convincing students that the best preparation
for forensic science is a broad-based background that combines biology, chemistry, and physics.
Law enforcement officers are still heavily involved in crime scene investigations.
In my opinion, they're the real heroes in terms of solving crimes because they're the
ones that put the parts and pieces together.
But today, the bulk of the analysis of physical crime scene evidence falls to scientists.
As technology has advanced the field, a strong foundation in lab sciences is really the basis
for today's forensic careers.
And the really cool thing about science as a process is that it's truly universal.
Once in Guatemala, I got to work side-by-side with Guatemalan archaeologists who were exhuming
mass graves from political conflicts that led to myogenocide.
And even though we didn't speak the same language, we carried out the process in the
exact same way.
There's a real beauty to the standard ways of doing things that are recognized by everybody
involved, and the scientific method is just that.
Even little kids are scientists in the sense that they use their version of the scientific
method to explain what they see.
They examine things and test things, and they test people.
How does it work?
Put it in your mouth.
Even better, poke it with a stick.
You all know that poke it with a stick is the original scientific experiment, right?
Students constantly ask, why, why, why?
That is, until parents or the educational system drums that out of them, right?
But keep in mind, the explanations people come up with for the things they observe do
vary, depending not only on their age, but also on things like their cultural and educational
background.
I mean, people once thought the earth was flat because the horizon looks like a straight
line, right?
And people used to think that evil spirits cause disease.
While that may not seem very sophisticated to us, it's still an attempt to explain an
observation.
So science is a mechanism for understanding the world around us, and it's not only international,
it's universal, and as old as human history itself.
So to put all this together, a forensic scientist is supposed to use the scientific method in
an objective attempt to explain what's gone on in some kind of issue that's open to legal
interpretation.
And while science is science around the world, what's seen as legal or illegal behavior
is linked to a person's culture.
What one group considers the norm, another group might consider terrible.
Legal systems and laws vary around the world.
That's because laws are political and cultural constructs.
Laws and legal systems change over time as cultures evolve and exchange ideas.
The purpose of this series is not to debate legal issues or to try to explain how or why
cultures vary in what they consider moral or legal.
Our focus won't be to study crime criminals or legal systems.
We're here to talk about how science is applied in legal settings and to try to address how
evidences gathered, tested, and considered, regardless of what a given culture considers
right or wrong.
So let's stop and have you think for a minute about the first time you really remember hearing
about forensic science.
If you're reasonably young, you've probably grown up with that term as part of your standard
vocabulary.
But if you're over the age of about, say, 35 years old, you probably did not grow up
with the term forensic science as part of your vocabulary.
The forensic science craze in the United States is really not that old.
In my opinion, and I'm not alone in this idea, one pivotal event in the United States legal
history almost single-handedly catapulted, I mean rocketed forensic science into the
eyes, ears, and minds of the general public.
Think you know what it is?
Have any guesses?
Think about it for a minute.
Okay, I'll give you a hint.
The event occurred in 1995.
Still don't know?
How about this?
Although it was a single event, it lasted from late January through early October of
that year.
Come on, still don't know what it is?
Okay, I'll give you a couple more clues since forensic science is all about clues, right?
The event surrounded a couple of high-profile murders, and the accused was a very well-known
American figure.
Got it yet?
Now, if I mentioned a low-speed chase in a white Ford Bronco along a California freeway,
you will most likely know the answer if you haven't guessed it already.
The event I'm talking about is the infamous trial of the infamous American football star
and sometime Hollywood actor, O.J. Simpson.
That highly publicized and televised nine-month ordeal was the beginning of the forensic science
explosion that began in the United States and has spread like wildfire throughout the
popular media ever since.
During the many months of testimony, a bunch of forensic scientists took the stand and
spoke not only to the judge, the jury, and a packed courtroom, but also to a riveted
public who all of a sudden were fascinated with science and how it could be used and
some say abused in order to demonstrate guilt or innocence.
An entire lecture series could be devoted to the Simpson trial alone, and as of today,
nearly 200 books and probably hundreds of thousands of articles have been written about
it.
It's often been referred to as the trial of the century.
This case had all manner of forensics brought up as evidence.
There was the bloody glove that created the famous line, if it doesn't fit, you must
acquit.
There were bloody footprints said to be made with extremely rare and expensive Bruno Mollie
shoes.
The evidence included hair analysis, autopsy results, bloody socks, carpet fibers, prior
offenses, and DNA profiling.
The trial was a showcase for some really dramatic testimony and a handful of savvy and flamboyant
attorneys.
There were accusations of racial bias on the part of a key detective in the case, and
of course the allegations of evidence tampering that probably ultimately led to Simpson's
acquittal.
I mean, this case had it all.
Regardless of how you feel about the outcome of that trial, no one can question the impact
it had on the public perception and general awareness of the field of forensic science.
And one thing that the public learned from the evidence presented was that there are
many different specialties and many different experts involved in forensics, and that the
legal system has rules that govern the presentation of both facts and opinions at trial.
Now, let's set the stage for this course with one of my own cases from back in the 90s.
Now this case happened a long time ago, and I may not have 100% accuracy on all the specifics,
but this is essentially the story.
One morning, in a nature preserve just outside of a town in southwest Ohio, a man was walking
his dog and discovered a human skull almost hidden in some tall grass.
The skull was taken to the Montgomery County Coroner's Office in Dayton, Ohio, and I was
called in.
After examining the skull and taking my measurements, I said that I thought the skull was most
likely from a white female who was roughly what I'd call young to middle-aged.
The skull didn't have any flesh on it, but I knew it was recent because there was still
a lot of odor of decomposition to it.
Police searched the area, but they didn't find anything else, and at the morgue, they
took a tooth from the skull and used it in DNA analysis.
In the meantime, based on the physical description that I had given, they began to go through
local missing persons reports and found out that several months earlier, a woman had reported
her daughter, Shannon, missing in that same general area.
A little while later, when the DNA results came back from the skull, they were compared
to a reference sample the mother provided, and the skull was identified as Shannon.
Now, we have to fast forward several months.
One night, a park ranger was driving his rounds in a nature area in southwest Ohio.
As he turned a bend in the road, a completely naked woman came running out of the woods
screaming, he's trying to kill me, he's trying to kill me.
The police surrounded the area, they brought in the dogs, and closed in on a guy who was
trying to make his way through the woods.
The terrified woman told police that she had willingly gone with this guy to provide sex
for money.
He said he took her into the park and said he wanted to play Tarzan and Jane with her,
if you can believe that.
So she took her clothes off and folded them neatly at the foot of a tree.
And she said after that, he blindfolded her and told her that he wanted to run through
the jungle with her in his arms.
So he picked her up and started to carry her, and suddenly she felt a noose around her neck.
And as the noose was tightening around her neck and she was struggling to get free, somehow
the rope came down from the tree and she got away.
And that's when she ran out into the roadway and was discovered by the park ranger.
So after police captured the guy, they searched his car and found what appeared to be blood
in the trunk.
Investigators developed a DNA profile from that dried blood, and lo and behold, it matched
Shannon's profile.
At that point, it was apparent that the nude woman from the park wasn't the only girl
this guy had attacked.
So not only was he charged with the attempted murder of the lady in the park, he was also
charged with Shannon's murder.
And if all this wasn't already strange enough, when news of this attempted murder came out
in public, a handful of other women started to come forward to tell their own horrendous
stories.
Several ladies came to the police and told investigators that this guy offered them money
to go with him.
And then he would attempt to strangle them until they lost consciousness.
And get this, then he would try to revive them.
He would literally use CPR to try to bring them back to life.
They said the guy said things like, what did it feel like to have your life in my hands?
And what did it feel like to be dead?
Well, apparently, Shannon didn't survive his sick little game.
But when it came time for the trial, one of the problems was that many of these women
were drug addicted.
They were all known prostitutes.
And every time they would come in for some kind of a pretrial conference, they would
either be high or agitated.
And pretty soon, the prosecutor's office began to realize that these ladies would probably
not make very good witnesses.
So the county prosecutor decided to offer the bad guy a plea bargain if he would lead
us to the rest of Shannon's remains.
And by this time, it's over 18 months after Shannon's call was found.
Now in my opinion, allowing him to plead for the rest of Shannon's remains really didn't
advance the case at all.
I mean, we knew Shannon was dead and we knew he probably killed her.
But this was an election year and I won't even go into the politics here.
But they decided to bring this guy out of jail to lead us to the location where the
rest of her body was, which unbelievably was the backyard of the house where he lived with
his wife and two children.
How sick is that?
So we assemble at his house.
Mercifully, they had his wife and children leave for the day.
And there I was slumped down in the back of a police cruiser peeking out because I know
this man likes to do evil things to women.
And I see him in his orange jumpsuit with his ankles and wrists shackled, being walked
into his yard, into his yard with a couple of high powered rifles pointed at his head.
Now this is a rural area and the guy lives in a house that literally has cornfields in
the back.
So they asked him where he buried Shannon and he said, I'm not exactly sure.
But it's a stretch somewhere along this stretch of fencing between those two tree stumps.
The area he indicated was probably around 75 feet of fence row.
He wasn't confident of the exact spot.
So after they took him away, I got out of the police cruiser because it was now my job
to locate and exhume the unmarked grave where allegedly we'd find the rest of Shannon's
remains.
Now this was in early March in southwest Ohio and there had been a little bit of snow coming
down all day long, so it's cold.
And the first thing the guys from the prosecutor's office wanted to do was have the police bring
in a backhoe so we could all go home.
But I said, let me try to figure out a way to narrow down the area where she might be
buried.
I think I have an idea.
And I got down on my hands and knees right next to the first tree stump the bad guy
had pointed out and I started to crawl slowly along the fence row.
Now I'm pretty sure the other investigators and the guys from the prosecutor's office
thought I was nuts.
But I had a hypothesis and I was going to test it.
I knew that when the corn was planted, the plow couldn't come within a couple of feet
of the fence.
I also knew that if Shannon's body had been buried there, there was no way that guy could
have put the soil above her back the way it was before he started digging the hole.
That's Locard's principle and we'll talk about that in the next lecture.
Anyway, as I crawled along the ground, it was as smooth as glass for a while and then
all of a sudden I hit about a six foot stretch along the fence that was all bumpy.
And I said, let's start here.
So we pulled up the grass with our hands and then started to take down the top dirt with
shovels.
All of a sudden we hit something and I said, stop, let me get a better look.
What we had hit was this little exposed edge of bone that was about the size of my baby
finger.
And I said, it's her.
And the prosecutor said, that's not her, that's just a root or a stick or something.
And I said, no, it's her, this is human bone.
And he tried to keep arguing with me and I turned to him and said, actually, if you
want to get specific, it's her left iliac crest, which is the front edge of what we
call the hip bone.
And within a couple of minutes, he watched me with a hand trial expose her entire pelvis.
And I went from being some crazy woman crawling around on the ground to Dr. Murray real fast.
In the next hour or two, I took Shannon's remains out of this man's backyard.
And after almost two years, we were able to reunite Shannon's skull with the rest of her
bones and her family was able to give her a proper burial.
Now that case, that story, as bizarre and unique as it is, has all the makings of a
typical forensic case, though no two of them are the same.
There are different types of evidence.
There are witnesses.
There's the requisite bad guy.
There are representatives of the legal system and a whole bunch of different forensic scientists.
In any forensic case, to get us back to the scientific method, an observation begins the
investigation, whether it's the discovery of human bones, a burglary, a hit and run
accident, the identification of some piece of evidence or some event signals a possible
crime.
And that starts a chain of analysis.
The initial observation causes investigators to develop hypotheses to explain what they
see.
Lots of different types of evidence and expertise come into play as forensic investigations
unfold in a real interdisciplinary effort.
And when enough scientific evidence points to a particular suspect, that allegation can
lead to a trial.
So how will this course unfold?
Well, first we'll take a look at different types of physical evidence that might be indicative
of criminal activity.
Things like fingerprints, firearms, hair, body fluids, DNA, drugs, question documents.
Then we'll see how complicated events unfold through analyzing things like blood stains,
particular accidents and explosions.
Then we'll turn our attention to the science of death and decomposition and see how experts
conduct death investigations and look at bodily evidence.
Then we'll change gears a little bit and talk about investigation processes, criminal
profiling and using behavioral sciences to get it motive.
And we'll take all of this evidence to the courtroom and see how forensic science is
used at trial.
Although my focus will be on the science behind forensics, as time allows, we'll look at
specific cases.
In fact, we'll wrap things up with a couple of segments that showcase the ways in which
forensic science has been used to solve specific crimes and to assist in mass disaster investigations
and to identify unknown persons.
Along the way, I hope you'll learn a lot about the many ways that science is used in
the pursuit of justice.
So you can bust the Hollywood myths yourself when you see them on TV.
So let's do another introductory lecture now.
Learn on crime scene analysis as we make our way toward a better understanding of forensic
science.
