Although there are rules of conduct and punishments for inappropriate behavior in lots of other
groups of social animals, human beings are unique in terms of formalizing those codes
of conduct into what we now call laws. We're probably also rare animals in that we attempt
to use logic and the scientific method in order to identify who done it, if we don't
all actually see the crime in the making. Crime scene analysis probably goes back to
our earliest human ancestors. Picture a comic where Fag is standing outside of a cave with
a bloody club in his hand while Glug lays inside the cave with a smashed-in skull. As
the other cavemen approach, it probably doesn't take much in the way of investigation to figure
out who the culprit probably is. But forensic science involves a lot more than forming logical
conclusions. We also need to analyze specific pieces of evidence and systematically ask
probative questions of the people involved, either victims, witnesses, or the potential
criminals themselves. In any society then, throughout human history, public order has
been maintained by defining rules of behavior, identifying rule breakers, and singling them
out for punishment. This is not only to provide what we might call justice, but also as a
way of demonstrating to the rest of the group what will not be tolerated. Because of these
punishments and maybe due to some type of inherent knowledge of right and wrong, bad
guys don't tend to commit their crimes out in the open view of the public. Instead they
try to hide them, or at a minimum they don't stick around. This means that some crimes
have to be pretty thoroughly analyzed in order to figure out the doer of the dirty deed.
One of the most famous guiding scientific theorems of criminal investigation is known
as Locard's Exchange Principle. Edmund Locard was a French forensic scientist who, about
a century ago, set forth the idea that no one can commit a crime without leaving something
behind or altering the surroundings, if even imperceptibly. In other words, we can't be
somewhere or do something without somehow leaving our mark or without taking some evidence
of the contact away with us. As we interact with our environment and move through space
and time, we always leave a trail. That trail might be made up of minute amounts of material
known as trace evidence, or somebody can generate a mountain of evidence like a bull in a china
shop. No one truly disappears without a trace. But whether signs of a person's presence
can be located and documented or not, that's another matter. One book I use in my forensic
course says, the popular concept known as the five-second rule, you know, the myth that
alleges if you drop food on the floor and it's there for less than five seconds, it's okay
to eat it. Well, that's a clear application of Locard's Principle. How much time-to-things
spend in contact with one another is one of the big factors behind how much evidence
is exchanged. By the way, studies have shown the five-second rule is not accurate, not
for wet or dry food, so don't go eating that pretzel you just dropped on the floor.
I guess Locard's Principle has at times been a huge source of frustration to crime scene
investigators. I mean, we know there's evidence present, but sometimes, especially when a
perpetrator's been extremely careful, the physical evidence can escape us. Locard's
exchange principle has also been the driving force for many innovations in technology and
forensic science, as researchers in the field continue to try to improve our ability to
find and analyze evidence, and in doing that, solve crimes.
Let's go back to my own forensic case that I talked about in the previous lecture. What
types of evidence exchanges did we have? The skull that was found by the man walking
his dog was a major piece of evidence, but we had no way to know at the time that one
of the most important links we would have in that case was the exchange that happened
between that victim and the trunk of a car. And if I hadn't realized that the soil over
the shallow grave the killer dug in his own backyard could never have been restored to
its original condition because of his exchange with it, well, it might have been a lot more
difficult to locate the rest of Shannon's remains on that cold day in early March.
Those are just two examples of how interactions between things and people change the environment
and leave clues to follow in a crime scene. And how many crime scenes did we have in that
case? There was the attempted murder of one woman in the woods, and that not only brought
Shannon's death to the surface, but also caused a few other women to allege even more assaults
by this predator. And we still don't know exactly where Shannon was killed. We only
know where her dismembered head was apparently thrown out of the creep's car and where he
ultimately buried the rest of her body. In fact, there's an interesting side note that
I didn't even mention the first time around. This guy confessed that he first buried Shannon's
entire body in the, quote, middle of the cornfield behind his house. But a couple days later,
when he realized the plow might unearth her in the spring, he went out one night, dug
her up, and then, quote, chunked off her head with a flat-edged shovel. He then reburied
her headless body near the fence row where we finally found it. And then he drove her
head, apparently in the trunk of his car where Shannon's blood was ultimately found, out
to where her skull was recovered. So just considering Shannon's death alone, her first
burial, her dismemberment, her second burial, and the discard of her head, well, you can
see how complicated and ill-defined crime scenes, or in this case, a trail of crime scenes,
can be. Not to mention the other case is allegedly linked to this single serial predator. One
of the books that I use in my forensic science teaching refers to the crime scene as a piece
of history with a story to tell. As an anthropologist who's worked as an archeologist, I know a lot
about trying to reconstruct the past through the artifacts and patterns people leave behind.
That's exactly what goes on during the analysis of a crime scene, and I'm sure my training
as an archeologist has made me a better forensic investigator. There are lots of issues that
play a role in crime scene investigation. First and foremost, in any scene investigation,
are issues regarding the treatment of injured victims and the safety of first responders.
These are really critical factors in the initial response of law enforcement and emergency
workers. Fortunately for the victims, first responders will always attend to life-saving
measures first if they can. But sometimes, unfortunately, the initial assessment of the
crime scene can damage or even destroy important evidence. For example, pulling injured victims
out of a mass disaster situation can do additional damage to the bodies of the people who died
in the incident. Blasting a fire hose to put out or contain a fire can destroy small debris
that may be critical to establishing how the fire started. But if lives can be saved in
either of those situations, any damage to the evidence has to be considered an acceptable
loss. Law enforcement officers as first responders or first officers also have to quickly figure
out whether the bad guy might still be on the scene. Not only for their own safety, but
also because there's the possibility then of a quick capture. There can also be dangerous
chemicals or disease-causing microorganisms left behind at certain crime scenes. Clandestine
methamphetamine labs are really notorious for the amount of toxic and combustible chemicals
they generate and sometimes warehouse. Some crime scenes are considered hot zones when
major biohazards are present, like anthrax, nerve gas, or any other biological chemical,
or nuclear threat. These scenes can be accidental. They can come from mass disasters, natural
disasters like the 2011 earthquake in Japan, or they can relate to crimes like bioterrorism.
So first responders and law enforcement investigators have to be trained in how to approach and
search these types of dangerous situations, and they need to have the right personal protective
gear to recover victims, gather evidence, and analyze what might have happened. Another
immediate consideration has to be containing and securing the scene and limiting access
to only people with a good reason to be there. Somebody has to maintain a careful log of
everybody who enters and exits a crime scene and at precisely what time. That's one of
the non-glamorous crime scene jobs you don't see on TV. Anybody at the scene becomes a potential
witness at a future trial. So news reporters, curious bystanders, distraught family members,
sometimes even potential looters, have to be controlled. Any of those people can jeopardize
the crime scene not only by their physical presence, but also through the information
they could gather that might thwart the investigation. Unnecessary people at a crime scene can introduce
additional fingerprints, footprints, tire tracks, hair, even DNA. If that happens, the
work of investigators is increased because they'll have to try to sort out all the extraneous
data if they even can. Public access also has to be controlled so that any nitwit with
a cell phone isn't releasing information or photographs to the public. And we all realize
that media reports with specific information have the potential to tip off a suspect or
reveal details that might be better kept close to the vest for use by law enforcement during
questioning of any victims, witnesses, or suspects. Even the investigators themselves
can jeopardize evidence. So they have to figure out a specific search strategy for a given
crime scene that will minimize their impact while maximizing the evidence they gather.
And before any active search is undertaken, the appropriate legal standards for search
and seizure must be met. For example, in the United States, the Fourth Amendment of the
U.S. Constitution requires consent to search from the property owner or a legal stand-in
from the justice system, except in emergencies. So, since evidence can be material found
in tiny quantities like grains of sand in the carpet, and we call that trace evidence,
or patently obvious clues like tire tracks, the minute they step onto the scene, investigators
have to consider everything they see around them as potential evidence. Using the context
between and among objects and normal and abnormal relationships between things, maybe even before
setting foot in a room, they might have to figure out what could be evidence and how
it may be linked to other things they see. If crime scene investigators see what looks
like blood, they have to try to figure out the likely source of that blood, which might
be immediately obvious or not. They also have to consider, though, that a substance that
looks like blood may not actually be blood, but blood is pretty obvious, or something
that looks like cocaine might really be powdered sugar or something. So, at a crime scene,
there are going to be some assumptions made before any formal scientific testing. There
are some tests, though, known as field tests, that can allow for some initial screening in
the field, like on blood or illegal drugs, and we'll talk about them in other lectures.
Things of potential value to an investigation not only vary in our ability to immediately
spot them, but also in our ability to preserve them for possible collection and analysis.
This is where documentation becomes so important at the scene. Blood spatter, for example,
is an example of what we call pattern evidence. It's not enough to merely establish that a
substance is blood. In order to reconstruct the history of what happened at a bloody scene,
it's the pattern the blood makes on surfaces it hits. That's the key to a full understanding
of the scene. If there's blood from ceiling to floor and everything in between, and I've
seen some pretty gruesome cases like that, photography in a careful map of the scene
are crucial. A scene can't be maintained indefinitely. If a homicide happens in an apartment hallway,
that property probably won't be boarded up and protected between when the crime happened
and when a suspect might be located, let alone when the case might go to trial. I mean, years
can pass between when something occurs and when it may come before a judge and jury.
Meanwhile, bullets, hairs, and fibers can be picked up and preserved fairly indefinitely.
Some types of pattern evidence are transient and can pretty much only be preserved with
images. In the old days, and I've been around long enough to remember them, Polaroid instant
cameras were the primary ways we documented crime scenes. This was typically done in conjunction
with regular film photography, usually in both black and white and color. In the really
old days, and I have not been around long enough to remember them, a crime scene sketch
was usually the best, maybe the only way of preserving a scene. Hand drawn sketches and
maps are still used today. In fact, I've used them myself to document relationships, say,
between bones at a crime scene. The sketches don't have to be drawn to scale, but the idea
is to map and measure the relationships between important objects at a scene. And like we
use in archaeology, if possible, all the points on the sketch have to be measured from a single
fixed and permanent point called a datum. This datum can be anything reasonably permanent,
something like the corner of a building, or if we're out in the woods, maybe a mature
tree is the best we can do. But today's state of the art methods for documenting scenes
include digital photography, video photography, and even portable electronic computerized
mapping systems known as total station survey systems. This documentation might occur long
before suspected evidence is confidently known to be a particular substance like blood or
cocaine, or especially long before that substance can be attributed to a particular individual,
say in the case of a DNA profile obtained from semen. Whether evidence is in trace amounts
or readily visible, documentation cannot be emphasized enough. In TV shows and movies,
what needs to be collected as evidence is nearly always obvious, because the camera
usually focuses our attention right on those items. But imagine yourself as an investigator
at your initial approach to a potential crime scene. And I'll bet like me, you might not
have any idea where to start. Are there stray hairs in the carpeting? Are there fingerprints
on that desk? Were those papers scattered on the coffee table like that before the break-in?
Who drank from that glass? How many pills are in that bottle? Is this actually what we
think it is or has the scene been staged to throw us off? That list could go on and on.
So a potential scene has to be thoroughly documented, not only photographically, but also by carefully
written notes. You might never know initially the evidentiary value of a specific item.
That's the reason crime scene investigation requires keen observational skills, a methodical
approach, good logic, and the willingness to be pretty much compulsive about documentation.
I asked a cop friend once how he can tell if a place has just been ransacked or it's really
just a super messy house, and he had an immediate answer. He said, you look at the kitchen sink
to see if dirty dishes are all piled up or how nasty the toilet is. Makes sense to me.
Because each situation in each scene is unique, different strategies have to be considered
before actually collecting any potential evidence. Obviously, there's a big difference between
trying to secure and search a small liquor store when compared to a mall parking lot,
a high-rise building, or an interstate highway. Crime scene analysts owe it to themselves,
public safety, and the investigation to do some really careful planning before launching
into a crime scene. They can't just move through the area at random. They need to develop a
systematic strategy or all could be lost. Now, there are a few standard patterns we
use to search scenes. Grid patterns, circular patterns, and what are called lane or line
patterns are probably the most common, and I've used all of them in my work. When I helped
look for remains scattered in a soybean field from a plane crash, we used a line search.
But if I see a clear concentration of bones that suggest the site were a victim probably
decomposed and maybe carnivores have scattered bones around the area, I might pick the central
location as my core starting place and then move out from there in a circular spiral pattern.
That's because it's more likely that bones will be found closer to the site of decomposition
than further away. I've also had to climb trees to see if there could be a clump of
hair and a bird's nest above a pile of bones because hair color and length can be important
in identification. And it sure helps to have a background in biology and have to grown
up as a sort of tomboy in an area surrounded by woods because the knowledge of critters
and how and where they travel has helped me know how and where to search.
Searching and analyzing a crime scene is a complicated and destructive process, and
I admit I've found things by actually stepping on them. But any damage done can derail an
investigation and even make evidence unacceptable in a court of law. I mean, crime scene analysts
are also subject to low cards exchange principle, right? As we move through a scene to document
and collect evidence, we really only get a single shot at the area and the exact way
in which we found it. Every item we move or pick up changes the scene forever. Now you
can try this yourself. Have someone hide a mock piece of evidence in one of the rooms
of your house. And unlike an Easter egg hunt, have them choose something without even telling
you what you're looking for. Then walk to the door of that room, stand there and think
about how you could search that room systematically to find that object using the least intrusive
method possible. Then consider how familiar that room in your house is to you as compared
to being asked to search the home of a complete stranger to try to figure out what's normal
from what's not. TV shows make searching a scene look so easy. Actors just blunder into
a room and start picking stuff up. And I'm sure there are crime scenes where investigators
have done that too. In some ways and some crimes, it's a wonder any evidence has found
and recovered at all. A good scene investigator goes a long way towards solving a crime and
making sure that the proper legal conditions are maintained. Good communication between
people who are or may need to be involved in the scene search, it's critical in the
initial stages of an investigation. This ranges from bringing in the medical examiner or coroner
if a death is involved to making sure permission to search comes from the legal authorities.
Somebody has to do the mundane task of making sure that plenty of the right kind of supplies
are on hand to gather the evidence. Even the everyday language among the officers and investigators
at the scene is important. Something as simple as whether a piece of furniture is going to
be called a couch or a sofa or a love seat during documentation can be important. That's
because any type of inconsistency has the potential to complicate things in the future.
Another one of the goals in a crime scene investigation is to preserve the evidence
in the event of a future legal trial. And, well, the adversarial system that's set up
in the courtroom is poised and ready to take advantage of any confusing terminology as
potential ammunition. Another critical issue in crime scene analysis
is known as chain of custody. As soon as something is collected as evidence, the chain of custody
for that item has to be maintained as a physical log of who handled the evidence, for how long
they had it, and where they kept it while it was their responsibility. Without a good
chain of custody, critical evidence might not make it to trial. We'll talk more about
that in our discussion of courtroom issues near the end of this series, but a good evidence
custodian is critical to a forensic investigation. This person takes charge of evidence, logs
it in, and makes sure that everything is properly labeled and sealed with evidence tape before
it leaves the scene. That's another one of those non-glamorous roles you don't see on
TV shows. When it comes to the actual physical collection
of evidence, meaning picking it up, handling it, and preserving it right, each type of evidence
has its own specific needs. And we'll talk about those with each type of evidence we cover.
These texts have to be trained on how to collect a lot of different types of items and substances.
Consider how they might need to pick up a loaded gun versus how they might collect a spilled
liquid. Not only that, but they also have to make sure
to take known standards from the scene that might be used in future comparisons. By that
I mean something like taking a fiber sample from the carpeting in the room in case a suspect
is later found with unknown fibers on his shoes. As we'll see, many forensic lab analyses
involve comparing known evidence to questioned evidence.
Let's review some general guidelines about evidence as we wrap this up. First, even physical
evidence varies in its permanence, as we'll see. So, a quick decision might need to be
made if an investigator enters a scene, say, and there's blood in the sink and the water
is still running. He may rush to immediately shut off the water without even considering
there may be important fingerprints on the faucet knobs. Crime scene personnel have to
quickly assess and prioritize to best fit any situation.
Secondly, evidence can be a direct transfer from one source to another, or it can have
one or more intermediary transfers between its initial source and where it's ultimately
found. That type of exchange is called an indirect transfer. If a lady pats her cat goodbye
before leaving for work and has cat hair on her hand, that's a direct transfer. If she
wipes her hand on her skirt, the skirt becomes an indirect source of the cat hair. Then if
she sits down on the subway and the cat hair clings to the seat she's on, there's another
indirect transfer from the cat. And then if you sit down on that seat and the cat hair
gets on your pants, well, you never saw the cat, but there you are with its fur on your
pants. You get the idea. Indirect evidence transfers can really complicate things and
have to be carefully considered because they have the potential to put the wrong person
at a scene.
Third, evidence can be classified in a couple of different ways. Recognizing that something
belongs to a particular group is pretty general and obvious. Like saying it's hair, it's a
fiber, it's a piece of broken glass, or it's a paint chip. But further defining that hair
is cat hair, that fiber is polyester, that piece of glass is being from a light bulb,
or that chip is coming from automotive paint, and even better from a Mercedes-Benz product.
Well that lumps the item into a group of like items with similar features. And we call that
class identification.
The most distinctive type of evidence identification puts an item into a group all by itself, meaning
a group with one and only one member, and we call this individualizing evidence. Not
all pieces of evidence can rise to that level as we'll see, but it's the highest form of
identification. For instance, if that chip of automotive paint can be completely matched
to an identically shaped void on a specific car involved in hit and run accident, well
that might rise to the level of individualizing evidence. But that's only possible if the
car that it came from can be located and a direct comparison can be made. I'm sure these
categories will become clearer as we use these concepts in future lectures about physical
evidence. Fourth, not all evidence can be sampled and not all of it can be tested. If
there's blood all over a room, it can't all be collected and it can't all be analyzed.
The same applies to a truckload of a number of large bags of what they think is cocaine.
Crime scene technicians need protocols for how much evidence to collect, and labs need
to have protocols for how much of it to test to ensure that representative sampling and
testing take place. If there's 286 cigarette butts outside the door of a 7-eleven after
a burglary, the lab is not going to test them all for DNA. On the other hand, if only a
small amount of a substance is present as evidence, analysts have to decide what tests
are possible and which are the best bet for the small amount of evidence they have and
what order those tests should be done. So, if there's a bloody handprint on a weapon,
detailed photos would be taken first. Then a small amount of the substance would be analyzed
to make sure it's blood without messing up any more of the handprint than necessary.
There may also be legal ramifications of using up a whole sample, because it might prevent
the opposing side from conducting their own independent testing. We'll come back to these
with more specific examples in later discussions, but I wanted to introduce those ideas here
because they relate to evidence in its collection. Remember, evidence is information that can
support or refute a fact, and evidence typically consists of both physical objects and testimony.
We'll talk about testimony much later in the series, but it's just one example of intangible
evidence. Technological advances have added other new types of evidence that have little
in the way of a physical presence. So far, we've been thinking about a crime scene as
a physical location, where a murder, rape, burglary, or arson took place. But when you
think about it, today's technology has expanded the definition of a crime scene, like cybercrimes
where funds can be shifted from one account to another, through signals being bounced
off of satellites, without any physical money ever actually changing hands. But there's
still a perpetrator on one end of a crime like that and a victim on the other. So there
will still be a trail of evidence. It'll just take different forms than what we've been
talking about here. The good news is that as technology has changed the traditional notion
of the crime scene, it's also changed the ways in which crimes can be detected and analyzed.
So, let's move into our first specific type of evidence, fingerprints, as an example of
what's old and what's new in forensic evidence and its analysis.
