What do the Mona Lisa, John Dillinger, and the kidnapping and murder of 12-year-old
Polly Kloss all have in common?
They all have some notorious connection to fingerprints, one of the oldest and still
most commonly used kinds of forensic evidence.
Fingerprints are evidence of our presence that we all leave day in and day out as we
move from place to place and handle all kinds of objects and materials.
Without even thinking about it, from the time we wake up and reach to turn off our alarm
clock each day until the time we pull the covers up at night, we leave our mark on all
kinds of things in the environment.
Some of those fingerprints are nearly immediately erased or smeared over by the next person
that grabs the same doorknob, but other prints might hang around indefinitely, like if we
straighten a picture in our office and nobody touches it again for years.
Fingerprints have provided major evidence in countless criminal investigations, and their
validity has long been widely accepted as proof of a person's identity.
One of the earliest fingerprint investigators, Alphonse Bertillon, solved the theft of the
Mona Lisa from the Louvre Museum in Paris in 1911 using fingerprints.
When authorities gunned down the notorious American gangster John Dillinger in 1934,
his autopsy showed evidence that at some point he had tried to destroy his own fingerprints
by burning his fingertips with chemicals.
And it was a palm print from a child's bunk bed that led to the conviction of Richard
Allen Davis for the 1993 murder of 12-year-old Polly Kloss, who was abducted from a slumber
party right in front of her girlfriends in California.
There's some evidence that the Chinese used fingerprints in handprints as a form of identification
or signature as long as two to three thousand years ago.
For example, an artist might sign his work with a fingerprint.
By the 1860s, William Herschel, who was a British official in colonial India, was using
handprints of the Indian people he dealt with as a form of signature on contracts.
Out of interest, Herschel tracked his own fingerprints for about 50 years, establishing
that the patterns do not change over a lifetime.
In 1880, Henry Falls, a Scottish missionary who was a doctor in a Japanese hospital, published
a letter on the uniqueness of fingerprints in the journal Nature.
Falls is sometimes credited with the first true forensic application of fingerprints
when he helped the Tokyo police investigate a burglary.
Falls also tried to chemically alter his own prints and noticed that they grew back.
And here's a story worthy of its own forensic investigation.
Falls attempted to get funding for his fingerprint research by sending a letter to Charles Darwin,
who of course is known for his theory of evolution, but you may not know also engaged in some
early anthropology studies.
And Darwin then forwarded the information in Falls' letter to his cousin, Darwin's cousin,
Sir Francis Galton, who basically took over the fingerprint projects project without supporting
or even crediting Falls.
Around the same time, the French police expert, Alphonse Bertillon, started this quasi-scientific
identification method that became known as Bertillonage.
This was an early form of what's called anthropometry.
Basically, it was a systematic series of measurements of the human body.
Now, Bertillonage combined photographs and body measurements to create what amounted
to identification portraits of people.
And then in 1903, a famous case from Leavenworth Prison in Kansas showed that two male prisoners,
a Will West and a William West, not only had essentially the same names, but also the
same Bertillonage profiles.
In fact, it said these guys looked nearly like twins, but there was one key difference.
They had different fingerprints.
This showed that Bertillon's method didn't really discriminate among people very well,
but fingerprint patterns did.
Okay, back to Sir Francis Galton.
Expanding on the work of Falls, Galton published three books about fingerprints between 1892
and 1895.
Galton realized that print patterns don't change as we age, and all prints can be essentially
grouped into three main classifications, arches, loops, and whirls.
And as required by Good Science, Galton also did some statistical work on the probability
of two people having the same prints.
And this basically established that fingerprints are unique.
Now, let's talk about skin a little bit to better understand fingerprints.
The skin on vertebrate animals, and that includes everything from fish and amphibians
to reptiles, birds, and mammals, it has two main layers, an outer layer called the epidermis
and then a deeper layer known as the dermis.
The epidermis is made out of tightly packed cells that form a barrier to the outside world.
And the dermis underneath has blood vessels, different kinds of glands, and other structures
anchored in it, like scales, feathers, hair, nails, whatever you got.
As for the skin of humans and our fellow primates, all surfaces of our skin have that
same epidermis over dermis pattern, but when you consider the whole body, primate skin
can be broken into two types, thin skin and thick skin.
Thin skin has four main layers of epidermal cells that bear hair follicles and oil glands.
But thick skin has five main layers to its epidermis, and it's found only on the palms
of the hands and the soles of the feet, which are scientifically called our palmar and plantar
skin.
Thick skin also has lots of sweat glands, but doesn't have any hair follicles or oil
glands.
Now on this palmar and plantar skin, the interface between the epidermis and the dermis has hills
and valleys called dermal papillae.
The dermal papillae in turn, project through to the epidermis, creating the corresponding
surface ridges on our palmar and plantar skin, and these are called dermatoglyphs.
All primates have these friction ridges on the pads of our hands and our feet, and evolutionarily
they're assumed to help us in gripping by increasing the surface area for contact.
While all thick skin has these ridges, for second discussion I'm just going to refer
mainly to fingerprints.
In humans, prints start forming about eight weeks in utero, which in terms of its timing
is right at the interface of the embryonic and fetal periods.
After 17 weeks, the pattern's set, and the ridges only get bigger as the fetus and then
the infant and child grows.
Now no two people have the same prints, not even identical twins.
So clearly there's more to the development of fingerprints than just genetics.
Did you know that squeaky clean fingers don't leave prints?
That's because there aren't any oil glands on palmar or plantar skin.
And as we all know from TV of course, many criminals try to wear gloves to try to prevent
leaving prints.
But did you know that after about a half hour of wearing them, fingerprints can even be
laid down through latex gloves?
Oh, there I go, making smarter criminals again.
Palmar and plantar skin is really rich in sweat glands compared to all other body skin.
But the sweat itself is really watery, and so it doesn't directly contribute much to
the print.
The water in sweat though becomes a vehicle to pick up other materials that get deposited
in the print.
In other words, a fingerprint's really made by the junk that winds up in sweat and then
clings to the ridges on the skin.
That includes stuff like shed skin cells, body oils, dirt, dust.
Those are all picked up by sweat when we touch things, including other parts of our own body.
So try this sometime.
Get a clean drink and glass out of your cabinet, and then wash your hands really well.
Dry your hands and then try to make fingerprints on the glass.
You won't be able to see them with your eye at all, well, unless you never really learned
good hand washing or you have some pretty grimy glasses in your cabinet.
Okay, now, assuming you didn't just step out of the shower, take your fingertip and wipe
it on your forehead or on the side of your nose, where most of us typically have at least
some minor amount of body oil.
Now press your fingerprint on the glass, and you'll probably be able to see the print.
My students often ask whether chemical and thermal burns will destroy prints, and yes,
they can, but they will leave scars behind.
Deep cuts in the dermis, whether intentional or not, those also leave scars.
The thing is, the scars that form can be even more distinctive than the original prints
were, so John Dillinger may have ended up with more unique fingertip patterns than the
ones he was born with.
Like any other type of pattern, scientists quickly figured out that to compare and discuss
fingerprints, they'd have to develop a common language to describe and classify the patterns
they saw.
The three major fingerprint classifications, arches, loops, and whirls, first set out by
Goulton, are still part of Dactyloscopy today.
Yes, I said Dactyloscopy.
Dactyloscopy is your million dollar word for the examination and comparison of fingerprints.
I admit it's a fun word to say, but because it's a mouthful, I'm probably not going to
use it much.
Okay, the part of a fingerprint that's categorized runs from the last joint on the palm side
of each finger to its tip, and then all the way to either side of the nail bed.
In other words, they're sides to our fingerprints.
That's why you see fingertips being rolled from side to side when you watch shows where
somebody's being fingerprinted.
It's also the reason that intentionally taken fingerprint records show each fingertip as
more of a square than the type of oval you would naturally lay down if you just touched
the pad of your finger to something.
There are major and minor features to any fingerprint pattern.
An arch, loop, and whirl are considered major features.
These describe the overall pattern of the main ridges in a print, especially how they
change direction.
The major change in direction is known as a delta.
An arch lacks a delta, a loop has a single delta, and a whirl has a pair of deltas.
You can also see that some print patterns, like in a loop, exhibit a central region known
as the core.
Generally about 65% of all prints show loop patterns, about 30% are whirls, and only
about 5% of fingerprints are arches.
Some of the three main categories are further broken down to give a total of eight patterns.
So for instance, there are plain and tented arches.
These are differentiated because a tented arch has almost a vertical core.
Loops are subclassified by the direction they open in.
If a loop opens in the direction of the little finger, it's called an ulnar loop because
the forearm bone on the little finger side is the ulna.
And if a loop opens in the direction of the thumb, it's called a radial loop because the
forearm bone on the thumb side is the radius.
Whirls are more complex and they subdivide into four types, plain, central, pocket, double
loop, and accidental whirls.
But there's a lot more to fingerprint analysis than just these eight major classification
groups.
Smaller features within the major patterns are called minutia.
These include things like ridge bifurcations and trifurcations, ending ridges, islands
which are sometimes called enclosures and tiny dots.
Under a microscope, even the pores of sweat glands can be seen.
All these and other minutia add detail to the main pattern of a fingerprint and are
behind the comparison science of dactyloscopy.
There I said it again.
Now if you've never taken a good look at your own prints, you might want to try it now.
The easiest way to do this is to get an ink pad or some fast drying paint, something like
that, and then try to tap or roll your prints onto paper.
My students and I have found it's not as easy as you might think and it's certainly not
as easy as they make it look on television.
Just keep playing with the process until you get some clear images.
For your analysis, a magnifying glass might help, especially if you're a 40 like I am.
See if you can figure out the major classification designation for each of your fingers and then
look for minutia.
Okay, let's get back to forensic investigations.
Fingerprints are deposited in a couple of different ways.
Paint and prints are prints that can be seen with the naked eye.
They might be made by friction skin touching blood, paint, ink, grease, mud, any kind of
semi-liquid substance and then transferring that material to a dry surface.
Layton prints can't be visualized with the naked eye and so they have to be developed
or enhanced with physical or chemical means.
Plastic prints are the third type.
There are fingerprint impressions on some kind of soft material like chewed gum, uncured
latex caulk, wet paint, something like that.
Partial prints could be any type, patent, late, nor plastic, but they just don't reflect
a full fingertip.
As you might imagine, most crime scene prints are partial prints since fingertips are curved
surfaces and most things we touch aren't flat either.
Besides being deposited in different ways, fingerprints also need to be documented in
different ways during crime scene analysis.
Paint and prints can be brought back to the lab if they're seen on an object that's easily
transported like a coffee mug, a photo frame, or even a vehicle.
But when you think about it, many crime scenes would include prints on surfaces that are
difficult or impossible to move, like a plaster wall or a 25-foot-long bank countertop.
There have been cases where an entire door frame has been removed or a piece of drywall
cut out if paint and prints are visible on them.
Most of the time, though, this type of evidence is going to be collected using only photography.
In that sense, as we'll see with some other types of evidence, fingerprint evidence can
be temporary and investigators may only get one shot at recovering it.
On the other hand, late and prints have to be treated in some way in order to make them
visible.
One way to find late and prints is by projecting an ultraviolet light source across a non-absorbent
surface where prints might be hidden.
The residues in the fingerprints will reflect the UV light in a different way than the surfaces
around them, so prints that can't be seen with the naked eye might appear.
Late and prints have to be developed usually by dusting or through some kind of chemical
enhancement.
Late and prints can be used as a fine brush and a type of powder that will stick to the
unseen fingerprint, making it visible and available to be photographed.
Dusted prints are then captured by what's known as lifting, where an adhesive pad can
be applied to the dusted print like cellophane tape to lift it off the surface, making it
able to be transported for analysis.
There are types of chemical enhancement that can be used to develop a late and print.
There's lots of kinds of methods, but one that most people have heard of is superglue
fuming.
Superglue and related adhesives are made out of volatile cyanooacrylate compounds.
In the early 80s, some Japanese manufacturers who were trying to improve this type of glue
accidentally discovered that its fumes would stick to late and prints on smooth surfaces,
leaving a permanent white residue of the print.
The thing is, this method is really only useful on objects that will physically fit into a
chamber where the fumes can circulate.
The chemical involved is toxic, and the fumes have to be contained not only for safety,
but also so they can condense on the late and print.
There are cyanooacrylate bombs that can fume a closed car, any other kind of closed space
like that.
In certain additions, like fluorescent dyes, can be applied over the fume prints, and then
lasers or alternate light sources can be used to enhance the photography of those fumed
prints.
Other chemical development methods have been discovered and used on late and prints, and
each has its advantages and disadvantages.
One of these is iodine fuming, but the prints developed by iodine are temporary, and so
they have to be photographed immediately.
Spraying a chemical called ninhydrin is a useful way to develop late and prints on paper
and other kinds of porous surfaces.
Regardless of how prints are developed, though, they still have to be captured in some way
as evidence.
In order for fingerprints to be useful in forensic investigations, they have to be compared
to other prints, so repositories of reference fingerprint records have been collected over
time.
There's lots of reasons any one of us might have a fingerprint record on file, or at least
have had one made at some point.
I'm sure many of you have been fingerprinted, and you don't have to tell me the reason why.
Fingerprint records are made at the time of arrest, of course, but people who work with
large sums of money or other valuables like at a bank, they'll have their fingerprints
recorded too.
And these prints are held for what's known as exclusionary purposes, since if the bank
was robbed, investigators would want to be able to figure out the fingerprints of people
who have a good reason to be there and exclude them.
Other times prints are taken for background checks.
For instance, people who work with children will periodically have prints taken and compared
to police records to help ensure the safety of vulnerable groups like kids.
These can be and still are taken by simple inking methods on what's called a 10-print
card.
This standard presentation method collects a rolled print from each finger and both thumbs
and then a tapped print from the four fingers on each hand placed next to each other and
then each thumb.
But more recently, since about the early 90s, digital technologies have been developed.
These fingerprint scanners now allow a digit to be put on a digital pad that records the
fingerprint.
Along with this movement from ink to scanning, there have been changes in how prints are
stored and compared.
There are a couple of reasons why, reasons and ways prints can be compared.
If a suspect is arrested, her prints can be run against prints and storage to see if she's
linked to any other crimes.
Or unknown prints from a crime scene can be compared to fingerprint records on file to
try to identify who done it.
In each of those cases, either a known or an unknown person is being compared to the
records of known people.
But sometimes unknown prints from a crime scene are matched to other unknown prints from other
crime scenes.
In these cases, even though the identity of the perp isn't known, the crimes are linked
by the prints found at two or more scenes.
So a series of breakings and enterings may be linked as being the handy work of a single
person, even if the police don't know yet who that criminal is.
Another important use of fingerprint comparisons is to help identify the unknown dead, but
only if the body is good enough shape to allow for fingerprinting.
We'll talk more about that in another presentation.
Prints are also used for security and access purposes, like when banks use fingerprints
to verify identities.
And some high-tech security measures involve scanning a person's prints like a key in
a lock to open a door or log on to a computer system.
So when comparing fingerprints, how do investigators come up with a match?
Well, for over a century, searching one print against others was done by hand.
Using 10 fingerprints per person and the volume of stored reference prints, you can imagine
how tough comparing prints used to be in the past.
Particularly, once the value of fingerprints was known, after Bertillon and Galton's time,
print records from criminals began to accumulate in police offices all over the world.
Because of how complex searching and comparing records became, a couple of fingerprint coding
systems developed over time.
All these systems basically turned the arch, loop, and whirl patterns on a set of 10 digits
into alphabetical and or numerical codes that can be more quickly and easily compared.
This coding has the capability to quickly let law enforcement eliminate huge batches
of data without even having to look at the prints the codes represent.
These codes can also be communicated across distances by phone, text, email, and if they
don't correlate, that's the end of the story.
If the codes do match, then the actual prints can be compared by hand side by side to look
for minutiae and confirm whether the prints are a true match.
One coding system that evolved is the Henry System, developed by Sir Edward Henry, head
of the Metropolitan Police of London during the early 1900s.
The Henry System boils down an entire set of 10 prints into a single fraction that represents
the even digits of both hands over the odd digits of both hands.
A Henry code might look like 6 over 3 or 12 over 5, something like that.
The overall possible universe of the entire Henry scheme is 1,024 possible fractions.
And while that's not an infinite number, it's still quite a lot.
One version of the original Henry System is still used in most European countries and
by the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Recent modifications to the Henry System used by the FBI create even more code classes that
can narrow down a search even faster.
As computer technologies like scanning improved, then computerized matching of prints became
possible.
And in 1999, the U.S. FBI developed its Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System,
known as IAFIS.
There are amazing advantages to computerization.
First, comparisons can be done against millions of prints in minutes.
Second, a single print can be compared against all stored data.
You don't need a full set or a Henry System fraction.
Even local state and national databases are now linked for simultaneous searching, which
is really crucial today because of transportation networks that literally allow a criminal to
be here today and gone sometimes across the world by tomorrow.
Now I can't vouch for the complete accuracy of this story since I wasn't there.
But one of our local fingerprint guys told me about a group of high school students who
visited the county sheriff's office on a field trip.
The detective asked for a volunteer who would have his fingerprints scanned into the IAFIS
system as a demo.
And one kid in the back of the group raised his hand, came up front, and put his finger
on the data pad while the whole class watched.
Within a minute, IAFIS was linking that fingerprint to a series of car burglaries in the local
area.
My cop friend claims he simply looked at the kid and said, son, you're staying after school
today.
But as powerful as it is, even IAFIS has its limitations.
Fingerprint quality, particularly from scene prints, is often lacking.
And IAFIS really only searches on ridge patterns, not minutia.
A law enforcement officer or forensic scientist still has to put an eye on any IAFIS system
suggested matches and give them a real critical examination.
So what constitutes an accurate match?
Historically, there have been databases, debates, on the number of points of comparison required
to confidently and legally declare a fingerprint match.
Typically, individual jurisdictions set a minimum number of correlations that had to
be there to justify a match.
But that number varied from state to state and among different countries.
It was usually somewhere between 10 and 16 points of agreement between prints.
But in 1990, the IAI, which is the International Association for Identification, decided there
shouldn't be a mandatory minimum.
But instead, each investigator should rely on his or her own expertise.
Whether or not the comparison ultimately held up in court would be up to the judge and or
the jury.
To wrap this up, let me add a few tidbits and then close with a case.
It's not only our fingers that leave prints, remember people's palms also have unique prints.
And if a suspect is discovered for a given crime and palm prints are involved, that person
can be made to produce palm prints for comparison.
This is also true with the soles of the feet.
So if a crime scene may be involved barefoot footprints in blood across the bathroom floor,
a suspect could be forced to give footprints for comparison.
Even the footprints taken of newborns in the hospital have occasionally been used in identification,
especially in mass disasters settings like a plane crash if somebody has a footprint
but no fingerprints on file.
Even lip prints like from a coffee mug or a lipstick mark, they've been used to link
a person to a scene or an object.
Can fingerprints from one person be recovered off the skin of another?
Well, at least since the 1970s, attempts have been made to try to lift or image prints off
human skin using different chemicals or alternate light sources like lasers.
Fingerprints from an offender can sometimes be lifted from the skin surface of his or
her victim, whether that victim is dead or alive, provided investigators act quickly
enough.
A 2010 article in the Journal of Forensic Sciences summarized studies from police agencies
in Europe over a 10-year period.
Using 1,000 corpses, researchers tested whether latent prints could be recovered on skin.
Investigators were able to get ridged patterns 16% of the time using standard black powder
dusting.
And in a third of those cases, they could also get a DNA profile from the donor's fingerprint.
So even though it's been around a long time, fingerprint science is not old news and it
still holds new potential in solving crimes, sometimes even after a long time has elapsed.
Here's an example.
In 1994, a 48-year-old man started dating a lady who was recently separated from her
husband.
One night when the new couple was eating dinner, the doorbell rang and the man got
up to answer it.
Now his girlfriend couldn't see the doorway from where she was sitting, but she could
see and hear her boyfriend.
And as he answered the door, she heard him mutter something and then he turned and looked
right at her at about the same time she heard four gunshots and then saw him collapse.
Lots of people in the apartment complex heard the shots, but nobody saw the shooter.
So during their search, police found four shell casings in the hallway outside the dead man's
door.
They examined the casings for prints, but even after super glue fuming and fluorescent powder,
they couldn't get any latent prints off the shell casings to try to figure out who had
loaded the gun and then by assumption who likely shot it.
So in 2009, which was 14 years later, the investigators decided to take a second look
at the case.
They had just read about a study that said if you heat brass to 700 degrees Fahrenheit
over an open flame, it might cause the natural body salts in a fingerprint to develop into
a surface corrosion image.
So in 2009, they heated shell casings from the 1994 homicide and when the super glue
residue disintegrated, they could see some faint ridges on one of the casings.
From that, they developed a strong lead to a guy who not only owned a nine millimeter
handgun at the time, but was even known to wipe the bullets on his shirt before loading
them.
And that might explain why they couldn't find prints back in 1994 and why only a few remnants
of a print pattern were found even using this new technique.
We'll talk more about fingerprints in other lectures, but I hope this overview has given
you a grip, fingerprints, grip, get it, on an old but really essential crime fighting
tool.
