In forensic science, a toolmark is just what it sounds like.
It's some type of evidence, maybe a cut, gouge, abrasion, or any impression that's left by
a tool on something it contacts.
You might not realize it at first, but much of the science of firearms identification is
really a subcategory of toolmark analysis, because a gun is really a tool and a gun leaves
its mark on the bullet and the bullet's cartridge case every time it fires around.
One of my friends, who is actually a former student of mine, is now the toolmark and firearms
examiner at our local crime lab.
He told me that firearm, cartridge case examinations and comparisons make up about 70% of his regular
workload.
So, we'll start with a general discussion of toolmark basics, but then talk a lot more
about guns and ammunition.
I'll bet you all have tools somewhere in your house.
Some are probably new and hardly ever used, and others might be old and used often.
I actually have some that are very old but seldom used, since I have a lot of my dad's
old tools, but I'm usually either too busy or not skilled enough to fix a lot of things
around the house.
And we all have things that we might use as tools that aren't official tools, like when
you use a butter knife as a screwdriver.
Necessity is the mother of invention, and sometimes that's the case at a crime scene
too.
Well, we can't see with our naked eye about our tools and even household objects we could
use as tools, is that the original surface of any manufactured tool contains random microscopic
irregularities and imperfections that are created by slight variations in the manufacturing
process.
What we can sometimes see is that wear patterns develop over time on a tool's surface when
it's used, like that old Phillips head screwdriver that hardly has any grab left to it.
So forensic toolmark examination relies mainly on the overall shape of a tool and the combination
of manufacturing and use defects that are on it.
These features can allow a tool to be identified as to its class by the marks it leaves.
Remember class is a general category, in this case like screwdriver, pliers, wire cutter,
hammer, all those are examples of classes.
The toolmarks can also sometimes reveal pretty unique characteristics about a specific tool
as well.
The nature of a tool, what it's made out of, how it was made and its shape, determine the
type of evidence it will or it won't leave.
And any mark left by a tool is also affected by the nature of the surface that the tool
struck or rubbed against.
So these toolmarks usually take the form of impression and striation marks on a softer
surface that the tool gets used on.
Using Locart's principle, we know that tools can also cause a physical exchange of materials
between the two surfaces that come in contact.
For example paint could chip off a locker and be transferred to the end of a screwdriver
that was used to pry it open.
Or if a softer material is used as a tool like a piece of wood, it might leave fragments
on the thing it was used against.
And these toolmarks and any transferred trace evidence involved can be obvious or microscopic
depending on the tool, the substrate and the actions involved during the exchange between
the tool and its target.
Now when a tool marks big enough to see with the naked eye, it usually gives some class
characteristics like the general shape or size of the tool.
So a round impression mark might lead an investigator to think a hammer was involved or a squared
off bite out of some material might suggest the tip of needle nose pliers.
But unless the tool has some obvious defect that's easily seen, knowing a hammer or a
needle nose pliers were involved might be as far as the assumptions can go without more
testing.
A microscopic examination of a toolmark though gives way more detail and might even allow
a suspected match between a specific tool and the thing it was used on.
Minute random irregularities on a screwdriver, a wire cutter, a scraper, a crowbar, a shovel
or any other tool with what we could call a use edge, those can often be matched by investigators
to evidence left at the scene of a crime.
Okay so we've learned that no two tools are completely identical, not even those made
by the same manufacturer in the same batch, but likewise no two tool marks are completely
identical, even those from the same tool used repeatedly during a single crime.
One reason is that the repeated use of a single tool involves different angles and different
amounts of force applied each time.
We know that from our own practical experience.
If you can't pry the lid off an old paint can, you're just going to keep going at it
from different angles and using different techniques, different pressures until you open it.
And if the tool being used has a complicated shape or multi-purpose surfaces, the patterns
get even more complicated.
I've seen this first hand in tool marks on a skull in a horrendous case where a woman
was bludgeoned to death with a claw hammer, and you can imagine how different the marks
from the head of the hammer were from those that its claw end made since both ends were
used interchangeably in the struggle.
Okay so the tool changes the surface of what it's used against and leaves marks behind,
but the tool itself can also be altered during the course of the crime.
For example if a pry bar is used to break into a convenience store, the interaction between
the metal of the tool and the doorway itself can change the surface of the pry bar in both
obvious and microscopic ways, especially if both are made out of hard surfaces.
And if the first try isn't successful, the second and third attempts to jimmy the door
might continue to alter the surface of the pry bar, making not only each tool mark different,
but also changing the surface of the tool in a very short period of time.
So the surface of a single tool changes over its lifetime.
Now for investigators this is both a blessing and a curse.
Useware creates individualizing characteristics on a tool, but unless that tool is found immediately
after the crime, or is kept in storage and not used again, or is much harder than the
thing it was used on, its surface could be different when it's ultimately discovered
than when it was when it was used to commit the crime.
So who finds and recovers these tool marks at a scene and how are they analyzed?
Well let's say investigators find tool marks and tools at a burglary scene.
And break-ins are a big part of tool mark analysis, anything from trying to break into
a safe to prying up a window frame or jimmying a door.
Well the tools themselves are usually easy to get back to the crime lab if the perpetrators
are stupid enough to leave them behind, and sometimes you just get lucky and they are.
But the surfaces the tool marks are on may or may not be easily transported if wire cutters
are used to disable a security system.
The cut section of wire can simply be cut again, making sure investigators know which
end was their cut, and then take that piece of wire back to the lab for a microscopic examination
of any tool marks that might be on it.
Okay, that's an easy one.
Now here's a hard one.
If criminals use a crowbar to break into the 16 by 30 foot door of a large drive-in storage
locker, investigators are either going to have to completely document the door while
at the storage facility, or somehow or another remove the evidence and get it back to the
lab.
The tool mark scene documentation, as with all crime scenes, involves a lot of careful
photography with a measuring scale in place.
And if the situation warrants, like in the case of evidence that can't be easily transported,
the investigators will attempt to make a really detailed cast of the tool mark using a casting
material like liquid silicone or dental plaster right there at the scene.
Having only a cast to work from, though, can dilute the evidence and reduce the ability
to make a definitive association with a suspect tool if it's found.
Sometimes just the affected portion of a window frame or door jam can be cut away and then
taken to the crime lab for examination.
The packaging of the evidence is critical, too.
The tool and whatever it was used on have to be packaged separately to prevent them
from banging into each other and causing further interactions between them.
And because a tool can hold important trace evidence, like microscopic chips of paint,
fiber evidence, or even blood and other body tissues, only careful packaging and transport
of that kind of evidence will preserve it for lab analysis.
Another thing, the crime scene investigator should never try to fit the suspected tool
back into the tool mark, not at the scene and not in the lab.
To do that could alter the mark and compromise the investigation.
So how do they figure out if there's a match between a tool mark and a tool that might
have been used to make it?
At the lab, tool mark experts can use a suspected tool to make test markings for comparison,
which allows the direct comparison between known and unknown tool marks.
When you consider all the possible angles and pressures possible when a tool is used,
it's not easy for tool mark examiners to exactly duplicate a tool mark left at a crime scene
in their lab.
The use of a soft material in the lab, something like lead, will allow an impression to be made
of the edge of a recovered tool without damaging it or creating any additional use wear.
After doing microscopic exams and casting and testing the suspected tool on lead in
the lab, the investigators can also use a piece of the original substrate to try to
duplicate the tool mark.
In other words, they might try to replicate the tool mark by not only using the suspect
tool, but by using a piece of the same exact surface from the crime scene.
Just like we saw in fingerprint analysis, when investigators find a sufficient number
of similarities between the test markings and the evidentiary marks from the crime scene
an association can be made.
Careful documentation of the lab-created tool marks and the ones taken from the crime scene
are necessary in case they'll be needed in court.
They use comparison microscopes that are capable of taking side-by-side photographs during
their examinations to compare known and unknown markings.
Okay, now let's turn our attention to firearms, which like I said before are also a form of
tools.
We're covering firearms with tool marks for a couple of reasons.
First off, when a projectile travels through the barrel of a gun, microscopic marks called
stri-A are created on the bullet and its cartridge casing.
So that each bullet is changed and etched as it gets fired, much the way the machining
of a tool creates unique microscopic properties during manufacturing.
Also tool marks, firearms, bullets and cartridge cases are analyzed in similar ways and usually
by the same experts in a crime lab.
Before we really dive into this topic though, I need to mention that firearms examination
and the science known as ballistics are not the same thing.
Ballistics is really a subdivision of physics that explains the way any object travels,
whether it's a baseball or a glider.
In forensics, the projectiles in motion we're interested in are usually shotgun pellets
or bullets.
First, let's take a look at how firearms are classified.
Some of you might know a lot more about this than others, but there are generally five
main groups of firearms and almost countless different types of ammunition.
So let's take a look at the types of guns one at a time.
Guns, which are sometimes called handguns, are subclassified as either revolvers or
self-loading pistols.
Even if you've never seen these types of guns in person, you'd recognize them just
from Hollywood movies and the television shows that you've seen.
Revolvers are those types of handguns that hold individual live rounds in a revolving
cylinder and each live round is a single bullet to be fired plus the cartridge case that holds
that bullet.
As the revolving cylinder turns, individual rounds are hit with a firing pin and sent
down the barrel.
Once a bullet is fired, its cartridge case is left behind in the cylinder and has to
be removed by hand.
Self-loading pistols are those kinds of handguns that have a magazine or a clip that gets inserted
into the pistol and contains a number of cartridges that are spring-loaded from a magazine into
the firing chamber.
Self-loading pistols are also self-emptying in the sense that their cartridge casings
are ejected from the chamber automatically as each bullet gets fired from the barrel.
Now rifles are the second major class of firearms.
These are like pistols but they have a longer barrel and they're meant to be used with two
hands.
They're all kinds of rifles like single shot, double shot, which refers to whether they
have one or two barrels or semi-automatic and automatic rifles, which has to do with
the way the ammo gets fed into them and how the cartridges get ejected.
Machine guns are the third classification.
We've all seen them on TV or in movies.
They're automatic weapons that are fed their ammo from either a magazine or a belt.
Because they have such powerful recoil and they get super hot, machine guns have to be
mounted on some kind of a stand.
Submachine guns are the next major group of firearms and they're also fully automatic
but they can be handheld.
And shotguns are the last of the five major classes of firearms.
Shotguns are significantly different because they don't fire bullets.
Instead they fire pellets, buckshot or slugs.
A shotgun shell is typically designed as a plastic cartridge that contains a group of
small pellets or larger buckshot and those all get fired at once.
A slug is a single projectile, usually made out of a soft metal like lead that gets loaded
into a shot shell.
My friend, the firearms examiner, says the guns he most frequently sees in the lab are
derringers, which are the smallest pocket type pistols, easy to hide, revolvers, semi-automatic
pistols, submachine guns, single shot and semi-automatic shotguns and single shot semi-automatic rifles
and machine guns too.
So what do firearms investigators look for in guns?
Well, they may need to document a gun's general condition.
They may have to check to see if a recovered weapon is even capable of being fired or if
a gun's been made illegal by modifications or something was wrong with a firearm that
may be caused it to discharge accidentally.
Firearms examiners may also have to try to restore the serial number on a weapon or really
any object that might have a serial number stamped into its metal since criminals are
known to try to file the serial number off of a stolen gun.
What the bad guys don't realize though is that even after the serial number might be
obliterated to their eye by filing it flat, the process that created the serial number
leaves traces.
That's because the original stamping in the manufacturing process leaves permanent stress
marks in the metal below where the serial number was placed.
So to recover a serial number, a firearms and tool mark expert can sand the surface
metal in the area where the serial number has been filed away and they'll sand that
till it's very smooth.
Then they treat the area with a caustic solution which will differentially start to dissolve
the underlying metal that was strained and softened by the stamping process.
Now as the metal that was directly under each digit of the serial number dissolves, the
digits will briefly appear in the metal beneath where it was once clearly stamped.
Now forensic scientists only gets one shot at this though because as the chemical continues
to work, all the surrounding metal will also start to degrade.
So they have to take a photograph really quickly before that restored serial number disappears
again forever.
A big focus of firearms examination is whether a particular weapon fired a certain round
of ammunition that was recovered.
This is when investigators try to match bullets recovered from a crime scene or from a victim's
body or casings that have been fired to figure out whether they came from a certain weapon
in question.
To understand this we first need to focus a little bit on how firearms are made and
how they work.
Surface irregularities produced during manufacturing processes can make it possible for a forensic
investigator to tie a bullet to a particular gun to the exclusion of all others.
The barrel of a gun is initially produced by hollowing out a solid metal bar and this
is done by a drill that leaves random individual tool marks on the inside of the barrel.
But in addition to that, the inner surface of a gun barrel gets imprinted with a series
of spiral grooves in a manufacturing process they call rifling.
Inside the barrel of a gun, the raised regions resulting from the rifling process are known
as lands and the valleys between them are known as grooves.
When used as a verb, the term rifling means the spin that gets put on a flying object,
whether on a football or a bullet, by encouraging the twist with a series of raised objects.
When a quarterback throws a football, his arm, his wrist, his fingers become that rifling
mechanism that puts the spin on the ball as it leaves his hand.
In the case of a gun, the rifling ridges inside the barrel produce the spin on the bullet.
Just like a rapidly thrown football, a spinning bullet won't tumble end over end as it flies.
So rifling helps the bullet stay on a true trajectory and helps maintain its velocity.
Now the internal diameter of a firearm barrel is known as the gun's caliber and that's
measured between the lands, which remember are the raised regions inside the barrel.
Caliber is usually expressed in either hundredths of an inch or in millimeters.
So when you hear a caliber like 22 or 38, that's actually 0.22 and 0.38 because that's
tenths of an inch.
Obviously a nine millimeter is measured in millimeters, duh.
Actually in practice, caliber is really only an approximation of the barrel's diameter
because the exact measurement depends on how the lands and grooves oppose each other.
So guns of the same caliber can vary slightly in the actual bore diameter inside the barrel.
Shotguns are not measured in the same way.
Their barrel diameter is called gauge and gauge is kind of weird to me.
It's the measure of the number of lead pellets of the diameter of the barrel that together
would weigh a pound.
So 20, 20 gauge pellet balls would weigh one pound and the diameter of a 20 gauge shotgun
would be the same diameter as one of those 20 gauge lead balls.
Since there'd be 12 gauge balls in a pound, as the number gets lower, the diameter of
the barrel of a shotgun actually gets larger.
Okay, back to rifling.
Historically before commercial mass production of weapons, which occurred around 1940, barrels
were rifled manually using a big steel hook made that they would cut maybe one or two
grooves at a time as they pulled it through the barrel.
But today's modern manufacturing uses machining methods that cut all of a barrel's grooves
and leave behind its lands at the same time.
Some lands and grooves aren't just found in a gun barrel.
When a bullet's fired, the barrel's lands and grooves make corresponding marks on the
surface of the bullet as it spirals down the length of the barrel.
The raised lands in the gun barrel etch matching grooves on the bullet and the depressed grooves
in the barrel create raised lands on the bullet so the barrel and the bullet become like negatives
of each other.
The beauty of this is that firearms manufacturers choose specific rifling processes to meet
their weapons specifications.
So for instance, all .32 caliber Smith & Wesson revolvers have five lands and five grooves
that twist to the right.
While another .32 caliber handgun from a different manufacturer might have a different number
of lands and grooves and maybe a left-sided twist.
So by knowing the specifics of different gun manufacturers, a firearms examiner might
be easily able to tell the class characteristics on a bullet as having been fired from a certain
brand of gun.
But by definition, class characteristics aren't unique to one specific weapon.
So what lets investigators match a bullet to a gun then?
Well, despite large-scale manufacturing operations, my new random markings produced mostly by
drilling will make the inside of one gun barrel different from another.
So when a bullet travels down the barrel of a gun, in addition to the major features
of lands and grooves made by each other, the microscopic manufacturing imperfections also
get transferred to the bullet.
Now these are the money because they result in individual characteristics that can tie
a specific bullet to a specific gun.
In order to match a bullet or a cartridge case from a crime scene to a given gun, a
firearms expert has to test fire the gun using the same type of ammo.
Then compare the bullet fired at the crime lab to the bullet from the scene.
They have to fire the gun into something that will trap the bullet without damaging it.
Our lab has this big tank of water that's specifically designed for test firing weapons.
Now I've been dancing around the topic of ammunition.
So let's add a little detail there.
Bullets used to be made of pure lead, but advances in firearms technology meant that
ammunition had to change too.
One thing that happened over time was a change in propellants that made the journey down
the barrel of a gun a lot hotter.
Because lead is such a soft material, the extreme heat would cause it to build up inside
the barrel.
So eventually, the elements antimony and tin were added to the lead in bullets.
The shotgun shells still often hold lots of small pellets of lead.
But today's modern bullet is typically a lump of lead that has a collar around its
base known as a jacket.
Jacketed bullets have coverings like copper, brass or steel that keep the lead from fouling
the barrel and keep the bullet less prone to deforming.
Because the jacket is much harder and covers the surface of the bullet, fully jacketed bullets
typically pick up more consistent striated detail as they travel over the lands and grooves
inside the length of a gun barrel.
There are also lots of types of cartridge cases and some have markings that designate
the gun caliber and the manufacture.
Cartridge cases can carry additional evidence like impressions from a gun's firing pin
with your tiny tool marks in themselves.
Bullets and shotgun pellets can be found at crime scenes, maybe lodged in a victim, a
wall, a piece of furniture and just like with tool marks, if the bullets lodged in something
or someone that can be moved back to the forensic lab or the morgue, that's always the approach
they take.
Even if this means taking out the section of the ceiling that contains the spent round.
If the bullets removed at the scene, investigators have to take great care to prevent any surface
damage that might damage the microscopic barrel markings that are on the bullet.
Bullets, cartridge cases, cartridges and guns all have to be handled and documented
really carefully to preserve any trace evidence that might be present.
This could include fingerprints of the victim or the shooter as we saw in the last lecture.
As well as blood or tissue that might be on the gun or in its barrel.
Trace evidence could even include lint picked up from the gun being tucked in the waistband
of a pair of pants.
Lastly we should also talk about the types of propellants that are used in guns or ammunition.
Saltpeter, which is the common name for potassium nitrate, is the basic ingredient for the type
of gun powder known as black powder, which was invented around the 9th or 10th century
by the Chinese.
The black powder fell out of use because it's really corrosive to a firearm and can also
easily give away the shooter's location.
So in the late 19th century, smokeless powder was invented using combinations of nitrocellulose
and nitroglycerin.
By the middle of the 1800s, live rounds were being made with a chemical called mercury
fulminate in the cartridge head.
This small amount of explosive will detonate when struck, shocked, or sparked.
The today's modern cartridges contain a small container of what's called primer in the middle
of the cartridge.
A firing pin on the gun's hammer strikes the primer, detonates it, and ignites the propellant.
The propellants and primers used in firearms are important in forensics because they constitute
what's called gunshot residue, often just called GSR.
GSR exits the barrel as a mix of the partially burned and unburned powder, soot, lead, and
lead vapors, all from the ammunition.
Because the residue disperses in a geometric pattern as it leaves the barrel, it can help
identify the distance between a weapon and its target.
But this is only reliable for distances of less than around 36 inches.
The primer can also leave lead, barium, and antimony residue on things or people that
are within close proximity or downwind, and that can aid in forensic investigations too.
In the early 90s, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives in the United States
developed something called the Integrated Ballistics Identification System.
That allows microscopic images of bullet land and groove rifling impressions to be compared
across the Internet.
By the late 90s, this system was linked with one developed by the U.S. Federal Bureau of
Investigation to examine firing pin and primer impressions on spent cartridge casings.
And these two tools have revolutionized the work of firearms examiners and allowed the
national networking of investigations in much the same way IAFES did for fingerprints.
These databases led to suggested change in the firearms industry that's known as ballistic
fingerprinting.
In this program, all new weapons would be test-fired after manufacturing and a cartridge case recovered
in order to document surface markings like firing pin impressions.
Then this information would be stored in a database for future comparisons using automated
comparison systems.
Unfortunately, what sounded like a perfect plan has not yielded the best result.
That's partly because guns purchased legally too often wind up stolen and or sold illegally.
And those are the guns most often used to commit crimes.
The U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives estimated that over 80,000 firearms
were sold illegally in the United States in 2002 alone.
So ballistic fingerprinting has never really taken off, not only because it's really difficult
to reconstruct the chain of hands that handle a gun after it leaves the factory, but also
because many criminals discard the firearm after they commit a crime.
In addition, cheaply made guns can change over time as they're fired, and guns can become
fouled by gunshot residue and can rust over time.
So these things can combine to change or mask the original individual characteristics
documented at the factory.
For these and other reasons, toolmark and firearms comparisons can't simply be automated.
They'll always require the eye for detail in the critical thinking capabilities of skilled
forensic scientists.
