Now that we've covered fingerprints, tool marks, and the types of surface evidence linked
to firearms and ammunition, let's spend a little time looking at a few other forms of
impression evidence.
Things like shoe prints, tire marks, and fabric impressions have also all been used
in forensic investigations.
Contact evidence found at crime scenes can be any kind of pattern made by or found in
soil, dust, snow, blood, wet paint, lots of other media.
Like other kinds of evidence, impressions made by shoe prints, bicycle tires, or the
tire treads of cars and trucks show general features that give information about the manufacturer,
size, and brand.
Remember, this is what we call class evidence.
But like tools and firearms, shoes and tires also gain individuating characteristics as
they're used in more and over time.
And this can actually tie a shoe print, for example, to a specific shoe at the exclusion
of others.
There can be lots of issues with evidence collection and preservation where shoe prints
and tire treads are concerned.
Just like we saw with fingerprints and tool marks.
Welcome back to some of those topics again and add a little new detail, including the
ways that forensic photography can be used to capture some of the more transient forms
of evidence.
And like lots of other types of analyses, looking at these kinds of impressions typically
involves comparing an unknown pattern from a crime scene with a known exemplar shoe print
or tire track that's been intentionally taken off a suspect person's footwear or vehicle.
This kind of impression work can also involve getting exclusionary shoe prints or tire tracks
from people or cars that are not related to the criminal act.
But for one legitimate reason or another, we're at the scene.
Like the shoe prints of an ambulance worker who walked through blood at the scene of a
shooting to try to save a life.
So given all these similarities to contact evidence we've talked about before, how are
these kinds of impressions different?
I guess we could start off with the obvious size differences, duh, between shoe prints
or tire tracks when compared to fingerprints or the microscopic stray that might be left
on tools or bullets.
Not only might shoe prints be easier to locate at a crime scene, but when you think about
it, there are probably lots more footprints left behind at a crime scene than fingerprints,
tool marks or bullets.
Our two-legged locomotion pretty much guarantees that our feet make more contact with surfaces
in our environment than our hands do.
But I'm sure more criminals think of wearing gloves than shoe covers.
On the other hand, though, shoes can be thrown away after a crime is committed, whereas fingerprints
not so much.
And it's generally easier to wipe off your fingerprints than to get rid of shoe prints.
But I guess a backtracking burglar could do either, at least we've seen that done in
the movies.
Now, before we go thinking that shoe print and tire track evidence is simply easy to
locate and handle at a crime scene due to its size, think for a minute about the many types
of surfaces that shoe prints and tire tracks might be found on.
I guess the best case scenario would be wet cement or wet paint, and the worst case might
be rapidly melting snow or on the beach where the tide's coming in.
Also think about how difficult it might be to access a crime scene on foot without disturbing
latent footprints, or to get a crime scene vehicle into a location without complicating
any existing tire track evidence, especially if that evidence can't be seen until you're
right up on it.
So one of the greatest problems that investigators might run into with these kinds of impression
evidence, examples, is preserving and documenting the scene.
Typically, shoe prints and tire tracks have to be carefully photographed by a competent
crime scene photographer.
Because if the material the printer track is on can't be moved, or the substrate is temporary
like in snow, those photographs might be the only source for future comparisons or at
trial.
Maybe this is a good time to talk about general crime scene photography.
Over the past decade or so, crime scene photography has moved from the old black and white Polaroid
instant cameras to state-of-the-art digital technology.
There are a handful of basic principles of forensic photography that are pretty much
common to all scenes.
First, a forensic photographer has to keep a really careful log that tracks the pictures
being taken, including when, where, and by whom.
Usually images start with broad overviews to give perspective and show relationships between
things at the scene.
And then they progress to medium shots of, say, maybe six feet, and then close-up shots
of maybe a foot or less.
Those will be made where detailed views are needed.
And these have to include a measuring scale so that the exact size of something can be
shown.
But it's fairly common to first take a duplicate picture without the scale just to show things
as they were before the scale gets put in.
Only with an accurate scale can things and photos be compared with any confidence later
to other images or objects.
Images should be taken from a couple of different angles and using both direct and sidelighting
to maximize detail, which is especially important in impression evidence.
Sidelighting can show more of the three-dimensionality of evidence.
Images should be taken in a 360-degree pattern from some kind of a fixed point using a tripod
and a wide-angled lens.
That way pictures can be overlapped to show the entire scene in every direction.
Special attention has to be given to entrance and exit routes early because it might be
hard to preserve those areas and still get full access to the scene.
At indoor crime scenes, any adjacent rooms or spaces need to be photographed too because
the perp had to get there somehow.
Any physical evidence, including a body, needs to have full photo documentation before it's
moved.
And whoever discovered the crime scene or the body has to be questioned to see if they
moved anything in their effort to figure out what was going on, like a family member might
have rolled the body over to check for signs of life.
The general rule of thumb, especially now that photography has gone digital, is that
you just can't have too many pictures of the scene or the evidence in it.
You know at first there was some concern when digital photography came out that it couldn't
be trusted since images can be altered using computer software, meaning that digital images
might not fly in court, but today's technology can detect when a digital image has been tampered
with and now digital photography has become standard.
So has video photography, now that the costs for it have come way down.
Something like videotaping a path of footprints from eye level can really give a view that
you can't get any other way.
And sometimes one cop will do the filming while the other narrates what they're both
seeing and doing.
Videotaping doesn't replace still photography though.
Forensics needs the resolution that only still images can provide.
And there are lots of types of still cameras with different types of aspect ratios.
That's the ratio of the images width to its height.
Now most of your common consumer cameras have an aspect ratio of 4 to 3 or 3 to 2.
And so they produce rectangular images.
But there are specially designed cameras that do guaranteed 1 to 1 aspect ratio images,
often called square format.
And these are especially good for taking pictures of fingerprints, footprints, entire
tracks at a scene because they capture the image on the negative in the exact size the
evidence was in real life.
Now we'll talk more about special photographic techniques for specific types of evidence
in other lectures, like the alternate light source stuff that I mentioned earlier in this
segment on fingerprints.
Let's get back to our shoe print and tire track impression evidence.
We talked about how important photos can be at a scene, especially when there's no way
the evidence can be moved back to the lab.
But there are some cases where shoe print or tire track evidence winds up being completely
portable.
When somebody leaves a bloody footprint on an area rug or piece of paper, for example,
or the victim of a hit and run winds up with a tire tread across his t-shirt.
But when shoe prints or tire tracks can't be moved after the photographer's finished,
investigators might try lifting or casting 3D evidence.
This might involve a skilled crime scene investigator using his or her head in some
pretty quick decision making because you typically only get a single shot at either lifting or
casting a shoe print or tire track.
If an impression like a shoe print or a bicycle tread is made in a thin layer of dust or dirt,
investigators can try an adhesive lifting material and put it all over all or just part
of the impression, just like a fingerprint can be lifted.
But I've also seen the use of electrostatic lifting technology, which is really cool.
The evidence tech takes a sheet of this Mylar film and rolls it over an impression in duster
dirt and then puts a high voltage electrode onto the film.
And that electrostatic charge that's created picks up the duster dirt from the surface
where the impression was and transfers it to the Mylar film.
Then it can be picked up and moved from the crime scene and taken to the lab.
This electrostatic technique is particularly useful, say, if a suspect walked across something
like a bank counter or a tabletop, which is a surface that typically holds a little dust
and isn't usually walked on.
I've tried this with my students on visits to the sheriff's department and it's pretty
amazing.
We have a student hop up and walk across the table and you might not even be able to see
the footprints, but the electrostatic lifting not only picks them up and preserves them,
it makes that evidence completely portable.
The same technique can be used over bigger areas like a floor, but the problem is there
are probably lots of other footprints in whatever dust and dirt is on the floor.
It's the same problem you wind up with in fingerprinting, too.
Too many prints and it's just hard to know who's is who and what's what.
When a footprint or tire track is not on a flat dusty surface, lifting it with adhesive
or an electrostatic process doesn't work.
So where there's a lot more three-dimensionality to an impression and it can't be moved back
to the lab, casting is the best way to preserve the evidence.
There are a couple of different casting methods that are commercially available to law enforcement
and forensic scientists.
Which one they use is based on what substrate material the impression is on.
A good old plaster of Paris used to be pretty common, but today dental stone is the preferred
casting material.
That's the same gypsum material that dentists use to make molds of people's teeth.
Dental stone gives better detail and makes more durable casts than most other options.
For really fragile or transient prints, there are even some commercially available waxy
sprays that will seal a footprint or tire track when they occur in something like snow.
And then that sealed impression can be casted.
Casting methods all pretty much involve pouring the casting material over the 3D surface of
the impression and letting it harden.
After the cast is dry, they can do a detailed examination of it.
And if it's a good impression, it ought to be as close to a copy of the original surface
as possible.
See when you step in something that's soft, like soft mud, you're making a negative impression
of the sole of your shoe in the mud, like a mirror reversal.
But if you cast that footprint, the cast makes a negative of the original negative and you
wind up with a positive image that matches, not mirrors, your shoe.
And you try this yourself by getting one of those large aluminum pans from the grocery
store and then fill it with dirt or better yet sand.
Make sure it's not too wet.
Then put on some shoes with a fancy sole like running or walking shoes and step into the
pan.
Now, if the mud mess you made isn't too dry or too runny, you should wind up with a pretty
decent 3D footprint.
And if you want, you can get some plaster of Paris and try to cast your footprint.
We've done this in my class and we're still not really good at it.
The only tip I have is to let the plaster dry for a really long time before you try
to lift the cast out or even before you move the pan.
Or once the cast is pretty dry, support it with your hand and then turn the whole pan
upside down.
Of course, you'll have to pick the mud back up off the floor so I'm not responsible for
the mess you make.
You may want to do it outside.
If you just want to get an idea of the detail present on the sole of your shoe and you don't
want a huge mess, it's easy to just put a shoe in your hand and put a piece of paper
on the sole of it and do a crayon rubbing on the surface.
Those fat crayons for little kids work best.
Peel the paper off and just use the side of the crayon.
Now, before you go thinking that casting is just a brilliantly simple way to capture this
kind of 3D evidence, there are things that can really up the ante on how difficult it
can be to cast a footprint or tire track.
It can literally be an uphill or I should say a downhill battle if the impression is
on a steep grade.
In cases like that, the casting material is going to want to follow gravity, so some
engineering might be called for, like maybe building a wooden frame around the footprint
first and then filling that box they've built with casting material.
There can also be problems when debris winds up in the impression, either when it was made
or maybe some junk blew in after the suspect made the footprints or the car drove over
that surface.
Removing the debris without disturbing the evidence can be tricky and really complicate
the casting process.
Okay, so what's done with photos or casts in terms of their value as evidence?
As we saw with fingerprints, tool marks and bullets, shoe prints, tire tracks and a whole
bunch of other types of evidence we'll talk about in future discussions require comparison.
But comparing unknown evidence and known evidence can only happen when both unknowns and knowns
are recovered and available.
So basically there are three comparison possibilities we can consider.
First, some kind of evidence is recovered from a crime scene, but a plausible suspect
who might have similar evidence to match it is never found.
Unfortunately, police evidence storage rooms are full of this type of potential evidence
that never gets linked to a suspect.
Secondly, an investigation might lead to a good suspect in a case, but either that person
didn't leave much recoverable evidence or the right kind of evidence at the scene.
Examining every shoe in a person's closet is useless if none of those shoes were used
when committing the crime being investigated.
Plus, and I'm guilty of this right now as I speak, all of today's focus on forensic
science just keeps making smarter and smarter criminals that no ways to avoid leaving a trail.
This time has gone on, I think all of us in the business have seen increasingly sophisticated
attempts to hide crimes.
I know I certainly have in my own case work.
The third comparison possibility is really the backbone of forensic investigation.
Evidence is found at a crime scene and later a suspect person, tool, weapon or shoe, you
name it, is discovered to have the identical properties of the crime scene evidence.
Like other kinds of forensic comparisons, investigators like to use test impressions,
like the test firing we talked about with guns and bullets, in order to make quality
comparisons between an impression from an unknown shoe or tire associated with a crime
and a like object they want to compare it with.
One of the ways that shoe prints and tire marks are like guns in ammunition but different
from fingerprints is that shoes and tires come in standard sizes that are made by manufacturers
that work towards quality control and brand identity and how they make their products.
The size and style of a shoe or a tire can give what we call class characteristics.
In other words, that standard swoosh of the Nike brand would be pretty obvious in a footprint.
Once they know the brand, the measurements of and between all those little funky lines
on the bottom of the shoe can let investigators figure out its size.
Some footwear patterns let investigators know the manufacturing size of a shoe that made
evidence at a crime scene.
They may be even able to contact the manufacturer until the manufacturer will tell them exactly
when and where that type of shoe was produced.
There are even some automated footwear databases, so law enforcement can look up the brand and
size of a shoe using a scanned shoe print image.
But even if the suspect has the exact same kind of shoe in his or her closet, which is
compelling by itself, the style and size alone don't rise to become individuating evidence.
In other words, that similarity doesn't put the suspect at the scene unless maybe we're
talking about some high-end designer shoe that was a one-of-a-kind production with really
good documentation of ownership, like OJ and his Bruno Mollies, which is pretty unlikely.
I mean, one recent survey I found said there are over 1.5 billion shoes sold each year
in the United States alone.
So what good are footprints then?
Well, just like we saw with tools and guns, a shoe develops its own unique use characteristics
when it's worn over time.
Investigators might just get lucky, especially if the shoe isn't new or is discovered right
after the crime was committed.
Small gouges, cuts, other kinds of wear marks found on a well-worn shoe might be able to
be matched specifically to crime scene evidence.
This kind of pattern evidence comparison rises to a much higher level of certainty.
Like fingerprints or the microscopic rifling marks on a bullet, when enough points of comparison
can be made between the unknown footwear evidence and a test pattern that's made from
a known shoe, there just might be enough for reasonable people to say that this and only
this shoe was used at that crime scene.
Okay, so what about tire tracks?
Well, one estimate I found said that about two-thirds of major crimes in the U.S. involve
cars.
And one way that tire marks are a little bit different than shoe prints has to do with
record keeping.
The ability of investigators to identify the make and model of a tire from its tread could
ultimately lead them to a particular kind of vehicle.
And because cars are registered to owners, a tire track might actually lead to a suspect
in a way that a shoe print probably couldn't.
More than likely, though, even if a tire can be identified to its manufacturer and style,
a lot of vehicles would have that brand of tire.
So again, we're right back to class evidence.
Let's cover a little bit of tire history.
Now, doesn't that sound exciting?
Well, the first tires were made by Dunlop in 1888, and they didn't have any tread.
They were just smooth rubber.
Tread was developed as speeds increased and road surfaces got smoother.
The original tread design was pretty much a gimmick by Firestone.
In 1907, they started stamping their tires in 3D with the company name.
So as it turned out, the tracks made by Firestone tires were not much more than advertising.
Now, today's tires are a lot more complex in their construction, and they can vary a
lot in size.
If you take a look at your car or truck tires, the coating on the sidewall describes the
type of vehicle the tire is made for, along with some of its dimensions and other design
features.
Databases of tire details have been developed to help identify vehicles in forensic work.
Because of the repetition on a tire's surface, it might not take much of a pattern to figure
out the kind or brand of tire that made that track.
And from that, then, may be the kind of vehicle.
But to get the full 360 degrees of a tire's surface to look for things like details and
imperfections that might lend themselves to a positive ID, you'd need a pretty long stretch
of tire impression, especially for something like a semi-tracker trailer tire.
In those cases, a series of overlapping photos would help, because a cast of that size would
be nearly impossible to create or transport.
And it's not just the tire details that give information.
A measurement of, say, something like the distance between the right and left tires,
or between a front tire and a back tire, those can also help narrow down the vehicle type.
And that might let investigators hone in, at least on a particular mode of transportation,
like was it a truck versus a car.
And before we change gears and leave this whole group of related topics, since fingerprints
tool marks, bullets, footprints, tire tracks are all types of impression evidence, let
me mention a couple of other things about impression evidence.
It's occasionally possible that a fabric imprint gets transferred to the surface of a vehicle
that strikes a pedestrian, especially if the fabric has a unique 3D surface, like a weave
pattern or some courting or beadwork, something like that.
The same goes for textile marks left on skin that might be seen at autopsy or in the emergency
room.
Things like belts, ropes, jewelry, zippers, buttons, all those kinds of things can leave
impression evidence on skin.
Now, not too long ago, I saw a case presentation at our local coroner's group meeting where
a baby died in one of those portable cribs they now call a pack-and-play.
It's like a small playpen.
The baby was at another woman's home daycare where a couple of kids came each day.
And because it was a snow day from school, the baby's seven-year-old brother just happened
to also be at the babysitters on that particular day.
The babysitter said she was out of the room and she heard the baby's big brother hollering
something about the baby making a funny noise.
When the woman got to the playpen, she said the baby was all twisted up in a hooded zip-up
sweatshirt that had somehow gotten hooked onto one of those little dangly baby toys.
You know, the kind of thing you can hang above a crib or clip on a kid's car seat.
The woman freed the baby from the tangled clothing, so the body wasn't in the original
position when ambulance workers arrived on the scene and they had to rely on her story
of the events.
The baby was taken to the hospital, but it turned out to be too late.
The little girl had died from strangulation.
Now given the situation, the babysitter, and even maybe the seven-year-old, could be prime
suspects in the baby's death.
I guess police thought that either one of them could have asphyxiated the baby.
After all, how could a kid's hoodie be a cause of death?
It didn't even have those little string ties on it.
It was just a zip-up sweatshirt with a ruffle around the edges of the hood.
When at her autopsy, the baby's skin showed clear impression evidence of the top part
of the sweatshirt zipper, and her little neck even showed impressions of some of the ruffles
that went around the edges of the hood.
I saw the photos from the autopsy, and you could see each tiny bruise-like impression
of every tooth of the zipper with a wavy pattern next to it from the ruffle on the edge of
the hood, and talk about a tragic death.
The best they could figure, the little girl stood up in the playpen, and somehow the hood
of her sweatshirt got caught on that dangling toy.
And when she felt something tugging on her, I guess she turned around, and apparently
she must have turned around a couple of times before the sweatshirt hood basically became
a new surrounder neck.
And then when she lost blood flow to her brain, she must have passed out, and her own body
weight, small as it was, just suffocated her.
Now the loss of that baby was one of those things we all call a terrible freak accident.
But at least the impression evidence found that autopsy saved the babysitter from wrongful
allegations of child abuse.
After I heard that story, I called my son right away and told him about it, because
my own grandbaby was about the same age at the time, and I told him not to put a hoodie
on her if she was going to be by herself for even a second.
The impression left by that zipper was really obvious on the baby's neck.
That was partly because she had very light and delicate skin, and that the tragic accident
had just happened.
But sometimes impression evidence on skin can't be seen with a naked eye without what's
called alternate light source photography.
That's taking pictures under ultraviolet or infrared light.
And that can sometimes show impression evidence on human tissues that can't be seen with
the unaided eye.
We'll talk more about that in our discussion of bite mark analysis, and learn more about
how specific special types of forensic photography were.
Now I'm sorry to leave you with an awful story like that, but it does emphasize something
that we have to keep in mind when talking about the value of any kind of evidence.
And that is to say that evidence is just as important, if not more so, when it exonerates
somebody who's innocent.
Partly based on TV, and maybe partly because of human nature, we're usually way too focused
on getting the bad guy.
So much so that we forget how important it is to make sure that innocent people are not
persecuted or prosecuted for things they didn't do.
Just put yourself in the place of that babysitter for even a second.
In the U.S., our legal system is supposed to fully support the notion of innocent until
proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
The English lawyer, William Blackstone, put it best all the way back in the 1760s when
he said, better that 10 guilty persons escape than one innocent suffer.
That's something we have to keep in mind throughout this entire series as we continue
to explore the use of evidence in making sure that justice is served.
