From 1979 to 1981, in the Atlanta, Georgia area, investigators started to see patterns
among nearly 30 homicides of young black males, most of whom were children.
Many of the victims have been dumped in the Chattahoochee River after being bludgeoned
or asphyxiated.
As the investigation unfolded, two main kinds of fiber evidence kept turning up on the bodies
and clothing of the victims.
One was a purple-colored acetate fiber, and the other was a yellow-green nylon fiber
that was trilobed or Y-shaped in cross-section.
Detectives decided to stake out the Chattahoochee to see if they could catch the killer disposing
of his next victim.
And on May 22, 1981, they heard a splash in the river and saw the vehicle of Wayne Williams
drive away from a bridge.
The next morning, another victim was found in the water.
A search of Williams' home turned up a yellow-green carpet as the possible source for the trilobed
nylon fibers.
But how common was that particular textile?
Was it rare enough to implicate Williams as the serial killer in a string of incidents
that became known as the Atlanta Child Murders?
Investigators discovered that particular fiber was made by only one manufacturer.
The fiber type was then sold to several carpet makers, who in turn added their own dyes.
Williams' carpet came from a Georgia company who made their particular color and style
in a fairly limited run.
In fact, based on the small quantity of carpet that was produced and average square-footroom
sizes, that particular carpeting was ultimately estimated to be in fewer than 100 homes in
the Atlanta area.
So based on this, Williams ended up being tried for two of the murders and was found
guilty, based mainly on the carpet fiber evidence.
There was plenty of other supporting evidence, too, including hair from Williams' dog, which
was also found on some of the victim's bodies.
We'll talk about hair and fur in the next lecture, but now we'll take a look at fibers
and other types of man-made materials that are commonly found as trace evidence at crime
scenes.
Unlike fingerprints, tool marks, or footprints, which are examples of impression evidence,
trace evidence like fibers, paint, and glass are actual physical bits of material that
can be left behind in minute quantities.
Polymers, whether they're from natural or man-made sources, and paint are chemically
similar in that they're what scientists call polymers.
That means they're made out of long chains of repeating subunit molecules called monomers,
all linked together by chemical bonds.
Lots of natural and synthetic materials are polymers, including many of the carbohydrates
and all the proteins we eat.
Polymers also make up many structures in and on our bodies, like muscle proteins and
hair, heck, even DNA as a polymer of repeated units.
But plastics, rubbers, paints, varnishes, shellacs, stains, some inks, they're also polymers.
Glass is structurally different.
It's not a polymer.
It's a composite substance technically called an amorphous solid, made mostly of sand, often
with the addition of soda and lime.
Humans have known how to make glass for over 5,000 years at least, but glass can occur
naturally where sand has been heated to very high temperatures, like when volcanic glass
is formed.
Glass and polymers, like paint and textile fibers, are pretty common types of trace evidence
that can be found on clothes, shoes, floors, and other surfaces.
These bits of evidence can be directly deposited from a primary source or moved around by different
modes of transfer.
We'll see in this lecture that even tiny bits of polymer or glass evidence can usually
be matched to like substances by common class characteristics, meaning these materials can
be identified as to their chemical makeup, even sometimes to their manufacturer and where
they were sold.
We'll also see that occasionally when larger pieces of fabric, paint, or glass are found,
they can actually be individualized to the definitive source they came from, at the exclusion
of all others.
Okay, let's talk in more detail about textile fibers.
Fiber evidence can come from lots of sources.
It could include part of a gag, rope, or cord used to bind a victim, a blanket, a small
piece of torn clothing, or carpet and upholstery fibers from home's offices or cars.
Fiber transfer evidence might be found on clothes, so one person's clothing fibers might
be found on another person's clothes, or the fibers from a knit cap, maybe a robber
left behind, might be found later in his hair.
Stray fibers can also be found underneath the fingernails or in the hair of a perpetrator
or a victim.
They can be found on hit and run vehicles and at crime scene entry points, especially
where the criminal had a tight squeeze or went through a jagged opening like a broken window.
And after the usual documentation, including careful photography, fiber evidence can be
removed at the scene if investigators see it, but it's often better to take surfaces
that might hold fibers back to the lab.
So if fibers are seen or suspected on something, that whole item can be bagged.
Most fiber evidence isn't obvious to the naked eye, so if all the victim or suspect's
clothing, for example, can be completely taken to the lab, collection is best done there.
There are a couple of ways fiber evidence might be gathered from clothing.
Our local crime lab uses a brush to get what comes off.
Some investigators use cellophane tape since it pulls off only the surface material.
Vacuuming picks up more stuff than tape does, but that just means a lot more to look through
under the microscope.
Now if a stray fiber is obvious on clothes or anywhere else, forceps can be used to directly
pick it and only it up so that they can take a look at it.
Since fiber analysis looks at the physical properties of different materials, let's talk
about how textiles are classified.
You could break down fibers into five major types that are kind of familiar to us from
when we read clothing labels.
We can talk about different types of plant fibers using textiles like cotton, flax, hemp,
jute, rainy, even papyrus.
Secondly, some fibers have an animal origin like wool or silk.
Although plant and animal fibers are natural, they're usually processed in some way, and
we'll talk about processing in a minute.
The third major classification includes synthetic fibers that are completely man-made like polyester,
nylon, rayon, lots of others.
And then fourth are blends like a polyester cotton blend.
And the last class of fibers really isn't used in clothing, but still could be found
as evidence, and that's man-made mineral fibers in fiberglass, sometimes called glass wool.
Fibers can also be distinguished by their color and their weave, and this relates to
the kind of processes used on the base materials during the manufacturing process.
So for example, if the color goes all the way through the fiber, an investigator would
know a soluble dye was used, but if there are small bits of color that are visible in
the fiber, a pigment was used instead.
And some fibers have a twist to them.
They either go clockwise or counterclockwise.
Fibers have different diameters, and some fabrics will have multiple fibers of different
diameters and even different twists in them.
They put one fiber in one direction and the other in another direction.
We also see ropes and cords have different numbers of individual strands.
Fabrics have different thread counts like we see in sheets.
Cloth can be knitted with interlocking loops.
It can be woven with alternating strands that go above or below each other, alternate above
and below each other, or they can be non-woven like felt where they make it out of friction.
Several fiber types are actually each pretty rare in their frequency and the environment
with one notable exception.
Any idea what that exception is?
It's indigo dyed cotton denim.
Unless you wear a work uniform of some type or you never wear blue jeans, that may be
the most reoccurring fiber in your closet.
Really, you could take six fabrics that all look the same color to your eye and just pull
out one thread from the hem of each one, and you'd be surprised at how differently those
threads may behave when they're subjected to different experimental treatments.
We do this in my forensic science class.
The students see how threads from seemingly identical fabrics react to heat and fire by
taking a fiber in a pair of forceps, not the fabric but the fiber from it, and they push
it near and near to a flame.
What we see is some fibers melt while others burn, and that happens at different distances
from the flame for each fiber.
Now if you sew or do crafts, you could try that by taking fibers from a few types of
fabric and holding them carefully near a candle.
Make sure you pick some man-made types along with some natural fibers like cotton.
My students also pull a thread from each of our study fabrics and put them into a couple
different solvents like we use hydrochloric acid, acetone, and sodium hypochlorite.
Now I doubt you have any hydrochloric acid at home, but you might have acetone since
that's nail polish remover, and sodium hypochlorite is bleach.
Different fiber types react pretty differently when subjected to certain chemicals, but those
tests are really far simpler than what's actually done at a forensic lab, plus they're destructive
techniques, and so they would have the potential to use up a preciously small amount of trace
evidence.
So let's get more realistic.
Microscopic analysis, which is something my students also do in their fiber lab, is a
non-destructive way to get a whole lot of information about the fibers that make up a
particular fabric.
Under the scope, fibers, like many other compounds, react differently to different types of light,
and this is because the speed of light gets altered as it travels through any medium as
compared to how light travels in a vacuum.
Scientifically, we call that measure the materials refractive index.
A microscope can establish the precise width of a fiber, since measuring tools known as
micrometers can be put inside microscopes.
You can also see the waviness of a fiber within its given amount of length, and whatever type
of wave it has, that can be seen under the scope, too, like is it kinky or twisted or
straight?
Microscopy can also show differences in the cross-sectional anatomy of fibers when you
cut them.
Some around, others are triangular, some have these really funky shapes, and that's especially
true with carpet fibers.
Under the scope, more can be seen about something like the fabric's luster, you know, if it's
shiny or dull.
They often add a chemical to synthetic fibers during manufacturing to cut down on how shiny
they are, and some plant fibers can't even be microscopically identified to their particular
plant source like cotton or bamboo.
Any of these microscopic details has the potential to match an unknown fiber to a known source,
like matching a fabric fiber on a victim to a piece of clothing worn by the suspect.
And this kind of detailed examination can also document damage, maybe making it possible
to determine if a fabric's been intentionally cut or whether it's been just pulled apart.
Microscopy might also identify any foreign material in the fiber, like soil or blood,
that might not be visible to the naked eye.
And you've probably heard of these really high-tech scopes called scanning electron
microscopes, or SEMs, that can be used to see a lot more three-dimensional detail.
Using SEM, a forensic scientist can actually determine if a puncture in a piece of clothing
is a bullet hole or something else, or get a way more detailed look at cut-ins and fabric
to tell maybe what type of sharp surface made the cut.
So in a sense, that's a form of toolmark analysis.
And in combination with some high-tech x-ray methods, SEM can show something about fabric
chemistry.
For example, the presence of tin and bromide suggests the fabric has a fire retardant on
it.
Now, there are lots of chemical tests that aid in fiber identification, but these are
only done after all the non-destructive techniques are used.
These chemical tests are going to essentially break the fiber down to figure out what's
in it.
For instance, you may have heard of chromatography, which is chemistry that separates the subcomponents
in a mixture.
And it can be done on either the fibers themselves or just the dyes in them.
That's only one example of the type of analytical chemical testing that goes on in forensic labs
around the world every day.
So by putting all the testing data together, which includes the microscopy, the optical
properties, and the chemistry, forensic scientists can often hone in on and identify the specific
fiber types involved.
The end result from nearly all the fiber evidence testing is the same, though.
Analysts can't state with 100% certainty that this fiber came from that specific source
because of the mass production of garments and textiles.
But they can determine similarity, and like we saw with shoes and tires, estimates can
be made of how frequently that particular fiber occurs in the general population of
clothing or carpeting.
Every once in a while, though, when an actual fragment of clothing is recovered as evidence,
investigators can get lucky with what's called a tear match, where the evidence fits together
like pieces of a puzzle.
That's if they can find the garment the cloth fragment came from.
The same thing holds true for paint chips and glass pieces, so let's move on and talk
about those now.
Okay, paint is a polymer that starts with long chains like fibers do, but paint has other
cross-linkages in it that hold the strands together into a sheet.
And forensic investigators often examine automotive paint, like maybe from a hit-and-run or other
car accident, where paint gets transferred from one car to another, or from a car to
some other surface, like a phone pole, a bike, a curb, even the clothes of a pedestrian who
was struck.
Paint evidence can also include something like microscopic flakes on a pry bar after
a breaking and entering.
In forensic terms, we could break paint down into three main categories.
Automotive paint, structural paint like what's on buildings, walls, furniture, your mailbox,
and then artistic paint, which could be important in cases involving art forgeries.
Now chemically, paint is a collection of pigments and additives that get suspended in what's
called a binder.
And it's all put together with a consistency that's adjusted by a solvent so that it can
go from a liquid to a solid state.
This includes both organic and inorganic chemicals, and additives are things like the bits in
car paint that give it its metallic finish.
The binder's often a polymer to hold the ingredients together.
It helps dry the paint into smooth layers as the solvent evaporates.
So for instance, if we're talking about a water-based paint, water's the solvent that
evaporates to leave the pigments, additives, and binder behind as a dry surface.
Let's focus on automotive paint then, because that's what forensic scientists deal with
most often.
An automotive paint job is surprisingly complicated.
Maybe that's why they charge us so much at the body shop when our car gets damaged.
First, they use a primer, and that gets applied to the bare metal of the car body, usually
by dipping the whole car frame into a tank.
And it's a mixture of epoxy-based resins that provide some rust-proofing.
Next, a primer surfacer is applied over that, or sometimes mixed with it.
And the color of this layer is dependent on what the base color is going to be, the next coat.
So the base color coat is what's applied next, and it's combined with any additives like
if they want a metallic finish.
The last layer is a clear coat, and that gives the paint a shiny surface.
This is the stuff they put on older cars to give them that like-new look.
And it's not uncommon that if there's a flaw seen during the factory painting, any or all
parts of this process can be repeated without removing the flawed paint job.
So you can imagine how complex the layering might be, even in a brand new car.
Now, the thing about all this layering that's important in forensics is that manufacturers
and refurbishers use specific chemicals.
They use different sequences of layers, they use different thicknesses of layers, and the
repainting of older vehicles makes the layering even more unique.
So the complicated nature of automotive paint usually actually makes it much easier to match
than other types of paint.
Now, there are some things about collecting paint evidence that mirror what we talked about
with fiber evidence collection, like taking the whole surface with the paint on it to
the lab if they can.
But if the paint is more or less maybe embedded in the road or stuck onto a phone pole, they
can use a scalpel to carefully slice off a sliver of asphalt or the phone pole with the
paint and all.
Because without the full layering, an analyst doesn't get the whole picture.
Now one way that paint evidence collection differs from textiles is that crime scene
investigators should not use a tape lift because the chemicals and adhesives in the
tape can make certain paint tests more difficult.
So for a car accident, they take samples from all involved cars all the way down to the
base metal from some undamaged area of the car, but they want to get as close as possible
to the area of damage, especially if there's a chance that any part of the car has been
repainted.
Then back at the lab, forensic scientists can use a thin blade to cut a paint sample
at an angle and then they'll be able to see the layers.
So same as with fibers, the order of testing is sometimes determined by how big of a sample
the lab has to work with.
So they'll use microscopy first and the layers can be examined and compared and they'll look
at known and unknown samples together to see if they match in condition, color, wear, texture,
as well as the layering.
After microscopic analysis, there's all kinds of high tech, chemical and instrumental methods
that they can use too.
Now what if there's no known sample for comparison?
The law enforcement agencies can use a database called the Paint Data Query or PDQ to potentially
identify the year-making model of a car.
This database was started in 1975 by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, but ultimately became
a multinational effort that included the cooperation of the FBI, the German Federal Police, the
European Forensic Institute and the Japanese National Police.
With the cooperation of all these regions known for auto manufacturing, the database
now contains information on over 50,000 automotive paints.
Now let's move on to glass.
Did you know there are estimated to be over 700 different types of glass?
Only about 70 of those are used commonly.
So for investigators, it's the rare types, again like OJ's Bruno Mollie shoes that are
the most distinctive bits as forensic evidence.
Now glass, remember, is not a polymer.
It's actually more interesting in its nature.
As an amorphous solid, it doesn't have any crystals in it or any other type of ordered
structure.
Glass is made from fused inorganic materials, mostly silicon oxides, which we know better
as sand, and some metal oxides.
These are melted together at really high temperatures and then cooled without crystallization.
So glass winds up being reasonably hard but easily broken.
It can be transparent or translucent, and glass comes in all kinds of colors, shapes
and sizes.
Depending on the size of a piece of broken glass, some features can be discerned with
the naked eye, and other details could only be seen through a microscope.
Researchers look at a bunch of different properties to narrow glass to its source.
Is it thin like a light bulb or thick like plate glass?
Is it clear like a window or colored like a beer or wine bottle might be?
Is it colored glass from a car's turn signal?
Is the glass uniformly clear or does it have decorative bubbles or flecks of something
in it?
If there's bubbles, are they intentional or are they accidental during the manufacturing
process?
Does the glass have a design on the surface, like from a car's turn signal or a piece
of glass block window?
Is the fragment completely flat, like from a window, or is it curved like it came from
a vase or a bottle?
Does it have tinting in it, so maybe it's a car window?
Acroscopy can also show debris on glass fragments, like gunpowder residue or soil from a rock
that was thrown through a window.
And unless it's just been cleaned, the amount of debris can usually help identify which
side of a piece of window glass was the outside surface that gets dirty all the time.
The way glass fractures can also tell something about its makeup.
Tempered safety glass is made stronger than ordinary window glass by rapid heating and
cooling of surfaces, so it ends up breaking into small squares or spheres instead of shards
with sharp edges.
Laminated glass is used in car windshields, and it's got a layer of plastic between two
pieces of window glass, so it breaks differently too.
Like paints, the additives in glass are going to give it different properties, and so that
they can be used in forensic glass identification.
For example, there's a high sodium and calcium content in the sodalime glass that's used
for making bottles, jars, and windows.
For oscillicate glass, which we know better by its trade name Pyrex, has a high boron
content that resists heat shock.
Tin can diffuse into panes of glass during the manufacturing of what's called float glass,
which is a method that ends up making glass really flat and more uniform in its thickness
like we want with window glass.
And sparkly decorative glass has, usually in it, elements with high atomic numbers to
increase its refractive index.
The refractive index and density of glass are two of the most important properties that
forensic examiners look at.
So let me say a little bit about both of those.
I mentioned refractive index before when we talked about fibers.
It's the result of the way the speed of light changes when it passes through a material.
But understanding refractive index is a lot easier when we talk about glass than it was
when we talked about fibers.
That's because we've probably all seen light refracted, which means bent, as it passes
through glass like a prism.
The refractive index is also why objects look different above and below the surface of water.
Now if you've never noticed that, try this.
Put a pencil in a clear drinking glass full of water and then look at it from the side.
The pencil will look like it's in two shifted pieces at the water's surface.
That's because of the difference between the refractive indices of the two media that
the pencil suspended in, the water in the air.
If you want to try another refractive index experiment, get a clear marble or a small
piece of glass, put it in a container of water, and then take a look at it.
Then put the same marble or piece of glass in some cooking oil and look at it again.
Whichever liquid is harder to see the object in, that substance, the oil or the water,
has a closer refractive index to the marble or the piece of glass you used.
Now how about density?
The density of glass or anything else can be determined with what's called a float test.
They have these fancy clear gradated columns filled with liquids of known density that
an unknown glass fragment can be floated in.
The glass fragment will stop dropping in the density gradient when it reaches its own
density.
There's also a mathematical way to estimate density that I use in my forensic class.
You take a cup completely filled to its brim with pure water, put your glass fragment into
it, and then measure how much water spills over the top of the cup when you put the glass
fragment in.
Now that gives you the volume of the fragment.
Then you divide the weight of the fragment by its volume that you've established and
that gives you its density.
So what's the point of having the refractive index and density of a piece of glass?
Well, the FBI lab has created a database of refractive index and density values from glass
samples submitted to them for evaluation since back into the 1960s.
This database can not only narrow down the type of the glass, but because of the records
kept by the FBI on the samples, even help determine how frequently that type of glass
occurs in the U.S. or in any given geographic area, and even look at glass samples across
time.
A couple of other points about glass fragments.
If an investigator has big enough pieces of broken glass, he might be able to put the
pieces back together like a jigsaw puzzle to recreate all or part of whatever was broken.
And sometimes examiners can figure out whether glass breakage was due to a high or a low
velocity impact.
In high velocity impacts, there's usually a cone or a crater effect.
You might have seen this on your windshield or where a BB went through a window.
The smaller opening, what would be the top of the cone, is on the side of the glass that
was first hit by the impact.
Then the larger opening, what would be the base of the cone, is always on the exit side
of the glass.
To figure this out in glass that was shattered by the impact, the investigator may have to
reconstruct the glass first from all the tiny shards, and that could be really time consuming.
In glass, even if examiners can't reconstruct the actual entry or exit hole, they can look
at microscopic details known as concoitial fracture lines that tell which side of the
glass the impact came from.
And I use some of these same principles in my work as a forensic anthropologist when
I analyze bone trauma, especially on the skull where I'm looking at high velocity trauma
like gunshot wounds.
What happens is the entrance wound has a smaller diameter on the outside of the skull, and
its cone, what I call a beveled edge, will be of a larger diameter on the inside surface
of the entrance wound, just like with glass.
But if the bullet passes completely through the skull, I'll have a corresponding exit
wound somewhere else, and it will have a smaller diameter on the inside of the skull, and then
it'll blast a large crater on the outside surface of the exit wound when it finally leaves
the skull.
Really, when a bullet passes through the skull, it's kind of like passing through two pieces
of glass, one representing the entrance wound and the other representing the exit wound.
In gunshots that go through either glass or bone, the diameter of the hole can't be
precisely or directly correlated with the caliber of a bullet, other than to give say
a maximum possible size since you can't wind up with a hole that's smaller than the bullet
itself.
Examiners can sometimes even establish the order of multiple impacts in both glass and
skull fractures, using what are known as radial and concentric fractures.
Radial fractures extend out like rays from the initial point of impact, while concentric
fractures are circular fractures around the point of impact.
The sequencing can be established by looking at where each crack starts and where it ends.
This is because a crack will terminate when it hits an already existing crack.
So if a glass investigator sees a pattern in broken glass, or if I see one in a damaged
skull, we can actually reconstruct past events.
And this not only provides key physical evidence, but can also be used to corroborate or refute
a witness or suspect statement.
Forensic evidence like this, whether clothing fibers, microscopic paint chips, or tiny bits
of glass, can all be small elements that help tell a much bigger story.
