Among the many varieties of what's known as trace evidence, hairs have a long history
of being used in the attempts to solve crimes.
In fact, hair is still one of the most commonly analyzed forms of trace evidence.
One of the great values of hair in forensic science is that it's so stable when compared
to other body tissues.
Hair might be found or analyzed years after a death or a crime, and the recent reopening
of cold cases in the United States and elsewhere has shown the stability of hair as trace evidence
over long periods of time.
But let's begin by stating right up front what hair analysis can do and what it cannot.
Hair analysis cannot conclusively match two hairs.
So then, what good is hair in forensics and why is it still so useful?
Many people think that since DNA technology has come along, it's eliminated the need for
other forms of testing, like forensic hair analysis.
But consider a case where, say, a woman was at a big party and claims to have been raped
on her way home by a guy who was also at the party.
The victim shows up at the emergency room and the sexual assault nurse examiner takes
the woman's clothing for submission to the crime lab.
The victim says that the perpetrator wore a condom and there are no obvious semen stains
anywhere.
So back at the lab, the trace evidence examiners find several head hairs on the victim's clothing
and in her panties are a couple of pubic hairs.
None of these hairs seems to be a visual match to the victim's own hair in terms of length
or color.
So the police then round up the suspect but he says he has an alibi.
He claims he left the party with somebody else and spent the whole night with her.
He says he never touched the lady who said she was raped.
Now do you have any idea how long it takes to get DNA samples back from the lab?
On TV, they get them back after the commercial break, right?
But in reality, it usually takes months or even longer.
Besides, it's not always possible to get DNA out of a hair sample.
So what can investigators do?
If the suspect is willing or sometimes by a court order, even if he's not, the crime
lab can get a sample of his head and pubic hair for comparison.
The suspect's hairs are the known hairs, which my trace examiner friend refers to as the
K sample.
And the hairs on the victim's clothing are the unknown hairs, called the Q sample, Q
being for question.
Well, if microscopic comparison reveals clear differences between the K and Q hairs right
then and there, that guy from the party is no longer a suspect.
Without going to all the taxpayers' expense of DNA testing and without months passing
while an innocent man stands accused of something terrible, the crime lab has conveniently eliminated
him from suspicion just by looking at some hairs under a microscope.
That's the power of exclusionary evidence.
But what if the hairs are similar?
Does that prove the man is guilty?
No, but it'll certainly allow investigators to continue to focus on him as a suspect and
gather additional evidence to either show his guilt or support his innocence.
Microscopic hair analysis only serves as class evidence.
That is, remember, evidence associated with a group rather than an individual.
But if the hairs are similar, DNA testing will probably be one of the next steps taken.
Now that we understand something about the value of hair as forensic evidence, let's
take a closer look at its structure.
Hair is a unique feature of mammals, abundant in some animals, but less so in species like
whales and we modern humans.
There's really no difference between hair and fur, except the term fur is typically
used for the hair of non-human mammals.
Hair form differs not only among different types of mammals, but also on different regions
of the same animal's body.
For example, we know that the whiskers on a cat or a dog are different from the long
guard hairs of its coat, which are different from the rest of its fur.
Humans have a lot of different types of hair too, including eyebrows, eyelashes, beard
hair, and body hair, we all know that.
But did you know that none of those types of human hairs are routinely used in forensic
hair examinations?
Only pubic and scalp hair are typically analyzed in a forensic lab.
The other types just don't have enough internal detail for meaningful comparisons.
Because hair is so familiar to us, it's something we pretty much take for granted, but hair
has interesting growth patterns and functions.
Some hairs on the body have a long lifespan with near-continuous growth, like beard hair
and head hair.
But other hairs, like arm and leg hair, eyebrows, and eyelashes, they have a fairly consistent
and relatively short length on an individual.
And once they achieve that length, they're shed and replaced.
All hairs have a little nerve ending at their root.
So hairs actually act as a means of sensation.
In other words, hair allows us to feel the approach of something before it actually comes
in direct contact with our skin.
So a predator might wind up with a mouthful of fur instead of breaking the flesh of its
prey.
Now, you might say, what does that have to do with forensic science?
But the fact that hair is, in a sense, a breakaway structure is one reason it might be found
at a crime scene.
Some hair, like that of other mammals, is a dead extension of the skin, made mostly
out of proteins, the main one being keratin.
Keratin is a widespread component of the body coverings of many animals, including reptile
scales, bird feathers and beaks, cat claws, primate fingernails, and rhino horns.
Other proteins in hair like melanin give it its color.
Humans typically have hair on all-body skin, except the thick skin on the palms of our
hands and the soles of our feet, where we have the type of friction-ridged skin we talked
about in our discussion of fingerprints.
The structure of hair has often been compared to a standard pencil.
There's a thin outer layer called the cuticle.
This would be like the paint on the surface of a pencil.
Beneath the cuticle is a layer called the cortex, like the wood part of a standard pencil.
This is the thickest region in a human hair.
At the core of some hairs is a hollow region called the medulla.
In our analogy, this would be like the letter graphite in the pencil.
The root of the hair is anchored into the dermis layer of the skin, surrounded by epidermal
cells that make up what's called its follicle.
Blood vessels at the hair root truck in the raw materials for hair production and growth.
As the substances needed to build hair come from the bloodstream, hair then becomes a
lasting repository of certain chemicals in the body.
This can include illicit drugs, like THC from marijuana, and certain poisons like arsenic
that can get incorporated into the shaft of a hair as it grows.
If there's a suspicion of drug use or poisoning, chemical analyses can be performed on hair
during drug testing or at autopsy.
As we'll see in a future lecture, blood and urine samples can only show a relatively
recent history of drug use or toxins in the body, but the chemical stability of hair makes
it an excellent and long-standing record of body chemistry.
Plus, since hair growth rates are fairly standard, investigators are able to put a
rough date as to when a chemical substance was laid down in hair.
So what's the typical rate of hair growth?
Now, I'm not admitting to anything, but if you color your hair, you have some idea of
how fast your hair grows.
References vary on the typical rate of scalp growth and estimates range from about 1 to
1 1⁄4 cm a month, which is about half an inch.
Although it might appear that hair grows continuously, there are actually life stages to each and
every hair on the body.
These hairs on our body at any given time are in an actively growing stage called the
antigen phase, in which new cells are being added at the hair root, and this is what pushes
the hair shaft further towards the body's surface.
The antigen growth phase can last as long as 2 to 7 years for scalp hair.
The growth rate varies for different types of body hair, and according to some authorities
seems to vary by genetics, so the hairs of people with African ancestry tend to have
a shorter life cycle than those with Caucasian heritage, and people with Asian ancestry have
hair with the longest antigen phase.
If a hair is pulled forcibly during this growth phase, a follicle tag will remain as a ribbon-like
end on the hair root.
You might have seen this white residue yourself if you've plucked an eyebrow.
A follicle tag is always indicative of a pulled hair rather than a hair that was naturally
shed.
So in violent crimes in which people struggle with each other, hair may be pulled out and
left at a crime scene or transferred from one person to another.
The follicle tissue can also be a source of nuclear DNA and we'll come back to that in
a little bit.
Now near the end of a hair's life cycle, it enters the next phase called the catagen
phase where growth begins to slow down.
During this catagen phase, the hair root begins to shrivel away from the follicle and becomes
elongated.
The final phase in the life of a single hair is called the telogen phase, and it's time
when a hair is getting ready to be shed naturally.
During the telogen phase, it breaks away from the follicle and the root takes on a more
bulbous shape.
A hair might remain lodged in its follicle in this telogen stage for several months before
actually falling out, but a hair with a bulbous root and with no follicular material indicates
a hair that was shed naturally in the normal course of our hair replacement.
I've seen different estimates, but numbers of typical hairs lost per day range from a
few dozen to a hundred or more, and we all know that's dependent somewhat on age and
health too.
After all hair is lost, for example from chemotherapy, which targets cells in rapid growth and division
like cancer cells, but also targets normal body cells that undergo rapid growth like
those at the root of a hair.
Anyway, it takes about six months to regrow a full scalp of hair.
Shed hairs are typically the type found at crime scenes and analyzed in case samples.
As you can imagine, they might be found on the inside or outside of clothing, among bed
sheets, on the headrest of a car seat or in a hairbrush.
In fact, when you think about it, depending on the amount of body hair a person has and
how often that person might vacuum, there may be hundreds or even thousands of shed
hairs in somebody's home or vehicle at any given time.
We have to keep in mind though that shed hairs can easily be transferred from one place to
another by an object or a person that hair doesn't belong to.
So in that sense, hair is always circumstantial evidence.
Remember what we learned earlier about evidence transfer?
You might occupy a subway seat after a person who owned a cat, and unknowingly you could
transfer cat hairs on your own clothing without ever having met the cat's own or let alone
seen the cat.
And if we're talking about an airplane seat, that transfer can happen across the country
in a matter of a few hours.
Now let's look in more detail at the microscopic anatomy of hair.
I mentioned the three main regions of a hair, cuticle, cortex, and medulla.
So let's start on the surface with the cuticle and work our way towards the center of a hair
shaft.
The cuticle of a hair is made up of scales that have the microscopic appearance of a
shingled roof.
And all humans have the same cuticle pattern.
So looking at the cuticle of a human hair is really no help in identification.
But non-human animals have different cuticle patterns that can be observed microscopically
to differentiate among non-human hairs.
Scales of the cuticle can be seen using a scanning electron microscope.
But in my forensic science class, we just put a thin layer of clear nail polish on a
microscope slide, we rest the surface of a hair on it briefly, and then gently pull the
hair away from the slide.
This results in an imprinted cast of the hair's surface cuticle on the microscope slide that
we can then put under the microscope and look at.
Beneath the cuticle, the cortex of a hair is made up of many cells that are regularly
arranged parallel to the hair's length, and that gives the hair most of its strength.
Looking at the cortex is a critical part of hair comparison because the cortex contains
the pigment granules that give hair much of its color.
A melanin is the primary pigment found in all types of hair, and it comes in varieties
ranging from yellow to red and brown to black.
The pigment granules also differ in shape and in distribution within the cortex of a
hair, giving more continuity or intensity to the color of the cortex.
The complete absence of pigment causes hair to appear white as in albino hair, but the
gray color changes that we usually associate with age are actually due to an accumulation
in hydrogen peroxide production that then causes a gradual decline in melanin production.
When hair is bleached, it will lose pigmentation from its cortex, and when hair is dyed,
the color can either coat the surface or penetrate into the cortex depending on the kind of hair
color used.
And we all know that the only portion of the hair that is treated will show the color change.
So at examination, the root end will not only show the true color, but also the line
where it was dyed, and we all know that untreated regrowth also will show the original color
of hair.
The core of the hair, known as the medulla, is a hollow region at its center.
In humans, the medulla takes up only about a third of the total diameter of the hair,
but in most non-human mammals, the medullary index, meaning the fraction of the medulla
when compared to the whole hair shaft, is more than half.
Scientists classify the shape of the medulla within a human hair as continuous, interrupted,
or fragmented, and in some cases there may be no medulla present within a human hair
shaft.
In general, human scalp hairs either have no medulla or they have a fragmented medulla.
In the hair of non-human animals, the medulla is often the most unique and obvious microscopic
feature.
Most non-human mammals have a continuous medulla pattern with a variety of really interesting
shapes that are classified in different ways than human hairs are.
For non-humans, we use terms like latter, lattice, and vaculated patterns to their medulla.
Databases of medulla patterns for lots of different mammals have been developed for
rapid species identification when non-human hair analysis is necessary in a forensic setting.
One of the main reasons non-human animal hair identification in comparison would be useful
is to try to link transferred hair like from a pet to a suspect, a victim, or a crime scene.
But species identification is also an important tool in what's known as wildlife forensics
where issues of poaching or illegal importation of animals is suspected.
And we'll talk about this more in our next lecture.
Now back to humans.
Telling the difference between hairs from different parts of the human body is fairly
easy, sometimes even with the naked eye.
You can probably tell the difference between the different types of hair you or others
in your house shed on the floor of your shower just by the length, texture, color, and diameter
of those hairs alone.
But there are underlying microscopic differences that relate to the obvious differences we
can see.
For example, pubic hairs have wide variations in their shaft diameter along the length,
and they often exhibit a continuous medulla, whereas male facial hair usually has a shaft
that's more triangular than it is round.
And hairs also different at their ends.
Ends that have been cut or shaved will have a blunt tip, while body hairs that are not
will have a naturally tapered end.
And scalp hairs that are long and not recently cut, they'll usually show a frayed end, often
called a split end on TV commercials.
By the way, shaving a hair does not make it grow back faster or thicker, that's a myth.
Shaved hairs only feel more coarse because of the thickness of their blunt ends when
compared to the tapered ends they would have if they hadn't been cut.
Knowing the average rate of hair growth, the age of a hair can be gauged by its length.
But the age or sex of the person the hair belongs to can't be judged with any confidence,
except maybe for the very fine hairs found on the scalp of a baby.
Even gray hair doesn't necessarily relate solely to a person's age.
There are some differences though in hair among people from three general racial classifications,
Caucasian, African, and Asian, provided those people have a fairly strong single race heritage.
Some of those features can be observed with the naked eye, while others require looking
at hairs through a microscope.
Scalp hairs from Caucasians will have more continuously distributed pigment granules
in the cortex, and the shaft is often round if they have straight hair or oval if they
have wavy hair.
Hairs from people with African ancestry have more uneven distribution of very dense pigment
granules, and they're generally flat to slightly oval in cross section, which results in a
kinky to wavy texture to the hair.
Asian people have a medulla that's usually continuous and a round hair shaft that results
in straight hair.
Now that we've learned something about forensic hair analysis, let's summarize the specific
steps involved in hair comparison.
First, a question hair has to be identified among all the evidence it has seen, and that
can be difficult in itself.
That unknown hair has to be classified as to its type, like is it head hair, pubic hair,
and then be assessed to see what tests it's likely suitable for.
For example, does it have a follicle that could yield nuclear DNA, or does it not?
Next, a representative group of known standards of the same type of hair, head or pubic, have
to be taken from a suspect or somebody that needs to be excluded.
If there are similar features, they should be noted even before a microscopic exam.
If there are not similar features, then the comparison's done and the report gets issued.
But if the question to known hairs warrant a complete comparison, then they do have to
be examined microscopically.
To do this, analysts typically embed each hair to be compared on a microscope slide
in what's called a mounting medium.
If you just put a hair on a microscope slide and looked at it under the scope or examined
it using a water mount, where you just put water on the slide, you really won't see the
details of the cortex and the medulla.
In order to allow light to penetrate the hair so that the details in the cortex and medulla
can be seen, investigators use a mounting medium with a refractive index similar to
that of hair itself.
Remember, we talked about refractive index when we talked about fibers in glass.
So then, using side-by-side comparison microscopes, detailed observations can be made using all
the features of the cortex and its pigment distribution as well as looking at the medulla
in its form.
If there's a positive association between the two hairs being compared, my trace examiner
friend says she always gets a second opinion from another qualified hair examiner.
This is because of the subjectivity involved in drawing conclusions by comparing two hairs.
In fact, there have been an unfortunate number of forensic cases, including relatively recently,
where investigators really stretch the boundaries of what can and cannot be known from hair
analysis.
Most often, these cases are related to a single hair from a crime scene being linked to a
suspect allegedly at the exclusion of nearly all other individuals.
In other words, more was made out of the evidence than was scientifically possible, often accompanied
by unsubstantiated statistics.
Take for example the case of forensic analyst Joyce Gilchrist, who was employed by the Oklahoma
City Police Department for 21 years and participated in thousands of forensic investigations.
Evidence she analyzed, including numerous hair comparisons, contributed to over 23 death
sentences.
Tragically, 11 of those people had already been executed by the time her conclusions
and the methods she was using were seriously called into question.
According to DNA testing, they've now exonerated some of Gilchrist's victims and case reviews
have shown that she either lost or destroyed evidence and she made specific conclusions
about hair comparisons that were completely unwarranted.
So what kind of valid conclusions can be made from hair comparisons?
My trace evidence friend put it this way.
She said, if she could take a couple of questioned hairs, remember those are her Q hairs, and
mix them up with a sample of known hairs from someone.
Those are her K hairs.
And then shake them up, dump them out, and not be able to tell them apart even after
using all of her cool tools, then the most she can say is the Q hairs are consistent
with originating from the known person.
But it also has to be understood, especially in court, that those same questioned hairs
could also have come from any other person whose hair exhibits all those same characteristics.
An investigator really then has only three options with regard to reporting on the comparison
between any two hairs, and the same goes for lots of other types of evidence comparisons.
First, if there are no unexplainable differences and lots of commonalities, a trace analyst
may conclude that the two hairs could have come from the same person.
Secondly, if there are clear differences that go beyond the typical range of variations
seen in a single person, then an analyst may conclude that those two hairs could not have
come from the same individual.
And third, if they see both similarities and differences between two hairs being compared,
then no conclusion can be made about a potential association between the hair in question and
hairs taken from a known person.
This is because hairs exhibit features that are shared among a group of people, which again
means we're talking about class evidence.
And the size of these groups that share hair characteristics isn't even close to being
known.
Investigators have attempted to classify hair in much the same way fingerprints are categorized,
but human hair really can't be fit into any reasonable number of classes to allow for
the same discrete categories like they have with fingerprints and as we'll see with genetic
markers and DNA.
So there's just no way to establish probabilities among individuals and say, for example, that
the chances of two similar hairs coming from two different people are 500 to one or something
like that.
The other problem is that when people change their hair or as it changes naturally when
they age, the hair then changes class groups when it changes its features.
This is different then from fingerprints or genetic markers which don't change as we
age.
So because of the inherent difficulties and the subjectivity involved in hair comparisons,
only a highly skilled and very experienced trace evidence examiner can make a quality
assessment of the similarities among human hairs.
This is not only because there can be strong similarities between the hairs of two different
individuals, but also because there can be striking differences among multiple hairs
taken from the scalp of just one person.
In fact, you might remember that one of the questions raised at the famous OJ Simpson
trial was how representative a single hair is with regard to the hair on a person's
entire head.
The answer to that question seems to depend a lot on the person.
To come up with a good hair standard for a single person, many known hairs are needed.
That's because even on the same person's scalp, any number of hairs might vary in diameter,
length and color.
Protocols differ, but I've seen it suggested that an investigator should collect at least
50 full-length intact hairs.
That means hairs with the root from the scalp of a single subject to serve as that person's
known reference sample.
And because of regional differences, the hair should come from a variety of locations on
that person's head.
In rape cases, it's suggested that at least 20 intact pubic hairs be collected from a
suspect before attempting a comparison with an unknown pubic hair from a crime scene.
But more is better, and the FBI recommends 100 scalp hairs for a known standard.
And the RCMP, that's the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, suggests pulling 150 sample hairs.
Man, that's got to hurt.
So where does that leave us?
Similarities between hairs can be noted, and dissimilarities between hairs can definitely
provide exclusions.
But there is currently nothing short of nuclear DNA technology to positively link a hair to
a specific person.
We have a DNA lecture coming up shortly, but let me highlight some of the fundamentals
now.
There are two basic types of DNA found in human cells, nuclear and mitochondrial DNA.
And both are relevant to hair analysis.
Nuclear DNA is inherited from both parents, and it's unique to each one of us, except
in the case of identical twins.
Analysts can get nuclear DNA from follicle cells surrounding the hair root, or sometimes
even from the actively growing antigen root itself.
But remember, follicle tissues only found on hairs that have been forcibly removed, hairs
that are on their way to being naturally shed, are in the catagen-intelligent stage,
and they don't have actively growing roots.
On the other hand, mitochondrial DNA, which is inherited only from a person's mother,
can be obtained and analyzed from a hair shaft.
The problem with mitochondrial DNA, though, as we'll see, is that it is not as discriminatory
as nuclear DNA, since it's shared among all people in a maternal bloodline.
It certainly does add additional data to a case, but it's not considered positive identification.
In 2002, the FBI published a study that used mitochondrial DNA to try to assess the validity
of microscopic hair analyses that they conducted between the years 1996 and 2000.
Their self-study looked at 80 so-called positive microscopic associations that qualified FBI
hair analysts had made and compared them to mitochondrial DNA analyses on those same
hairs.
The results showed that 11.25 of those microscopic associations made by the FBI were in fact not
true associations.
And that doesn't mean the analysts were wrong.
The hairs themselves did show positive microscopic association.
It just means those associations were not valid when compared to DNA testing and reminds
us that hair is class evidence.
That study is an example of good science and critical self-analysis.
It doesn't negate the usefulness of hair analysis since nearly 90% of those FBI associations
did hold up.
But it certainly suggests that all evidence comparisons, not just hair analyses, but all
of the types we've covered and those yet to come, should only be undertaken by the most
experienced and ethical of professionals and always backed up with additional evidence
and testing.
