As we saw in our last lecture on hair and fur, elements from our fellow creatures can be
useful in forensic investigations, but there are lots of other ways in which the natural
world is involved in forensic science, including, but not limited to, what some people call
wildlife forensics.
For instance, soils, wood, pollen grains, animal hairs, and single-celled organisms
called protists can all be used to tie a person or object to a crime scene.
Animals are used directly in some investigations, particularly insects, which are used by forensic
entomologists to determine the time of death.
Sometimes, of course, larger animals are investigated as suspects, maybe if they're accused of attacking
people.
Let's start our discussion with the smaller stuff and then work our way up the food chain.
Soils, pollen, and plant or fungal spores are all examples of microscopic evidence that
have the potential to link people, objects, events, and locations.
For instance, soil analysis can maybe link the shoes of a suspect to the scene of a crime,
or if it's found on the tires of a vehicle, might show where a car traveled or where a
victim was transported.
This type of microscopic evidence has even been used to investigate crimes against humanity.
In the Bosnian war crimes trials, pollen analysis showed that the war criminals exhumed bodies
from a mass grave and then reburied them in smaller graves to try to make it look like
the victims had been killed in small clashes rather than a mass execution.
Distinctive wheat pollen grains from one of the secondary burial sites helped to pinpoint
the site of the execution is happening near a particular wheat field.
And pollen from plant species found near the original mass grave was then found on the
remains and soil of the smaller individual graves.
Soil is something we all take for granted, but most of us probably really don't know
what's in it.
Soil is a mixture composed of both natural, inorganic, and organic materials, but it
can also include man-made materials as well.
The inorganic stuff in soil is mostly decayed or weathered rocks and minerals.
Now we all know what rocks are.
Minerals are naturally occurring crystals.
There are about 2,200 minerals known, and about 40 common ones occur in soil, and those
include quartz, feldspar, mica, lots of others.
At their most basic levels, minerals are crystal and solids with really regular shapes and
some with very distinctive colors.
As they tend to vary geographically, the types and percentages of rocks and minerals can
indicate a possible location associated with a suspect or victim.
The organic fraction of soil is known as humus, which is mainly a mixture of plant and fungal
matter like decaying wood, grass, pine needles, pollen grains, and spores.
There's also animal matter in the organic constituents of soil, like feces, parts of
bugs, and the remains of other decomposing animals.
Any manufactured objects in the soils are going to depend on the surroundings.
They can include things like glass, paint chips, asphalt, gravel, concrete, brick fragments,
cinders, even insulation.
If big enough particles of these man-made materials are found, they might be useful to
link the soil to a particular structure or a road type, something like that.
Now, soil testing requires experience and skill in a whole bunch of microscopic, physical,
and chemical testing methods.
It's usually done by a forensic chemist in a crime lab, but sometimes a geologist, a
soil scientist, or even an archaeologist, maybe somebody from the local university
who has a particular knowledge of a specific area and knows how to use geological maps,
so they might be able to determine, or at least narrow down the area, where the question
soil was originally picked up, and that might help forensic investigators determine where
known samples should be taken from for any comparison they want to do.
The U.S. Geological Survey, the American Society of Testing and Materials, known as ASTM, and
the British Standards Institution have all developed standard methods of soil analysis.
Depending on the type of test being done, the soil might have to be pulverized or homogenized,
but this can only be done after any tests that require the soil be as is are finished
with.
For example, chemical testing is only done after the soil's particle size and shape have
been determined.
Okay, you might think soil is boring, but there are lots of different features to soils,
and I'm familiar with some of them from my days working as an archaeologist.
For one thing, soils can vary a lot in their color.
It's estimated there are over a thousand distinguishable soil colors.
The Munsell system, which was developed by a guy named Alfred Munsell and then adopted
by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, uses three main descriptors with regard to color.
Those are hue, which is the color itself, the value, which is how light or dark the color
is, and the purity of the color, which is called chroma.
The color of soil will be darker if it's wet, so soil samples have to be dried before
they're analyzed, and then they're compared to a Munsell chart, which is like this big
book of color chips, sort of like you'd use with paint.
When it's done, each color winds up with a code that's this universal standard fraction.
Now, I know a lot about Munsell charts because the archaeologist I used to work with most
often was colorblind, so I always got stuck doing the Munsells for both of us.
Soils vary in texture as well.
Some are real loamy like garden soil, others are silty like soil from a creek or a river,
and in Ohio we have a lot of dense clay, which I can tell you is no fun for an archaeologist.
Particle size differs in soils too, and we measure this using a graduated set of mesh
soil sieves.
You put the soil sample through the series of sieves, each has smaller and smaller holes,
and then each fraction that comes off is weighed, and that determines the percentage of each
particle size in the soil.
The specific rocks and minerals in soil can be examined too.
Important features there include fracture patterns, you know, maybe the way materials break off
from the minerals, leaving jagged or smooth edges.
The optical properties of inorganic components can be examined too, like the refractive index,
which in the case of soil is the way light bends going through a particle or crystal
in the soil.
Crystal and solids like quartz can actually have two refractive indices because of their
structure, and some grains appear different colors at different angles.
So soil really isn't as boring as you might think, or maybe it really is to you, so I
guess I'll move on.
Have you ever heard of palinology?
If not, there's your big word of the day today.
It's specifically the study of pollen and spores, but it can also include the study
of other microscopic organisms in soil and water.
For instance, dinoflagellates and diatoms are two groups of really cool looking single
cell protist that are part of the plankton and algae we find in water.
Pollen grains are the male gametes of seed bearing plants, and those include all flowering
plants and cone bearing plants.
Essentially, in other words, pollen is nothing more than plant sperm.
Spores on the other hand are the reproductive units of lower plants like fungi, ferns, and
mosses.
Some protists also reproduce using spores.
Pollen and spores make good forensic evidence for a couple of reasons.
First, they both have really durable coverings that resist being degraded over time in the
environment.
And secondly, localities have distinctive plant and fungus distributions, so they have
distinctive pollen and spores too.
The same kind of thing can be said for populations of protists like dinoflagellates and diatoms
in a pond or other water source.
The types of these microscopic little bits of evidence in a sample of soil or water may
even point to a specific season, since plants and fungi reproduce at specific times of the
year.
There's also seasonality to some protist cycles, like algae blooms that happen in water.
Soil or water samples that include pollen grains, fungal spores, and protists need to be examined
microscopically, using a typical light microscope for general structure, and then a scanning
electron microscope for any 3D detail.
The distinctive features usually include the size and complexity of these little biological
bits of evidence.
Most pollen is super small, in the neighborhood of only 10 to 70 micrometers.
In case you forgot or you never learned the metric system, a single micrometer is one
millionth of a meter, or one ten thousandth of a centimeter.
So these pollen grains range in diameter from about four ten thousandths of an inch to a
little over two and a half thousandths of an inch.
That's really tiny.
Pollen and spores also vary in their unique, complex, and often really cool looking structures.
A scanning electron microscope, often called an SEM, can be used to determine what plant
pollen grain came from, or the specific spore type in a water or soil sample.
So now let's get to the forensic value of pollen, spores, and protists.
Well, if a body's found in the bushes, but the pollen on the clothing doesn't match the
type of bushes it's found in, that may suggest the body was moved from somewhere else to
its current location.
Now that's a good clue as far as it goes, but there may be more that can be done.
If the clothing can be assessed for the specific types and amounts of pollen and spores, analysts
might be able to come up with a general profile of the type of area and the plants in it that
investigators ought to be looking for.
The same goes for pollen, spores and protists on, you know, or even in a body that's found
in water or suspected to have been in water.
Characterizing the microscopic life forms in the clothing or the airway of a body that
was in water might lead investigators to a possible location, or it will at least tell
them something more about how or where the person died or where the body's been.
In addition to pollen, wood's another type of plant evidence that has forensic value.
Some forensic specialists can identify species of trees and other woody plants by the microscopic
patterns they see in wood.
Different woody plants have characteristic self structures and grain that can lead to
identification down to the genus level, like spruce, oak, pine or maple, even with a small
sample.
But this type of ID can't usually go down to the species level, though, the way it can
with pollen, flowers or leaves.
And so far, DNA testing isn't possible with wood because there are only minute quantities
of DNA contained in wood.
So why would you need to identify a specific type of wood in forensics?
Well for one thing, some wooden objects that could be involved in crimes might be cultural
artifacts or prized antiques, and they would need identification and authenticity, you
know, certified by a wood expert.
And some types of trees are protected species, and so they're illegal to harvest.
But there are also some crimes against persons that require forensic wood identification or
the linking of pieces of wood by examining fracture patterns and other clues.
The Lindberg kidnapping is a famous example of a case that used wood matching as critical
evidence.
Lindberg was the first man to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean, and his infant son Charles
Jr. was abducted in 1932, apparently through the second story window of the family's New
Jersey home, leaving a homemade ladder behind.
After a ransom was paid, the decomposing body of the Lindberg child was found in the
woods near their home.
As events unfolded, including tracking the ransom money, much of which was being spent
in the Bronx, authorities brought in a wood expert who analyzed the ladder.
And this analysis included tool marks from how the ladder was made, the types of wood
that composed it.
There were four different types of wood.
And a section of one of the rails of the ladder seemed to be from a floorboard made out of
the wood called fur, and it didn't match the rest of the ladder's construction.
So then police followed a trail of clues that spanned a couple of years and finally honed
in on a guy named Bruno Hauptman as their prime suspect.
He was a carpenter who had used one of the ransom bills at a gas station.
And when they searched Hauptman's home, which was in the Bronx, by the way, they found that
a section of the fur floorboard in the attic was missing from a joist.
And in that joist were four nail holes that exactly matched the spacing of four nail holes
on the question piece of fur from the kidnapping ladder.
So that wood evidence and a lot of other clues led to Hauptman's 1935 conviction for murder
and kidnapping and his execution that came just a few months later.
So now let's turn our attention to the types of animal evidence that's used in forensic
science.
We covered mammal fur in our last lecture, along with our discussion of human hair.
But have you ever heard of snarge?
Believe it or not, that's the name investigators use for the pulverized bird guts they wipe
off of airplanes.
Do you remember in 2009 when U.S. Air Flight 1549 landed in the Hudson River in New York?
It took a team of feather investigators at the Smithsonian, led by a scientist ironically
named Dr. Carla Dove, to figure out that the accident was caused by a bird strike.
The Smithsonian Institution holds a reference collection that contains over 620,000 feather
and other body part samples from 85% of the world's bird species.
They analyze about 4,000 samples a year for the airline industry in the military.
The team's ability to figure out the bird species involved in these types of incidents
is really an important form of pest management that protects us all as air travelers.
Now if the Smithsonian's researchers can't define the type of bird or birds involved from
the goo they pull out of the engines, they can send tissue or blood samples to a forensic
wildlife DNA lab to get the species identification.
There was one really interesting case where DNA and some snarge from a plane strike at
1,500 feet was identified as coming from, are you ready for this, a deer.
Nobody could figure out how that happened until one of the feather fragments turned out to
be from a black vulture that must have recently dined on a deer carcass, mystery solved.
Animal evidence is also used to investigate crimes against our fellow creatures and even
crimes against our earth itself.
There are laws intended to protect both animals and the natural environment so these are forensic
cases too.
Some types of forensic investigators specialize in identifying animal abuse and ensuring animal
safety.
This includes things like looking into possible cases of hoarding or neglect, dog and cock
fighting and illegal activity at what are often called puppy mills.
And specialists also examine practices and conditions in the horse and dog racing industries
including dog showing as well and horse showing, both types of animals.
The meat production industry is also monitored and inspected.
All these types of investigations are intended to help make sure that domesticated animals
are treated humanely and if any forensic evidence suggests otherwise charges can be brought
against the perpetrators.
There's a relatively recent branch of forensic science that's often called wildlife forensics.
It has a couple of main focuses.
Forensic wildlife investigators can examine poaching violations and help protect endangered
species and that includes both animals and plants.
They look into things like the poisoning of wildlife to try to figure out if an event
stems from something malicious and like intentional baiting of animals or if it was an accident.
As a science, wildlife forensics really emerged out of the U.S. Endangered Species
Act of 1973 and the UN Convention of International Trade in Endangered Species and that organization
has roots that go back into the 1960s but wasn't formalized as an entity until 1975.
The UN Convention currently protects 30,000 species of animals and plants and is comprised
of 175 member parties.
Most of those are countries and they've agreed to be legally bound by its guidelines
in order to protect our natural world.
Did you know that illegal trade in international wildlife is worth billions of dollars a year?
In fact, in terms of criminal activity, it's thwarted only to drugs and guns and it affects
hundreds of millions of plant and animal species.
As you can imagine, some of the problem is that cultural customs as well as an understanding
of ecology and environmental awareness, they all vary significantly around the world.
Let me give you one example.
In the 1990s, three adult female black bears were found dead in a garbage dump in Canada
and they were apparently killed for their gallbladders because that was the only thing
that had been taken from their bodies.
Their gallbladders are prized in some forms of traditional Chinese medicine.
But to add even more to this tragedy, five cubs were left orphaned and two other cubs
were found killed, also for their gallbladders which were really too tiny, way too tiny to
be of any actual value.
Now it was specifically the killing of the cubs that was the illegal event in this case.
So wildlife investigators examined the bodies and then they used entomology to help establish
or estimate the time since the cubs' deaths.
Forensic entomology, as you might know, is the use of insects in forensic science and
we'll talk a lot more about it in a later lecture.
Anyway, the insect evidence in that case showed that the cubs had been dead for only a few
hours by the time they were discovered.
And this timing ultimately led to the arrest of two poachers who were known to be among
the very few people in the area at the time the cubs were killed.
In this case the bodies of the cubs were easy to identify and examine, but one of the problems
with investigating many other kinds of poaching violations as well as other forms of illegal
collection of plant and animal products is that the cases rarely involve whole plants
or whole animals as evidence.
I mean, after all, a zoo or museum or botanical expert could easily identify whole animals
and plants, even to the species level.
But wildlife forensics can involve a whole range of types of animal and plant evidence.
Some animal violations have to be detected by maybe examining food products, things
like fresh, frozen or smoked meats.
And fish row used in caviar may come from endangered and protected species.
Sometimes all investigators have to work with as evidence is blood or loose hairs maybe
on a suspected hunter's clothing.
Other animal evidence comes in the form of commercial or handmade products that are
made from protected species.
Mammal pelts and furs can be used in clothing and rugs and mammal and reptile skins can
be turned into leather for purses, shoes, belts, boots.
Feathers from protected birds can be used in jewelry or they're down used in pillows
or insulation.
And shells from protected species can be used in jewelry and other decorative objects.
Some animal and plant materials can be significantly altered, sometimes making them even more difficult
to identify.
For example, some animal parts can be ground up for medicines like powdered rhino horn
and protected herbs might be dried or crushed.
And ivory and wood can be carved or inlaid in very small pieces, but that usually doesn't
obscure their origin.
When you think about it though, wildlife forensics work is so much more diverse in scope than
traditional criminalistic studies.
Wildlife experts deal with many different species as compared to the focus of traditional
forensics, which is mainly on humans.
But wildlife forensics still involves many of the same experts as in other forensic labs.
They have trace evidence specialists, firearms experts, pathologists, entomologists, microbiologists,
molecular biologists, chemists, even fingerprint analysts for non-human primates.
So out of a need to enforce established laws and protect our natural world and the creatures
in it, the U.S. National Fish and Wildlife Forensics Lab was founded in 1988 in Ashland,
Oregon.
And this high-tech crime lab and its team of experts perform a huge number of forensic
examinations covering all parts of the U.S.
For example, like we saw in the bear case, they can use forensic entomology to determine
when an animal was killed.
Even legal hunting has seasonality, and insect evidence on a body can narrow down a pretty
specific time frame.
Pathologists can examine the cause of death in an animal and judge where the hunting methods
use legal or not.
Firearms experts can analyze bullets removed from carcasses or casings found at the site
say of a poaching, and from that they can try to link the kill to a specific weapon.
The Wildlife Forensics Lab can even do DNA testing to determine the species and sex of
animals.
They can even identify individual animals, and this can include maybe figuring out the
number of animals involved.
That would be distinguished by how many unique genetic profiles they find, and this could
be important maybe if the animals have been rendered down only to meat.
This chemistry can be used to show what's in a powdered medicine, what type of poison
killed an animal, or even differentiate male and female hormones in meat, which could be
important if the sex of a species is regulated during the hunting season.
Wildlife forensic experts do include some specialists you wouldn't typically find in
a standard criminalistic slab.
For instance, they have mammalian osteologists that can look at teeth, bones, and antlers
say to see if age requirements for hunting have been met.
And these experts can also try to match up dismembered body parts.
Ornithologists can look at feathers and talons used in things like headdresses or dream catchers
as potential evidence of illegal hunting of protected bird species.
In the U.S., the entity that governs the trade of these kinds of animal and plant products,
including their important export, is the Department of Homeland Security through its Customs and
Border Protection Division.
They have a pretty interesting website that lists all the prohibited and restricted imports,
including wildlife, food products, plants, seeds, soil, and hunting trophies.
These regulations and their enforcement are important not only for the preservation of
endangered species, but also because they protect our environment from the introduction
of non-native species that could harm U.S. ecosystems.
And this brings us to another way that forensic science is involved with the natural world,
the investigation of environmental damage and contamination.
Things like abnormal odors, areas called dead zones and plant growth, and dead fish
and waterways.
Those could all be clues that something or someone could be poisoning the environment.
Whether the toxicity is due to an intentional release of chemicals or some kind of accidental
contamination, these types of incidents need to be investigated and they often culminate
in criminal and or civil litigation.
Commonly encountered poisons include things like heavy metals like arsenic, lead, mercury,
phallium, different types of insecticides like organophosphates, toxins intended to
kill rodents like strychnine, even barbiturates used by humane societies can leach into the
environment when carcasses of euthanized animals are put into landfills.
Sometimes even the patterns in the dead animals themselves can reveal the particular toxin
involved, like clenched talons seen in eagles after they consume the rat poison monofluoroacetate.
The forensic identification of pesticides and other toxic chemicals in the environment
is critical because not only does it damage plant and animal life, it could hurt and kill
humans too.
As plants and animals are lower on the food chain, they are often the first indicators
of environmental damage.
When wildlife investigators pick up on these clues, the work they do might ultimately protect
human health.
Even if rehabilitation groups step in to help sick or injured animals after an oil spill
or other toxic event, important documentation like photos, carcasses, tissue samples, even
poop or vomit has to be kept just like it would be in any other suspected crime scene investigation
because of the eventual importance of stuff like this if there is ever a trial.
Really all the same types of scene and evidence collection protocols have to be maintained
like protecting self and others, securing a scene, properly collecting and preserving
evidence, maintaining a chain of custody.
All in the event the case winds up in court someday.
Okay, now in the interest of fairness, we'll wrap up this lecture by taking a look at the
forensic investigation of cases where animals occasionally attack humans.
We all know that when people travel or live in remote places, there's an increased likelihood
they'll encounter potentially dangerous wildlife.
And this isn't just remote areas anymore.
Coyotes are moving more and more into suburban and even urban areas as I've seen in my own
backyard.
Sometimes diseased animals like ones with rabies lose their fear and come into areas they normally
wouldn't inhabit.
If fatal attacks by humans or fatal attacks by animals on humans occur, they have to be
reported to the governing coroner or medical examiner just like any other unexpected death.
Even when somebody survives an animal attack, the proper authorities have to be notified.
And this also means that any necessary media releases come out through the proper channels
especially if the animal is still at large.
In October of 2011 in Zanesville, Ohio, which is not too far from where I live, the owner
of a bunch of exotic animals released them all before killing himself.
This guy let loose a total of 56 creatures including lions, tigers and bears.
Now I can just hear you saying, oh my, but this really is not funny.
They also released leopards, mountain lions, wolves, even a couple of primates.
And at home, all that afternoon and into the next day, I heard media releases from all
over Ohio telling people to be careful of these animals and report them if they're spotted
anywhere.
Now sadly, nearly all the animals were shot by law enforcement including 18 endangered
Bengal tigers.
Of course, the goal of the killings was to protect the public from these potentially
dangerous animals, but I sure wish they could have found a better way to do it.
Anyway, when animals do attack, the bites they leave on a victim can be examined using
the same type of bite mark analysis that forensic dentists known as forensic odontologists use
when people bite each other.
We'll talk about bite mark analysis in a later lecture, but in this context, bite mark analysis
can be used to help identify the type of critter involved in an animal attack and possibly even
tie the victim to a specific animal if it's found.
When investigators have to search for an animal at large, they also use the same types of
strategies as when searching for a human predator, but they track for things like paws, fur,
and scat.
That's animal poop.
If necessary, paw prints can be cast using the same type of methods we talked about with
shoe and tire impressions.
If the suspected animal is caught, it may have to be analyzed to see if it's in fact the
perpetrator.
This is usually done by examining the animal's stomach contents.
In fact, I have a friend and colleague in South Carolina who's a fellow forensic anthropologist.
He was once involved in a case where a shark was caught off the coast of the Atlantic near
where he lives and a human leg was found in its belly, just like the movie Jaws.
The anthropology exam was able to reveal a few clues as to the man's identity, but the
case has still never been resolved.
Okay, to close on a more positive note, let me mention a couple of topics that remind us
how animals and plants help forensic scientists.
In Lectures to Calm, we'll not only talk more about how insects aid estimations of the time
since death, but we'll see that plants can help do this too.
Plant growth can also maybe help locate a buried body, and so might a well-trained cadaver
dog.
We'll also talk about some of our four-legged crime fighters when we cover a little bit
about bomb, arson, and drug detection dogs in action.
