Imagine a crime scene where investigators walk into the bedroom after a bloody homicide
happened.
Now, we all have an image in our minds, and I'm sure it's a pretty gruesome one.
But also consider for a minute that the perpetrator might have done everything in his or her power
to clean up that scene.
We've been talking about crime scenes in evidence for quite a while so far, but as
we've all seen on television, sometimes the bad guys and the bad girls do a pretty good
job, at least on the surface, of covering up their dirty deeds.
I was once involved in a case where a military guy was caught on duty, on base, in what we'll
call a compromising position, literally, with one of his female subordinate officers.
He was immediately dismissed from duty and was facing a court-martial procedure.
Now, his wife, who was about eight months pregnant at the time, needless to say she
was pretty ticked off by this situation, and she also threw him out.
Then when he didn't come home for a couple days, his wife flew out west to stay with
her mother and commiserate until the baby was born.
A couple of weeks later, the guy's truck was located in a wooded area which then prompted
a search.
And down a rocky ravine, wearing nothing but his underwear, this guy's decomposing body
was found, along with a bottle of Jack Daniels whiskey and a shotgun.
The cops actually called it a typical Kentucky suicide.
They said there was a supernasal entry that's right above the nose and a right temporal exit
wound.
And the reason I got involved in this case is because this guy's skull was in about 65
pieces.
The biggest one was about the size of the palm of my hand.
And the medical examiner wanted me to try to reconstruct the skull to make sure this
was, in fact, a suicide, as they suspected.
Talk about your 3D jigsaw puzzle.
After I glued the skull back together, yeah, that's exactly what I do in a case like that,
I was able to see that there was a close contact gunshot wound to the temple, not the
forehead.
Now it's possible for a full grown man, I suppose, to hold a shotgun out to the side
and shoot himself, depending on the length of his arm.
But this guy wasn't very big, and the typical length of a shotgun barrel is about 24 to
34 inches.
Besides, that's a pretty awkward direction to generate the kind of force needed to pull
the trigger.
It's more common that people who are bent on killing themselves with a shotgun rig up
some kind of mechanism, like a string they can pull, or they prop the gun between their
feet and use their toes to pull the trigger.
Anyway, I saw a gunshot residue that was actually on the bone, suggesting the guy had been shot
at close range from the side, and I told the medical examiner that.
The police called the guy's wife and got access to search their home with her permission,
but nothing seemed out of place.
Then one of the cops decided to fly out to the mother's house and speak more directly
with this man's pregnant widow.
Within a few minutes after he got there, she crumbled and told the officer she'd blown
her husband's head off right there in the bed where he slept on the very night she heard
about his little trist with his co-worker.
Now as I mentioned, the cops had already searched this couple's house and nothing seemed out
of place.
They went back there then and used a chemical spray known as luminal in the bedroom, and
to quote one of the cops, the place lit up like a Christmas tree.
Well, the headboard and the wall and the carpeting did, but not the mattress.
They later found the full-sized bloody mattress the wife had dumped in a different location.
Can you imagine this woman, eight months pregnant and allegedly with no accomplice dragging
a bloody mattress onto the roof of her car and then dumping it out in the woods?
That's exactly what she said she did before cleaning up the bedroom and then buying a
new mattress.
She dumped her husband in his underwear in one spot, with the shotgun and the whiskey
to make it look like a suicide, and then dumped the blood-soaked mattress in another.
Unbelievable, but apparently true.
I saw her at the trial and she was quite a sturdy woman.
Incidentally at that trial, she was found not guilty after using the battered wife
defense on a sympathetic jury.
We'll talk about courtroom concerns in a much later lecture.
Now maybe you've seen luminal used on TV, where they spray a surface, they turn off
the lights and the blood stains become immediately visible, even though the surface looked clean
to the naked eye.
So before I explain how that's done, let's talk about the variety of body fluids and
how they can be detected at a crime scene.
Violent crimes are the most likely to produce body fluid evidence, consisting mainly of
blood and semen from rapes or other sorts of physical attacks.
But the science of body fluids, which is known as serology, can be applied to lots of other
substances like saliva, sweat, tears, vomit, and vaginal secretions.
The places that this kind of evidence might be found are pretty infinite.
Means saliva could be found on a cigarette, but a licked stamp or a drinking glass.
Sweat, tears, and semen could be found on clothing or bed sheets.
A skin and other tissue might be left on a vehicle after a hit and run accident.
Female secretions could be found on a foreign object used in a sexual assault.
And any of those fluids might also be found on the skin or transferred to the clothing
of a perpetrator or a victim.
If body fluids are suspected at a crime scene, the investigator has to consider several questions.
First, what type of body fluids might be present?
Also, what state is the fluid in?
Is it liquid or dried?
Is it fresh or is it degraded?
All those factors are going to impact how the substance can be collected and analyzed.
Liquid blood has a lot more genetic markers in it than dried blood, and it can be taken
up by a syringe.
But dried blood resists bacterial growth a lot better, and in that sense is much more
stable.
The next major consideration when fluid is found at a scene is whether it came from a
human or some other animal.
Like could that blood be from the victim's unfortunate dog that tried to defend her?
The science of serology can be used to answer all of those questions, and some can even
be answered right there at the crime scene.
Serology can even automatically exclude a person as a suspect, just as we saw with hairs.
But just like with hair evidence, the thing that serology cannot do is to tie a body fluid
to a specific and unique source.
That takes the power of DNA testing, which we'll talk about in the next lecture.
At some crime scenes, the presence of blood or other body fluids might be obvious.
But in cases like the one I mentioned earlier, investigators might not see clear signs that
blood's present.
So in order to determine whether or not blood is present, or to make certain that some type
of stain that looks like blood is actually blood, there are a couple of types of what
are known as presumptive tests they can do right there at the scene.
A presumptive test is a quick and dirty way to figure out the likelihood of whether something
is what you think it is in the field.
Basically, with regard to serology, presumptive testing helps investigators figure out where
blood and other body fluids might be, so that'll help them determine what may have happened
and what to collect or not.
Now when I say it's quick and dirty, that's true, because there are presumptive tests used
that occasionally produce a false positive result, but then that can be sorted out later
at the lab.
On the other hand, we'd never want to use a field test that could produce a false negative
result, or investigators would walk away from real crime scenes thinking their job was done.
Presumptive tests always have to be followed up in a forensic lab with what are called
confirmatory tests.
Those are a lot more reliable and discriminatory, but they also take a lot more time and cost
a lot more money.
With regard to presumptive tests, luminal is the method of choice in cases where the perpetrator
has tried to clean up the scene, because it can detect blood in minute quantities, as
little as one part blood per 10 million of something else.
I've seen luminal even work through fresh paint on a basement floor.
This was a dismemberment case where the perpetrator cut a woman up in his basement, and then he
thought he washed the blood down the floor drain and painted the concrete floor as an
additional cover-up, but the little bit of blood that was mixed with the paint that he
couldn't even see himself was still there and detectable with luminal.
One problem with luminal, though, is that it doesn't work if chlorine bleach was used
to clean up blood.
There I go, making smarter criminals again, but a good thing about luminal is that you
can use it in the field, and although it does dilute a sample to some degree, it complicates
but doesn't completely ruin the blood for further testing.
There was a precursor to luminal that goes back to the early 1900s called fluorescein.
It's still used today because it doesn't react with chlorine bleach like luminal does,
and it's a thicker chemical, so it's sometimes easier to use against gravity maybe on a vertical
surface like a wall.
So once again, we see that investigators in the field have to make smart decisions in
real time because crime scenes and evidence collection are never one size fits all.
But they tend to show on TV is not luminal.
Because it's more dramatic, they usually show fluorescein being used with a UV or a blue
light in those orange goggles.
Both luminal and fluorescein work the same way.
They're both based on the fluorescence of blood.
But luminal doesn't need the lights.
In fact, it needs darkness.
Now, both of those are good for finding stains that have been cleaned up, but when there
is an attempt to clean up blood, you'd see white marks, not a blood spatter pattern.
Now watch for that on TV shows, because that's not the way they usually show it.
They usually show their CSIs spraying what looks like a clean wall with their phony chemicals.
But when they turn out the lights and we see the invisible stain, it's a bunch of spots,
not a cleaning smear.
Now I'm making smarter TV people instead of smarter criminals.
Okay, there are some other presumptive tests specifically for blood that use chemistry
to produce a color change.
One is just like what they use on those dipstick test strips for your analysis in doctor's
offices.
If crime scene investigators think a substance is blood, they can take a moist cotton swab
and dab a tiny bit of the suspected blood and put it on the test strip.
This strip will turn blue-green if blood's present.
Another field test is called leukomalachite green.
Guess what color change it produces?
But the most commonly used presumptive field test is called the Kasselmeyer test, and it
uses phenolphthalein and hydrogen peroxide to detect the hemoglobin in red blood cells.
It produces a dark pink color that some of you might remember from phenolphthalein indicator
tests from your high school chemistry lab.
The thing about tests for hemoglobin, though, is that hemoglobin's a really ancient oxygen
carrying protein that's found in all of our relatives with a backbone.
And I don't just mean our fellow mammals, but even fish, amphibians, reptiles, and birds.
So just because field tests indicate blood, that doesn't mean it's human blood.
So let's talk for a few minutes about human blood typing, and then follow up with a little
bit about how human blood can be differentiated from non-human blood.
Since at least the 1920s, human blood typing has been used in forensic investigations.
An Austrian physician named Karl Landsteiner figured out how to type blood in 1901, and
he won the Nobel Prize in Medicine for it in 1930.
Another major milestone happened in 1925 when it was discovered that about 80% of the human
population actually secretes a variety of proteins native to their blood in their tears,
their saliva, sweat, urine, and semen, making it possible to test non-blood body fluids
and still determine the person's blood type in the majority of cases.
Most people are called secretors because they secrete aspects of their blood type.
The forensic lab at Scotland Yard was a major pioneering group that studied the whole gamut
of variable biological proteins found in body fluids.
They ended up setting up serology protocols that are used by forensic labs around the
world.
As you probably know, a person's blood type is genetically inherited.
There's two main protein systems typically talked about when discussing human blood type.
One's the ABO system, and the other one is the RH protein.
Now, these two proteins really don't have anything to do with each other, except for
the fact that they're both found in human red blood cells.
Using them both at the same time, as in, I'm A positive, I'm O negative, is kind of
like reporting your eye color and your height.
Those two things are totally unrelated, but they're both descriptors about your physical
appearance.
And we don't really need to talk about our RH here, except to say that it isn't used
in forensic science.
It's really only used in blood tests for compatibility, like when somebody's getting a transfusion.
For the ABO system, the cell membranes of red blood cells have identity flags that are
proteins on the surface called antigens, and they come in two forms.
There's an A form and a B form.
If somebody has type A blood, their red blood cells are sporting the A protein antigen,
and if they have type B blood, their red cells have the B form of the protein antigen.
If a person's type AB, they express both the A and the B form of the proteins on their
cells, and if they're type O, they express no proteins for this particular blood system.
O is used like zero here, meaning no proteins for the ABO system on the red blood cells.
Now, let's talk a little bit about immunology.
That's the study of interactions between two major groups of genetically determined biological
proteins known as antigens and antibodies.
An antigen is anything the body reacts to by producing what's called an antibody.
Antibodies are proteins that our immune system can make to fight off a specific intruder.
And normally, we develop our antibodies through vaccines, or by encounters we have with foreign
substances in the environment, like when we actually get sick.
But in the strange case of the ABO blood system, we're actually born with genetically determined
antibodies in the liquid part of our blood known as plasma.
We have antibodies to the opposing types of red blood cells that we might encounter in
each other.
So in other words, if your blood type A, you have those A proteins on your red blood cells,
but you have anti-B antibodies in your plasma.
If you're type B, you have type B proteins waving on your red blood cells, and anti-A
antibodies in your plasma.
If you're type AB, you have both types of proteins on your red cells, but no antibodies
in your plasma for the ABO system, since you don't recognize either A or B as being foreign
to you.
And if your blood type is O, you express neither protein on your red cells, but you have both
anti-A and anti-B antibodies in your plasma.
It's important to understand how antibodies and antigens interact in order to understand
how blood type testing is done.
Our antibodies attack and then attach to foreign antigens in order to deactivate them.
And this reaction between antibodies and antigens is called a glute nation, or more simply put,
just clumping.
The antibodies we make are highly specific to the antigens they encounter in a one-to-one
relationship between antibody and antigen.
Once it's made by the body, an antigen-antibody complex will precipitate out of the liquid
part of blood, and then certain white blood cells can degrade and destroy that antigen-antibody
complex.
Antibodies have capitalized on the formation of antigen-antibody complexes and then developed
tasks for blood type based on the concept.
So what they do is treat the blood with antibodies to the major blood types, and they see what
those antibodies cling to and pick up.
In other words, if there's a piece of evidence that contains blood, it can be treated with
a commercially prepared solution of antibodies, and they'll attach to any antigens that are
present in the blood sample.
Next they do a washing step to get rid of any antibodies that didn't attach because they
didn't find their corresponding antigen in that blood sample.
Then the next step is called elution, and that's a method of heating up the sample high enough
to break any antigen-antibody bonds that did form.
By doing that, the antibodies that did match to the blood sample are removed and can be
tested.
If they turn out to be anti-A antibodies, then the A antigen was present in that blood
sample on the evidence, and they found it and stuck to it.
If the antibodies that come off during the elution process are anti-B antibodies, then
that's because the B antigen was found in the original blood sample in the evidence.
If both anti-A and anti-B antibodies come off, the blood sample was type AB.
Essentially, what serologists are doing is targeting the original blood sample on the
evidence with a solution of antibodies and letting the antibodies reveal the antigens
that are present, since those antigens determined the person's blood type.
I'm sure my description makes testing for blood sound pretty simple, but consider that
blood can be found at a crime scene in a whole lot of different forms.
It can be a congealed puddle, that's another way Hollywood typically gets it wrong.
We often see dripping blood at crime scenes when blood actually clots within about 5 minutes.
But blood can be relatively fresh, or it can be dried up at a scene.
In fact, all items of evidence that have blood on them are dried by the time they reach
the forensic lab, because blood's so much more stable when it's dry.
Most morgues have these climate control cabinets that they can hang a victim's clothing in
so they can dry it out before examination.
A blood sample might come in on any type of surface, carpeting, upholstery, a piece of
drywall that's cut out from the wall of somebody's living room, even a ceiling tile.
We'll talk about how blood behaves when it leaves the body and gets thrown around at
a crime scene in another lecture about blood spatter.
But suffice it to say that blood typing in a forensic lab is often really different from
the standard blood typing done in a hospital lab.
Because forensic scientists are typically dealing with blood and other body fluids that
are degraded, old, contaminated, sometimes even commingled.
Figuring out whether blood is from a human and not a cat, a dog, or a butcher deer, well
that requires the use of antibodies that are specific to antigens only found in human blood,
and not the blood of other animals.
So forensic labs have these commercially prepared stock solutions of antibodies to the blood
of lots of common animals.
We've got dog, cat, rabbit, chicken, deer, pig, horse, cow, basically those animals that
we have as typical pets or those we eat.
Since those non-human types of blood might be found in a residence or a business like
a restaurant or a butcher shop where a crime could occur.
Wow, just imagine trying to figure out a murder that happened in a slaughterhouse.
I think I feel a novel coming on.
Well, either that or I'm creating smarter criminals again.
Another interesting application of human blood type that relates to the law, so in that sense
I guess is forensic, is paternity testing.
In the past, before DNA technology, blood types were routinely used in paternity tests.
In order to understand how that works, let's take a look at how blood types inherited.
The A form and the B form of the red blood cell proteins are said to be co-dominant because
if somebody inherits the gene for blood type A from one parent and the gene for blood type
B from the other parent, that person's red cells will have both the A and B antigens
on them, as we've seen, and they'll have blood type AB.
And both the A form of the blood type gene and the B form of the blood type gene, they
both trump the recessive O. So if your blood type A, you have at least one gene for blood
type A, but you might be carrying the recessive gene for O. You might have inherited the A
gene from both of your parents, or you might have inherited the A gene from one parent
and the O gene from your other parent.
The same goes for blood type B. But if you have blood type O, you definitely inherited
the recessive O gene from both of your parents. And in turn, the genes you inherit determine
what you can pass to your own offspring.
So let me ask you this. Can a mother whose blood type B and a father whose blood type
A ever have a child whose type O? Think about that for a minute. Stop the DVD if you want
to work out that genetic problem with an old good old punnett square like you may have
done in high school biology.
The answer is yes they could, but only if each parent were carrying the recessive O
gene.
Now here's the real case. The famous silent movie actor Charlie Chaplin was involved in
a paternity suit in 1944 in which a young starlet by the name of Joan Berry accused
Chaplin of being the father of her child.
Now Chaplin was reportedly type O, Berry was type A, and her child was type B. So could
Charlie Chaplin have fathered Berry's child? What do you think?
Well blood tests prove that Charlie Chaplin could not have been the father of that child.
But interestingly, because blood tests were not admissible in court at the time, the judge
ordered Chaplin to pay child support anyway.
And hey, the man did play a reoccurring role called the little tramp, right? But the good
news was that the notoriety of this case prompted California to reexamine the issue of allowing
blood tests as evidence and the law was ultimately changed. That's just one more example of science
society and the law moving hand in hand.
Okay, this example really shows how non-specific blood typing is, doesn't it? All that human
red blood cell typing can do is exclude or include somebody as being a suspect. It cannot
show that the blood in question came from a specific person. In other words, blood type
is class evidence. It's not individuating evidence.
There are different distributions of the ABO blood groups in different human populations.
The long standing genetic isolation that led to our major ancestral and racial groups has
led to some blood types being more common in some groups over others. But considering
just one of those facts, that blood type O is found in nearly half of all white people
of Northern European descent, well you can see that blood type alone doesn't get you
very far in forensic science. In addition to blood, the science of serology
also deals with other body fluids. In sexual assaults, saliva, semen, and vaginal fluid
may also be exchanged between perpetrators and their victims. The testing for these types
of fluids is pretty similar to blood in that there are presumptive tests that can be done
in the field and then confirmatory tests that are done later in the lab.
One of the presumptive tests for semen involves looking for a chemical known as acid phosphatase.
That's a chemical made by the male reproductive glands known as the seminal vesicles. Those
glands produce the bulk of the fluid part of semen. The problem with acid phosphatase
though is that it's fairly common in nature, including being present in vaginal secretions,
the body fluids of non-human animals, and even the juices of certain kinds of plants
and fungi. But if acid phosphatase is found at a crime scene, it's considered presumptive
evidence of the presence of semen. Again, we allow false positives but not false negatives
with regard to field tests. Confirmatory tests for semen include a microscopic exam
to look for sperm cells, which can still be detected even if the sperm are dead and starting
to degrade. But what if the rapist had a vasectomy? In that case, looking for sperm would
be useless. Fortunately though, seminal acid phosphatase levels are not affected by a vasectomy.
Here is the chemical called PSA, which stands for prostate-specific antigen. Both the seminal
vesicles and the prostate gland contribute fluids to semen, and both of those glands
are located beyond the male ductwork that's cut during a vasectomy. PSA is considered
a confirmatory test for the presence of semen because unlike acid phosphatase, it's unique
to semen. Timing is also important in serology cases involving sexual assault. If a woman's
raped and murdered, the medical examiner may find evidence of sperm in her vagina for up
to about two weeks. This is because her body is no longer actively producing and sloughing
off the surface cells from her female tract. But in a living victim, live sperm will only
be found for about five hours after a rape occurred. And within about 72 hours, there
may be no remaining evidence of sperm or semen. Relevant to this, one of the more recent fields
that's emerged within forensic science is called forensic nursing. An important role
that forensic nurses play in emergency rooms is to understand how to properly collect this
type of critical evidence in rape cases. The chain of custody that begins in the ER may
ultimately get any potential evidence to a courtroom someday.
Okay, we've talked mostly about blood and semen, but the bottom line with regard to
the serological and chemical testing of body fluids, including saliva and vaginal secretions,
is that it's just not very discriminatory. These types of tests, though, are still important
in the field in order to make sound decisions about gathering evidence. And presumptive
tests are still the first strategy a forensic lab uses before they waste a lot of time and
money chasing down a bum lead. But the real power in body fluids lies inside the cells
they contain. The advent of DNA technology revolutionized the study of body tissues in
a way like nothing since the microscope. In the next lecture, we'll look at the forensic
science of DNA.
