You know, I always have to laugh when I hear people talk about how forensic science was
different quotes before DNA.
Come on, DNA is one of the oldest biologically active molecules on the planet.
This history goes back at least as long as the 3.5 billion years that life spent on Earth,
and that's just part of its charm.
At least as far as we know at this point, living organisms have always contained the
genetic molecule DNA.
It's just that until the mid-1980s, we didn't know how to use it in forensic case work.
You almost can't talk about DNA in forensic science without covering the case of a British
guide by the name of Colin Pitchfork.
He was the first man ever to be convicted using DNA evidence, not only because he turned
out to be a rapist and a murderer, but also because he did something really stupid in
his effort to cover his tracks.
In November of 1983, in Leicestershire County in central England, the body of a 15-year-old
girl named Linda Mann was found.
She had been raped and strangled and left on a path in the woods.
After a semen stain was found on her clothes, the UK's Forensic Science Services Lab did
a standard serology exam and figured out that the semen came from a guy with type A blood.
They also did an enzyme analysis which showed a protein pattern that would likely match
about 10% of the male population.
Without anything else to go on, though, the case went cold.
As three years later, in July of 1986, in the same county, a second 15-year-old girl
named Dawn Ashworth was also found raped and strangled in the woods.
Serology showed that the blood type and enzyme profile from the semen stain in this case
was the same as the 1983 case.
Police honed in on a 17-year-old local kid named Richard Buckland, who worked at a psychiatric
hospital near where the second body had been found.
Buckland, it seems, knew some details about the body that hadn't yet been released.
He also had the same blood type and serology profile found in the semen.
During questioning, Buckland said that he did kill Dawn Ashworth, but denied having
anything to do with the 1983 murder of Linda Mann.
But investigators weren't fully satisfied with the reliability of Buckland's confession.
At nearby Leicester University, there was a professor named Dr. Alec Jeffries, who was
studying DNA.
Jeffries had figured out that there were some repeated sequences in the genetic code that
varied from person to person, and he thought these hyper-variable regions, as he called
them, were different enough to sort out people using their DNA sequences, and Jeffries even
predicted that his findings would someday have forensic applications.
The forensic science services brought Jeffries the semen samples from the two murders and
the DNA from the confessed killer, Buckland.
Jeffries figured out that the DNA profile from the semen on the two little girls was
identical, but it didn't match up to Buckland.
Now here's where things get really weird.
Once they found out that Buckland was not a match, the police decided to ask every 17-34-year-old
guy in the county who didn't have an alibi for the murders to come in and give a blood
and saliva sample.
After they analyzed 4,000 samples, they still found no match.
They even expanded the search to include men who did claim to have an alibi, but after another
thousand samples, still nothing.
Eventually, a woman contacted police because she overheard a friend of hers saying that
he was paid 200 pounds to submit a sample in the name of his buddy, Colin Pitchfork.
Pitchfork claimed that he couldn't give a sample himself because he had already given
one for some other guy who was a known flasher, you know, some guy who exposes himself in
public.
You already see where this is going, right?
When the cops find Pitchfork, sure enough, his DNA matches the semen from both of the
murder victims.
By the way, Pitchfork himself was already the convicted flasher he incorporated into
his story.
So not only was this the first case of conviction through DNA evidence, it was also the first
case of exoneration when Bucklin was shown not to have been the murderer despite his
false confession.
Okay, let's talk about DNA.
DNA is an abbreviation for deoxyribonucleic acid.
It's the genetic molecule that makes up our chromosomes and basically encodes the instructions
for when and how to make proteins in a living organism.
Now all standard cells have DNA, from bacterial cells to the cells of the most complicated
creatures like us.
Even some viruses are made of DNA, but viruses are not cells and currently they're not considered
alive.
The DNA molecule is kind of like a twisted ladder where the uprights of the ladder are
made out of phosphates and sugars and the rungs of the ladder are made out of pairs of smaller
molecules called nucleotides.
Now what's really amazing to me is that the alphabet that makes up our genetic code and
the genetic code of all living things has only four letters.
We even abbreviate those four molecules with letters A, C, G and T.
So in spite of all the genetic diversity on earth from bacteria to insects, plants, humans,
the instructions for making us what we are is a code made up of only four repeating nucleotide
molecules that are strung between the phosphates and sugars I mentioned.
Now living things are much more similar when they share more of their genetic code in common
and less similar when they don't.
So we're very different from say fruit flies because they only have six chromosomes and
we don't share many genes with them.
But we're very much like our closest living relatives chimpanzees because we share about
97% of our genes in common with them.
And when you think about that just imagine how closely all people are genetically related
to each other.
That makes me think of how absolutely absurd racial prejudices really are.
Anyway, it's not the major genetic recipes of humans that make a difference in forensics
because we share so many functional genes in common with one another.
It's estimated that we differ from our fellow humans by less than 1% of our DNA.
That's because most of our DNA is devoted to making basic body structures and controlling
standard functions like making skin and hormones, stuff like that.
We all do those things in pretty much the same way with only a little variability related
to our family history.
But over the course of evolution, as genutations have occurred, lots of randomly repeated and
apparently unnecessary sequences have accumulated in our DNA.
And these sequences aren't rare.
They make up about 30% of our entire genome.
But since these sequences don't have any real genetic function, the fact that they tend
to almost stutter and stammer in certain regions of our DNA really doesn't cause any genetic
problems.
It does, however, create a certain amount of uniqueness in that small fraction of our
genetic code that differs from other people.
Now when DNA differs in a group like humans, the difference is known as a polymorphism.
That word basically means having many forms.
Now there are really two kinds of polymorphisms in human genes.
The first one's called a sequence polymorphism, where there's a difference in the order of
the nucleotide-based pairs in a stretch of DNA.
The other kind of polymorphism in human genes is what's called a length polymorphism.
That basically means that something we could call a phrase in the genetic code gets repeated
over and over a number of times, you know, that stammering I mentioned earlier.
Scientists have figured out some of the more standard genetic repeats and call them variable
number tandem repeats or VNTRs.
Now they use these VNTRs to categorize or type DNA, but it wasn't until they could really
figure out how often these VNTRs occur in populations that forensic scientists got a
hold of the real power of DNA profiles.
The mathematical science called population genetics has given us information about the
probabilities that any two people could have the same VNTR pattern just by coincidence.
And when they look at multiple stretches of DNA at the same time between two people,
the statistical probabilities get even narrower.
In fact, they get strong enough to let genetic comparisons link a single person to a DNA
profile at the exclusion of anybody else except an identical twin.
Now because I'm not sure what kind of background you may have in biology, we probably need
to talk a little bit more about DNA and its inheritance before we go on.
As I first mentioned in the lecture about hair, we have two types of DNA in our cells.
We have nuclear DNA inside, you guessed it, the nucleus of our cells, and we have another
type of DNA called mitochondrial DNA inside the small energy producing organelles called
mitochondria that are inside our cells.
Nuclear DNA is the typical double-stranded twisted ladder molecule that I talked about
earlier.
Within the nucleus of each of our cells, it's packed into units called chromosomes.
Nuclear DNA is inherited from both of our parents.
We get 23 chromosomes of DNA from our father and 23 chromosomes of DNA from our mother
at our conception.
This is a type of DNA that through the interaction of dominant and recessive genes gives us the
traits that make us who we are, biologically speaking.
Remember that mitochondrial DNA, though, is inherited completely from our mother.
This is because a woman's egg is a big, fat, juicy cell that not only contains a nucleus
with a half set of chromosomes, but also all the cellular organelles that do energy production,
nutrient processing, and the cell division that's going to take place right after the
egg gets fertilized.
But a sperm is really not much more than a tiny genetic missile.
It's a nucleus with a half set of chromosomes packed into a free-swimming cell with a propeller-like
tail called a flagellum.
In fertilization, the male chromosomes are more or less ejected into the female egg and
the flagellum drops off.
The sperm has the right stuff to get to the egg, but really the male sperm cell gives
nothing else to a new offspring but a package of nuclear DNA.
And then as soon as that male DNA and female DNA partner up in a fertilized egg, the new
offspring's first job is to begin to divide and make identical copies of its cells as
it grows.
In this cell division, called mitosis, make sure that each new cell contains the identical
full set of chromosomes from conception, except in the occasional cases of random mutations.
That's why any cell in the body contains the same nuclear DNA, which is really important
in forensics.
Okay, back to mitochondria.
Bacteria are basically the tiny energy factories in all of our cells.
They're actually descendant from primitive bacteria that got incorporated into larger
cells, which then ultimately evolved into plant and animal cells.
Now, mitochondria have their own DNA, and they can reproduce themselves when our bodies
need to make more energy.
So if you start an exercise program, the mitochondria in your cells will multiply to help give you
the energy your new workout routine demands.
Mitochondrial DNA is like bacterial DNA, in that it's not housed in a group of chromosomes.
Mitochondrial DNA and bacterial DNA both consist of a single circular molecule that looks kind
of like a round ladder.
Anyway, the two most important things to know about mitochondria for our purposes here is
that first, there are way more mitochondria in each body cell compared to a single nucleus.
And secondly, that the mitochondrial DNA in every single cell of our body came from
our mother through her mother, and through her mother, and her mother, and so on.
So let's quickly summarize both types of DNA, especially as it relates to forensics.
We each have a unique set of nuclear DNA that belongs to no one else in the world unless
we have an identical twin.
50% of that nuclear DNA came from our mother, and 50% of it came from our father when they
created us.
And at this point in my class, I always add, la la la la, don't make me think about my
parents having sex, that always gets a laugh.
Once we each only get half of our mom's chromosomes and half of our dad's chromosomes, we share
some of our DNA with them, but not all of it.
If we have full blood siblings, we share 50% of our genes with them.
Because of the way sperm and eggs are made, our brothers and sisters don't get the same
half set of chromosomes we got from either of our shared parents.
So we share a fourth of our DNA with our grandparents, aunts and uncles, and then the
amount drops down to an eighth with cousins.
So the closer we are related to people, the more nuclear DNA we share in common with them.
Since all of our mitochondrial DNA came from our mother though, we share 100% mitochondrial
DNA identity with her.
And not only with her, but with every other child she had.
In other words, all of our brothers and sisters from our mother, regardless of whether or
not they had the same father that we did.
And ours is the same mitochondrial DNA that our mother got from her mother, so that same
mitochondrial DNA would be in all of our mother's siblings, whether they're our aunts
or our uncles.
As long as they came from our same maternal grandmother, they have the same mitochondrial
DNA that we do.
In fact, when you think long term, the only mitochondrial DNA differences in humans on
earth relate to the occasional mutations that happen when DNA is copied to make new
mitochondria.
The second thing about the two types of DNA that I should reiterate for forensic purposes
is that each cell of our body has only one copy of our nuclear DNA.
But since our cells contain many, many mitochondria, each body cell can yield a lot of mitochondrial
DNA.
And because our mitochondrial DNA molecule is a lot smaller, it seems to be much more
stable over time than nuclear DNA is.
Now long before DNA was used in forensics, scientists knew it could be found in body
cells.
So, any source of living or dead cells, as long as they aren't too badly degraded, are
a potential source of either nuclear or mitochondrial DNA.
Lots of early forensic DNA research involved trying to figure out the best sources of crime
seen DNA.
Some things like blood, semen or other obvious or other obvious body tissues were a no brain
or pardon that pun.
But eventually, scientists figured out that DNA was even left behind on things like cigarette
butts, soft drink cans, toothbrushes, a licked envelope seal, hair follicles, tampons, latex
gloves, even on the inside brim of a well worn hat.
But biological evidence is perishable, and even though DNA is a pretty durable molecule,
it will degrade over time and it will fragment.
So, the chances of getting DNA from fresh blood are way better than the chances of extracting
it from something like dinosaur bones.
Some of the things that can cause DNA to degrade are strong UV light, strong acids, things
like bleach and hydrogen peroxide, things that can oxidize biological molecules, almost
any extreme environmental condition like heat or fire, or even high humidity can damage
DNA samples.
But scientists have still gotten DNA from some pretty ancient sources, maybe not a whole
genome, but definitely enough to be analyzed.
A general rule of thumb is that fresh tissues are going to yield more nuclear DNA and older
tissues are going to have less.
But when a nuclear DNA profile isn't possible, analysts may still be able to get mitochondrial
DNA out of an old sample.
In my own skeletal cases, the forensic lab can often get mitochondrial DNA from cases
that are decades old, even if they can't get a nuclear profile.
And there's been a renewed interest in cold cases since DNA technology has improved, as
you probably know.
At a crime scene, possible sources of DNA have to be handled carefully.
Anything wet, like a piece of cloth with blood on it, should be air-dried and put into a
container that can breathe a little to stop moisture buildup, something like a paper bag.
It should also be kept at low temperature, or at least nothing higher than room temperature.
And that'll help prevent bacterial and fungal growth, because those cells have their own
DNA.
You don't want to be extracting bacterial or fungal DNA instead of human DNA in the
crime lab.
Sometimes you can't avoid environmental contamination, like some of my cases where a body's decomposed
in a lake or some other source of water.
That's because those water sources contain lots of other creatures than just my victim,
and most of them are microscopic.
But once we get the body back to the morgue, the DNA analysts are pretty good at figuring
out how to choose the best tissues and minimize cross-contamination.
If the DNA sample isn't a body, but something on a surface that's portable, like a coffee
mug, a pair of panties, a piece of chewed gum, then the whole thing should be brought
back to the lab.
But if the whole thing isn't easily transported, like spit on the sidewalk, then a sample that
contains the question DNA can be taken from that.
Those texts not only have to be careful with samples to preserve the DNA in them, they also
have to think about their own safety, since body fluids can carry infection.
Seeing in lab workers also have to make sure they don't contaminate crime scene evidence
with their own DNA, from their hair, dander of skin cells, or their saliva.
Anybody who has direct contact with DNA evidence might be asked for what's called an elimination
sample of their DNA to make sure that the genetic profile from a crime scene isn't accidentally
that of a lab person or an evidence technician.
When investigators need a known sample from a particular person for comparisons, they
can use blood, but most often these days known samples, called reference samples, are taken
with a buckle swab.
That just means a sterile cotton swab gets rubbed over the inside of somebody's cheek
and then put into an envelope.
Remember, putting that in a vial or other airtight container is bad because that holds
in moisture and encourages other life forms, like the bacteria in our mouths, which have
their own DNA, to grow.
Now if you tried this buckle swab yourself, you wouldn't see a thing, but under a microscope
there would be plenty of cells with a big nucleus in them.
Anyway, these types of known reference samples can be taken from a suspect or a victim and
then compared to unknown crime scene samples.
In the morgue, we often take DNA samples from unknown persons to help get them identified.
But where do you start when it comes to comparisons if you're dealing with a body that's unknown?
Really boils down to a couple of ways.
First, if investigators think they have a pretty good idea of who they think the victim
is, then they can try to find relatives to take reference samples from for comparison.
But what if no relatives are available?
Well then a reference sample might actually end up coming from the victim themselves.
Say we think a body in the morgue is John Q. Smith.
Well, maybe a death investigator can go back to Mr. Smith's home and get his toothbrush,
hairbrush, electric razor, or something else that only his DNA is likely to be on.
These samples have even been taken from stored medical tissues like a woman's pap smear
slide that might be years old or donated blood sitting in a blood bank, things like that.
The other major way to get people identified is by using DNA databases and I'll talk more
about that later.
So back at the lab, DNA scientists have to extract the genetic material from crime scene
reference samples, and DNA extraction techniques have been around for a long time.
Heck, there are even high school lab activities that let students get DNA out of bacterial
cells.
The extraction isn't what's the tough part.
The difficult part of DNA analysis has been figuring out how to find and capitalize on
the tiny fractions of DNA that differ among people, rather than the over 99% of our DNA
we have in common.
After the stretches of variable and relatively inconsequential DNA I mentioned, the ones
we call sequence and length polymorphisms, that's what they use to develop someone's
DNA profile, or is it sometimes called their DNA fingerprint.
The first really successful method of DNA profiling was what's called restriction fragment
length polymorphism, or RFLP analysis.
This uses the equivalent of a molecular scissors called a restriction enzyme that's literally
been designed by scientists to cut DNA at specific places, wherever two particular nucleotides
sit next to each other.
In those variable number, tandem repeat, or VNTR parts of the code I talked about, like
wherever the enzyme finds a TA combination next to a CG combination, it'll cut the DNA.
These restriction enzymes are used on particular areas of human DNA that are known to be polymorphic.
When they cut between specific places, what's left are a bunch of smaller DNA fragments.
And since one person's variable regions are different from another's in these polymorphic
areas, the resulting fragment sizes will differ between two people.
So even though the same molecular scissors could be used on your DNA and my DNA, the
lengths of the DNA fabric they cut will end up being different.
A method called gel electrophoresis is then used to sort out the RFLP fragments by size.
Now during electrophoresis, the DNA gets put in a gel with a chemical buffer that gives
the DNA fragments a slight negative charge.
And then the gels put in an electric current bath where one end is negative and the other's
positive.
Since the DNA has been given a slight negative charge, it's going to be attracted to the
positive end of the electrophoresis chamber.
Now because the smaller pieces of DNA are lighter and can move faster than the larger
ones in the gel, after the electric currents turned off and the fragment race is over,
the result will be a separation of the fragments by size.
In the same electrophoresis gel they'll also run calibration controls called ladders to
make sure everything's working okay and to give some standards for comparison.
After electrophoresis, the resulting DNA fingerprint can then be compared to other DNA samples.
RFLP began being phased out of forensics in about the mid-90s, but not before it tied
the stain on Monica Lewinsky's dress to then President Bill Clinton.
RFLP is problematic because it requires a pretty large sample and the results aren't
compatible with the major DNA computer databases.
So in 1983, which remember was the same year Colin Pitchfork's first known victim was discovered,
a technique for mass producing copies of DNA was developed.
The process is called PCR, which stands for polymerase chain reaction.
Now it amplifies a small sample of DNA, so there's plenty of it to analyze in a forensic
case.
Basically PCR takes advantage of the double stranded nature of the DNA molecule and the
simplicity of its code to essentially clone the DNA.
The machine used is called a thermal cycler because it heats up the DNA to open up the
double helix for copying and then with each cycle it doubles the amount of DNA present.
So in a couple of hours, a single target piece of DNA can be copied about a trillion times.
Now that means a little crime scene sample can go a long way in testing.
Today RFLP typing of DNA has been replaced by something called STR analysis.
It uses PCR and some of the same principles as RFLP, but STR is quicker and doesn't require
as much sample.
STR stands for short tandem repeat because it focuses on the smaller repeating units
in DNA.
STRs are essentially the shortest examples of that stuttering or stammering sections of
DNA that I mentioned earlier.
Consisting of only maybe three to seven repeating base pairs compared to 15 to 35 for RFLP.
STRs have been shown to have a lot more variability among people too.
And because STR focuses on really small stretches of DNA found all throughout the human genome,
it can be used on much smaller and more degraded samples.
An estimate I read said only about 18 cells are needed to get a DNA profile using STR technology.
And that's a tiny fraction of the estimated 50 to 100 trillion cells in the human body.
Electrophoresis is still used to separate STR fragments, but there have been advances
there too.
They now use what's called capillary electrophoresis, which is done in a tiny column, not a flat
gel.
STR typing is also the most sensitive of all types of DNA testing.
Scientists have settled on 13 different core locations within human DNA that capture much
of our STR variability.
And each one of these 13 locations has its own established probability.
And then when you combine the results of STR typing at all 13 of those locations, the statistical
probabilities of two people having the same DNA wind up jumping into the quadrillions.
That's 10 to the 15th, or even higher than that.
Better still, the profiles generated by STR are sets of numbers that can be input into
the CODIS database, which is the acronym for the Combined DNA Index System that was developed
by the FBI and others in the late 90s.
This lets agencies easily compare DNA profiles they obtain to those from other cases and
even to offender databases, and that has the potential to pinpoint suspects and link cases.
When DNA from an unknown person is put into CODIS, it can be compared with DNA profiles
from missing persons in the effort to identify John and Jane Doe's.
Other advances in DNA technology have been the fairly recent ability to tell whether a
sample is from a woman or a man by looking at DNA from the sex chromosomes.
Those are the chromosomes called X and Y that you might remember from biology class.
There's a gene called amylogenin on the sex chromosome that's a mere six nucleotides longer
in males than females, but that's enough to produce a different genetic signature.
In addition to that, the Y chromosome has its own standard tandem repeats, meaning
its own STRs that are especially useful in focusing in on the male fraction from, say,
a mixed sample of DNA that might contain sperm.
Or revisit DNA in a couple of other lectures, including some case examples, but at least
we've covered the basics and a little bit about the technology used in forensic science
to generate DNA profiles.
You can see that DNA has some similarities to other kinds of evidence we've already talked
about in that it relies on comparisons between samples taken from people, whether they're
known individuals, unknown persons, or crime scene samples.
But unlike hair and serology, DNA has risen to be the gold standard in both victim and
perpetrator identification, because it's one of the rare pieces of evidence that can
be statistically linked to a single person at the exclusion of all others.
And because DNA can be found in all body tissues and fluids, we'll see that it has even greater
ID potential than fingerprints.
The field of chemistry has played a huge role in the way we analyze some types of evidence.
So let's continue to explore body chemistry and see how it's used in forensic science.
