We've just seen how forensic labs examine a variety of body fluids and tissues to extract
and analyze the DNA molecule, which of course is native to our cells.
But there are lots of other types of tests done in forensic labs to look for chemicals
or drugs that are introduced into our bodies.
In this lecture, we'll talk about toxicology, which is the study of how animals, including
humans, are affected by drugs and poisonous substances.
And since many drug and poison issues have legal ramifications, we'll more specifically
address the science of forensic toxicology.
Let me first mention that forensic labs really have two chemistry sections within them.
A forensic chemistry lab that analyzes contraband abuse substances in dosage or seized form,
in other words, before somebody ingests or smokes them, and we'll talk about those in
the next lecture, and they have a toxicology lab that looks for drugs or other chemicals
in biological samples like urine, blood, and other body tissues, in other words, after
people have a chemical in their system.
That's what we'll talk about in this lecture.
The reason behind the two chemistry lab sections in forensics has a lot to do with the huge
differences in concentrations between a drug on the street and a drug in someone's body.
The forensic chemistry lab deals in grams and kilograms, but the toxicology lab looks
for drugs in nanogram and microgram amounts.
These two sides of forensics use different supplies and different analytical instruments.
They're even housed in separate locations.
That's because of the potential for cross-contamination that would take drug and poison results in
the toxicology lab.
Now what's the difference between a drug and a poison?
We all have an intuitive sense of what those terms mean, but by definition, a drug is a
single chemical or a mix of chemicals that have some kind of psychological and or physiological
effects on the body.
Other are therapeutic drugs that we take for various ailments, like aspirin or antibiotics,
and other drugs that are recreational.
Some are legal, like alcohol and caffeine, while others are not.
But a poison is something that has life-threatening effects, which are often collectively known
as toxicity.
And as we know, both legal and illegal drugs can be poisonous if not taken in the right
amounts or taken in combination with other substances.
Legal drugs and even prescription drugs can also have unanticipated toxic side effects
that may affect some individuals, even when those drugs are taken properly.
Let's start off by learning a little bit about how drugs enter and act within the living
body.
Then we'll cover more about poisonings.
Some of you might know a lot about this if you're in a medical field, but others of you
probably use medications all the time without really knowing much about how they behave
once you take them.
The way drugs act and the effects they have is the science of pharmacology.
But we're going to break that down further into two areas, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics.
Those are your two big words of the day.
Pharmacokinetics is the study of the way drugs move, including how they get into and out of
the body.
And we can organize that into four main areas, absorption, distribution, metabolism, and
elimination.
We'll see that although drugs can enter the body in a variety of ways, the blood is the
superhighway that drugs use once they're inside.
And the reason most drugs don't affect people indefinitely is that they're metabolized,
after which most drugs, but not all, end up being removed from the body in a couple of
different ways.
Now, let's add some detail.
Absorption is how a drug gets into the body, and we're all pretty familiar with absorption
routes.
Drugs can be injected directly into the blood intravenously, which means right into a vein,
or injected into a muscle or under the skin, where they'll enter the blood a little more
gradually.
But drugs can also be introduced orally or rectally, where they'll have to cross the
mucous membrane lining of the gastrointestinal tract to reach the bloodstream.
Some drugs enter the extensive networks of blood vessels of the lungs by being inhaled,
while others can cross the skin by being applied topically.
Some drugs, especially those used on the skin to treat the skin, including some anesthetics,
might not wind up in significant levels in the circulatory system, so they're said to
act more locally.
Now in terms of distribution, if a drug is not intended to act only locally, it's the
circulating blood that carries the drug to almost all parts of the body.
And I say almost because sometimes, depending on the size or chemistry of the drug, it may
not get to all parts of the body.
For instance, many drugs can't cross what's called the blood-brain barrier, which means
they can't get into the brain.
That's because the blood vessel networks of the brain are less permeable than those of
the rest of the body, especially to certain sizes and types of molecules.
So when a person takes a drug, it may end up at different concentrations in different
parts of the body.
Here are some examples.
Some organs, like the heart and liver, have a richer blood supply than other organs, so
they can hold a higher concentration of a drug that's in circulation.
Also the chemical structure of some drugs makes them preferentially collect in certain
body parts.
For instance, some pesticides tend to collect in fatty tissue, specifically called adipose
tissue, and it's hard to get rid of them.
Over time, the buildup of these chemicals can cause health issues or even death.
This is also important when you consider nature's food chain.
Like when fish swim in polluted waters, because when a person eats that fish, they're also
ingesting all the pesticides that have collected in that fish over its lifetime.
Now let's move on to metabolism.
That's when a drug is broken down within the body into other substances, which can be
called metabolites.
There are multiple steps in the process of metabolism for a given drug, so that even
metabolites can be further broken down into other chemicals in a series of body reactions.
The breakdown of the drug has generally four main possible outcomes.
First, it deactivates the drug, which ultimately limits or lessens its effects on the body.
Secondly, metabolism of a drug usually makes it easier for the body to get rid of it.
This is because metabolites are smaller and usually more water soluble than the parent
drug they come from.
And the smaller and more soluble they are in the blood, the easier the bloodstream can,
for instance, carry them to the kidneys where they can be excreted in urine.
The third thing metabolism of a drug can do is convert it into a substance that's usable
for energy.
There's also a fourth outcome where a parent drug can be metabolized into the act of drug.
Things like this are called pro-drugs.
Usually drug metabolism takes place in the liver.
For instance, the ethyl alcohol in alcoholic beverages is a drug.
Remember, a drug is any chemical that has psychological or physiological effects on
the body.
Specifically, ethyl alcohol, also called ethanol, also called grain alcohol or just good old
drinking alcohol, is what's called a psychoactive drug.
But in terms of its metabolism, ethyl alcohol is broken down within the liver into a chemical
called acetaldehyde, which is then further metabolized into acetic acid.
Now the intermediate metabolite, acetaldehyde, is more toxic than ethanol itself and contributes
to liver damage.
But because ethanol produces both physical and psychological dependence, and people with
fat dependence consume large quantities of ethanol, alcoholism ends up affecting all
systems of the body and producing toxicity in many organs, not just the liver.
We'll talk a lot more about drugs of abuse, including alcohol in our next lecture.
Okay, the final step in pharmacokinetics, which remember is the movement of drugs in
the body, is elimination.
Most drugs leave the body in urine because the bloodstream carries them to the kidneys
where blood is filtered, and this puts the drug and or its metabolites into urine.
That's the basis for urine testing, looking for drug use.
But other drugs or their metabolites can also exit the body in feces, sweat, through respiration
when people exhale, or by being deposited in hair that's growing in a follicle, or through
lactation in nursing mothers.
So all of these are sources of forensic testing.
Now remember, our second big word of the day was pharmacodynamics, which is the science
of how drugs act in the body, including their interactions with other drugs.
The reason a drug can exert an effect on the body is because drugs and other substances
like our body's own hormones, which can also be taken as drugs, are like chemical keys.
The locks of those keys may fit are called receptors.
These are some of the many types of proteins found on the surfaces of cells.
We talked about other proteins found specifically on the surface of red blood cells when we
talked about blood type.
There are even some types of receptors that are inside of cells.
So even though a drug may be coursing through the bloodstream, the only cells that are really
sensitive to it, or maybe I should say the only cells that are targets for that drug,
are those that have the matching receptors for it.
And when a drug key fits into one of its matching receptor locks, it'll bind to that receptor
and in turn, the cell will react in some way.
Today, many of our recent drugs have been scientifically designed to bind to specific
receptors.
But all throughout human history, other drugs have been discovered by accident, like when
it was first realized that Willow Bark relieved pain, which goes back thousands of years.
We now know that's because the plant contains salicylic acid, which is the active ingredient
in aspirin.
Aspirin is a drug that acts by suppressing the formation of body chemicals called prostaglandins,
which among their many other functions are cell mediators involved in pain and inflammation.
And we all realize that if we have a terrible headache and we take aspirin for it, the aspirin
doesn't just rush straight to our aching head.
It courses through our whole bloodstream and would also relieve pain, say, in a finger
if we had a bad hangnail, too.
Now, that reminds us that the distribution mechanisms we just talked about in our discussion
of pharmacokinetics mean a drug doesn't just necessarily affect one body tissue or organ.
It can affect any cell or any other drug or body chemical it interacts with.
There are two main ways drugs interact with cells in the body.
Some drugs chemically tell a cell to perform a certain function when they bind to a receptor
on that cell.
For instance, when a diabetes drug binds to receptors on the pancreas, it can promote
the secretion of insulin by the pancreas into the bloodstream.
We call these types of drugs agonists.
Morphine is an agonist because it mimics endorphins in the central nervous system.
On the other hand, drugs called antagonists are those that tell a cell to stop performing
a certain function when they find and bind to that cell's receptors.
Like some drugs that bind to the receptors in stomach cells to stop the cells from producing
the acid that causes heartburn and ulcers.
Some antagonists work by simply blocking the receptor site so the drug that normally binds
there cannot.
This is how the opiate dependence treatment called naltrexone blocks opiate receptors
in addicts who are trying to stop using.
Some poisons are toxic because they act as antagonists and block normal functions.
And we all know that drugs can interact with other drugs, which is known as synergism.
Sometimes when two or more drugs are taken together, they have a greater effect than
either would have taken individually.
For instance, the combination of barbiturates and alcohol magnify each other's effect to
the point where typically sublethal doses of each, when taken together, can cause death.
This was apparently the cause of death for both Jimi Hendrix and Janice Joplin, among
countless other famous and less famous people.
The science of pharmacodynamics also has allowed an understanding of drug dependence and drug
addiction, which are not the same thing.
Dependence is a psychological need for a certain drug, such that if that person stops
taking that drug, they don't have physical symptoms of withdrawal.
On the other hand, when someone is addicted to a drug, the body physically needs the drug
to continue functioning.
If the addicted person stops taking the drug, he or she goes into withdrawal, which can
include symptoms like high temperature, pain, seizures, and in some cases, like with severe
addiction to barbiturates or alcohol, a sudden withdrawal can even cause death.
Related to that is the phenomenon of tolerance, where the body adapts or gets used to the
drug.
As tolerance builds up, higher and higher quantities of the drug need to be taken to
achieve the same effects.
Tolerance occurs with most drugs to one degree or another, even some prescription drugs,
but tolerance is especially pronounced for things like morphine, heroin, cocaine, alcohol,
and barbiturates.
But there's also something called reverse tolerance, or sensitization, which is when
users experience heightened effects from the same dose of drug, which can occur with stimulants
such as methamphetamine or cocaine.
Now, forensic drug testing can be basically boiled down to two main areas, testing on
the living and testing on the dead.
Tests on living people look for illegal, banned, or abused substances.
This includes things like pre-employment drug tests and random drug screenings that help
ensure public safety, whether on the job or in the military, or to make sure athletes
are competing fairly.
Human performance testing also can be prompted by a specific incident or a crime, like when
people are tested to see if one or more drugs have affected their abilities, such as driving
under the influence, or whether a drug has incapacitated them, like when a victim of
sexual assault alleges a date-raped drug.
We'll talk about those issues more in future lectures.
But for the remainder of this lecture, let's look at the post-mortem forensic drug testing
of body fluids and body tissues in poisoning cases, whether they're accidental, suicidal,
or homicidal.
When looking for and at toxicity, forensic toxicologists work closely in conjunction
with forensic pathologists, who are medical doctors that specialize in the study of disease
and trauma in the morgue.
We've all heard horrible incidents of accidental poisonings that harm or even kill people.
Examples are all too familiar.
A child accidentally drinks a toxin like drain cleaner, or gets into and ingests prescription
drugs.
That's what happened to one of my nephews, leaving him brain damaged and legally blind.
But similar accidents can happen to adults, too, especially when drugs are not labeled
or stored properly, like somebody putting weed killer in an old whiskey bottle, storing
it in the basement, and that old Uncle George decides to take a nip one day.
People can accidentally take the wrong medication from a shared bathroom cabinet, or take too
much of a prescription, especially if they're forgetful and thought they already took it
that day.
There can also be accidental poisonings related to adverse drug interactions.
Or in some cases, a medical condition can lead to organ damage, particularly the liver
or kidneys, and a drug taken at normal levels can become toxic because it can't be properly
metabolized or eliminated by the body.
Other accidental poisonings can have environmental causes, like carbon monoxide or radon gas accumulations
in homes or somewhere else.
Carbon monoxide can come from faulty heaters and engines, but it's also produced in house
fires.
The discharge of lots of different toxic chemicals, including nuclear poisonings, can come from
industrial and even sometimes natural sources.
We'll cover examples of those in our lecture about mass disasters.
These toxins can harm other creatures in the environment, as well as humans.
But the environment can bite back, since accidental poisonings also include attacks
by venomous animals, like spiders and snakes.
Although I'm not sure exactly how you classify such a death in a snake handler.
I mean, wasn't it practically inevitable?
Many people know that some plants like hemlock and certain fungi, like toxic mushrooms, are
poisonous parts of the natural world, too.
Sadly, some poisonings happen because people decide to take their own lives by intentional
drug overdoses, usually involving random prescription drugs, including tranquilizers and morphine,
or different over-the-counter drugs, especially analgesics, or combinations of the two.
Suicide attempts from drug overdoses are only fatal about 2% of the time, but the resulting
organ damage may ultimately take the person's life sooner or later.
And of course, there are countless stories throughout ancient and modern history of killings
committed by poisonings, using substances like strychnine, ricin, heavy metals like arsenic
and cyanides, like the hydrogen cyanide gas, Zyklon B, used in the Nazi gas chambers in
World War II, which is said to cause death in less than a minute.
In order for a toxicologist to figure out whether a poisoning was accidental or intentional,
they may have to take a number of different things into account.
If possible, this includes getting personal information about the victim that a health
care worker or a death investigator might gather from family members or medical professionals,
things like the victim's medical history, their drug use or abuse pattern, and the physical
condition at the time of the apparent poisoning.
The forensic toxicologist will then use that information in conjunction with what are called
instrumental tests run on body fluids and tissues, and possibly by testing substances
found at the scene that may relate to the incident.
In a living person, signs of poisoning may include nausea, vomiting, respiratory issues,
abnormal coloration of the skin, mental confusion, seizures, and where severe enough, a loss
of consciousness.
The effects depend on the type of the drug involved and the amount and duration of exposure.
Medical professionals or clinical toxicologists can sometimes have a head start on identifying
the poison involved.
If there's good clues as to its source, like, for instance, a snake bite, oh, here's an
example of a pretty confident head start on a source.
When I was four years old, I handed two empty bottles of baby aspirin to my mother, saying
that my older sister gave them to me and told me if I wanted to grow up to be big and strong,
I had to eat them.
That's pretty much the last thing I remember about the incident as my little blonde head
began to spin, though there was a certain amount of poetic justice in that they pumped
my sister's stomach too because they couldn't be sure she hadn't taken the aspirin as well.
So as you can see, there are lots of situations that call for toxological testing, including
in hospital and other clinical lab settings on people and non-human animals.
But let's return to the forensic lab's involvement in fatal human poisonings.
In order to identify one or more drugs in a victim's body, there are four main steps,
sampling, screening, extraction, and confirmation.
So let's take those one at a time.
In sampling, body fluids and or tissues are taken from the victim to search for drugs
or other chemicals.
In anti-mortem testing, the choice of the samples determined by what the lab thinks
it's looking for or how long the drug or chemicals been in the body.
The most typical samples for anti-mortem drug testing are blood and urine.
In post-mortem testing, in addition to blood and urine, vitreous fluids from the eyes,
stomach contents, bile, brain, and liver tissue, those are commonly collected.
Liver is important because it's the site of metabolism for so many types of drugs.
And the bile that's released by the liver and gallbladder into the gastrointestinal
tract concentrates many kinds of drugs.
Spinal fluid can be tested as can brain tissue.
And as I mentioned earlier, fatty tissues can wear house pesticides like DDT and marijuana.
The stomach can be opened up to look for signs of what was ingested, such as actual pills
or remnants of undigested pill capsules.
But what if the body's putrefying and tissues are already breaking down?
Sometimes it's still possible to find toxins in the vitreous humor since the eye is somewhat
more resistant to decomposition.
However, for some drugs, the amount that diffuses into the eye is so much less than the rest
of the body that it's not always a helpful specimen.
Urine can sometimes be withdrawn from what's left of the decomposing bladder.
Some drugs and toxins can even be found in embalmed or exhumed bodies long after death.
And as I mentioned earlier, hair is a long-standing warehouse of body chemistry.
Not only is it resistant to decomposition, but hair can also be used to capture a drug
use history since some drugs can get incorporated into hair as it grows.
Now once the toxicology lab has obtained the samples, they do screening tests.
These are the kind of presumptive tests we talked about in serology, only they're done
in the lab, not in the field.
And these preliminary tests indicate a drug might be present, which then allows the toxicologists
to know what direction to go in for further testing.
These screening tests can sometimes be problematic, though, because some drugs mimic naturally
occurring substances and vice versa.
Examples of common toxicology screening tests include what's called gas chromatography and
enzyme-multiplied immunoassay testing.
Chromatography tests separate mixtures into their chemical constituents based on their
interactions between two different phases.
Gas chromatography uses a solid to a gas phase as it separates drugs and chemicals, but it
also destroys them as it does so.
Immunoassay tests rely on the same types of antibody, antigen reactions we talked about
in serology, like looking for the type and concentration of a hormone in a body fluid
by using the antibodies to that hormone.
Next, the toxicologists will need to extract the drugs for the actual confirmatory testing.
The purposes of extraction are really twofold.
First, to clean up the drug or its metabolites so there aren't other substances present that
could contaminate the testing instruments.
And secondly, extraction concentrates the drug or metabolites so it'll be easier to
detect.
A scientist have honed in on a number of different extraction methods.
The one that's chosen depends on the drug and the body fluid or tissue sample being used.
When investigators need to know precisely what substances are in a mixture and in exactly
what quantities, the current state-of-the-art confirmatory test for most chemicals in drugs
and metabolites is what's called mass spectrometry.
It's often coupled with gas chromatography and mass spectrometry sends a vaporized sample
through an ionization method to charge the molecules in the sample, creating ions.
Then an electromagnetic field is applied, which will separate those resulting ions by
what's called their mass-to-charge ratio.
The ion signals that are created are captured as an image called a mass spectrum that shows
peaks representing the chemicals or drugs or metabolites that were in the original mixture.
Qualitative and semi-quantitative data can then be obtained from the mass spectrum in
that the chemicals in the mixture can be identified by their mass-to-charge ratio and the amount
present can be determined by the strength of the signal.
Toxicologists know the spectrum signatures, if you will, for all types of drugs, including
their metabolites, as well as several types of poisons.
These signatures are different for each type of chemical or drug, and in that sense they're
like drug fingerprints.
A mass spectrometry method can be calibrated with known standards to measure a drug's quantity
in a sample.
Now let's talk a little more about some poisons and how they affect the body using some specific
case examples.
As I alluded to earlier, many drugs or chemicals that are typically innocuous or even helpful
or even those that are helpful to the body can be toxic if they're in excess.
This is even true for substances normally found in the body, like the hormone insulin.
If given in high enough dosage, insulin will lower blood sugar to the point of death.
The first murder conviction for insulin poisoning happened in England in 1957, when the 32-year-old
pregnant wife of a nurse named Kenneth Barlow was found dead in her bathtub of what was
initially suspected to be a drowning.
After investigators found an injection site in each cheek of her buttocks, the surrounding
tissue was excised and removed, and it yielded 84 units of insulin.
And that's just by extraction from the tissue immediately around the wound sites.
Now Mrs. Barlow was not diabetic, and one estimate I read said the amount of insulin
found just in those small tissue samples alone would have been enough of a therapeutic dose
of insulin to last two diabetics for a full day.
Experts assume that Mrs. Barlow probably actually died from drowning, but only either after
losing consciousness from the insulin coma that Barlow induced or because he drowned
her.
In fact, Barlow might have actually gotten away with murder to use that well-worn phrase
if he had left his wife in the couple's bed rather than putting her in the bathtub, which
is what he apparently did.
Police found vomit on the couple's bedsheets and the woman's sweat-soaked pajamas in the
laundry hamper, and both of those symptoms were likely due to the insulin toxicity.
But insulin has a very short half-life, which means it doesn't stick around in the body
for very long before being metabolized, I mean literally on the order of minutes.
So the only reason all that insulin was able to be extracted from Mrs. Barlow's buttocks
was because her death stopped her metabolism, leaving that insulin in her tissues for toxicologists
to find.
Oh, one other thing, during the investigation, coworkers revealed that Mr. Barlow had said
for years that death by insulin would be the perfect murder.
I wonder if he was still saying that during his subsequent 26 years in prison.
Now here's another notorious case.
Many people know that acetaminophen, better known by the brand name Tylenol, causes acute
liver damage and high doses.
But far worse than its potential toxicity was the 1982 case of intentional product tampering
in Chicago, Illinois that cost the lives of seven people.
A person who was still unknown to authorities, so was still potentially at large, apparently
purchased packages of extra strength Tylenol, took them somewhere and introduced potassium
cyanide into some of the capsules.
Then the perpetrator took the containers back to retail stores, put them back on store shelves
and others purchased them.
Investigators quickly figured that was the killer's MO, which means the method of operations,
because the tainted capsules were of different lots and from different manufacturing plants.
Now the first victim was a 12-year-old girl and then an adult man.
Tragically, when that man's relatives gathered for his funeral at the family home before
the source of the poisonings was known, the deceased man's brother and sister-in-law both
took tainted Tylenol from the same bottle and they also died.
So three women also perished before investigators figured out that product tampering was to
blame.
This vicious act of poisoning, known as the Chicago Tylenol murders or simply as timers
by the FBI, prompted new anti-tampering legislation as well as many changes to product packaging
that we've become accustomed to today.
Like so many other lessons we've learned from forensics, this case illustrates another
way in which science, society and the legal system move hand in hand.
Now let's turn our attention to another chemical issue that also has strong relationships to
forensics and that substance abuse.
