In 1981, the Grunner and Jar Publishing House in West Germany paid the U.S. equivalent of
about $2 million for previously undiscovered writings of Adolf Hitler.
Hitler was known to keep diaries during World War II, and it was alleged these writings
were kept in a locked metal box that was being transported by air to Berlin when the plane
carrying them crashed near Dresden in 1945.
There were historical accounts of such a crash to back up this possibility.
The 27-volume Hitler diaries, along with other writings, including what was alleged
to be the third copy of Mein Kampf in existence, were later smuggled out of East Germany.
They had been held by a wealthy collector until being offered to Grunner and Jar by
one of its employees, Newsman Gerhard Heidemann, who broke the story to his boss.
The publishing company decided to authenticate the documents before showcasing them in their
German news magazine Stern and then selling the rights to other publishers, including
Newsweek in the U.S. and The Times newspapers in the U.K.
They had two experts look at the diaries, comparing them to supposedly known documents
of Hitler's handwriting.
Both the diaries and the exemplars were confirmed as having been written by the same person.
The cover story in the April 1983 issue of Stern announced that the magazine's parent
company was in possession of Hitler's diaries.
But since Stern had provided both the diaries and the exemplars for comparison, some people
remained skeptical, so further testing was done.
Ultimately, Dr. Louis Werner of the German police conducted analytical tests that exposed
the hoax.
He determined that the paper used in the diaries contained a whitening agent that only came
into use in 1954, but Hitler had committed suicide in 1945.
Plus, the ink used was less than a year old.
The alleged diaries and exemplars were written by the same person, but it was not Adolf Hitler.
It was actually a small-time criminal named Conrad Kujo who provided them to Newsman
Heidemann.
Both ended up serving nearly four years in jail for embezzlement and forgery.
A handwriting expert who later compared the forgeries to some of Hitler's known writing
said Kujo had not even done a very good job.
In this lecture, we're going to look at what are called question documents.
This includes forgeries by tracing, disguised handwriting, computer manipulation of images,
and examinations of documents that have been altered.
Question document examiners look at money, checks, forms, credit cards, stamps, even
concert and sports tickets.
They may also be asked to examine things like wills, contracts, and deeds for their authenticity.
Document examiners may look for potential falsification of records like a ship's log,
a passport, or other ID, maybe an insurance form or a medical record.
Question document examiners also analyze suicide notes, threatening letters, bank holdup notes,
and written demands for ransom.
A murder scene could have written evidence, sometimes even in blood on a wall or a mirror
or even a body.
Really, any type of written material could prompt investigation by a question document
specialist.
For both handwriting clues and, as we saw with the Hitler forgeries, the materials used
to create the document.
This not only includes papers and inks of all sorts, but also toners used in photocopiers,
print produced by word processors, fax machines, and in the old days, primarily typewriters.
Lots of large law enforcement agencies have document examiners on staff or police officers
trained in document analysis.
At the federal level, the FBI, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Secret Service, the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, the Internal Revenue Service, and the U.S. Postal
Inspection Service, they all have question document labs, military forensic labs, and
some large corporations in the private sector employ document examiners, too.
The two main areas for question document, often just called QD analysis, are handwriting
comparisons, which are much more subjective, and materials examination, which is far more
objective.
Now, let's start by talking about handwriting analysis, which, by the way, is not the same
thing at all as graphology.
You know that pseudoscience that alleges you can tell somebody's personality by their
handwriting?
Handwriting analysis involves looking at the class and individual characteristics in a
person's writing, especially when comparing two writing samples.
All of us who learn to write the same language have similar class characteristics in our
handwriting.
Especially in the past, schools in the U.S. were fond of what's known as the Palmer method
of penmanship, and kids were praised and graded on how precisely their own writing matched
the Palmer copy books.
But as we mature in our writing, most of us develop individual characteristics.
These are variations in our handwriting that depend on things like how often we write,
how fast we write, and even deliberate changes in style as we develop our own writing flair.
I remember the junior high days when girls in particular would add their own little
frilly tweets to their writing.
Handwriting also changes with experience and age, and sometimes physical condition.
For example, elderly people may show shakier handwriting than they did when they were younger.
Culturally styles of cursive writing have changed over time.
As you might notice, if you see a sample of writing from, say, the 1700s, like the U.S.
Declaration of Independence, I've also noticed some minor differences in the handwriting
of friends and colleagues who didn't grow up writing English as their first language
too.
We all know that our casual writing, maybe like a grocery list, might look very different
than what we might put on a form in a doctor's office or the address on an envelope that
we intend to mail.
But generally, there are consistencies in the quirks that mark our handwriting as our
own.
Still, I should point out that things like someone's sex, race, age, health status or
mental condition really can't be ever decisively determined from handwriting.
After 25 years of college teaching, I often think a handwritten paper is from a guy or
girl just by its appearance, and I'm often surprised.
When a document examiner wants to compare handwriting, a known sample called an exemplar
is needed.
Just as we've seen with other comparisons of bullets, hair, DNA and other types of evidence.
And the more known writing examples a QD examiner can get, the better able they'll be to see
the full range of class and individual characteristics, as well as somebody's normal variations.
Exemplar writing can be requested writing, but there are times when the known sample
might need to come from someone who's no longer alive, like we saw in the Hitler Diaries.
To get known exemplars in cases like that, investigators look for pieces of writing
that were executed in the course of everyday life.
Like checks, memos, personal letters, business forms, a diary, a lab journal or some other
kind of work log.
But as we saw in the case of the Hitler forgeries, a QD examiner has to be sure that the known
sample is authentic.
The other problem with requested exemplar writing is that if the person the writing
sample is being taken from happens to be a suspect in a crime, that person is not very
likely to be genuine in his or her handwriting style.
For instance, when somebody is in a police station being asked to give a writing sample
for comparison to a ransom note and he was the author, he'd be foolish not to try to
disguise his handwriting.
I don't even have to think that I need to say I'm making smarter criminals there since
anybody ought to be able to figure that out.
Now there's a standard protocol for obtaining a good requested exemplar.
The investigators should make sure the subject is comfortable and provide optimum writing.
And the same type of writing instrument needs to be used, like a blue gel pen if that's
what it appears was used in the question document.
The same style of writing should be requested, like print for printed question documents
and cursive for cursive.
The exemplar should also be executed on the same kind of paper as much as possible, especially
if it was lined paper.
Now this is important.
The writer should have what's supposed to be written dictated for transcription, rather
than looking at the question document and being asked to copy it.
That not only means the writer can't try to alter his handwriting from what he'd see,
but dictation tends to make it harder for a person to concentrate solely on the act
of writing.
If a bank hold up note said, put all your money in your drawer, into an envelope and
don't hit the alarm.
The investigators should read that same phrase to the person whose writing is being sampled.
But for the best results, that phrase should really be inserted into some longer passage,
and then maybe even just put bits and pieces of the hold up note here and there in a longer
piece of dictation, so that the writing is already flowing when the desired passages
come along.
And if the question document is a check where there's not a lot of text, the subject should
be asked to fill out 10 or 20 checks in a row, so comparisons can be made regarding
signature, spacing, and things like that.
You might want to make your own handwriting sample, and check for things that a document
examiner would look for.
Maybe get a friend or family member to write the same passage for comparison, or grab some
paper right now and transcribe some of what I'm saying right at this moment.
And look to see whether your letters are more rounded or tall and thin.
Is your handwriting consistently small or is it large?
What about the relationships of heights of letters?
Do the tall letters tower over the short letters, or are they all roughly the same height?
Do letters with a bottom loop, such as a lowercase j or g or y, do those consistently
go to the same depth below what would be the line on lined paper?
How about slant?
Are your letters pretty much straight up and down, or do they slant to the left or the right?
And with unlined paper, do the lines of writing tend to creep upward or downward on the page?
Now, how about some finer points, like the direction and shape of beginning and end strokes?
Do yours consistently start at the bottom and loop up for some letters, like a lowercase
l or f, or do you start at the top and omit the first half of the loop?
What about letter connections?
Do you continue from one letter to the next, or do you sometimes have breaks in the middle
of a word?
Do you stop to dot your eyes and cross your T's immediately after you write them, or do
you come back after the words completely written?
Question document examiners also look at things like indentations to see pen pressure, which
can vary depending on the writing instrument and the thickness of the paper or what's under
it.
Some people show very smooth pen movements, but again, that might depend on the writing
tool.
Genuine writing shows smooth, rapid, nonstop and free-flowing motions, and the absence
of any repair and correction kind of strokes, but we all probably knew kids in grade school
that got pretty good at their mom or dad's signature on their papers, right?
Generally, jerky starts and stops can be signs that somebody's trying to duplicate someone
else's handwriting by looking at a copy of it.
Features of fakes include awkward or inconsistent pen movements, as well as letter formations
that are inconsistent throughout.
As forgers slip back into their own penmanship, QD analysts can't always determine who a forger
is, since the individual and class characteristics of the forger are not usually present when
they're trying to forge something.
Investigators can really only say that a document was made by somebody other than the person
who wrote the exemplar.
This doesn't hold true of somebody's deliberately changing their handwriting, like writing with
the opposite hand, or intentionally changing letter construction or slant, but there may
still be clues.
If a person has some kind of impediment, it can also change their writing.
If they're drunk or they're in an unnatural or awkward writing position, like if they're
tied up or writing on a wall, or if they have some kind of injury or illness.
Essentially, what investigators are really looking for, really using no more advanced
technology than magnification, are significant similarities or significant differences.
The more similarities and the fewer differences, the more likely the writer of both documents
is the same person.
But they can't usually eliminate a suspect unless they're physically not capable of producing
the writing, as in the case of a child or an adult, say, who's too ill to hold a pen.
Now let's get on to the more scientific ways that documents are examined, which are more
objective and require more sophisticated testing equipment.
Historically, the only writing methods commonly available to people outside the printing industry
were typewriters.
Although they're not in common use today in developed countries, document examiners may
need to analyze older pieces of writing.
And before photocopiers and computers, typewriting was the bulk of the non-handwriting analytical
work that 2D specialists did.
Since there were many different kinds of typewriters, examiners have reference files for type styles
for different models and manufacturers.
From these, they could narrow some fonts down to a specific brand or time period.
For example, evidence could show a font style or typewriter wasn't in existence at the time
something was supposedly typed.
Like other tools, individual typewriters typically had manufacturing defects in some of their
letters.
Like a small notch in a letter's face that wouldn't hit the typewriter ribbon, so no
ink would be transferred to the page in that little spot.
Gosh, I guess if you're much younger than me, you probably don't have any idea of what
I'm talking about.
But each letter on a typewriter had to be pressed on the keyboard, sending a little bar, called
a type bar, with a raised version of that letter forward, to strike a ribbon full of
ink that would then transfer the ink image onto that paper.
Anyway, sometimes that raised letter on the type bar would have a defect, either a notch
out of it that would leave a void on the printed letter, or maybe a small bit of extra metal
from the manufacturing process that would give that particular letter a little bump or a
tail when it appeared on the paper.
Sometimes a typewriter would age, it could also develop useware patterns, like any other
tool.
Like if a kid played with a typewriter and hit a bunch of keys at once, it would send
a whole flock of typebars crashing into each other, I bet some of you remember doing that.
And as a result, the older and less cared for a typewriter was, the more unique features
it would have.
Analysts would use these unique characteristics to eliminate a typewriter, and then in theory,
as owner or user, or keep a typewriter and possibly a person in a list of suspects.
These defects were more common with the older manual typewriters that used those typebars.
The next generation of typewriters were electric, and used a small metal sphere with all the
letters on it that would spin to the correct spot and then imprint the letter on the page
when a key was pressed.
Those typewriter balls could be easily changed out on a typewriter though, and if that happened,
it would be impossible for a QD examiner to get a match between a typewriter and a question
document, unless they were able to locate the exact typewriter ball that was used.
Investigators also had ways to tell if everything on a page was typed at the same time, for
example to determine if a wheel had been altered after it was written.
Examiners could look for alignment issues on the page using a glass plate with a grid
etched onto it.
Since paper was fed manually into typewriters, it would be really difficult to insert the
same page into the machine two different times and with perfect horizontal and vertical alignment.
Examiners could also check how lines of ink matched.
A newly inked ribbon would make a darker type than an older ribbon.
Now today, printers and copiers have revolutionized the way documents are produced.
It only has this change the way words are put on a page, but it's also enabled people
to add images to a document, unlike a typewriter.
Many of us have seen the generations of computer printers go from dot matrix to inkjet and
then laser printers.
With the old dot matrix printers, characters were formed by putting down small dots of ink
to form each letter.
You could easily see the dots in what was called a nine-pin dot matrix printer since
they were larger and further apart.
But with the more advanced 24-pin dot matrix printers, it was harder to see the individual
dots.
In either case, sometimes an individual pin could have a defect that might be unique
to that one machine, but this wasn't nearly as common as the defects on typewriters were.
Inkjet printers, just like the name implies, shoot ink onto a page to produce an image
or characters.
They can sometimes have slight individualizing features, but not often and not many.
Some might have a slight spattering of ink that happens when the ink comes out of the
cartridge, but paper texture can affect the amount of spattering too, so that really complicates
looking at a spatter pattern as a signature defect to identify a specific inkjet printer.
Investigators can't use printer fonts to determine manufacturers, since many brands all have the
same font options that we can select on our computers.
As a result, it's almost impossible to determine if a document was printed on a specific inkjet
printer.
Laser printers work sort of like copiers.
The image of the text or whatever else is electronically created on the printer's drum.
Then toner sticks to the electronic image and is transferred to the paper, and then heated
briefly so it will stick to the paper.
Sometimes it's hard to figure out whether a document was produced on a laser printer
or a copier, or if a document is an original from a printer or a photocopy.
Like inkjets, you can't use laser printer fonts to determine manufacturer or determine
if a document was printed on a specific printer.
There I go, making smarter criminals again.
Now the machinery that moves paper through a photocopier though, that can sometimes leave
small indentations and other marks that can point to a specific manufacturer.
Individual copiers can also have defects that will appear repeatedly on copies.
These can link a specific document to a specific copier, at least until it's fixed.
If you work in an office, you've seen these defects like black or white lines across the
pages, smudges, or black spots, little specs that QD examiners call trash marks.
One complicating thing is that each time a page is run through a copier, it can pick
up new defects.
And it's hard to determine whether a question document is an original or a copy, or even
a copy of a copy.
A second generation photocopy will show the defects of both copiers, and it's nearly impossible
to tell which came first.
As with the alleged Hitler Diaries, question document examiners can also look at the composition
and other identifying features of paper too.
We've all seen fancy paper that has a watermark on it.
Chemical watermarks are put in after the paper's made, but mechanical watermarks are
impressed on the paper during manufacturing, and are sometimes coded for quality control.
If that's the case, not only can the brand be determined, but also when the paper was
made.
Some types of paper also vary in how they fluoresce under UV light, and have a variety
of fiber types and fiber contents in them.
The fiber content will affect the way paper absorbs ink, and the way it reacts to certain
chemical tests.
Two pieces of paper can look completely identical to the naked eye, but under the microscope
or in the lab, they can look or react very differently.
Maybe somebody tries to insert a new page into a stapled, multi-page document like
a contract.
Investigators can look at the staple holes for alignment.
They can even look at the paper type and thickness.
There are these measuring tools called micrometers that can judge the differences of paper thickness
down to the thousands of an inch.
And although there are standard width and height sizes to papers like 8.5 by 11, there
can actually be very slight differences in the true size based on the machinery that
cut the paper into reams.
So if a page doesn't match the rest of a document, that might be suspicious.
Multiple pages, as in a notebook, can show indented writing.
You've probably seen that yourself on a pad of paper where you tear off the sheet you
wrote on, and you see the indentations of what you wrote on the sheet below it.
In the movies, they always show the detective rubbing the side of a pencil over the surface
to see what was written.
But that will not only ruin the paper for fingerprinting, it can actually smooth out
the indentations.
As we saw with other kinds of impression evidence, sidelighting and photography work a lot better.
An electrostatic device, like the one I talked about in the shoe print lecture, that's the
latest thing for recovering indented writing.
They put a thin piece of plastic and hold it onto the document by a vacuum.
And then together, the paper and plastic are put in an electrostatic box.
The plastics then electrically charged and then dusted with black toner that sticks to
the plastic sheet where the indentations are.
And this creates a replica, and then the plastic sheet can be peeled off the paper and preserved
as evidence of the indented writing.
Another key in the Hitler Diaries was the ink.
As you can imagine, there are all types of chemicals in different types of inks.
Question document examiners have all kinds of analytical methods.
But you have to consider that many chemical tests are destructive, and you can't just
destroy a bunch of evidence to validate your suspicions.
I mean, what if those were Hitler's Diaries?
You can't just pull a page out and put it in a vat of chemicals.
So as we've seen before, investigators start with the least damaging methods.
Different lighting, like UV and infrared, can show ink differences, say if any part
of the writing on a page wasn't done with the exact same ink.
If an extra zero is added to a check to turn a hundred bucks into a thousand bucks, or
a loop added to the top of a one to turn it into a nine.
Certain photographic techniques can be useful too.
These types of non-destructive tests can detect mechanical or chemical erasures too.
Investigators might not be able to see exactly what was erased, but they can see that something
was altered.
After non-destructive tests are completed, then chemical tests can be done.
And it doesn't mean destroying a whole page.
QD examiners or chemists can use a hypodermic needle to take a tiny punch out of a piece
of paper that has the ink on it.
Then they can use chromatography tests, like those we mentioned with fiber evidence, that
can separate the subcomponents in a chemical mixture.
There are lots of chromatography procedures, but there's a simple one you can try for yourself.
Now you'll need a small amount of rubbing alcohol as your first solvent, and then two
tall, skinny containers.
We use test tubes in my class, but anything will do, like a drinking glass or a plastic
party cup.
If you have now polished remover, that would make a cool comparison.
But if not, just use water as your second solvent.
Now next get three pens that all have the same color of ink, like three black ink pens,
maybe one with permanent ink, a gel pen, and a regular black ballpoint.
But really, any three pens of the same color ink will do.
And don't put your solvents into your two containers yet, they'll evaporate, and that's
the point.
Okay, now you'll need six strips of paper.
You can use any paper, but a coffee filter would work well.
Cut the paper into six strips, each about five inches long and maybe three-four-seven
inch wide.
Now take one of your pens and color a small circle of ink near the bottom of each one
of those, about an inch from the bottom.
Repeat that using your second pen on two other strips, your third pen on your last two strips.
And so you'll wind up with six strips.
To keep them straight, you may want to make a code for yourself by writing pen one at
the very top of your first two strips, pen two at the top of your second two, and then
pen three on your last two.
So what you should wind up with is two identical sets of three strips each, one for each pen.
Now separate those sets so that you have three types ready for one solvent and your other
three ink strips ready for the second solvent.
Okay, now it's time to put the solvents into your containers, but this is important.
Only put about a half inch of the rubbing alcohol into one container and a half inch
of the nail polish remover or water into the other one.
You don't want to let the level of the solvent reach as high as the ink dots that you drew
on the paper.
Now put the dot end of each strip set into each solvent, but don't let the three strips
for pens one, two, and three touch each other.
Lean them up against different parts of the inside of the glass, and then you should quickly
see the solvents climb up the paper and then reach your ink and then hopefully separate
some of the chemicals in the ink into a fan of colors that will rise up on the paper.
If so, you've seen a simple demonstration of chromatography.
Now of course forensic labs use much more sophisticated chemical analyzers, including
different kinds of spectrometry devices like the ones we talked about in our toxicology
discussion.
But this gives you some insight into the ways papers and inks in suspected forgeries can
be tested that are not subjective like handwriting analysis is.
Forgeries are common and no doubt as old as writing itself.
In fact, during the Middle Ages, a forgery called the Donation of Constantine changed
the course of history as we know it.
This document, allegedly written in the fourth century by Constantine the Great and sent
to Pope Sylvester I, describes the Emperor Constantine's conversion to Christianity
and gives the Pope and his successors dominion over all of Italy and the Western Roman Empire
as well as Judea, Greece, Asia, and Africa.
The only land Constantine wanted to keep was the Eastern Roman Empire where Constantinople
had been established.
Now Constantine's conversion is a historical fact, but the letter was probably actually
written between 750 and 800 A.D. by a church official 350 more years after it was supposedly
sent.
That forgery was used for many years by various popes to assert political and spiritual power
including against Charlemagne.
Its authenticity was questioned even as early as 1054, but the donation of Constantine was
not officially shown to be a fake until 1440 when Italian humanist Lorenzo Valla exposed
it by a detailed linguistic examination, illustrating that because language changes over time, linguistic
discrepancies are yet another way that forgeries can be exposed.
