In our last lecture, we looked at the way in which forensic examiners analyze suspicious
documents for their authenticity.
But when you think about it, so much of what used to be information on a page that you
could hold in your hand has gone digital, as they say.
Sure, there are still plenty of paper documents around today, but email, electronic record
keeping, and online banking have made some of what question document examiners do nearly
obsolete or certainly limited its use.
The science of computer forensics has really taken off over the past couple of decades because
so much of our communication traffic today happens on computers and over the internet.
Forensic computer science does concern identifying and extracting digital evidence of criminal
activity, but with the proliferation of technology in this area, including cell phones, two-way
pagers, cameras, GPS units, fax machines, and all kinds of other electronic gear, the
current trend is to refer to analysis of evidence like this as digital forensics.
When you think about it, crimes that used to require the perpetrator to commit them
in person, or at least by some physical transfer of information, like a bank holdup note or
a letter demanding ransom, well those kinds of crimes can now be carried out remotely.
Fraud, identity theft, embezzlement, they can be accomplished using a computer and the
internet.
Hackers can break the security measures of large corporations and electronically siphon
money from them or steal their customers bank codes or credit card numbers.
Plans for a robbery or homicide could be stored on a computer and a kidnapper could send
a ransom note by a computer or other digital device.
We've all heard of cases of cyberbullying, child pornography, sent across the internet
and predators using social networking sites to lure their prey.
Law enforcement has even taken advantage of some of the anonymity inherent to those crimes
by posing as potential victims or consumers of illegal images or stolen goods in order
to catch the perpetrators of these kinds of offenses.
And social networking and other websites have had to enact safeguards to help their users
defend themselves from abuse.
But sometimes it's hard to know what somebody else is doing with your information.
In order to investigate digital crime, somebody first needs to realize that it's happened.
I mean this isn't like a bank hold up where an alarm gets instantly pushed.
It might take weeks or even months before a person or organization becomes aware of
a security issue.
The initial analysis also has to show that whatever happened is really a criminal act.
I mean there's always the possibility that an error like a programming glitch or a simple
human mistake caused something like the diversion of funds.
Next, investigators have to get to the source of the damage and figure out where the incident
originated.
In other words, what computer or phone or other device was attacked and how.
They'll have to figure out the path the perpetrator used to get to the server or the victim's
computer.
Was it over the internet?
Did they use a wireless network?
Or did somebody physically attach a USB drive to a computer or put a CD into it?
Investigators will also start to look at the victim to make sure they understand why this
person or organization was attacked, which might help them figure out motive so then
they can start to hone in on possible suspects.
For instance, somebody hacking into a government website might have political motivations.
But an attack on a pharmaceutical corporation could result from something like competition
or a desire to harm the company's reputation.
Targeting a single person's bank account would lead investigators down a different path than
if the credit card numbers of all consumers doing business with a certain website were
stolen.
Now of course, some major computer geeks are going to be involved in these kinds of investigations.
But let me point out that they don't work alone.
Depending on the incident, the analysis team might include law enforcement officers, maybe
some with a background in white collar crime, and they'll use standard investigative methods
out in the community at large, like interviewing.
The situation might call for auditors to sift through records to figure out how money was
moved from one account to another or things like that.
Did you know there are specialists called forensic accountants?
There are being counters specially trained to look for irregularities in accounting practices
that might indicate embezzlement, fraud, or the kind of illegal activity that's sometimes
called cooking the books.
And the computer scientists involved in these investigations may be specialists in security
issues who will look at the strengths and the weaknesses of the computer systems involved,
or maybe those who can read computer code to figure out how the problem occurred.
If the crime was something more like cyber bullying, investigators really need to focus
on the victim's daily interactions because these types of crimes usually hit very close
to home and often quickly point a finger at a possible suspect.
If it's an elderly person or somebody else who's been targeted by a fishing scam or maybe
a lonely heart scheme, then interviewing the victim and figuring out what they may have
done that opened their vulnerability to that kind of crime is important.
Did the victim answer an email and give their account number because they mistakenly thought
the message had come from the bank, those sorts of things?
But beyond interview and other standard police investigation techniques, let's see how the
technology itself is used to track down the suspect.
The computer experts will start performing what's called a trace back to get them to
the source computer.
In other words, they'll see if the trail of internet provider addresses, called IP addresses,
can be followed back to a suspect, or at least to a specific computer.
They'll also check the records of the attacked computer for its system documentation and
its computer logs.
In each step in the trail of digital evidence, authorities can continue to use routine policing.
They might interview the witnesses who first noticed the incident, maybe somebody at a
library or a school computer lab where the perpetrator might have tried to use a public
computer for the attack, or they can check surveillance tapes at a facility.
If they hone in on the suspect, officers might interview that person's associates or family
to find out what they might know.
One of the main things investigators look for in analyzing these and other types of
crimes is motive.
Did this suspect have a motive?
And if so, what was it?
Some computer security violations are done simply out of curiosity.
We've all heard about teenage hackers who breach government or corporate network security
just to show they can.
Ironically, just as soon as they finish their criminal sentence, many of those hackers
are quickly hired as computer security specialists.
This leads into another common motive, and that's money.
Many if not most computer security breaches, internet scams, and website hacking are done
for financial gain.
Maybe those young hackers realize if they disable some company's security system for
kicks the first time around, that will become the first entry on their resume, and they'll
ultimately make a lot of money later to prevent those kind of breaches.
Motives aren't always discreet entities, and some digital crimes are committed for power
or leverage over someone or an institution, or maybe to get revenge against them in some
way.
Other offenses relate to lust or other emotional issues, and these can be pathological drives
or normal feelings that get out of hand, just like any other criminal activity.
You need to always consider, though, that just because a person has a motive doesn't
mean they would do whatever happened in a case.
Okay, once an investigation has led to a suspect, experts have to figure out whether that person
has the knowledge and the means to carry out the digital crime that's been committed.
And this is different from many other crimes when you think about it, because anybody can
theoretically walk into a bank and commit a robbery with or without a weapon, since some
holdups have been carried out with very realistic looking toy guns, or just the threat of a
weapon when one's not really present at all.
But it takes some real know-how to disable serious computer security measures.
Investigators might need to reconstruct the technological crime to help them figure out
what skill level was needed to execute it.
Once they've done that, they can look into the background of the suspect to see if that
person really could carry it off.
Not all computer hackers have extensive formal training, though.
I mean, some of these are not much more than self-taught computer jockey kids who could
probably go really far in life if they were just on the right track.
The next step in looking at the suspect is to figure out if they have the access to commit
the crime.
This can be hard to pinpoint.
Some of these hackers have developed viruses that have delayed effects, or things that
are called logic bombs that will go off as it were later when some programs executed
or some software is run.
Smart digital predators can also alter computer logs to give a false picture of when that
security breach actually took place.
And then when you consider how long it might take for a digital crime to be uncovered,
there might be a lot of computer activity that will have to be waded through to get to the
bottom of things.
So unless digital investigators can match a login time to an event, or maybe in the
case of cyberbullying or child pornography catch the offender when they're online and
in the act, it can be very difficult to know when the crime actually took place.
As part of monitoring suspects, investigators can do surveillance, either by watching the
person and his or her activities, or hanging around online conducting surveillance electronically.
Let's say police suspect a certain guy is soliciting minors for sex.
Well, they can sit at a computer and pretend to be the victim, or another target themselves.
But in the meantime, if other investigators are watching the suspect, and he's a construction
worker who's up on a girder at a job site at the time, he's probably not their guy.
Of course, smartphones with internet capability can complicate assessing a person's physical
location as an alibi these days.
But all these devices leave a digital trail, as we'll see in a little bit.
In order to collect, analyze, and preserve digital evidence, authorities will need to
get a search warrant and then execute it by looking through the suspect's home computer,
work computer, or what other device could be involved.
A search warrant has to be specific, and it really sets and limits the scope of an examination.
Now suppose a warrant is written looking for a computer that may have child pornography
stored on it.
But while they're in the suspect's house, investigators find a bunch of old video tapes.
Well, the warrant doesn't cover those.
That's a fourth amendment thing we'll talk about in another lecture.
But search warrants have to be carefully considered and may need to be written inclusive of all
digital storage devices and media, for example.
Because of the privacy issues involved, when computer technology really took off in the
public, laws arose to regulate and govern electronic media, and the ability for authorities
to monitor and investigate what people do with their digital communication devices.
These laws include the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Electronic Communications
Privacy Act of 1986, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998, and the one most of
us have probably heard of, the USA Patriot Act of 2001.
You might not realize, though, that the name USA Patriot is really a ten-letter acronym
that stands for Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required
to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism.
It was a response by the George W. Bush administration to the September 11 attacks on the United
States.
Then in 2011, Barack Obama granted a four-year extension of certain aspects of the Patriot
Act, including surveillance of suspects, wiretaps, and business record searching in any situations
where terrorist activities are suspect.
Once legal constraints to search are met, digital investigators can begin collecting
evidence off of source and target computers or from a computer network.
Collecting digital evidence can be a risky operation because data can be accidentally
overwritten or lost while trying to retrieve it.
Any alterations in data can change its meaning, and critical pieces of information like the
characters in a password can be erased while mining data.
Now, I'm no computer expert, but here's the way it's been explained to me.
The computer they're working on has to be left on while investigators are looking at
it, because a shutdown can sometimes overwrite any evidence that's in temporary storage,
as we'll see in a bit.
Investigators have to disconnect the computer from its modem, but leave both of them on.
It's because of the chance that the computer's owner could be monitoring things remotely and
see that a remote session is happening on his computer.
If the modem is left connected to the computer, the suspect could dial in or come in through
the network and destroy evidence right there in real time.
We've seen that done on TV shows and in movies.
The phone that's connected to a modem might contain the last number dialed, or a list
of commonly called numbers or other digital evidence that might be important, too.
Investigators also need to be careful of business computers that are networked.
Disconnecting one computer from its network might cause that computer to start hunting
around and then potentially add additional unwanted data in its memory.
In advance of data collection, investigators will usually work with the companies, system
administrators and IT people, to be sure they know how things are set up and what might
happen when they start tinkering around with a victim or a suspect computer.
And if this is a really clandestine search where investigators want to look at a suspect's
computer, maybe in a case of terrorism, but they don't want to tip their hand, they might
review a guy's computer while he's off doing something else.
If they're doing that kind of investigation, they'll have to sketch or photograph the entire
computer and modem setup at the guy's house or wherever it is so they can get the information
they need and then reassemble everything exactly the way they found it.
Heck, that sounds like a good idea whenever you take something electronic apart.
I can never figure out which cable Jack was supposed to go into what port myself.
Now remember, like other forms of forensic evidence, if digital data isn't handled appropriately
or the legal grounds for obtaining it aren't met, that evidence might not hold up in court
under scrutiny someday.
Proper evidence collection procedures in a good chain of custody must be maintained every
step of the way for digital evidence, just as with more tangible things like fingerprints,
fibers or question documents.
But how do you do that on something like a computer?
Well, the number one rule for digital investigators is pretty much the same as it is for all of
us who use computers, and that's to make a backup copy of whatever you're working on.
So the first step of forensic analysts who need to look through computer files for evidence
is to make themselves a working copy.
Once digital files can be destroyed, changed or damaged, either on purpose or as some of
us know all too well completely by accident, it's imperative that the original data stays
intact while investigators work from a copy.
This way if something does happen, they'll always have the original data files to go
back to to create another working copy.
Keeping the original data intact also allows it to be presented later in its original
condition if that's necessary in court someday.
I mean, this is really analogous to taking photographs of the crime scene when you really
think about it.
In order to make a working copy, the digital media has to be first placed on a special
examination computer or linked to a device that prevents any new data from being added,
whether it's on a computer hard drive or another storage device.
Computers have different ways to copy the data off a drive, but they're the same types
of data transfer technologies the rest of us use, USB connectors, computer fire wires
and what are called scuzzies, which is really just the pronunciation of the acronym SCSI,
which stands for Small Computer System Interface.
I mean, there are only so many ways to enter out of today's computers, right?
Whether the digital forensic people copy or as they say, image the evidence, that first
copy is what they call their working copy master, which then they archive.
Other copies are made from that first download and it's those versions investigators actually
work on while the working copy master is safely stored.
If one of the versions they're analyzing gets corrupted in the process of going through
the evidence, investigators can make a fresh copy from the archived working copy master
without having to go back to the original device where the evidence came from in the
first place.
Essentially, the technology itself keeps the chain of custody for the working copy master
and all versions made from it right there within the device they're using to analyze
the digital evidence.
Digital devices, time and date stamp things automatically.
We're used to that in our own personal computer use.
As we'll see in a bit, this is the same technology that allows police to follow the chain of events
in digital crimes.
To make sure the data in each copy generation is an exact duplicate of the original, computer
analysts can use what's called a hash function.
It's a special computer program that converts the data into whole numbers and adds those
numbers up.
If the hash sum that's generated matches between a copy and the document it was made
from, investigators know the copy is a true and identical reflection of the original file.
Now, we've all heard that data, at least some data, can often be retrieved from computer
storage even after a person thinks it's been deleted.
That's because of the way data is written to a hard drive.
So to understand that, let's talk about how data is stored using the example of a typical
MS-DOS type file system hard drive.
Now computer systems do differ slightly, but the basics are the same.
The storage disk in the hard drive is kind of like an old record album that records data
on a circular track, but the entire disk drive is divided like a pie into units called sectors.
Now the area where a circular track of data is contained in a particular sector is called
a track sector, but the actual data itself gets written in what's called a cluster which
is a series of contiguous track sectors.
When a disk is newly formatted, files tend to be written on contiguous clusters, but
over time the disk begins to fill up with files of all sizes, some are large and some
are small.
If the computer attempts to store a large file and there's not enough room in a cluster
to fit all the information in, the computer will break the file up to put some of it in
other available clusters, which may or may not be adjacent to the first cluster the computer
used for that first part of the file.
When this happens, the hard drive disk is said to be fragmented, since the files are
fragmented over the storage space.
Okay, now any unfilled clusters that have smaller files in them have leftover space
that computer jockeys call slack space.
When somebody tries to save a new file, the operating system won't use up the slack space
in a cluster, it'll go to a new cluster.
Now we can't generally find or access our slack space to see what's in it or to put
things in it, but our computer can.
It dumps all kinds of stuff into slack space when it tries to clear its memory or do its
other internal tasks that are way beyond my understanding of computers, but that's the
reason when we think data is deleted and gone, it may really still be sitting there in some
piece of slack space.
Computer forensic experts have special software tools that let them access computer slack
space and see what's in it, but that same slack space can also be a security risk on
a computer because it might hold something like the original unencrypted version of some
text or numbers that a security software package would encrypt before sending over the internet.
So computer slack space might be a great place for forensic investigators to search for files
somebody thought were gone from the computer memory, but it also may be a place where hackers
can find unsecured data to exploit like people's credit card numbers.
Slack space on a computer hard drive is also where a computer automatically saves temporary
versions of files.
As computer users, these are a great resource to many of us if there's a system crash.
Since the computer can go back to its slack space and recover the last version of a document
or a spreadsheet, it held in temporary memory, even if we were unable to save or we can't
retrieve that final version.
But again, if the temporary version of the computer file held information important or
sensitive data, that information may still be in slack space for a digital criminal to
find, even if the document or spreadsheet was password protected.
Okay, that's just one example of the ways computers store information that we can't see
or access.
The way computers use their storage space, things that we think we've deleted a while
back may actually still be completely intact if that portion of the disk space wasn't ultimately
rewritten over by a new file.
The general user can't necessarily easily get to the deleted document or the spreadsheet,
but that doesn't mean that information is really gone.
Computer forensic experts, just like some savvy computer techs at businesses and other
institutions, know different ways to get that information out of storage, even sometimes
after it's been intentionally deleted.
But so do computer hackers and other data thieves.
Okay, back to the investigation.
To find data on a piece of computer hardware or get into a file that's in slack storage,
computer forensics experts use some of the same search features that we would use on
our own computers.
They can search their working copy of the computer files by browsing, which is opening
up individual files to see what's in them.
Or they can do a keyword search that will look for things within documents.
But savvy computer criminals and terrorists will often use code words to deflect these
kinds of keyword searches.
Researchers can use what are called metadata searches.
These find information about a file, like who created it, when it was created, who it
was sent to, when it was received.
Metadata information can also help develop a timeline of the crime, which might show
opportunity or negate a suspect's alibi.
Automatic log searches are searches created by computer programs to record activity.
This will show when someone was online or when a file was moved from one place on the
computer into another folder, things like that.
But for metadata and automatic log searches, the forensic investigators will need to make
sure the time-date stamp on the computer's internal clock matches.
But computers, as I said earlier, are only one part of the digital picture.
Some of the same investigative tools are used to look for crimes involving credit card readers,
electronic banking, the piracy of software, music and videos.
Offenses committed electronically can include money laundering, identity theft, and altering
medical records or insurance claims.
But it's not just property crimes that leave digital clues.
So can violent acts like kidnapping and even murder.
So in the time we have left, let's look at another way that digital evidence from the
latest technology can help solve crimes.
In the Atlanta, Georgia suburb of Buford in December of 2004, a 7-year-old boy awoke
to find his mother shot in her bed.
Alone in the house with his 5-year-old brother, he went to a neighbor.
The deceased woman was 33-year-old Jennifer Corbin, whose husband, dentist Dr. Barton Corbin,
had filed for divorce just a few days before, indicating he wanted custody of their two
sons and the family home.
When police contacted Barton Corbin, he claimed to be nowhere near the house when his wife
had been shot, which death investigators estimate happened around 2 o'clock in the morning.
The case looked potentially to be the suicide of a woman about to lose everything she loved.
The Corbin said he had been at a restaurant the night before with some of his friends,
and then he went to his brother's house by 1.30 in the morning where he stayed the rest
of the night.
But digital forensic experts pulled the records of Corbin's cell phone and were able to see
that two calls were made from Corbin's phone around 2 o'clock in the morning.
And because of the global positioning satellite chip each cell phone carries, the calls could
be shown to have bounced off a cell phone tower in the vicinity of the Corbin family
home where Mrs. Corbin was found dead.
Not only that, but investigators were able to use cell phone tracking to hone in on a
couple of other calls that were placed later that same night from Corbin's phone.
This time the cell signals had used the tower near his brother's house.
It wasn't a great distance between the home where Jennifer Corbin had been shot and where
Corbin's brother lived, but because there were a few cell phone towers in between those
two locations, investigators were able to see that there was no what they call handoff
or bleed of the cell signal from either of those implicated towers to another.
Now that evidence really threw Corbin's alibi into a tailspin.
But the digital forensic experts weren't finished in this case.
They went back further into Corbin's cell phone logs and using the GPS records of the
towers his phone was hitting off of during the days before, they learned that Corbin
had traveled to Alabama a few days prior to his wife's death.
Next, using the log of the calls Corbin placed in Alabama, they checked who the phone numbers
belonged to and the digital trail led them to an old friend of Corbin's who he'd gone
to see.
When Corbin's Alabama buddy was questioned, he admitted to giving Corbin a handgun on
that visit.
That gun turned out to be the murder weapon.
And that's not even the end of the story.
Investigators learned that Barton Corbin had also been questioned 14 years before the death
of his wife in another apparent suicide.
This time the victim, who apparently shot herself, was a young dental student named
Dolly Hearn who incidentally had just broken up with Corbin while the couple was in dental
school.
When faced with questioning again, Corbin admitted to Dolly Hearn's murder and because
of the digital evidence in his wife's killing and the similarity to the 1990 offense, he
pled guilty to both of those crimes.
Investigators at the time of Dolly Hearn's murder said that Corbin also had an alibi
that involved making phone calls from a certain place at a certain time.
But back in 1990, this type of digital tracking wasn't available to law enforcement and Corbin
couldn't be definitively linked to Hearn's death.
So what has the digital age brought forensics?
It's shown criminals that when it comes to computers, you can delete but not always destroy.
And when it comes to cell phones, you can run but you can't hide.
