Many causes of death and injury are as old as human history, like knife wounds and poisons,
whether they were intentional, accidental, or suicidal.
The deaths due to motor vehicle accidents are only as old as the invention of transportation
methods driven by machines.
Sure there were deaths in the past from horse and buggy collisions or falling off a chariot,
but there's no way those had the same impact, and I didn't mean that as a pun, as a crash
of a 747 jetliner or a subway train.
But most of today's motor vehicle accidents still involve personal vehicles like cars,
trucks, motorcycles, and other recreational vehicles.
Automobile-type vehicles with steam engines go back to the late 18th century, and internal
combustion engines develop shortly after the turn of the 19th century.
But it wasn't until 1885 that gasoline-powered engines were introduced.
By 15 years later, in 1900, only about 8,000 cars were registered in the United States.
But by 1915, there were over 2.3 million cars on the developing U.S. road system.
The earliest motor vehicle accidents probably involve cars running into things other than
each other, like buildings and unfortunate people.
But as the popularity and availability of cars increased, so then did the frequency
of motor vehicle accidents.
Today, there are over 250 million registered passenger vehicles in the United States alone.
Over half of those are cars, and the rest are SUVs, light trucks, motorcycles, things
like that.
The number of accidents per capita varies depending on location, with city streets being
safer than country roads.
But that's based on federal data involving fatal crashes when comparing population-based
to miles driven.
Lots of factors are behind that generalization, including lower speed limits in cities, more
traffic control devices like stoplights and one-way streets, as well as shorter distances
to emergency medical treatment in cities when compared to rural areas.
At the same time, safety improvements have decreased fatalities for motor vehicle accidents
significantly.
In the last three decades of the 20th century, between about 1970 and the year 2000, the
death rate from traffic accidents was cut by 50%.
The decline seems to relate to three main factors.
First, a dramatic increase in seatbelt and child car seat use.
Second, a major reduction in drunk driving.
And third, the effort to redesign safer vehicles by car companies.
Some of the changes relate to legislation, like seatbelt laws and much tougher penalties
for drunk driving.
Some of the decrease relates to social activism, including public service announcements and
national organizations like Mothers Against Drunk Driving.
And I'm sure those of you who are my age or older remember the sharp points and the metal
interiors of the cars of the 1950s and 60s.
And so you recognize the drastic improvements in the safety features of cars, like shoulder
belt seat restraints and airbags, safety glass, laminated windshields and child car seats.
I remember my little brother's car seat was not much more than a few straps of cloth.
They were tied to this bare metal frame that hooked over the back of the bench seat in
front of my mom's big old turquoise blue 1960s station wagon.
You know, the ones with the fins on the back of it.
She'd sit him in that little car seat right next to her in the front seat.
And in hindsight, it seems like it wasn't really much more than an aiming device to
send the poor kid through the front windshield if an accident did happen.
We also have to consider that some of the changes were probably brought about because
of lawsuits among insurance companies or lawsuits against car manufacturers.
One estimate I read suggested that economic losses from motor vehicle accidents in the
U.S. are about $200 billion a year.
And a third of that is still related to alcohol crashes involving alcohol.
That total considers not only all the legal, medical and funeral costs, but also property
damage and lost wages of the people involved.
Lastly, I want to mention some of the most common causes of vehicular accidents other
than impaired driving from the influence of alcohol or other drugs.
These include whether people were injured, killed or not.
And those top causes are right-of-way mistakes, failure to yield, excessive speed, following
too close, disregarding traffic signals, and other things they call imprudent driving styles.
Interestingly, equipment failure is not a significant cause of motor vehicle accidents.
While I'm rattling off statistics, let me mention a relatively recent breakdown of the
kinds of car accidents that do result in fatalities.
Almost half of fatal accidents are collisions between vehicles, as you might expect.
But another quarter of the fatal accidents are collisions with fixed objects like telephone
poles, overpass and bridge supports and trees.
A little over 10% of the fatalities involve pedestrians being struck by a car.
And just over 10% are considered non-collisions, awful things like going off a cliff.
Accidents involving bikes, scooters and the like cause about 2% of the traffic fatalities.
And accidents with trains are about 1%.
Now I live in an area with a high-deer population, so I was curious to see the percent of human
accident fatalities due to collisions with animals.
And it was only 0.2%.
Because so many of us drive and have the potential to be in traffic accidents way more so than
being robbed or assaulted, I think it's important that we talk about the forensics of vehicle
accidents in this series.
So let's get on to the science.
Some of you math and physics geeks out there probably already realize that the analysis
of motor vehicle accidents, often just called MVAs, involves Newton's laws of motion as
well as the application of some particular laws of physics, namely conservation of energy
and conservation of momentum.
But the data investigators use comes from specific and more familiar things at the scene of an
accident.
Things like the length of skid marks, the positions where vehicles come to rest after
the accident, the direction they were traveling in before the accident, and the point of impact
if it can be figured out.
So to gather this kind of data, the law enforcement officer who documents a scene has to create
the equivalent of a crime scene sketch of the whole area, complete with accurate measurements.
He or she will also have to look at the damage to the vehicles and other objects involved.
So the investigator needs to note the location of any crash debris, look for impact and paint
transfer evidence on both cars, and to try to assess the roadworthiness of the vehicles
involved both before and after the accident.
The investigating team will have to note things like road conditions and weather conditions
at the time of the accident, as well as to figure out the mental and physical conditions
of the drivers involved.
To complicate matters even more, all this has to be done after any injured victims are
attended to, and a roadblock or a safety tour is established for other vehicles in the vicinity.
I'll think about that the next time you're sitting in traffic cursing the fact that you're
being delayed because of an accident, there's a lot going on, and a lot that needs to go
on before the scene can be released again to the general public, especially if the accident
is serious involves fatalities.
Now if you've ever been in or witnessed an accident, you recognize that time and speed
are really difficult to judge when you're there in that moment.
I mean how many of us have thought we were driving the speed limit, only to look down
at the speedometer and realize, woo, I'm 10 miles over.
In accidents it's typical that each driver under-represents his own speed and over-represents
the speed of any other vehicle involved.
We've all seen how different people can judge the same event, depending on their perspective
or their involvement, like whether the light was green, yellow, or red when a car went
through it.
We'll talk a lot more about eyewitness testimony in another lecture, but obviously that's
going to be a factor when witnesses to an accident are being interviewed.
Now what's interesting to me about accident reconstruction is that the forensic engineers
that actually do the calculations to reconstruct what happened, well they're seldom if ever
at the scene of the accident just after it occurs.
They might be crunching the data weeks after the accident or maybe even years later if
they're offering a second opinion before a trial for instance.
Forensic engineers often have to base their analysis after the fact, using the accident
report from the investigating scene officers, using photographs taken by police or insurance
estimators, the vehicles or what's left of them in a junkyard or salvage lot, as well
as the statements of drivers or witnesses.
And if a car is being examined at the place where it ended up being towed, it can be significantly
different than it was at the time of the accident.
That's because doors might have to be removed to rescue a victim, towing could have meant
replacing a flat tire, or a break in at the junkyard might have stripped parts off the
car that could be important to the analysis.
Do you remember some of the basics of physical science?
We only need a couple of them here.
To start off with, we need to remember that kinetic energy is the energy of motion.
And work and physics is the force needed to overcome resistance and produce change.
Now when a vehicle's not moving, it has no kinetic energy.
And when it is moving, it has kinetic energy related to how fast it's traveling and its
mass.
Now mass isn't quite the same thing as weight.
This is how much matter is in something as related to how it accelerates when a force
like gravity acts on it.
So stopping the motion of a vehicle, whether by coasting, breaking, or hitting something,
means that the kinetic energy of that vehicle has to get to zero.
The kinetic energy of a moving car or any other vehicle is one half of the product of
its mass and squared velocity.
Which is easier to see and symbols than hearing me say it.
The reason it takes more braking power to stop at higher speeds than at lower speeds
is because since velocity squared in that equation, when speed doubles, the kinetic energy increases
by a factor of four.
So if you're going 50 miles an hour, you need four times the distance to break as you
would if you were going just 25 miles an hour.
I think all of us who have had some practical and white-knuckle experience can relate to
that.
Another consequence is that the damage to a vehicle and its occupants or a pedestrian
that it hits also increases with speed.
I'm sure you've all heard the phrase speed kills and it's really true.
But people don't look at their car speedometer just before they hit something, right?
And even if they do, that's a secret they may take to their grave.
So the speed at the time of the accident has to be estimated after the accident.
To figure out the speed of a vehicle right before an accident happens, the physics principle
called the conservation of energy has to be applied.
Now this law sets forth that the total energy at the beginning of the physical processes
involved in the accident is equal to the total energy at the end of the physical processes
involved in the accident.
The accident event itself includes what investigators call irreversible work that happens during
the accident.
This irreversible work includes things like breaking, skidding, and crushing because they
use up some of the energy in an accident and can't be converted back into the energy of
the motion that caused them.
There are a couple ways this can be expressed mathematically.
Break zero equals delta E over delta T, where E is the total energy, T stands for time,
and the delta symbol means change.
And when we use our brakes to stop our car when it's moving, the rubbing of the brake
pads on the brake disc or drum irreversibly changes some of the energy of the moving vehicle
into friction that wears off the brake drum and the pad surfaces and that's why we eventually
need new brakes.
And it also converts some of that energy to heat.
If we're trying to bring our car to a complete stop, that heat loss and friction will continue
until all the energy of a moving car is used up and the vehicle comes to a halt.
But in an accident, the energy of the car in motion can be irreversibly changed in other
ways like producing the skid or crumpling the bumper.
So without going into a whole lot of mathematical detail that I just barely understand myself,
when a police investigator studies the scene of an accident, he or she can measure the
skid mark and figure out how fast the vehicle was traveling at the time the driver first
slammed his foot on the brakes.
But in order to get an accurate calculation, the type of road surface and how wet or dry
it was need to be considered too.
There are specific standards called frictional coefficients for different types of tires
and different types of pavement.
One book I use in my class gives the example that a 100 foot skid mark on dry concrete
pavement will result from a car that slammed on its brakes when it was going 47 miles
an hour.
Now, the implications are obvious.
If the speed limits 35 miles an hour on that stretch of road where the accident occurred,
then the math shows that the driver was speeding when he slammed on his brakes.
But not all collisions produce skid marks, right?
Because not everybody sees a crash coming.
So looking at the damage to a vehicle's front end can also help determine how fast it was
going.
Crash test data produced by both government and private agencies breaks cars down by
their crash worthiness into several categories, like subcompact, compact, intermediate, full
sized cars, among others.
Some of this data forms the basis for establishing crush versus speed relationships for different
types of vehicles.
Although the cars in each category do have their own independent safety ratings based
on how they're manufactured.
For these major categories of cars, standards called energy to crush depth coefficients
have been generated.
For example, subcompact cars generally have crush coefficients that range around 5,000
pounds, a force, an inch.
So by looking at the average crush depth across the front of a car that's involved in an accident
and knowing what category the car fits into, tells how much energy that car spent when
it crashed into whatever hit, then that in turn will tell how fast it was going at the
time.
Investigators can also use combinations of skid marks in front end crush, in the case
where a skid mark leads up to the site of an impact, for example.
Let's say the driver recognizes she's about to hit a concrete bridge abutment and then
slams on her brakes, but ultimately hits it anyway.
Something else to consider is that the driver's body is also being propelled at the same speed.
So if there's nothing like an airbag or a seatbelt to take some of the kinetic energy,
the driver hits whatever is in front of her at the same speed as she hit the bridge support.
That's why car interiors have been redesigned over the years to include not only things
like better safety restraints and airbags, but also collapsible steering columns and
engines that slide beneath the car rather than slamming through it.
Now because more than half of all collisions happen between two cars, both of which are
usually moving, the calculations get a little more complicated.
So let's turn our focus to momentum.
Momentum is the velocity of an object times its mass and can be represented by the equation
p equals mv, where p represents linear momentum, meaning something moving in a straight line,
and m represents the mass of a vehicle.
v equals its velocity.
We also need to think about force, since collisions involve force.
Force relates to momentum and can be expressed by the equation f equals delta p over delta
t.
In words that means the change in momentum divided by the change in time gives you the
force that caused the change over time.
Remember the Greek symbol delta means change in equations like this.
So when two cars run into each other, they exert equal but opposite forces on each other.
You might remember if you studied physics, that's basically Newton's third law of motion.
And because the forces between both cars are equal and opposite, they sum to zero unless
some other external force is applied.
The principle of conservation of momentum states that the total momentum stays the same in
a system like this, regardless of the collision.
So whatever momentum the two cars had just before they hit is equal to the total momentum
they still have just after they hit.
Here's an example of how this works.
If a car is sitting motionless at a stop sign and the guy who's talking on his mobile phone
and not paying any attention smacks into the back of the stopped car, the distracted driver's
car will slow down from the impact, but the stopped car will be pushed forward.
The total momentum of the two vehicles is equal just before and after the collision.
But some of the initial momentum of the idiot's car gets transferred to the bumper of the guy
that was sitting at the stop sign.
And if either of them leaves skid marks, say if the cell phone user sees the crash coming
and slams on his brakes, or if the car at the stop sign has his foot firmly on his brakes,
well investigators can use a combination of the skid mark method and the momentum method
to figure out how fast the distracted driver was going when he hit the stopped car.
It takes some pretty fancy math, but it's routinely done by people who understand the
principles involved.
Now mind you, it's not really that simple because there's more than one dimension to
the conservation of momentum.
It's really a 3D issue, but you get the general idea.
Another thing we should talk about is that there are really two basic types of collisions
known as elastic and plastic.
In passenger cars, elastic collisions happen only at really low speeds of less than about
two and a half miles an hour.
To call a collision like that elastic means that the car parts that hit each other will
bounce back to their original shape after the wreck.
And we all know that modern bumpers and vehicle manufacturing materials are designed so that
they can now better withstand things that used to be considered a definite fender bender.
Forensic vehicle accident reconstruction really doesn't apply to these elastic collisions
since by definition they don't cause any damage.
But car crashes of any real significance are always plastic collisions where the car parts
that hit are damaged to the point where they can't snap back to their original condition.
In other words, what gets smashed, dented and crumpled at the time of the accident stays
that way, at least until you get that monumental bill from the body shop which hopefully you
can pass to somebody else's insurance company.
Now that damage, while painful to your pocketbook and maybe even to your insurance rating, has
value in the accident investigation.
If we go back to our previous example, remember that the crush depth on the back bumper of
the car sitting at that stop sign and the front end of the distracted driver's car,
they can be used to check the accuracy of the driving speed that's arrived at by doing
the math and using the momentum method.
So it's worth something, right?
Speaking of distracted drivers again, although they're probably too clueless to realize it,
they do leave clues for investigators.
Things like open maps, cell phones, headphones, ladies open makeup containers, splattered
food or loud stereo which investigators can check by the position of the radio knob even
if the car is no longer running.
Those are all things that could incriminate a driver as not paying attention at the time
of an accident.
Accident investigators also need to consider a person's sobriety at the time of a crash.
So in their search of a car's interior, they also need to look for alcohol or drug paraphernalia.
But they need to be careful where they stick their hands.
Syringes or a loaded gun could be under the seat, especially if the car's a thugmobile
where there's thugs, there's often drugs.
And sometimes these characters who are drunk or high try to put the blame on each other
even to the point of changing seats.
So if the passenger dies, the impaired driver might try to switch seats to implicate the
dead guy as the one that was behind the wheel.
Investigators have to use all available clues to evaluate the position of the occupants
at the time of the accident.
They use things like bloodstain and injury patterns to make sure it all makes sense,
especially in crashes where the sobriety of the driver might be at issue.
Here's a couple of other tidbits worth mentioning about vehicle accident analysis.
Did you know that the filaments and car light bulbs can actually help show whether exterior
lights were on or off at the time of an accident?
That could be used to see if the headlamps or maybe a turn signal were on at the time
of the crash.
And that could be used to corroborate or refute somebody's statement or show a driver's intention
maybe in the case of a turn signal.
These days, many cars have technology that has the capability to tell the truth despite
what those involved or what witnesses say.
The newer black box technology in some vehicles can capture information in an accident.
Here's an example that got a lot of attention when it happened.
In 2003, South Dakota Congressman Bill Janklow ran a stop sign at a high rate of speed.
A motorcyclist traveling on the cross street struck Janklow's car and was killed instantly.
Janklow's Cadillac continued moving another 300 feet beyond the scene before it hit a
sign and that's what stopped his car.
The speed limit on the rural road that Janklow was traveling was 55 miles an hour.
But by the evidence at the scene, the investigating state highway patrolman figured Janklow was
probably going around 70 miles an hour.
When the data from the black box in Janklow's Cadillac was retrieved, it showed he sailed
through the stop sign at between 63 and 64 miles an hour.
So although not as fast as the investigating officer suspected, he was clearly over the
speed limit and threw a stop sign no less.
At trial, Janklow said that a blood sugar issue was to blame.
He said he had taken insulin that morning but had neatened all day and was confused
when the accident happened.
But Janklow had a history of driving offenses, although they didn't allow that to come out
at trial, and he was ultimately convicted of second degree manslaughter mainly based
on the information about speed from the car's data recorder.
Of course, we've all heard about black box technology being used in airline crashes.
And in a future lecture about mass disasters, I'll talk about the work I did in the morgue
after the crash of American Eagle Flight 4184 out of Indianapolis, Indiana, which happened
on Halloween in 1994.
In that crash, the data recorder captured far more than just speed.
It registered a terrifying series of events that happened in flight.
The black box showed that the plane did a full rollover and then was able to ride itself
once, but the second rollover resulted in a full speed crash upside down at 375 knots.
That's just over 430 miles an hour or about 695 kilometers an hour.
Went right into the middle of a soybean field in Roseland, Indiana.
The type of plane involved, which was the ATR-72, had already been implicated several
times as being prone to equipment failure, particularly during icy conditions.
That's what apparently happened in this case.
While the pilots were on autopilot in a holding pattern, pending landing at Chicago O'Hare,
freezing rain caused a super-fast buildup of ice on the plane.
And the plane's monitoring systems gave the pilots a warning that something was going
wrong.
Plane was going way too fast for the poor conditions.
But when the pilots lowered the flaps to slow the aircraft, the plane went into that first
rollover, which kicked the autopilot off, and the plane never recovered.
Sixty-eight people lost their lives in that incident, 64 passengers and four crew members.
Now that stemmed from a really tragic combination of an equipment issue and the cold weather
conditions that caused the issue to manifest itself.
As a result of that accident and some other incidents involving the same type of plane,
ATR-72s are only permitted to fly in warmer climates today.
Another tragic equipment and temperature combination apparently caused the space shuttle Challenger
disaster in 1986, killing all seven of its crew, including the highly publicized first
teacher in space, Krista McAuliffe, who had become somewhat of a media icon before the
flight.
Just a mere 73 seconds into the flight, while much of America and others elsewhere watched
the spacecraft disintegrated, leaving that huge plume of smoke that's been forever burned
into many of our minds, it was ultimately determined that the morning's cold temperatures
likely caused a failure of a simple piece called an O-ring that served as a seal in a solid
rocket booster.
This O-ring failure set off a chain of events that ultimately let pressurized hot gases
affect the solid rocket booster and an external fuel tank and the spacecraft broke apart.
Now because of this, President Ronald Reagan formed the Rogers Commission, which included
famed physicist Dr. Richard Feynman, and they investigated the accident.
And the shuttle missions were put on a 32-month hold.
Many of us probably recall the sad and simple news video footage in which Dr. Feynman,
elegantly explained and demonstrated the cold failure of this small and seemingly innocuous
object in his hands.
You can find that online if you're interested.
Feynman's role in the investigation also pointed to some major disconnects between management
and science within NASA that needed to be addressed.
So as we can see, these kinds of tragedies, whether they're car accidents, plane crashes,
or space travel disasters, they all had the power to promote change.
And these include modifications in the way all manner of vehicles are designed and manufactured,
as well as changes in policies and procedures.
It's a shame that awful things often have to happen before these kinds of faults are
revealed.
But as sad as these accidents are, they do promote better and safer vehicles, as well
as remind us all to be more careful when we drive.
So maybe in that sense, the victims of vehicle fatalities don't completely die in vain.
