Have you ever actually watched a building burn?
It is a terrifying and mesmerizing thing to see.
We all know what fire looks like, but what is it really?
Fire happens when oxygen combines with some fuel in the presence of heat.
The dancing flames we observe, or gases that are burning, as a combustion takes over one
substance after another in its path.
Really, everything we see is chemistry and physics in action.
In this lecture, let's take a look at the forensic science used to analyze fires and
explosions.
We know that some fires are truly accidents, such as when an appliance malfunction causes
a house fire, a clothes dryer gets clogged with, the vent gets clogged with lint, and
at some point the heat the appliance generates may cause that wad of fibers in the vent to
catch fire.
Explosions can be accidents too.
If the pilot light and a gas furnace goes out and natural gas builds up inside a closed
area, something as simple as flipping on a light switch can be enough of a detonator
to ignite that gas and blow up an entire building.
Other times, a short in an electrical system can start a fire.
There are also fires that originate naturally, like those from lightning strikes.
How do investigators determine if a fire was accidental or not?
Even in the examples I just mentioned, fire and explosion science need to be used to figure
out the cause.
Was that furnace faulty by design or manufacture?
Was it somehow rigged to explode?
Could the homeowner have modified or misused the furnace in some way?
Or did the pilot light simply go out from a gust of wind that came in through an open
doorway that was later closed without anybody realizing the pilot light was extinguished?
Now consider that this fire investigation will have to be carried out on a building that
may be completely incinerated.
Just like engineers may have to reconstruct the events from a building collapse just from
the rubble or vehicle accident experts figure out the cause of a plane crash, a subway collision
or an auto accident, sometimes from not much more than a twisted heap of metal.
Unlike in the courtroom where innocent until proven guilty is the rule, since any of these
incidents could be a crime scene, suspicious until proven otherwise is the way these cases
are approached so as not to overlook any evidence.
In their analysis of fires and explosions, investigators will look for accelerants, igniters,
pieces of a bomb or explosive residues.
They'll also have to look for the point of origin in a fire.
Multiple origins will nearly always rule out an accident.
Other evidence of a fire that was intentionally set could include signs of a breaking and
entering, like tool marks on a door frame or glass shards from a broken window.
Critical thought should also be given to points of entry and exit and their proximity
to the fire.
An arsonist would need to get in and out of the building safely and with time to get
away.
As we've seen before, motive needs to be considered too.
The most common motives for arson are to conceal some other crime, like murder, burglary, embezzlement,
in other words to destroy evidence.
Another familiar reason is the financial gain that can come from insurance fraud.
Moreover, others can also be motive, as in intimidation, extortion, terrorism, or sabotage.
Other emotions like revenge, jealousy, or hatred could cause somebody to set a fire.
Still, other arsonists are caused by vandals who are being malicious and destructive, especially
in the case of what are called pyromaniacs who have fire obsessions.
It's estimated that half of all arson arrests involve juveniles.
Occasionally, an arsonist will set a fire and then discover it in order to seem heroic.
Research has shown that babysitters, volunteer librarians, night watch personnel, and security
guards are among the most common of these misguided heroes, as well as some volunteer
firefighters.
According to U.S. FBI statistics, in 2010, about 45.5 percent of arson offenses involved
in arsonist structure, including houses, storage facilities, and public buildings.
Another 26 percent of arsons had cars, trucks, and other vehicles as their targets.
And although probably not what most of us think about when we hear the word arson, the
other 28.5 percent of intentionally set fires begin outdoors, like timber and grass fires
or crops.
When all these settings are considered, arsons in industrial and manufacturing settings
resulted in the highest average dollar loss at over $133,000 per fire event.
In 2008, it was estimated there were 14 times more arson fires in impoverished neighborhoods
compared to wealthier areas.
Now before we go on to talk more specifically about forensic investigations, let's talk
a bit about the chemistry and physics of explosives to understand how they're different from fires.
An explosive is a material capable of rapid conversion from a solid or liquid state to
a gas.
That conversion results in energy released as heat, pressure, and sound waves.
All explosions, except those that are nuclear in origin, are similar to fire in many ways.
But there are a couple of main distinctions that can be made.
First, explosions give off more energy than fires for a given amount of fuel.
And secondly, oxygen is mixed into the fuel during an explosion, but tends to come mainly
from the surrounding air during a fire.
The damaging effects of fire are pretty self-evident.
They include the heat that melts objects, the burning that can reduce some materials
completely to ash, and smoke damage, which can carry with it soot deposits and dispersed
chemicals that come from the substances and objects that are burning.
You've probably heard that smoke inhalation kills far more people who die in fires than
the actual flames themselves.
Explosions have their own set of damage mechanisms.
The escaping gases from the blast pressure can travel thousands of miles an hour and
exert hundreds of tons of pressure per square inch.
There are really two phases of pressure waves associated with an explosion.
First is what's called the positive pressure blast.
It moves away from the site of the explosion and causes a wave that shatters anything in
its path.
The damage from the positive pressure blast decreases with distance as the wave dissipates
energy and then loses power.
Because the gases from the explosion were expelled so quickly, the positive pressure
wave creates a partial vacuum at the site where the explosion occurred.
This vacuum in turn sucks air, gases, and debris from the explosion back towards the
site of detonation.
This second wave is called a negative pressure phase of a blast.
It's not as strong as the initial positive pressure blast that moved away from the explosion,
but it can still do a lot of damage.
Explosions also produce fragmentation not seen in fires.
For instance, the casing on a bomb can shatter and produce shrapnel that can break up or
tear apart any objects or people it hits.
As the blast itself fragments objects in its way, the pieces of those materials can become
projectiles that in turn tear up the other things they hit.
Other fragmentation can be caused by the bomb's design as when bombers put things like nails
or other pieces of metal inside the bomb casing to create additional damage.
Typically the least damaging consequences of an explosion are its thermal effects.
Sometimes there's a fireball at the moment of detonation and if what are known as high
explosives are used, the thermal effects are hot and quick.
But in the case of low explosives, the thermal effects are less but longer in duration.
An explosive fireball tends to burn out quickly unless there are lots of other materials that
catch fire from it.
Now obviously when a fire is discovered or an explosion happens, the first responders
have two main goals before doing anything else.
Get everybody who may be trapped by the fire or blast out whether they're inside a building,
a car, or the cabin of a downed airplane.
The next responsibility is to put the fire out or to try to ensure there are no more
explosions.
In other words, make sure things are as safe as possible.
Only after those two things are tended to will an investigation begin regarding the
cause of the incident.
And when you consider collecting evidence at the scene of a fire, things can be far
more complicated than in most other forensic investigations.
For one thing, there might not be any light or temperature control because there's no
power.
Investigators might be slogging around in piles of wet materials and objects because of the
firefighting efforts.
And personal safety may be at issue due to hazardous fumes or other kinds of residues
that are present.
And as I've seen myself, the area might not be entirely safe because of structural damage.
In 1999, during the early morning hours, I was called to assist in finding a body in
a terrible house fire not too far from my own home.
All two stories of the house had caved into the basement and the fire was so intense that
investigators weren't even sure they could recognize what had been a body.
When I got there, I was told that a sixth grade girl who was babysitting died after
aiding two of her siblings and getting out of the house safely.
A 10-year-old sister and a 13-year-old brother who had cerebral palsy.
She also got the family dog out.
Why she went back into that burning house at 1 o'clock in the morning is still not known.
Others thought maybe she went back into the house to see if, in fact, her parents had
already come home and were asleep in their bedroom since the fire had started after the
children had gone to bed.
After we searched for several hours, it was determined that the scene was too structurally
unsound for us to continue going.
And I was told to go home and get some sleep while they brought in heavy equipment to remove
some of the larger pieces of construction that threatened our safety.
They were going to do that one layer at a time.
And we returned to the site later that day to continue the search.
It was only after I got home that I received word from a family member that the little
girl who died was my niece's best friend from school.
I was so busy that morning with my responsibilities that I hadn't picked up on the family's last
name and made that connection.
Her body was eventually recovered, but those are the kind of cases that make it really
difficult to be a lifelong Cincinnati resident with most of my family and many of my friends
still there in town, especially since many of my victims are often visually unidentifiable
at the outset.
I mean, I never know when I might be looking for or even examining somebody I turn out
to actually know.
Victims can be nearly completely incinerated by fire, and the high pressurized water coming
out of fire hoses can cause additional damage.
Victims can be nearly completely obliterated by fires and blasts, and even common household
and personal items might be difficult to identify.
Explosions can rip objects and people apart or throw them a considerable distance away.
As with any other crime scene, firefighters, rescue personnel, utility workers, police
officers, and even onlookers can taint a fire and explosion scene before investigators
even get there.
This can damage existing evidence and may even introduce irrelevant footprints, fingerprints,
fibers, DNA, or other material.
But given the need to rescue people and secure the scene, investigators have to work with
what's available to them.
What kind of things or materials should be collected from a fire explosion scene in an
effort to find out its cause?
Investigators should collect pieces of burnt or partially burned wood, carpeting, and
other materials, as well as control samples from the same materials that are unburned
or undamaged areas for comparison if they can find them.
Samples of suspected flammable liquids that may have been used as accelerants should
be collected.
A gasoline is the accelerant of choice in more than 50% of all arson fires.
But lighter fluid, paint thinner, kerosene, propane, any other fuel can be used to start
or spread a fire.
There are also some materials that can prove more fruitful than others in search for accelerants.
Things like carpeting, bedding, upholstered furniture, clothes, or soil, really anything
that will absorb a liquid has the potential to retain unburned accelerant for sampling
and lab analysis.
And forensic labs use the same type of analytical chemistry to figure out the nature of an accelerant
as they use for identifying other chemicals, like drugs and poisons, such as gas chromatography
and mass spectroscopy, among other high-tech methods.
At the scene, arson investigators might be clued in by what's called a fire trail.
This happens when an arsonist pours an accelerant on the floor from room to room and then lights
it on the way out.
And the branching pattern of the fire trail essentially causes all the areas to blaze up
at about the same time, and that doesn't typically happen in a normal structure fire.
Investigators have different tools and partners to detect accelerants, like chemical analyzers
called hydrocarbon sniffers, as well as arson dogs.
Dogs can be trained to detect small quantities of common accelerants and confine them in
really tiny amounts.
They can even smell those hydrocarbons after extensive burning.
Arson dogs enable much quicker processing of fire scenes, and follow-up results from
forensic labs show very good correlations between arson dog hits on suspected accelerants
and the actual presence of those hydrocarbons in the materials they test.
The only real problem is that fire itself can produce hydrocarbons when it burns.
And dogs can't differentiate between those and any hydrocarbons used as accelerants.
But remember, we're okay with field tests that produce false positives, but investigators
can't afford false negatives that would allow evidence to be completely overlooked.
Scene investigators will also look for the source of ignition for a fire, or whatever
served as the detonator in the case of an explosion.
In a fire, an igniter can be as simple as a burned match that could possibly be linked
specifically through a microscopic examination to a matchbook in a suspect's possession.
If a matchbook is left at an arson scene, it might have fingerprints on it.
So might a candle or a cigarette lighter that was used as an igniter.
And if a cigarette was used to start the fire, there could be DNA on the cigarette butt.
Some arsonists don't even enter the building or the area they intend to burn down.
You may have heard of a Molotov cocktail.
That's a container made out of glass or something else breakable that has an accelerant inside
of it with some kind of wick hanging out the top.
You might have seen one of these handheld fire bombs shown on TV, like a beer bottle
filled with gasoline with a rag stuck in the top.
The arsonist lights the rag and then throws the entire container into the structure or
the vehicle he wants to torch, maybe even through a window.
Now, it goes without saying, of course, this is not something you should try at home.
At the scene, analysts will also look for timing devices, anything that could be used
to delay ignition of a fire or an explosion so that the perpetrator can get away before
the destruction starts.
Not only for his own safety, but to avoid suspicion.
These timing devices can range from simple to very complicated.
To start a fire, the arsonist can take a pack of matches and wrap it around the base of
a burning candle.
When the candle burns low enough to heat the match heads, the pack of matches will light
up and start the fire, or the same device can be used to light a bomb fuse.
Considering how slow some candles burn, this simple timer could delay the start of the
fire or the explosion for hours.
A perpetrator will get far less time if they use a smoldering cigarette on a pack of matches.
Again, do not try this at home.
Now, bombers have developed all kinds of detonation devices for their package bombs, briefcase
bombs, luggage bombs, and car bombs.
In many cases, a small spark is all that's needed.
So a device as simple as a spring-loaded nail that hits a metal plate could be a detonator.
We've seen on TV and in movies where a cell phone can be set to detonate when it rings
so that the bomber can literally phone in his damage.
Now, specific to explosions, investigators can search for unburned or partially burned
explosive residues.
As I alluded to before, there are low explosives and high explosives.
Now, low explosives include the black powder and the smokeless powder we talked about in
our firearms discussion.
Both of these are commonly used in what are called pipe bombs.
That's when the perpetrator takes a section of metal pipe and stuffs it with a low explosive.
And when the bombs detonated, the pipe fragments become shrapnel that tears up things and people.
The unabomber, Ted Kaczynski, used pipe bombs to maim and kill his victims.
His devices started out relatively simple, and over his reign of terror, they became
more complex and more dangerous.
Initially, he used a pipe bomb that was about one inch in diameter and about nine inches
long filled with smokeless powder.
Because he used wooden plugs to seal the ends, though, the ignition of the powder didn't
create enough pressure buildup inside the pipe to do a tremendous amount of damage.
That was one of the reasons his initial victims suffered less physical damage than those who
encountered his more sophisticated devices.
Kaczynski graduated, too, including nails and wooden splinters inside his pipe bombs.
People suffered much greater harm.
In fact, Wood became part of his signature.
We'll talk a lot more about the unabomber in another lecture.
Another example of what's considered a low explosive is called ANFO, which stands for
Ammonium Nitrate and Fuel Oil.
This was used in the bombing of the Oklahoma City, Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in
1995 by perpetrators Timothy McVeigh, Terry Nichols, and a couple of accomplices.
At the time it was carried out, the Oklahoma City bombing was the deadliest act of terrorism
in American history.
Remember that I mentioned explosions differ from fires because of their oxygen source?
Oklahoma City bombing is a good example to explain that.
Ammonium nitrate is found in plant fertilizer, and it provides the oxygen source.
When the fertilizer is soaked in fuel oil, the mixture becomes highly explosive.
At Oklahoma City, the perpetrators used 13 barrels of fuel oil combined with fertilizer
to create over three tons of explosive material, all packed into a rental truck, which they
parked outside the Federal Building.
The explosion was estimated to be the equivalent of a 3.0 magnitude earthquake and was heard
over 50 miles away.
The blast killed 168 people and injured over 600 more.
It destroyed half of the Murrah Building, as well as damaging cars and over 300 other
structures, some of which were blocks away.
This 1995 bombing was carried out as a revenge against the Federal Government for its involvement
in two prior confrontations with citizens.
First, the 1992 FBI and U.S. Marshall Siege of Randy Weaver, his family and an associate
at Ruby Ridge in Idaho, and secondly, the 93-branch Davidian standoff in Waco, Texas, where cult
leader David Karash had his compound.
The bombers at Oklahoma City spent well over a year planning their attack and clandestinely
gathering some of the resources and materials they needed, but it was estimated the entire
operation cost only about $5,000, including the bomb materials, the rental truck, and
a cheap getaway car.
Okay, back to explosives and their residues.
High explosives include things like nitroglycerin, dynamite, which is nitroglycerin mixed with
diatomaceous earth and calcium carbonate and then rolled into tubes, and TNT, which is
the abbreviation for trinitrotoluene.
And also, the military explosive called C4, those are all examples of high explosives.
Now, some of them are much more sensitive to heat and shock, and so are typically really
unstable and only used in small quantities.
For example, a small amount of nitroglycerin may be used as what's called a primary explosive
to detonate a secondary explosion.
The secondary high explosives are more stable.
They're easier to transport, and they need what's called a booster charge to detonate.
Dynamite, TNT, and C4 are examples of secondary high explosives.
You may have heard of plastic, which is that moldable explosive stuff we sometimes see
in movies.
Plastic is an example of a booster, so is a blasting cap.
In addition to explosive residues, scene investigators will look for what's left of the devices
themselves, which are often homemade, as well as try to figure out how the explosive
was delivered.
Was it in a backpack that got left on the floor of a building?
Did it come through the mail?
That was a method Kaczynski often used.
Or like at Oklahoma City, did it come in a vehicle?
As we saw with computer crime, investigators also have to determine the skill level necessary
to make the bomb in order to hone in on whether their suspect is an amateur or an expert.
Now what else should investigators look for to collect as evidence?
In a business, things like burned or partially destroyed paper should be carefully collected
for analysis that may prove useful in establishing motive.
Say if they point to evidence of insurance fraud or embezzlement.
Then question document examiners and forensic accountants might be able to piece together
the evidence and the facts to see if there's any pattern regarding specifically what items
were damaged or what files might be missing, things like that.
Where their injuries and fatalities are sent in explosives, investigators may have to work
with emergency room personnel or forensic pathologist in a coroner or medical examiner's office.
Because some of the evidence may be in or on the victim's bodies, like accelerants
on clothing or shards from a pipe bomb launched in an injured or dead person.
An autopsy will also help establish whether the fire or explosion was the actual cause
of death or whether the victim was murdered and then the blaze or blast executed to cover
up the killing.
Recent research suggests that setting a fire to cover up a murder is much more common than
formerly thought.
In the old days of arson investigation and the effect fire had on bodies, it was commonly
said that a human head would explode during a fire because so often incinerated remains
at a fire scene would show a badly fragmented skull.
Some colleagues of mine conducted studies using unembalmed donated bodies in homes that
were scheduled for controlled burns to train firefighters.
They found out that skulls do not explode in fires.
This research has called into question many previous death investigations involving fire
scenes.
Badly fragmented skulls are much more indicative of blunt force trauma from bludgeoning or shattered
skulls from gunshot wounds.
Other typical evidence we've discussed may be present at fires and explosions like glass,
fibers, hair, shoe prints or blood, but this evidence will have to be collected differently
than it would at a nonfire scene where arson is suspected any evidence needs to be kept
in sealed airtight containers.
From recovery at the scene all the way up to the time of analysis.
That's because many accelerants are volatile and could evaporate.
Our local crime lab, like lots of other crime labs, uses the same kind of gallon containers
that house paint is sold in.
Because explosives are not volatile, they don't have to be packaged in the same kind
of way at a crime scene.
Another important consideration in arson and explosions investigations is determining the
precise location they emanated from.
In a fire this is called the point of origin and with an explosion the term bomb seat
is typically used.
At the scene of an explosion the bomb seat is where the highest concentration of explosive
residues will typically be found.
Sometimes it can be pretty difficult to specifically locate where the bomb was detonated because
it's buried under tons of rubble.
They have to pull out all the debris and sift through that to find maybe one small piece
that can point to who made the bomb and how they made it.
Another complication I mentioned earlier are those positive pressure waves that can throw
materials away from the explosion, which are followed by the negative pressure waves that
suck things back in.
You can imagine how this two-fold mixing of evidence complicates the scene.
In suicide bombings there are often tell-tale signs of who was carrying the bomb by what's
left of his or her body.
In cases where the perpetrator straps on explosives or carries them in a backpack, often the only
thing left at autopsy are portions of the bomber's lower legs and feet.
The other victims of suicide bombings may have missing limbs, shrapnel, and other kinds
of injuries, but usually the bomber clearly sustains the most body fragmentation from
the blast and body parts that can't be recovered because they were literally blown to bits.
In fires the point of origin is usually where the most burning takes place.
Arts and investigators can interview firefighters to learn about the hot spots and in what direction
the fire traveled and how fast it was moving.
Usually but not always the hottest spot is the point of origin, so looking at the fire
destruction and noting which areas show the most damage from heat exposure, that's important.
The deeper burns in a wall stud, for example, means the fire was there longer and started
there earlier than other areas.
Things like blistering or spalling of concrete surfaces will happen where the heat was most
intense.
The point of origin also might be indicated by a V-shaped pattern of burning on a wall
where the bottom of the V may point to where the fire began.
By looking at objects that are differentially melted, like metal or glass, and things like
paint that's peeled or bricks that are chipped, fire investigators can figure out how high
the temperature may have been in a particular area.
The way things melt can even show the direction in which the fire traveled.
For instance, investigators especially look at light bulbs, which commonly occur all throughout
a structure, and that gives them some directional fire clues.
Once they figure out how hot a fire got by looking at the kind of things that melted,
the investigators can then go on to make additional assumptions.
If any natural fuels that would have normally been present at the scene, like papers in
an office, mulch in a shed, or wood cabinets in a kitchen, if those couldn't have reached
the projected temperatures on their own, that usually points to an accelerant.
When investigators see a pile of wood, or rags in a house or a structure where they
wouldn't normally be located, that's a clue to the origin of an arson fire.
Arsonists also typically start fires on the lower floors of a large building.
If the point of origin is on the 14th floor of an office building, it's less likely to
be arson, since it would have taken much more time for the perpetrator to get out.
And then think of all the witnesses and surveillance cameras they might have to pass during their
exit.
If the point of origin seems simple, something like a space heater or a candle left burning
on a dining room table, investigators may quickly have their answer and move on.
But regardless of the circumstances, point of origin determination is standard in all
fire investigations.
This not only helps establish the cause, which can be important for insurance purposes, but
can lead to safer appliances and lives saved.
