Analyzing bloodstain patterns goes well back into human prehistory when our ancient ancestors
tracked wounded animals in much the same way that a hunter would today.
Analyzing bloodstain interpretation and forensic investigations first appeared in the 19th
century in Germany and Poland.
Professor Balthazard's presentation of experimental data in Paris in 1939 impressed the forensic
medicine crowd.
And after a high profile 1954 murder, bloodstain evidence was used in the controversial Dr.
Sam Shepard case from my state of Ohio.
Shepard was a neurosurgeon who lived in Cleveland with his wife and seven-year-old son.
The night Mrs. Shepard was beaten to death in 1954, Dr. Shepard claimed he was sleeping
on a downstairs couch when he heard his wife screaming.
He went to see what was going on and said he saw a, quote, bushy-haired man who had
apparently bludgeoned his wife and then began attacking Dr. Shepard.
Shepard said he lost consciousness, but when he awoke, felt his wife's absent pulse went
to a sun room, went to a sun's room and saw he was unharmed, he then ran downstairs to
see the intruder running across the backyard.
Couple of neighbors also claimed to have seen this bushy-haired man, and Dr. Shepard's medical
bag with his watch and ring in it were found in the weeds behind the house.
During interviews, Dr. Shepard's story was said to be stilted and changing.
The few signs of an attempted robbery were suspicious to investigators, as was the fact
that there was no forced entry.
The couple's son didn't wake up during the crime, and the family dog didn't even bark.
A full 35 blows were apparently struck to kill Mrs. Shepard before Dr. Shepard even got
up to her room, which is definitely overkill for a burglary, and there were no signs of
a struggle in the bedroom.
Shepard said a single blow to his head by the same man knocked him out.
Blood stains on Shepard's watch and pants were also suspicious.
He couldn't produce the T-shirt he had been wearing, and he was charged with the crime.
The trial became a media event that some have compared to the O.J. Simpson trial, especially
when the mysterious woman who had been referred to as Ms. X took the stand and admitted to
having a two-year affair with Dr. Shepard.
In late 1954, Dr. Shepard was found guilty.
A month after Shepard's verdict, forensic scientist Dr. Paul Kirk visited the crime
scene and used blood stain patterns to help show the position of the victim and assailant,
along with alleging that the beautiful and pregnant Mrs. Shepard was beaten to death
by someone left-handed, and Dr. Shepard was right-handed.
After spending nearly 10 years in prison, Shepard won a retrial, which happened in 1966.
Shepard was found not guilty in the second trial with the young F. Lee Bailey as his
defense attorney.
Later, Shepard actually had the nerve to pull a short stint as a professional wrestler
who called himself the killer.
Despite all its controversy, the Shepard case was a major step in getting the legal system
to accept blood stain pattern evidence.
What I'll be presenting here is really the theoretical scientific underpinnings of blood
stain pattern analysis, which has been disputed by some to be highly variable and somewhat
subjective in practice, but that could be said for plenty of areas in forensic science.
Physics and chemistry do support blood stain pattern analysis, that's certain.
But like other specialties, it's been criticized, especially lately, because some experts have
been accused of extrapolating beyond what can be legitimately supported by science.
Blood stain pattern analysis is part of crime scene investigation that, like computer forensics,
engineering, vehicle accident reconstruction, among others, is really an attempt to reconstruct
a sequence of events.
Looking at a visible record of bloodshed in terms of the shapes, locations, and distribution
patterns can give clues about the objects and forces that have generated the blood stains.
Examples include areas where blood's been ejected, sprayed, dripped, walked through,
or smeared by either the victim or the perpetrator.
Cases involving weapons and the evidence they leave behind can develop a sequence of violent
events.
This is an area of forensics where extensive photo documentation is really crucial because
it may be the only way to capture the patterned evidence at the scene.
For proper interpretation, blood spatter experts have to understand physics, the nature of
blood, and the cardiovascular system that moves it around, as well as the pathology
of wounds.
Scene examination and photo documentation can help these experts figure out the source
where a blood stain originated.
It can help them estimate distances from the origin to the surface's blood hit, and
even the speed and direction that blood traveled.
Clues can lead to the positions of the victim and perpetrator during an assault, how many
blows or shots were delivered, and in what order, using clotting and drying to estimate
time since bloodshed.
Let's start by understanding blood as a substance in terms of its physical properties and how
it responds to gravity.
It's definitely true that blood is thicker than water.
The average amount in an adult body is 4 to 6 liters of blood, depending on body size,
so we can say the average adult has roughly 5 liters.
Our blood's usually around 8% of our body weight.
Blood plasma is the liquid fraction that's mostly made of water, but also contains various
ions, proteins, nutrients, and wastes.
Even white blood cells and platelets, which are really cell fragments, not whole cells,
are suspended in the liquid blood plasma.
We also need to briefly address blood clotting here, which is scientifically called coagulation.
When blood vessels are damaged, the lining of the vessel walls exposes proteins that
attract blood platelets.
The platelets then change their nature and stick to each other, forming a plug that can
help close up a small wound.
The damaged vessel walls and platelets also both release chemicals that act in domino-type
reactions that ultimately form a polymer of insoluble protein strands, called fibrin,
and that further bridges the wound.
When blood moves outside the body and hits a surface, the coagulation mechanism can also
take place by a slightly different pathway, but the result's the same.
Blood solidifies to some extent.
First into a gel that outside the body can later dry and harden as the plasma component
evaporates.
Now inside the body, blood movement is governed by the work of the heart, acting as a pump,
combined with the pressures within blood vessels.
But other forces act on blood when it's outside the body.
And this movement will depend to some degree on whether the heart is still beating as an
active pump in somebody who's wounded, or whether the heart has stopped in a victim
who's died.
As I said, blood plasma is mostly made of water, and we've all seen how water behaves.
For example, we're familiar with how it flows, splashes, and forms droplets when smaller amounts
break off from larger amounts.
Water and blood plasma, like other liquids, have cohesive properties that hold their molecules
together and make them flow.
They also have surface tension.
You know that property that lets a water, strider, insect walk on the water?
But because blood is more viscous than water, its thickness alters all these properties,
but only slightly.
Viscosity relates to molecular attraction within a liquid and causes it to resist flow
or resist changing form.
Outside the body, blood can separate into smaller droplets when gravitational forces
or impact forces are sufficient to break its surface tension and its viscosity.
In combination, surface tension and viscosity will cause a drop of blood to form a sphere
that minimizes its surface area.
The size of the drop that forms relates to the maximum speed it will achieve when it
travels due to the resistance of air.
Physicists call this terminal velocity.
Once a drop of blood breaks away from a larger amount of blood and starts to travel, it won't
fraction into smaller droplets unless and until it hits something or is acted on by another
force.
When blood comes into contact with something, it produces a bloodstain or blood pattern.
You can call it either.
There are a couple of ways the major types of stains can be categorized based on their
appearance.
Some experts break bloodstains into three main groups, passive, spatter, and altered.
And the term is spatter, not splatter.
There's a difference.
Spatter is when droplets of something are scattered on a surface.
The result can be a splatter, but the tiny residual droplets themselves are called spatter.
Other experts prefer to focus on the speed of traveling blood, which also has to do with
the patterns it produces, and classify stains as either low velocity, medium velocity, and
high velocity.
Regardless, a major factor in how a stain will look is the type of surface that it hits.
Blood will look and behave differently when it's on a smoothly painted wall, an upholstered
piece of furniture, a leather car seat, rough concrete, carpeting, or even grass.
Now let's go through each type.
Most blood stains are the result of gravity, like when blood drips vertically onto a flat
surface at a 90 degree angle.
Another example is the blood flow that happens when a pool of blood surrounds a bleeding
victim, or when large droplets of blood run down a surface like a wall or an angled driveway.
Some types of transfer stains are also considered passive, like footprints in blood, or when
hands or fingers move blood from one surface to another, which is sometimes referred to
as a swipe.
Spatter stains result from the application of some other force, not just gravity alone,
that affects the movement of blood.
Here investigators will see features that show directionality and distribution.
This would include impact spatter from blunt force trauma, which basically means a beating
where a non-sharp object was the weapon.
And we're not necessarily talking about blood stains on the victim here, but spatter from
the incident on nearby surfaces.
Gunshot wounds can also cause impact spatter on any surface that blood exiting the body
hits.
As the name implies, altered stains have been changed in some way, whether that's through
natural clotting action, insect activity, or when blood mixes with some other material
like soil.
For instance, fly activity, where blood's exposed, that can complicate interpretation
because flies can ingest blood and regurgitate it.
They can also excrete tiny amounts of digested blood that could be confused with spatter.
Altered stains also include blood evidence that's been modified when somebody's tried
to clean up a crime scene to hide it, as we discussed earlier.
This is different than the passive stains of hand prints I mentioned a moment ago, because
cleaning up is deliberate, so it's called a wipe rather than a swipe.
Other stain alterations are called voids, because they represent an area where an object
blocked the spatter of blood, but then was picked up.
Like if a piece of evidence or a weapon got hit with spatter and then it was picked up
and retrieved by the perpetrator, there'd be a blank spot or a void on the floor wherever
that object had been.
Now, let's analyze some specific blood stain geometry.
You might want to make some of your own practice blood and play around with some of the following
concepts we're about to cover.
In my forensic science class, I've tried quite a few blood recipes that I've found
to show these principles.
Some of them are definitely better than others.
Hollywood blood just has to look real.
It doesn't have to have realistic properties, so a lot of the stuff you find online in terms
of recipes is after the appearance of blood, not its properties.
Now my recipe won't clot, of course, but here's the preferred concoction that I use,
and it doesn't use anything too sticky or hard to clean up, although it will stain since
it's made with food coloring, so be careful there.
You need about 500 milliliters, which is the same as 500 cc's of powdered milk, and then
you'll need to add slowly to that while stirring about 325 or so milliliters of water.
Keep stirring until you get the right consistency.
If it gets a little too thin, sprinkle in a little more powdered milk.
If it seems too thick, add a little more water.
You can actually use it just like this if you just want to get the consistency of blood
to play around with, but if you want the right color, add one and a half ounces of red food
coloring, about 25 drops of green food coloring, and about five drops of blue.
Now the mess you'll make will keep for about a week or so, but the consistency might change
over time.
Okay, on with our analysis.
Keep in mind that all of this geometry stuff is dependent on the surface of impact, as
I mentioned before, so for the sake of simplicity, we're going to assume a flat surface for our
discussion.
Now, all these pattern generalities relate to standard physics principles that govern
the behavior of fluids in motion under the influence of gravity.
First, any circular distortion of a stain helps reveal the angle of impact on a flat
surface.
If there's a right angle between the blood source and the surface, there's a nearly
perfectly circular stain, equal in width and length.
So you might try dripping a drop of your fake blood straight down onto a large sheet of
cardboard and see if the spot doesn't turn out pretty round.
You can use an eyedropper or just make a drop fall from the end of a spoon or a popsicle
stick.
The next analytical principle is that the stain gets more elongated as the angle of
impact decreases.
So if blood is flying towards a surface at a low angle, the resulting stain will be very
oblong.
If you're experimenting with me, you can put some of the fake blood into a spray bottle,
but I'm not claiming responsibility for the mess that we'll make.
Each year I have to get some cookies or something for our housekeeping guy the day we do our
bloodstain lab, and we even use those huge rolls of brown paper to cover the floors.
This is a real mess.
Anyway, you can't drop blood easily at an angle without flinging it all over.
So you could try to cheat the angle by slanting the paper you're dropping the fake blood down
on a little bit.
And it makes sense then that it'll be oblong rather than circular.
Okay, now when blood flies onto a surface at an angle, the oblong shape it creates tells
investigators about the direction the blood was traveling in.
The more pointed end of the elongated droplet faces the direction of travel.
The linear tip of the oblong stain may even be fractured.
That's because tiny blobs of blood break off from the surface of the parent stain once
it hits, and they continue to travel even further, drawing out the shape of the stain
and leaving some tiny droplets at its farthest extent.
In a sense, the blood is kind of skidding when it hits the surface as it meets the resistance
of whatever it hits.
But surface texture is also a factor here.
The harder and less porous the surface, the less tiny spatter droplets will result.
Rough textured surfaces show what are called spines extending from their spatter droplets
and can also show what's called peripheral spatter that will complicate figuring out the
directionality.
Another thing that investigators can figure out from blood spatter analysis is the point
of origin, if they have a group of related blood stains in a spatter pattern.
Similarly to what we talked about with fires, the point of origin is the location from where
the blood spatter pattern emanated, meaning its height and distance from the spatter pattern.
Not necessarily the origin in terms of the person or the weapon used.
To do this, blood stain analysts need to first figure out directionality using the stuff
I mentioned about the elongated tips and the little cast off drops.
Once they figure out the direction the spatter came from, they can take a half dozen or so
really diagnostic elongated droplets, the ones that really show good features, and then
use something like that's long and straight, like a meter stick or a yard stick, and place
it lengthwise through the longitudinal center of each of their best oblong droplets.
Then they need to trace all those droplets one at a time, back to the point where their
lines converge.
I have my students literally run a pencil along the meter stick and draw a line from
the center of each of their best droplets to the place where all the lines they draw ultimately
meet.
The result is a bunch of rays that all intersect at a common point, and that was the direction
of origin.
Okay, that's the horizontal point of origin on a flat plane where the spatter is, but
what about its height?
Well to get that, we use trigonometry principles of triangulation.
Investigators or my students measure the length of those most diagnostic elongated blood droplets
and then use geometry of angles, and they can estimate the height above the surface where
the blood droplets were flying from.
Sometimes on TV you see this done with strings, and they call it stringing the crime scene.
These days lasers and computer software can do the necessary calculations, but I'm sure
stringing is still pretty impressive to a jury.
Remember I mentioned that some experts prefer to categorize blood stains by the speed with
which they're produced?
Low velocity, medium velocity, or high velocity are pretty gross generalizations about traveling
blood, but here's the gist of it.
A low velocity blood stain pattern would be produced if a bleeding victim is standing
still or walking away, and then some blood drips to the floor.
These low velocity patterns are said to produce the greatest variety of shapes and sizes compared
to medium or high velocity stains.
But low velocity blood stains are usually larger in size than either of the other categories.
In low velocity patterns, gravity is the only force that has to be considered, and there
really isn't any spattering.
That's not to say that low velocity drip patterns can't produce some tiny droplets that fly off
the edges of the drop of blood when it hits.
You've probably seen some slow motion photography of a drop of milk hitting a bowl of milk and
then the little crown of droplets rises up.
Blood experts call these satellite droplets.
Satellites particularly happen when drips of blood fall from a height, or if somebody
steps in a pool of blood and splashes it.
If you're experimenting, you can try dripping your fake blood from different heights.
Get some cardboard and then a meter or yard stick, and then make a drip from a height of
about 20 centimeters, which is about 8 inches.
Then move to a fresh spot on the paper and drip from 35 centimeters, which is about 14
inches.
Then use 50 centimeters and keep increasing your distance at regular 15 centimeter or
6 inch intervals until you reach about a meter or even a meter and a half.
Then compare the appearance of the drips from the different heights to see if you don't
see satellites on your higher drops.
It's also interesting to try dripping the fake blood on different materials to see what
happens.
Like a couple different types of cloth, a paper towel, a brick, or other types of surfaces.
Now medium velocity spatter travel would happen for existence, for instance if a person was
bludgeoned with something like a baseball bat.
Medium spatter occurs when the moving blood is subjected to a force in addition to gravity.
Mediums typically defined as greater than 5 feet a second to up to about 100 feet a second.
When blood hits a surface at that rate, it will be broken up into smaller droplets, producing
that fine pattern that I called spatter.
High velocity patterns are usually said to result from blood traveling at speeds of greater
than about 100 feet a second.
This usually only happens in gunshot wounds or where high speed machines are involved.
Like if somebody gets caught in a propeller or an industrial fan, something awful like
that.
The result of high velocity blood flow is tiny spatter patterns that are almost like
a blood mist.
Now here are a couple of variations on the theme of blood leaving the body.
When an artery is cut, blood will exit the body under greater pressure than when it flows
from a vein.
This is because there's much higher blood pressure in arteries due to the work of the
heart.
It's pretty dramatic if you've ever seen it.
My son once cut his ankle deep enough to hit an artery and it's pretty sickening to see
somebody's blood jetting out in time with their heartbeat, especially when it's your
own teenager.
In the emergency room, my son was snickering at me because I was almost faint.
He told the ER doc that I was a forensic scientist and taught gross anatomy for a living and
there I was cowering in the corner.
My reply was, where do you have kids of your own?
Then I looked at the ER doc and I told her, all my patients are already dead.
I don't know how you stand this, and the two of them laughed while my son got stitched
up.
Anyway, back to forensic science and arterial blood.
There are characteristic bloodstain patterns associated with arterial spurts.
When a major artery like the carotid in the neck or the femoral in the thigh or groin
gets cut, the rise and fall of blood pressure with the heart will create an intermittent
arching low velocity pattern that's pretty diagnostic.
I've seen it on a wall and it looks like up and down waves of droplets reflecting the
higher pressure when the heart's pushing blood into circulation on the upper part of
the arch and the lower pressure between heartbeats on the lower part of the wave.
Of course, that pattern is only going to be produced for so long before the victim loses
consciousness if a major artery has been cut.
Here's another pattern.
When someone's forcefully coughing up blood after an injury to the face or chest and there
are essentially literally choking on their own blood, the bloodstains will show a low
velocity spatter pattern, but sometimes investigators will see air bubbles in those droplets.
Even after the blood dries, the signs of those bubbles that were in the drops can usually
still be seen.
Also, how fresh a drop of blood is, especially as it's drying on a nonabsorbent surface,
that can sometimes be roughly approximated.
With least in comparison to other drops from what's called skeletonization.
You know I love anything that has a name like that.
You've probably seen this skeletonization of a drop if you've ever had something like
gravy or milk drip onto your counter.
When you first wipe over it the first time, you'll essentially pick up just the wettest
center of the drop, but the drier edges will be a circular skeleton that's left behind
until you really scrub on it.
Another interesting but awful crime scene phenomenon is known as a cast off pattern.
These signs represent blood droplets that are being slung off of a moving bloody object
like a weapon.
The pattern is actually made in the opposite direction of the intended blows of the weapon.
The pattern happens when the perpetrator is making a backswing to strike again.
Cast off patterns are seen many times in blunt trauma cases, like when a baseball bat, a
crowbar, or even a fist is repeatedly used to bludgeon somebody.
The first impact doesn't cause cast off staining from the weapon.
It can't because the weapon hasn't drawn blood yet.
It's the second and subsequent blows that make the pattern.
The weapon has to get blood on it before additional swings of the bat or the fist fling off blood.
Basically the first blow breaks the skin, the second blow picks up some blood, and then
when the assailant swings back to develop the force of the next hit, blood will fly
off the weapon and onto the ceiling above or the wall behind.
More cast off is produced in the backswing than the forward swing in these kinds of assaults.
When a cast off pattern is really clear, it looks like a series of linear drop patterns
and can give investigators an idea of the minimum number of blows that were struck.
Now you might ask what difference does that make in an assault, but the difference can
be great.
In one of my cases I was asked to assess some pretty serious fresh skull trauma, in a case
that I still call Cain and Abel, because one teenage brother killed another right in the
family room of their home.
This was a really disturbing case.
The skull was pretty much pulverized, there was hardly anything left at the brain at all,
and investigators were asking me if I thought that amount of damage could be done with a
single blow, and I said there was no way that I could envision.
Well besides the physical damage to the skull, I saw the crime scene photos too, and there
was cast off in several directions around the room, including the ceiling and the walls.
That kind of bloodstained pattern speaks to the horrendous nature of a crime like that.
There's no way the killer could say that he and his brother were arguing and he got so
mad he hit him once in the head with a baseball bat.
The bloodstained pattern analysis not only pointed to repeated blows, but also showed
that the victim was probably asleep on the couch when his brother came up from behind
and murdered him with a baseball bat.
It was a horrific crime that I will never forget.
Also, keep in mind that the clothing of the killer can also be analyzed for bloodstained
patterns.
This could include wipes, swipes, cast off, and sometimes back spatter on the shooter
of a gun.
Sometimes the image of the weapon can even be transferred to clothing as if it were stamped
in blood.
And don't forget that a perpetrator can leave bloody footprints and fingerprints behind
at a crime scene too.
Now let me end this lecture with a story of a lighter note from a world-renowned bloodstained
pattern expert who's a personal friend of mine, Paulette Sutton.
Paulette has a wonderful series of photographs that illustrate how these principles can be
used to analyze non-blood cases too.
This was a case where a guy stole several large industrial-type containers of paint
from of all places a church that was being renovated.
He put the containers into the bed of his pickup truck and then he left the scene.
What he didn't realize was that one of the drums of paint had a hole in it and was leaking.
Once the church leader reported the theft, the investigators were literally able to follow
the path of droplets all the way from the church to his pickup truck.
The paint was like a trail of breadcrumbs.
Paulette has images of the drop pattern as the guy approached and stopped at a traffic
light, turned the corner, stopped to visit his girlfriend for a while, still not realizing
there was now a puddle of paint behind his truck.
And then he drove on to his house where his truck was ultimately parked until police knocked
on the door to arrest him.
Now Paulette's from the deep south and I love to hear her say in her great southern accent,
sometimes forensic science is nothing much more than stupid detection.
