Okay, we've just covered quite a few complicated processes or events that can either cause
someone's death or provide evidence about how one or more people died.
Now, I know I said at the outset of this entire series that forensics doesn't mean death,
but certainly most people consider the most serious crimes to be those that result in the loss of life.
Now, hopefully you, your family members, and your other loved ones will never experience any of the really awful things that we've talked about in this series.
But even if you never know anybody who is robbed or kidnapped, and I hope you don't, the fact of the matter is that everybody dies.
You always hear the saying that life has only two guarantees, death and taxes, but I'm sure we know people who pay no taxes, and that can't be said for escaping death.
Because I've studied the skeleton in both historic and legal contexts, having been a forensic anthropologist for over 25 years,
and I've also taught human growth anatomy using cadavers for a couple of decades now,
I've probably spent nearly as much time around dead people as living ones, at least sometimes it feels that way.
One of the things I often say that is that death is my life. Now, isn't that a great way to introduce yourself?
But seriously, I think it's important to take some time to talk about the science of death.
And doing so will introduce us to the decomposition process as it's used in forensic science,
and let us better understand topics like autopsy, forensic anthropology, and other related subjects.
Maybe based on your age, your cultural background, or your occupation, this might not apply to you.
But I think it's fair to say that most people in modern culture are kind of removed, or should I say insulated from death and dying.
In what we could call the old days, people weren't, were much more in touch with death, as they still are in some less developed parts of the world today.
Imagine a five-year-old kid having the job of going out back on the farm and catching a chicken to ring its neck for Sunday dinner.
Or consider that a woman might have ten children, and only six of them survive.
And in the past, I'm sure that more grandparents, parents, and even children died at home surrounded by family members than they do now,
at least in this day and age in the U.S.
Today, we expect medical miracles, and often they do happen, so that infant and childhood mortality are greatly reduced in many parts of the world.
And many of our grandparents, elderly parents, and even maybe someday ourselves, die in nursing facilities, rest homes, and hospitals,
perhaps surrounded only by medical professionals instead of family.
Because of this, well, near sterilization of death, and our isolation from one of the things that all people, and all other life forms for that matter, share in common,
I think maybe we've lost a little bit of our humanity.
But this is a series about science, not my opinions, so let's move on.
I will add, though, that because death is something that will probably touch all of our lives, and probably has done already,
I think learning a bit more about it can only help to better prepare us, since I think we tend to fear things we don't understand more than things we know something about.
You often hear people talk about the quote, moment of death, but the reality is a lot more complex than that.
I can think of only a few types of death that would actually take place in just a moment.
Something maybe like an explosion, or a terrible plane crash, those could be situations where death would be practically instantaneous.
When you think about it, all other deaths happen over at least seconds, if not minutes, hours, or in some cases over years.
Death is a process, then, and even our ability to define or determine when someone's actually dead isn't always easy.
As creepy as it is to think about, there have been cases in history where people have been accidentally buried alive.
This is because our ability to determine death depends on our ability to accurately assess all body functions,
and that isn't always as easy as you might think today, and it certainly wasn't in the past.
We've all heard the stories of Victorian-era burials where they put a string up through the ground attached to a bell
that could be rung by the person buried if they weren't fully dead.
Some people say that's where the phrase saved by the bell comes from.
Even modern funeral customs, like the practice of, quote, laying out the body in what some people call a quote, wake,
those come from the customs of laying a body out for a period of time to be sure the person was dead and didn't wake up.
If you search the internet, and of course everything's true on the internet, right,
you'll see many historical accounts of people being buried alive, and as claustrophobic as I am, I can hardly read them.
The accounts list names, dates, and places of people from back as far as at least the 6th century AD, who were allegedly thought to be dead but were not.
Closer to the present are some supposedly documented cases, like Mr. Matthew Wall of late 16th century England,
whose coffin was dropped reviving him to live another few years,
and Marjorie Erskine, who allegedly died in Scotland in 1674, was buried and then woke up that night as grave robbers tried to steal her jewelry.
It's reported that she lived for many years after that, had two sons and raised them before dying a second time.
During epidemics of the 17th century, it's thought that plenty of unfortunate people were cast out as dead who probably weren't.
Either because they were thought to be dead or to try to prevent the spread of infection to the healthy family members in the home by setting the near-dead out for the body wagons.
In 1905, a British social reformer by the name of William Tebb and a physician named Edward Volem published an almost 500 page book titled, are you ready?
Premature burial and how it may be prevented with special reference to trance catalepsy and other forms of suspended animation.
Now there's a great title.
Tebb used medical references to document 219 cases of people who were nearly buried alive,
another 149 cases of people who were actually buried alive,
10 cases where people were dissected and found to be still alive,
and two cases where people were found not to be dead during the embalming process.
That really makes me shudder, but we don't have to worry about that anymore, do we, right?
Because modern technology can always detect whether somebody's dead or alive.
Well, in South Africa in 1993, after two days in the morgue, a man who was supposedly killed in a traffic accident was rescued by morgue employees who heard him yelling.
And in 1994, in Albany, New York, a woman who had been found lying on her living room floor without a heartbeat, not breathing, cold to the touch,
and allegedly stiff as a board woke up in the coroner's office after spending 90 minutes in a body bag.
She went on to live for another week.
Okay, let's just assume those are rare events, and I'm sure they are.
But they do illustrate that just as no two people probably enter this world in the exact same way,
the final exit of each person comes with its own story.
Besides, I'm never really sure how much science is behind some of those claims.
So, then when does death occur?
Well, we're alive because our cells are alive and functioning,
and we die when a significant number of the more important cells in our bodies die.
If you know anybody who's had a heart attack and survived, that person's living with some heart tissue that's probably no longer alive.
Stroke survivors carry around groups of cells in their brain that are dead.
The amount of disability a person suffers after a major body trauma like that depends on what part of the heart or what part of the brain is damaged and no longer functioning.
I like to say that our cells are really the guys in the trenches that are doing all the work that helps keep us alive.
Cells are carrying out all of our life processes like metabolism, respiration, movement, and maintaining what's called homeostasis.
That's the ability of a body to maintain its normal conditions like temperature and blood pressure,
despite external stresses and the ever-changing environment in which living things exist.
And you probably remember from biology class that cells make up tissues and tissues make up organs and organs make up body systems.
When you put all those body systems together, you get a multicellular living organism.
And I'm sure that you realize that body organs and body systems are dependent on each other.
For example, the cells in your heart have the ability to contract and generate force
so that they can pump blood to the lungs to pick up oxygen and then continue to push that oxygenated blood through our circulatory system and on to cells that need that oxygen.
They need it along with nutrients brought in by our digestive system that also use the circulatory system as their highway.
And together, the oxygen and nutrients allow cells to create energy.
And like all other body tissues, without that oxygen and nutrients and the energy the cells make from it, cells of the heart couldn't work.
And if the heart doesn't work, then other systems and tissues suffer too.
Okay, this isn't an anatomy and physiology course, although I could talk about that all day since it's one of the subjects I teach regularly.
The take-home message here is that body systems are intricately linked and that a major failure in any one body system can put enough stress on an organism, including a human, to cause its death.
Modern science now allows us to pretty accurately gauge the workings of body parts.
We have electrocardiogram or ECG machines to monitor heart functions.
And we have electroencephalogram machines called EEGs to look at brainwaves.
But there are still debates in society involving definitions of death.
Even modern technology that allows us to maintain certain functions in people that can no longer perform them on their own exists.
Ventilators replace respiratory functions and hearts that have given up can be restarted, making it even more difficult to really say when somebody's dead or alive.
So scientific panels have been created and devoted to outlining what constitutes death from a medical standpoint.
And those definitions have changed over time.
For instance, at the Harvard Medical School in 1968, a committee outlined four features to declare a person brain dead.
First, that the person be both unreceptive and unresponsive.
Secondly, that they have no breathing or movement.
Third, that they demonstrate no reflex activity.
And fourth, that their EEG or brainwave activity be in what's called a flatline stage.
The Harvard guidelines also suggested or recommended that the person be reexamined again 24 hours later and show no change before they could actually be considered brain dead.
Then in 1981, a U.S. Presidential Commission studied issues regarding death and amended the Harvard standards to say that a skilled physician should be able to use a bedside exam,
along with his or her own judgment to establish that death has occurred.
The results known as the Uniform Determination of Death Act, and it's been adopted in all 50 of the United States.
It says that there's no mandatory task or technology needed.
Anybody who has irreversible loss of circulatory, respiratory, or overall brain function is considered to be dead.
It might seem strange that we need governmental oversight of this kind of thing.
You know, something as natural as death, but the legal system is very complicated, and there's more at death at stake here, more than death at stake here.
If a 24-hour waiting period and certain tests were mandated to confirm death, other people wouldn't be able to be saved by organ donation,
which has to happen pretty quickly and is something that I consider a real form of life after death.
When you think about it, there are an infinite number of ways a person can die, some natural and some that attract the interest of forensic investigators.
In the United States, various forms of ischemic heart disease are still the top killer.
That means lack of sufficient blood flow to the heart, typically caused by block coronary arteries.
Now, based on data from around the year 2000, ischemic heart disease took the lives of about 164 people in every 100,000 in the U.S.
During the same time period, cancers of the respiratory tract took the lives of about 57 people per 100,000.
Cerebrovascular disease, essentially stroke, caused about 47 out of every 100,000 people to lose their lives in the U.S.
And breast cancer caused the deaths of about 30 of every 100,000 people.
Now, compare that with the only 15 people out of every 100,000 who died in motor vehicle accidents in the U.S.
Or the approximately 12 per 100,000 that took their own lives by suicide.
We can easily see that natural deaths far outnumber these types of fatalities.
In the next couple of lectures, we'll talk about how deaths, whether natural, accidental, suicide, or homicide, are investigated to try to figure out their cause.
And we'll take a closer look at homicidal deaths from violence in a future lecture, too.
But it's also interesting to look at how U.S. death rates compare to those from other countries.
Just looking at ischemic heart disease, Australia had a death rate that's fairly comparable to the U.S.
Germany's was a little lower, and Canada even lower still.
But deaths from ischemic heart disease in Japan were far less, accounting for only about 36 deaths per 100,000.
On the other hand, England and Wales had higher rates of death from heart disease at about 198 people per 100,000.
But in Russia, the number is over twice that at 409.
Deaths from motor vehicle accidents, which we talked about earlier, also show some pretty striking differences when we compare them across countries.
Now, looking at the same seven populations for comparison, deaths from MVAs were, again, highest in Russia,
followed by, in order, the U.S., Canada, Germany, Australia, and Japan,
with England and Wales weighed down at only six motor vehicle deaths per 100,000 people.
And no, I don't think it's because they all died of heart disease first.
Russia also tops the list in a remarkable way when it comes to suicides.
Sadly, nearly 42 people per 100,000 took their own lives in Russia,
followed by Japan, Germany, Canada, the U.S., and Australia,
with only about seven per 100,000 deaths being due to suicide in England and Wales during the same time period.
Well, let's get back to the science behind the universal phenomenon of death.
Despite the vast number of ways people can and do die, all these many causes can really be boiled down to just one thing.
People die because of an inability of the cardiovascular system to deliver oxygen and nutrients to cells.
Since, like I said before, we're alive because our cells are alive and functioning,
and we die when our cells can no longer produce the energy needed to sustain body processes.
The comparisons we made also illustrate that there are different timetables to the ways in which people die, too.
Dying results from more gradual processes called chronic conditions sometimes, like ischemic heart disease.
Or death can relate to quick events that are called acute causes of death, like a motor vehicle accident.
Longstanding conditions include lots of diseases like diabetes and high blood pressure that can develop and worsen over time.
Or chronic conditions might have been present since birth, like cystic fibrosis.
These types of longstanding diseases may take years or even decades to end somebody's life.
But accidents and violence cause what are called acute deaths from traumas like suffocation, shooting, stabbing, drowning, things like that.
Now, either chronic or acute deaths can be a cause for forensic investigation,
because whenever there's an unexpected death, an autopsy may be needed.
Now, the key word here is unexpected.
And even people with longstanding illnesses could meet with an unexpected death from a completely unrelated cause,
like a person who has cancer and gets hit by a bus.
We'll talk more about autopsy and forensic death investigation in the next couple of lectures.
That's where we're going with this discussion of the scientific aspects of death.
So, how do we recognize when a death is expected or imminent?
People who are expected to die are generally under a doctor's care.
And as the chronic condition advances, more and more of their body cells malfunction and die,
leading to tissues and organs with impaired functions.
And as organs fail one by one, body systems finally just shut down.
And because body systems are dependent on one another, vicious cycles get created
that just send a person into a downward spiral.
For example, if the heart isn't strong enough, it can't create the blood pressure needed to move blood around the body.
And then when blood pressure fails, the kidneys can't clean blood properly
and metabolic toxins build up in the blood, and then they begin to poison body cells.
That's what I mean by a vicious cycle. Things just go from bad to worse.
Other chronic conditions don't necessarily directly end a person's life,
but they're definitely contributing factors.
Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, commonly called Lou Gehrig disease, are just ALS.
Those are both nervous system disorders that cause people to gradually lose control of other body functions,
like movement and even breathing.
So in a downward spiral, people with these diseases become less active and more disabled,
and as fluid builds up in their lungs, bacterial growth can lead to pneumonia.
In cases like that, the direct cause of death is the respiratory infection,
but it wouldn't have happened if not for the underlying Alzheimer or Lou Gehrig disease.
The same goes for something like AIDS, where the immune system can't fight off infections,
and so pneumonia or certain forms of cancer can lead to the death of an AIDS patient.
In cases like those where a person's already been diagnosed with a serious disease,
there's usually a typical and reasonably expected sequence of events that culminates in their death.
It's also pretty obvious when a perfectly healthy person dies in an auto accident, for example,
or is shot during a burglary, then we know the death was completely unexpected.
But there are some gray areas when we talk about chronic conditions and acute deaths,
like when a young athlete dies for no apparent reason during a football game.
Cases like that are certainly unexpected, but might be easily explained during an autopsy,
say if the person's found to have a bad heart valve or some other condition
that neither the athlete nor his doctor even knew about.
It could be something that was present when the athlete was born,
but didn't present itself until he pushed himself beyond that heart valves limit.
That's still an acute death, but the underlying cause was present in a very chronic way.
Unfortunately, I'm sure that some of you have as much familiarity as I do with the signs that death is near.
I've been at the bedside of two different people while they died and several others as death was approaching,
and I saw firsthand a lot of the things you learn about when looking at information like hospice guidelines.
Hospice is the international organization that specializes in care for people who are dying.
And one of their contributions to our understanding of the sciences of death
has been to outline the physical changes that are to be expected when a person is approaching the end of life.
Obviously, when a person's body is shutting down from a chronic condition,
they eat less, they drink less, they sleep more, and they have general body weakness.
Some people even feel as though they're dying and might say that to their loved ones or caregivers.
As the nutrients supply to the brain declines, they may show anxiety, confusion, or restlessness.
The lack of fluid brings on dehydration, and because blood's mostly water,
when blood volume decreases, blood pressure decreases too.
Now, the heart might try to compensate with a rapid but really shallow heartbeat,
but when circulation slows down, then blood chemistry and blood pressure become less and less normal.
Our blood chemistry, particularly the ions in our blood, often called electrolytes,
is the driving force behind the movement of fluids into and out of body cells in compartments.
So, a person who is dying might have swelling in the arms and legs that complicates their blood flow even more.
That's part of the vicious cycle I talked about happening again.
And this kind of prelude to death typically lasts around two weeks, but that's an average,
and the hospice term for that period is the preactive phase of dying.
When people are dying from chronic conditions, they'll move from the preactive phase
into what's commonly called the active stage of death, which usually lasts a few days.
But in other cases where acute trauma causes a quick death, like massive bleeding,
whether that's internal from something like a ruptured aneurysm in the aorta,
or external bleeding like from a stabbing.
The active stage of death then goes a lot faster in the acute stage,
even though some of the body changes are the same,
and the hospice guidelines aren't really intended to describe these kinds of acute deaths.
When someone is actively dying, they may enter a coma, or a near-coma state,
where they're completely or nearly unresponsive to the outside world.
In other cases, people who are dying go to another extreme and might hallucinate and get very agitated.
Breathing and heart rate gets increasingly abnormal.
I've seen a dying person go for what seemed like close to a minute between breaths.
But the respiration rate for somebody who's actively dying is usually said to range from about 6 to about 50 breaths a minute.
A normal respiration rate is around 12 breaths a minute.
This is where I think TV and movies really get it wrong and portray some pretty misleading death scenes.
Think of all the Hollywood death scenes you've ever watched.
Most of them are what people might call a pretty death, especially in soap operas and live theater.
On television, a good-looking actor usually stays conscious till his last breath
and then nearly always utters some kind of profound statement to a loved one right before his eyes close
and his head drops gently to one side.
Those of you who've witnessed a death know firsthand it is seldom pretty.
When people are dying, their mouth will hang open, and as they dehydrate,
mucus collects in their throat, and their breathing may become more like a gurgle or a rasp than a typical breath.
Blood leaves the skin and goes to deeper vital organs, and the skin of a person who's dying often looks blotchy.
Their limbs might be cold to the touch because of this circulation, lack thereof.
A normal heart rate is around 72 beats a minute, but it can climb to double that in a person in the active stages of death.
It's anything but pretty and really difficult to watch.
Because I've literally written the book on death, subtitled Corpse's Cadavers and Other Grave Matters,
people always ask me questions like, is it true that a person loses bowel and bladder contents at the moment of death?
The answer to that really depends on whether the person's bowel or bladder is full at the time.
There's nothing about the dying process that causes mass peristalsis of gut muscles and drives intestinal contents on through the colon or out of the urethra.
But our intestinal and urinary outlets do have sphincters made of voluntary muscle.
So just as the muscles of the rest of the body relax in death, so do those voluntary sphincters.
And if a person's bowel or bladder is full, the contents may leak out at the time of death.
But if a person hasn't eaten for days and is dehydrated, there's really nothing in their bowel or bladder to exit at their death.
That same loss of control over voluntary muscles will cause the jaw to go slack and eyelids to remain half open in somebody who's died.
Because it takes muscle activity to close the jaw and close the eyes.
Other body parts relax and respond to the pull of gravity.
And death can look actually pretty peaceful, especially compared to the struggle for breath that can be seen in a person who's actively dying.
Another myth about death is that hair and fingernails continue to grow. Not true.
Growth requires energy and dead cells don't generate energy.
It's true that someone's hair and nails might look like they've grown after death.
But that's only because the soft tissues of the scalp and the nail beds can dehydrate and pull back a little from the hair and nails.
So it might look like the hair and nails have grown a little bit.
Something else that people often wonder about is how paramedics and emergency medical personnel handle people who are obviously dying.
The general guidelines are that paramedics can withhold care when they encounter somebody whose trauma is so serious that their injuries are completely incompatible with life.
Like a victim who's been decapitated in a car accident or a person who's clearly already dead like showing signs of rigor mortis or other evidence of decomposition.
The laws can vary from state to state in the U.S.
And decisions like these are often made between the on-scene medical emergency personnel and the consulting physicians they're talking to by radio or telephone.
Paramedics and emergency medical people are often on the front lines of a number of situations that intersect with the forensic community.
When a person is found unconscious, badly beaten, or the minute a serious car accident happens, and anybody calls 911 or 112 in European countries, 999 and some other parts of the world,
then emergency healthcare workers would be called out along with police officers.
And as I mentioned earlier when talking about crime scenes, it's essential that any life-saving measures be implemented even before any criminal activities are investigated.
Even though emergency workers can complicate a crime scene or a death investigation, it's still important that everything that's done or not done be carefully documented
so that if the victim of a stabbing ends up being taken from the scene to a hospital and dies there later, all the pertinent information gets transferred to the coroner's office or medical examiner's office.
Not only from the crime scene, but also from the paramedics and the hospital too.
All this information will be necessary to determine how, why, and where a person died and whether there are legal ramifications.
Forensic specialists known as death investigators or coroner's investigators are people who are called to the scene in all cases of unexpected death.
Along with law enforcement personnel, it's a death investigator's job to assess the situation and contact the coroner or medical examiner on duty in that jurisdiction.
Death investigators relay pertinent information to the coroner or medical examiner so that the right decisions can be made, like does the coroner have to come to the scene or will the body just be taken to the morgue?
Now it might surprise you to know that in most death investigations, at least in larger cities in the United States, the medical examiner or coroner in charge does not actually visit the scene.
He or she relies on death investigators to take photos and collect other information necessary to begin a forensic death investigation.
So in our next lecture, we'll talk about the role of forensic specialists once a death's been confirmed.
We'll look at the initial stages in death investigation and how they help in determining what's known as the cause and manner of death.
