I know a really great guy who's a death investigator and he once told me that as he's leaving
a victim's house, he often feels like the victim and the family have been violated twice.
First by the death itself and then secondly by the death investigators and the crime scene
personnel who invade their space and poke around in their personal life.
I guess we can only hope that all death investigators are that sensitive towards the deceased and
their families.
Now death investigators are people who were sent by the coroner's office or medical examiner's
office to the scene of a suspicious or unexpected death in the initial stages of inquiry.
They work side by side with law enforcement personnel but with different objectives.
Both entities begin the process of figuring out how and why a person died but police have
to immediately concern themselves with the who done it while the death investigator has
to try to remain detached from that aspect especially if the death might have come at
the hands of law enforcement or was maybe a death in custody.
So in a sense, the death investigator needs to serve as the objective eyes and ears of
the pathologist who might eventually conduct an autopsy.
Especially in really busy offices where coroners and medical examiners can't possibly handle
all the facets of an investigation by themselves, death investigators serve a really critical
role.
In consultation with the pathologist on duty, the death investigator will help determine
whether or not the coroner or medical examiner has to come to the scene.
Through photographs and other documentation, death investigators need to really carefully
convey the surroundings of the body back to the morgue in addition to mundane things
like determining how and when the body needs to be transported.
Although laws vary in different states and countries, there are usually standard processes
for reporting any death to public officials.
Some deaths are straightforward and they don't require a formal investigation, but
other deaths might be considered questionable or outright suspicious and they need a careful
examination.
One of the most well-known medical examiners in the United States, Dr. Randy Hanslick,
who I've had the pleasure to teach and work with on a couple of different projects, he
wrote a book about death investigation and in it, Randy summarizes the importance of
death investigations to individuals and the communities as a whole, and the community
as a whole.
Obviously, deaths can occur from someone breaking the law and this will be our primary focus
in this lecture and in the whole series, but unlike the notion of innocent until proven
guilty in the legal system, the rule of thumb in a death investigation is to always assume
foul play until shown otherwise.
But there are also deaths that can result from negligence or carelessness that may result
in a civil lawsuit like from an unsafe product or unsafe work conditions.
Remember that forensic means pertaining to the law and there are both criminal and civil
codes of law to be considered.
So how or why someone died could also relate to life insurance issues because some inheritance
is some policies aren't paid out in cases of suicide.
Public health and safety is another important consideration, like in cases where there is
or there might be an epidemic of some kind of widespread environmental contamination
or some kind of contagion.
Suspicious deaths can also happen in institutions like in hospitals, prisons, mental asylums,
and the safety of other patients or inmates relies on analyzing those types of deaths.
And then some families also opt for what we could call non-forensic death investigations,
often called hospital autopsies, to find out something like whether their loved one died
from some kind of illness that maybe might have a genetic component.
For instance, lots of people are diagnosed, unfortunately, with Alzheimer's dementia.
But the definitive diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease requires an autopsy of the brain and
there are some forms of dementia that are inherited.
So a family might request an autopsy to figure out what risks they might bear in the future.
But these kinds of autopsies aren't done at taxpayer's expense through the coroner medical
examiner's office.
They're done by pathologists in other settings.
And then lastly, both forensic and non-forensic death investigations contribute to scientific
research.
So in that sense, we all benefit from them.
Because our focus here is forensic science, let's look at some generalities about when
it's required that a death be reported to a coroner or medical examiner.
In the United States, there aren't any federal laws that govern death investigation.
The Model Postmortem Examination Act, which was passed in 1954, was intended to help states
generate their own statutes.
And so we can take some general guidelines from it and talk about when a death has to
be investigated by the medical legal system.
Any circumstance where a death was definitely or possibly caused by violence, any death
that may have been caused by a work-related or public health hazard, any death that happens
in a public institution other than a hospital setting, and any sudden or unexpected death,
all of those types of deaths need to be reported to a coroner or medical examiner.
And this includes all accidents and suicides.
Now keep in mind, we're talking about reporting deaths to the coroner or medical examiner,
not whether somebody is going to be autopsy or not.
We'll talk about autopsies in another lecture, but now let's talk more about what happens
during the initial stages of a forensic death investigation.
A death investigator has to collect as much information as possible about what happened
around, before, and after the death occurred.
Was any emergency medical aid given to the victim?
Was the body moved or altered in any way?
They also need to know things about the deceased medical history, maybe aspects of their
social or personal history, and what the person was doing up to the time of their death.
And obviously, because the victim can't speak for him or herself, the death investigator
has to rely on witnesses or people who knew the deceased to get that kind of information.
And this can involve asking some pretty sensitive questions, like whether the victim was depressed,
did the person regularly see a doctor, and if so, why?
What did the deceased last eat or drink?
Was that person known to take illegal drugs or engage in any risky or destructive behaviors?
Things like that.
The investigator also might not only have to go to the death scene, but maybe to another
location that might be related.
For example, let's say a person just got home from work and then collapsed.
Well, the death investigator would want to talk to people at the deceased workplace to
see if anything was said about them not feeling well or whether they did anything out of the
ordinary that day, stuff like that.
The investigator will take notes and photographs, maybe even a videotape.
Good images are really important because if the coroner or medical examiner doesn't go
to the location, those photos might be all they ever see of what could turn out to be
a crime scene.
Now, the death investigator's role isn't to solve any crime that might have occurred.
Let's up to law enforcement.
Death investigation is about capturing the information that might be important to figuring
out how or why a person died.
Basically, the information that's collected becomes the link between the scene and the
autopsy table.
Usually at the scene, the death investigator examines only the surface of the body and
then anything on it or in it.
And the authorities, when they decide that a full or even a partial autopsy is needed,
that's going to happen later at the morgue.
A death investigator needs to not only document the condition of the body and where it was
found, but also who found it and when.
Details like the victim's clothing, whether it was in its normal place or condition, all
those things might be important.
If there's stains or tears on the clothes or maybe bed linens, that kind of stuff needs
to be noted at the scene.
And any valuables or jewelry that are found on or with the body, they have to be carefully
documented not only for safekeeping, but also because they might play a role in getting
the person identified if nobody's sure who the victim is.
The investigator also has to document the temperature, the humidity, air movement, and any other
specifics where the body was found, like was the ground frozen, was the parking lot
asphalt or concrete, what was the current like in the water, things like that.
If there's a pool of blood around the body, its amount, its color, its consistency, all
those need to be recorded.
Is it fresh blood, clotted blood?
If there's an empty liquor bottle or a weapon nearby, the death investigator has to make
note of that.
They only have jurisdiction over the body itself and anything on it, and they won't
be responsible for analyzing other evidence, but those things might be important to the
scene.
The death investigator needs to help decide how to preserve evidence in or on the body,
like maybe bagging the hands in case the perpetrator's tissue might be under the victim's nails
and being sure to use a clean white sheet and a secure body bag so that they can preserve
any trace evidence.
The investigator also has to document all the visible injuries at the scene because
it's possible, although unlikely, that a body could be further damaged in transport,
maybe if there was an auto accident on the way to the morgue.
The death investigator may also have to do some limited searching at the scene, and this
is what my death investigator friend describes as violating the victim's personal space.
In conjunction with police officers, these death investigators have to look into a person's
bedroom and bathroom to see if any clues to the death are found there, you know, reading
a note or a journal on the bedside table, looking at a person's computer.
All those things might reveal clues related to somebody's mental health, their social
interactions, things like that.
Death investigators are the people that might see something like a conservative businessman
dressed in women's underclothing or find a body on the toilet or maybe hear from the
deceased husband that they were having sex when his wife lost consciousness.
So these are sensitive things, and you can imagine the scenarios that they encounter
at death scenes.
If the victim was on prescription medication, the death investigator might use the date on
the pharmacy label to try to figure out when the prescription was last filled, and then
they can compare that information to how many tablets are left in the bottle.
And this might show whether the deceased was taking that medicine on schedule, or whether
they stopped taking the medicine, or even if they might have taken an overdose of that
drug.
And sure, that's only part of the equation because we know somebody might have hoarded
medication and then taken it all at once, but toxicology results later would clarify that.
One really important thing to figure out when considering how or why someone died is estimating
when they died.
So we need to continue our discussion on the science of death by talking about post-mortem
body changes.
Now when a death occurs, all the normal body metabolism stops, and the biochemical changes
of decomposition begin.
Tissue decay can really be broken down into two main overlapping causes.
Part of decomposition happens simply because cells and organs of the body stop functioning
and body tissues undergo chemical breakdown.
But a significant cause of decomposition is actually related to life.
Not the life of the victim, of course, but the life of the absolutely astronomical number
of bacteria that live on and in a human body and continue to thrive after a person's death.
Right now, you and I have more bacterial cells living on us and in us than the total number
of our own body cells.
We have a symbiotic relationship with what's often called our normal flora, and we have
body mechanisms that keep those bacteria in check, meaning that they're in the numbers
we can tolerate and in the places they belong.
Some normal bacteria are specific, say, to living on our skin, like some Staphylococcus
varieties.
Other bacteria designed to live only in our colon, like Escharica coli, usually people
just call that E. coli.
Our regular body functions, like sweating, shedding our surface layer of our skin cells,
defecation, urination, all these things contribute to unloading a certain number of bacteria every
day.
Plus, we have immune functions that help defend us from the most excessive parasite
loads.
When somebody dies, all those normal functions stop, and the body becomes a reservoir of
energy and nutrients for that bacteria that we share our space with, as well as other
organisms of decomposition that we'll talk about later.
How much decomposition occurs in the body, or even if it happens at all, mainly relates
to the surrounding temperature.
If the body's frozen, decomposition will be pretty limited.
Many of you probably remember the story of the guy that was called the Iceman.
He was found in the Alps in 1991.
And scientists figured out that that guy had been dead for about 5,000 years, but because
his body was frozen, there was so little decomposition that his own brother probably would have recognized
him.
And I also heard from some of my anthropology friends at the U.S. Military's Central Identification
Lab about a World War II plane crash discovered in the Himalayas in 2004, where three crew
members were still pretty much visually identifiable.
So cold temperatures help retard bacterial growth and prevent the chemical changes that
happen in decaying organic matter.
I mean, that's why we refrigerate our food.
Now, I'm sure all of you have heard of rigor mortis.
That's the stiffening of muscles of the body after death.
But many people aren't aware that there are two other, what I call mortis brothers, that
are part of early decomposition.
Besides rigor, there are changes called liver mortis and algor mortis.
All three of these processes overlap in time, and they're not related to bacterial action.
These changes really come from the lack of our normal body functions after death.
Liver mortis, or sometimes just called levidity, is the settling of blood that starts to become
visible as a purplish discoloration on the skin's surface.
That happens about an hour or so after death.
Because the heart's no longer pushing blood through the circulatory system, blood responds
like any other liquid would to the pull of gravity.
So if a victim's lying on his or her belly, then blood will start to settle in the vessels
and tissues of the front side of the body.
Any pressure points on the body can show a different pattern from the skin around them.
So if an object is underneath a victim, like a gun or a cell phone, that pressure area might
look lighter in color than the skin around it.
If there's a ligature around the neck or even a tight waistband on pants, that can leave
a paler area of skin that lacks this levidity.
The ability to see liver mortis depends on the natural skin tone of the person who died.
But in all skin types, the hemoglobin in the bloodstream contributes to our skin color.
So then within about four hours, liver is usually well developed.
Now it might blanch out if a finger pressure is applied to the body, but by around eight
hours after death, the patterns of blood pooling are fixed, and they won't change even if the
body's moved.
So you can imagine then that liver mortis can be really helpful to a death investigator,
especially if the person who discovered a body maybe rolled it over to try to figure
out what was going on.
The discoloration of liver mortis will stick around then until more advanced decomposition
will completely change the normal skin tone in a process that we call marbling because
of the strange kind of modeled roadmap patterns that develop.
Investigators have to look for other color changes in skin too, like cherry red color
that might suggest carbon monoxide poisoning or a pink tone that may come from a cyanide
death.
Now algor mortis is a change in body temperature that happens after death, and that happens
concurrent with liver mortis.
You know that our homeostatic mechanisms keep our body temperature at roughly 98.6 degrees
Fahrenheit or 37 degrees Celsius, and they do that day in and day out with minor fluctuations
related to health and activity.
In humans and our other warm-blooded kin, metabolism and muscle activity, they generate
most of our body heat.
So when these activities stop at death, the body starts to cool down.
That's assuming it's in a colder environment than a normal body temperature, which isn't
always the case.
I mean, it's usually the case, but not always.
Algor mortis is an important early indicator of the time since death, and it'll happen
quicker in a cold environment and slower in a hotter environment.
A death investigator needs to take the ambient temperature for a potential comparison to
the victim's body temperature.
To get the core body temperature, some death investigators will use a thermometer probe
that they insert through the victim's skin into the liver.
The liver's a pretty big and easy to reach organ, and it's filled with blood vessels,
so it's a good reservoir of body heat.
But some medical legal offices don't use or advocate taking core liver temperatures at
the scene because it tends to introduce trauma of its own.
In an environment where the temperature is pretty consistent, like a climate control
building, temperature-related time since death calculations are pretty reliable.
In general terms, body temperature is pretty constant during the first hour after death
if there's not already a significant difference between it and the environment.
After the first hour, the body will start to lose heat at a rate of about 1.5 degrees
Fahrenheit per hour, which is about 0.83 degrees Celsius.
It's a little trickier when a body's outdoors where the temperature might fluctuate a lot
between day and night.
And the usefulness of algoramortis ends as soon as the body temperature equals the surroundings.
Over time, the body temperature can even rise again as bacterial activity and insect activities
start to generate their own heat.
We'll talk about insects in another presentation.
The condition of the body and how the person died can also affect the ability of a death
investigator to assess either liver or algoramortis.
So for instance, if a kid is left in a hot car and dies from hyperthermia, using the
temperature inside the vehicle compared to that of the child won't help much in determining
time since death.
And if somebody is nearly or completely incinerated in a house fire, there's not enough tissue
left to gauge much of anything in the way of time since death.
That doesn't mean a death investigator wouldn't have a role in those kinds of situations because
he or she still has the same responsibilities of collecting information that might be important
to the investigation.
They would just have to use other things to figure out, you know, the situation like
maybe use parking lot surveillance tapes to see what time the child was left in the car
or a neighbor's 911 call to see, you know, the time of that and that might help them
figure out when the fire started.
It's also important to check for algoramortis even if a death was witnessed.
Like if a guy says his business partner collapsed on the golf course, just because they need
to corroborate the witness's story.
Okay, back to the more well-known member of the mortis family, and that's rigor.
Rigor mortis, like his liver and algor brothers, relates to the breakdown of organ systems,
organs and tissues happening after death.
But more specifically, rigor mortis happens at the cellular level.
It's really a biochemical change that's part of the more widespread destruction of cells
called autolicis.
At death, all normal cell functions begin to break down, and the energy needed for important
cell processes like membrane function can no longer be produced.
So cell membranes disintegrate, and the organelles that hold digestive enzymes inside of cells
begin to rupture, and then other cell contents and molecules are destroyed by those enzymes.
It's important to remember that death doesn't end all body chemistry, it just ends our normal
body chemistry that's characteristic of a living body.
The molecules in the body cells and tissues are still a source of energy, but for other
life forms.
The cells themselves can't any longer use oxygen and glucose, the sugar, to generate
the specific energy currency known as a adenosine triphosphate, which is abbreviated ATP.
That's required for all cell functions.
So decomposition progresses due to biochemical changes that take place, and spontaneous reactions
will occur as old chemical bonds break and new bonds form within decaying tissue.
Some of these reactions even create new molecules, including two that have actually been named
cadaverine and putrosine, because they're responsible for the odor that we associate
with the decomposing tissue of mammals in our closest kin, like birds and reptiles.
You've probably smelled these chemicals drifting in the air as you pass a dead animal in the
woods or along the side of the road if you're driving with your windows open in the warmer
weather.
I know some researchers who have worked at the legendary Anthropology Decomposition Center
in Knoxville, Tennessee that people often call the body farm, and they were trying to
study the smell of decomposition a few years back.
They put unembalmed cadavers in climate-controlled caskets, along with a device called an artificial
nose.
And this is essentially a sniffing device that's used in different industries, like the perfume
industry, to try to break down a scent into its individual chemical components.
So the researchers wanted to see if they could actually use the quality or the quantity
of the odor to try to estimate the time since death.
It was a really interesting premise, but the results weren't as useful as those of
us in the death business had hoped they would be, unfortunately.
Okay, back to rigor mortis.
The activity of our muscles requires a constant source of the energy chemical called ATP.
In order to generate force, muscle cells have to shorten.
And they do this by over and over again creating and breaking, creating and breaking chemical
bonds between a couple of major proteins that we find in muscle tissue.
To do these controlled reactions, muscle cells use ATP in a couple of different ways.
And one of those ways is to break the connections between those proteins once they get involved
in a contraction cycle.
So when cell organelles no longer provide that ATP, muscle proteins get stuck in a contracted
phase.
And this muscle rigidity will actually happen faster if a person's been exercising right
before death since they had already used up most of the ATP in their muscle cells and
they never had a rest period to regenerate it.
So what that means is if a guy just ran a marathon and died from a heart attack, he's
going to go into rigor mortis a lot faster than a guy who dies in his sleep.
Another thing people don't realize is that rigor mortis doesn't last indefinitely.
Usually sets in within a few hours and then is fully established by about 12 hours.
But then as body tissues continue to degenerate and disintegrate and molecules become more
and more abnormal, within about 24 to 36 hours, rigor mortis ends and muscles become gelatinous
rather than contracted.
So rigor mortis is something else that a death investigator might use to hone in on the time
since death.
Depending on how the body is dressed and whether it's in an indoor or outdoor crime scene,
other changes might take place.
The odor of decomposition gets more intense and begins to attract some of nature's recyclers
including insects.
Organs and muscles get softer and the outer layer of the skin and scalp can start to pull
away from underlying tissues.
And forensic scientists call this skin slippage.
The toes and the tips of fingers and the edges of ears, edges of lips, these can start to
dry out and become leathery, especially if the body's in a dry environment.
And this is really what could be considered the early stages of momification.
And that can distort facial features and make a person hard to identify.
The incredible numbers of bacteria, especially those living in the gastrointestinal tract
can skyrocket, especially in the mouth, the throat, and in the large intestine.
And some bacteria reproduce in as little as 20 minutes, so you can imagine how quickly
their numbers can grow exponentially.
Bacteria don't have the same kinds of metabolic pathways that we do, and the ones that live
in our colon produce a gas as a byproduct of their biochemistry.
It's the same gas that can make us, shall we say, toot after eating things like beans
or broccoli.
As the numbers of these bacteria grow in the gut of a person who has died, the body might
bloat from the gases, especially in the abdomen.
Now the only upside of this bloating is when it has the potential to bring a drowning victim
or a body that's been dumped in the water to the surface where it can be discovered and
recovered.
One major downside of this is that a decomposing body can literally burst from the pressures
of these gases.
That is not something you see on television.
Not only does Hollywood fake a pretty death, even the corpses that are discovered in the
alleyways usually fail to conform to reality, and we are all lucky they haven't yet invented
smell of vision.
So unless something happens to stop that process of decay, like refrigeration in the morgue,
embalming at a funeral home, or cremation, decomposition will take place.
And I've seen bodies in just about every state of decomposition you can imagine at indoor
and outdoor crime scenes in the morgue and in the gross anatomy labs where I teach with
cadaver dissection.
I even sat with my own father's body through the night waiting for the people from the
funeral home to come the next morning.
And I actually witnessed the color of his skin as liver mortis began, and I felt his
temperature fall in algor mortis over the hours I sat with him.
And I'm sure that some of you have had similar life-changing experiences at the bedside of
a loved one who's died.
But in my father's case, the perpetrator was pancreatic cancer, and his death wasn't
only expected, it was imminent, so there was no autopsy needed, no formal investigation.
But in forensic science, the focus of a death investigation is to figure out why and how
a person died.
In formal language, we call that the cause and manner of death.
It's really the job of a forensic death investigator to merely, but really importantly, begin
the process of determining cause and manner by capturing physical clues and witness statements
that relate to a death scene.
A competent death investigator is going to pick up on things that family members might
be too unwilling or even too shocked to notice, and his or her documentation may end up years
later becoming very important in the courtroom.
But what happens at the scene is just the start, because an external exam, a medical history,
and even an approximate time since death, they're just the beginning.
It's not until a whole body of information, pardon the pun, is collected that the real
cause and manner of death can be known.
The information gathered by the death investigator will be passed along to the coroner or medical
examiner of that jurisdiction who's then going to decide whether or not an autopsy is necessary.
So we'll continue exploring forensic death investigation in our next discussion and see
how forensic pathologists use autopsy and related tests to shed more light on mysterious
or questionable deaths.
