I'm sure most people have some idea of what goes on at an autopsy, whether they want to
or not.
And everybody knows that the main goal of an autopsy is to try to figure out why and
how a person died.
In forensic terms, the why is called the cause of death and the how is called the manner
of death.
There are an infinite number of causes of death, heart failure, asphyxia, massive blood
loss, electric shock, thermal burns, drowning, malnutrition, drug overdose.
The list could go on and on.
The cause of death relates to a person's body and what failure or trauma terminated
their life.
And there's no way we could possibly discuss all of that in this series.
But manner of death, on the other hand, at least in most of the United States, is limited
to only five possibilities, natural death, accidental death, homicide, suicide, or unknown.
Some jurisdictions allow a sixth possibility, therapeutic complications, and that covers
unexpected deaths that occur following medical procedures.
The manner of death relates to the circumstances surrounding a death rather than the actual
anatomical or physiological mechanism that caused the death.
Legally, all deaths are given both a cause and a manner.
But in some situations, especially in some of my forensic anthropology cases, both the
cause and the manner could be listed as unknown or undetermined.
When a skeleton is found in an abandoned building with no apparent trauma, there may
be no way to know how or why that person died.
But cause and manner are not up to me as a forensic anthropologist anyway.
Those determinations are left to the coroner or medical examiner in the jurisdiction where
the remains were discovered.
I might find clues within the skeletal remains that might help the coroner or medical examiner
make their determination.
But all I can do, and all I should do, is point that information out, whether it's trauma
or some kind of disease process, if I see it in the bones, I can tell the medical examiner
or coroner that's in charge of the case.
Now throughout the series, I've been using the terms coroner and medical examiner.
And you might be thinking, why doesn't she just pick one and stick with it?
Well, in the United States, coroners and medical examiners are not the same thing.
Just a little over half of the United States use the coroner system.
And there's a lot of variation even within those states.
Generally, a coroner is an elected county official who may or may not be a medical doctor.
That depends on the particular state law.
In Ohio, where I live and work and do most of my forensic practice, county coroners have
to be physicians, but they can practice in any branch of medicine.
But in the two states that are within only 20 minutes from my house, which are Kentucky
and Indiana, coroners don't have to be medical doctors.
Lots of the Kentucky and Indiana coroners are morticians, emergency medical technicians,
dentists, and assorted other types.
In fact, there are currently only four states in the US, Ohio, Kansas, Louisiana, and North
Dakota, that require their doctors, their county coroners, to be medical doctors.
The United States inherited the coroner system from England, where it goes back to around
the late 12th century.
In Latin, corona means crown.
And the original function of having three knights and one clerk attend to death was mainly
to make sure that the appropriate assets got transferred to the crown when the person
died.
In a sense then, I guess the old coroner system was also in some ways the origins of the Internal
Revenue Service.
But a related role of the coroner was to investigate deaths to prevent homicides.
Today, the primary reason the coroner system has stuck around in many states is because
there just aren't enough qualified doctors trained in death investigation to handle the
entire country.
Although you might live in a big city like I do, where there may be several or even
many questionable deaths each day, in the majority of counties throughout the US, there
may only be a couple of deaths a year that need a formal investigation, and it would
be inefficient and cost prohibitive to hire a physician trained in medical legal death
investigations for that small of a caseload.
So in most parts of the country, being coroner is a part-time job with a pretty meager salary,
and it's filled by a local election.
Some jurisdictions have tied their own regulations to the coroner's position.
In some states, for example, morticians may not be coroners because of the potential conflict
of interest.
The thinking is that if the coroner comes to certify a sudden death where the family
had no funeral arrangements, the coroner could be seen like an ambulance chaser trying
to get the family's funeral business during difficult circumstances.
And I do know many coroners who are morticians, and I don't think that's necessarily a valid
argument, but you can certainly see why that law evolved.
Another potential problem with the coroner system is that coroners need to be reelected
every couple of years, so there can be a lot of turnover.
And this could work against resolving long-term cases.
I've seen that happen myself through my cold case work with the national missing and unidentified
person system.
Because the position of coroner can change several times even within one decade, and
especially if there's no set location that's the established county coroner's office, which
is often the case in Ohio, records can be lost or even not thoroughly transferred from
one county coroner to another, particularly after a nasty battle for an election.
Anyway, these non-physician coroners in the states that use them, they don't do autopsies.
Their job is to certify deaths in their jurisdiction and figure out when an autopsy is needed.
There are 88 counties in Ohio, but even though all Ohio coroners or doctors, really only
about 6 counties have the people in the facility to conduct their own autopsies.
The smaller offices contract with the larger agencies that in turn do their autopsies.
But even then, the local coroner where the body was found still has the last say on who
is autopsied and who is not, and on cause and manner of death.
I've heard people say, and I won't say where, but it's not my home state, that they're
a little concerned about a coroner system where Joe Blow is the coroner and his chief
deputy coroner is his brother Ricky, and the assistant deputy is his brother-in-law Earl,
and Aunt Marge runs the office, makes you wonder how you'd feel to be in that family
if there's ever a real nasty family feud, or even an alleged suicide, and the coroner's
office is in charge of the death investigation.
Okay, because of some of the issues surrounding the coroner system, some states have adopted
alternate strategies called medical examiner or medical investigator systems.
But even here, the only major common thread is that most medical examiners are appointed
by their state or county rather than being elected.
In the U.S., New York City created the first medical examiner system back in 1918.
Some states have a mixture where they have county corners, but with the oversight of
a state medical examiner's office, and that's the case in Kentucky where I also practiced
for about five years.
In some states, the medical examiner has to be a physician and maybe even a forensic
pathologist, but in other cases, the title of medical examiner can be given to anybody
responsible for death investigation, regardless of their education or employment background.
So you can see within the United States, there's a lot of variation.
You might want to research your own area and find out more about the death investigation
system where you live if you don't know anything about it.
Now that we understand who some of the players are, let's talk about autopsy.
The Greek word autopsy actually means to see with your own eyes, or basically to see for
yourself.
That's pretty cool when you think about it.
What somebody's doing when conducting an autopsy is using their own senses and their
own knowledge to speak for a person who can no longer speak for themselves.
Autopsies are done by medical doctors called pathologists who have specialized training
in interpreting the physical signs of disease processes that occur in the body.
Pathology literally translates to the study of suffering, but not all pathologists or
forensic pathologists, and not all even conduct autopsies.
Living people suffer from lots of diseases that might benefit from a pathological exam.
Medical and clinical pathologists routinely examine body tissues from the living, everything
from bone marrow and liver biopsies to gynecological pap smears to try to gauge the state of health
or disease in patients.
In the U.S., forensic pathologists are either MDs or osteopathic physicians called DOs who
have specialized training beyond their medical school.
They have to understand not only the normal and abnormal structure and function of all
tissues and organs, but also what happens to the body during all types of trauma, high
velocity impacts, strangulation, poisons, gunshot wounds, stabbings, you name it, all
kinds of accidents and violence.
And not only that, they have to understand the characteristic changes in all parts of
the body that take us through every stage of life, from fetus to old age.
They have to be able to separate diseases that were there prior to death, maybe as chronic
conditions, and then sort that out from what actually caused the death.
This is one of the reasons that the average forensic pathologist is usually 30 years old
by the time they complete their formal training.
I really admire the many forensic pathologists I know.
Okay, back to business.
When a body first comes into the morgue, the victim is logged in, and any personal effects
that come in with them will be documented and stored for safekeeping.
The remains then are weighed and measured, and based on information from the death investigator
in charge of the case, the pathologist on duty, in consultation with a coroner or medical
examiner, will decide on whether the autopsy needs to be done immediately, maybe it's a
really high profile case or something urgent relating to solving the case that the autopsy
could potentially show.
If not, the victim is put into whatever waiting line that agency has, and gets stored in a
cooler until the pathologist on duty is ready to take the case.
So the morgue isn't really like an emergency room, and this can occasionally cause issues.
I know about one case where a very obese woman was brought into a coroner's office late
one night.
She had been found dead in her bed, naked under the covers, and the initial assessment
was that she probably had a heart attack, so they decided to do the autopsy the next
day.
But when they got the body out of the cooler and began the exam the next day, they realized
that there was a noose tucked into the fatty folds around her neck, so the perpetrator
got at least about a 12-hour head start.
Don't judge a book by its cover, right?
Okay, the ability to do a standard forensic autopsy really depends on the condition of
the body.
In our last lecture on death investigation, I pretty much limited the discussion to cases
of early decomposition, in cases like that where the body is mostly intact and only in
the very initial stages of decay.
A forensic pathologist, usually with the help of morgue assistants, will do a complete external
exam and then document that with both notes and photographs of the appearance of the body
as they first observe it.
An autopsy changes forever the condition of the body, so that exam is important to do
right up front.
They'll look carefully for any trace evidence, like gunshot residue and fibers that might
be on the surface of the body or the clothing, and then collect that evidence for the forensic
science lab, which could be at the morgue or it could be at a crime lab somewhere else.
Whole body x-rays might be taken either before or after that external exam, and maybe even
before and after clothing is removed.
Clues might show not only whether bones are broken, but also foreign objects like bullets
or some previous surgical procedures like an artificial joint or surgical staples, and
that might give clues about a person's known health or their disease states, or it could
aid in identification if the identity is not known.
Next, any clues are taken off to see body regions that weren't visible during that initial
external exam.
And this is when a rape kit might be used to swab the genital or the anal regions, or
the pubic region might be combed to look for foreign hairs, if any type of sexual assault
is suspected.
The clothes might need to be analyzed for body fluids, blood, or defects that could point
to something like how many stab wounds the victim might have suffered.
After the pathologist feels sure that all surface trace evidence has been collected,
the body might be washed if need be, and if any blood, gunpowder, dirt, or any other
stuff is cleaned away, they'll do a second external exam and maybe take more pictures.
Skin wounds can be particularly tricky because skin is really pliable and wound margins can
come back together so well that small breaks in the skin can be really hard to find.
If surface trauma is found, then detailed photos and descriptions are made.
Lots of research has been done to try to develop confident ways to judge, say, the caliber
of a bullet or the type of knife used by just looking at the skin lesions.
But the bottom line is that skin is tricky because the skin itself has properties that
determine how it reacts to being broken.
And the angle of the projectile or the knife combined with the distance from the gun or
the force used by the assailant, those are all going to affect the look of the wound.
So during a detailed surface exam, the pathologist might not only be looking for information
about cause and manner of death, but if the body comes into the morgue as an unknown person,
often called a John or Jane Doe in the United States or Joe Blogs in the UK, Australia and
New Zealand, the autopsy needs to document anything that might be useful in figuring
out the person's identity.
This includes things like tattoos, scars and other features.
We'll talk a lot more about how unknown persons are identified in a later lecture.
Oh, and if it seems warranted, they'll take fingerprints.
Not only if it's an unknown person, but also if there's a chance that the body belongs
to somebody the police are searching for for any reason.
Maybe the dead guy was killed and is shoot out with police and he's responsible for
or at least a suspect in a string of robberies or rapes, something like that.
Taking prints and then running running them through IAFIS, which remember is the integrated
automated fingerprint identification system, might solve some unsolved crimes.
Another reason to take prints of a body at the morgue is to compare them to any prints
found at the scene.
I mean, investigators expect the victim's prints to be at the scene, but they'll also
need to sort out who else might have been there.
Okay, the next step in the forensic autopsy is the internal examination, which really
is a form of exploratory surgery.
Usually the pathologist makes what's called a Y incision through the skin that goes roughly
from each clavicle, collar bone, down to the sternum or breast bone.
And from there, the incision goes down the chest and abdominal wall to the pubic bone.
And this is just to reflect the skin in those areas so that they can first examine the bones
and muscles underneath for any trauma.
Now once the skin is pulled back, they look at the rib cage.
And then they use an autopsy saw or rib cutters to open up the chest and a scalpel to open
the abdominal pelvic cavity.
The pathologist will first make visual observation of the organs while they're still in place.
And we call this an in situ exam.
And then they start to take out individual organs like the heart, the lungs, liver, kidneys,
spleen to get a more detailed look at those.
Each organ will be weighed, measured and inspected, and often cut through with a series of slices
to look at the internal anatomy.
Because the size, the color, the density and other features can say a lot about whether
an organ's normal or not.
And then large chart might be from congestive heart failure.
And there's a certain surface appearance to the pale hard liver that's full of cirrhosis.
It used to be said that if a body's recovered in water, they could take a piece of lung
tissue at autopsy and it would float in water if the person didn't die from drowning, but
would sink in the water if the lungs were waterlogged.
And with newborns, I've read that the lungs will float if they've taken their first breath,
but will sink if they haven't.
And this could be important to find out whether a baby was a stillborn or was left out to
die.
But recent research is bringing these float tests into question because gases from decomposition
can also collect in lungs and cause them to float.
So just like any other scientific endeavor, the practice of autopsy changes over time.
There are way too many specifics about what happens at autopsy to cover here because there
are so many organs and body systems and diseases that might be involved in a pathology exam.
There can also be overlapping and related conditions like complications of one disease
that affect another organ or another body system.
The pathologist has to sort out this puzzle of existing conditions that may have nothing
to do with the death from what we might call more proximal causes, diseases or traumas
that directly led to the death.
And some of this information that might be picked up depends on how long the person's
been dead.
The standard appearances of organs can change once decay really sets in.
Once organs are out, the next step is usually taking tissue samples so they can be processed
with different chemical and staining techniques depending on the organ and then turned into
microscope slides by thin sectioning with a device called a microtone.
And there's only so much pathology that can be seen with the naked eye during an autopsy.
Because most diseases really happen on the cellular or tissue level, pathologists need
to do a tissue exam called a histologic exam as part of a routine autopsy.
So not only do forensic pathologists need to be experts in gross anatomy but also in
microscopic anatomy too.
And it might take a couple of days for the microscope slides to be finished.
So they're part of the reason the full results of an autopsy aren't ready the minute the
body gets closed back up.
The histology lab has to process the tissues, thin section them, make the slides, and then
the pathologist has to have some time in the office to look at them under the microscope.
And they might want to consult with other doctors in the office too.
And that's something maybe I should have mentioned earlier.
In bigger offices where there are small groups of pathologists all practicing together under
a coroner or medical examiner, consultations aren't out of the ordinary, particularly since
even some of my most seasoned forensic pathology friends, I won't call them old, they tell
me that they still see new and unusual conditions all the time.
Most offices have regular meetings to discuss cases right there in the office.
Okay, back to the autopsy table.
To check for the possibility of drugs or poisons, body fluids, and maybe even tissue samples
are collected for the toxicology lab.
As you know, drug overdoses, either accidental or intentional from suicide or homicide, cause
deaths every day.
And as for poisons, again, that can be accidental or deliberate too.
And if there's a suspicion, it has to be checked out at autopsy.
The toxicology results might take a while, sometimes a week or more depending on the
type of tests and how busy the lab is.
So again, closing up the body isn't the end of the story.
Depending on the suspicions, the pathologist might need to have microbiology tests run
on the body, fluids, or tissues too, to check for bacteria or viruses.
This isn't routine, and again, it takes time to culture microbes, which means to grow them
up in the lab.
Some bacterial or viral diseases might be seen in the microscope slides themselves because
they leave some pretty characteristic changes, like pockets of white blood cells in an infected
area of an organ or a tissue.
There are also some spot tests for certain bacteria and viruses and body fluids.
And that means tests that can be run quickly, like field tests.
But they would probably only be used if there was some widespread contamination that might
be a public health threat.
And they would always be followed up later with full confirmatory testing.
Depending on the pathologist, the next step in the autopsy is usually to look at the brain.
To do this, the scalp is pulled down over the face, and then a bone saw is used to take
off the skull cap.
And this way, the scalp can be put back in place after the autopsy in case the family
wants to have an open cascaded funeral.
Once the skull cap is off, the brain can be examined in place and then removed for thin
sectioning.
Now, brain tissue is a little trickier than other tissues in a couple of ways.
First, there are a couple of really nasty infectious diseases of the nervous system,
like the new variant of Kreuzfeldt-Yakub disease, abbreviated CJD, related to mad cow disease.
Both this variant, CJD and mad cow, are caused by prions, which are abnormal proteins that
become infectious and are at least, at this time, completely incurable and 100% fatal.
Now, even though all body fluids pose a certain health risk to others, at autopsy or anywhere
else, brain tissue can contain these prions that we have absolutely no weapons against.
The second tricky thing about brain tissue is that it needs to be processed differently
for thin sectioning in microscopy.
This takes more time, so that can delay the results of an autopsy.
As we've seen, some brain disorders like Alzheimer's disease can really only be positively
diagnosed through microscopic examination of brain tissue.
Most people don't realize that when a living person is diagnosed with Alzheimer's, that
that is the attending physician's best guess as to what's going on in the brain.
There's still no definitive way to detect Alzheimer's from any type of blood test or
brain scan.
Any diagnosis is tentative until there's a brain autopsy, but not all families opt for
a medical autopsy to confirm the diagnosis.
Brain slides are often sent to a specific specialist called a neuropathologist for an
exam, and that can add even more time until the full results of an autopsy can be released.
In some cases, and this is particularly true of my experience with child abuse cases, the
pathologist may open up the skin of the arms and legs to look for bruising or blunt trauma
damage that might not be easily seen on the surface or in x-rays.
Now this isn't a pleasant topic, but then none of this really is.
If it seems warranted, they will use the backside of each limb and make a long incision and
reflect the skin to inspect deeper tissues.
The way it's done can be closed up and still preserve the body for funeral purposes.
Especially in people with really dark skin, bruising isn't always as obvious on the surface.
And as we learned in our last lecture, blood acts differently after death when the circulatory
system shuts down.
So they may want to look for internal bleeding in deeper tissues of the limbs.
So what happens after the autopsy is considered complete and all tissue and fluid samples
are taken?
Well, the pathologist usually steps aside and the morgue attendance close up the body.
There's nothing really fancy or high-tech that has to be done at that point.
The organs that were removed are usually put in a plastic bag and then set in the body
cavity so the corpse doesn't look deflated.
But the organs aren't put back in their anatomical position.
I mean, what would be the point of that?
The skull cap is put back on the person with or without the brain inside it.
That depends on where things are going with the brain autopsy if one's being done.
The autopsy incisions are pretty crudely sewn up, not in any kind of grand surgical procedure.
They just close them up in a respectful way.
When those in charge of the death investigation decide that they've done all they can or need
to do with the remains and arrangements have been made, then the coroner or medical examiner's
office will release the body and any personal effects that come in with it to the funeral
home designated by the next akin.
This is assuming that the identity of the person is known.
If not, then decisions will be made about how long to hold the body or what the disposition
of the John, Jane, or sometimes even Baby Doe is going to be.
While we're speaking about next akin, coroner's, medical examiner's, and pathologist often
deal with family members as they continue the death investigation process that began
at the scene.
It's the family that might be able to provide the victim's medical history and point the
medical examiner's office staff to the hospital or doctor's office where records might be
found.
A family member might even be called in to view a body and verify the identity.
The family might be asked about tissue donation because some things like corneas of the eyes,
the bone, and skin, they may be able to be used for transplants even hours after death.
But the family really only has so much say in the whole autopsy process because by law
an autopsy can be ordered whether the family likes it or not.
Some religious groups don't allow autopsy and they can petition to prevent one but ultimately
it's up to the authorities in the jurisdiction to accept or overrule their request.
Remember that autopsy is a part of forensic science that's central to making sure that
deaths aren't caused by criminal activity.
So any unexpected death, even in cases where the cause of death might look pretty obvious
like an auto accident, that might have legal consequences.
Maybe the driver was under the influence of drugs or alcohol and caused the accident he
was killed in.
Or maybe the driver had a heart attack or stroke that led to the accident.
And we all know from Hollywood that a murder can be made to look like a suicide, things
like that.
Speaking of Hollywood, to wrap this up, let me add that most of the autopsy suites that
I've seen on TV look way more high tech, way more glamorous, and far more clean than most
of the morgues I've been in.
It's pretty obvious to me that nobody was ever really autopsy in the places they show
on TV.
People morgues are full of sights, sounds, and smells that cannot be captured on TV.
And they're also staffed by really dedicated professionals who aren't just going through
the motions.
Pathologists and their assistants do some really dirty, unpleasant, but very important
work that helps ensure the safety of the community and the integrity of the death investigation
process.
