In the last two lectures, we talked about early decompositional changes and how autopsies
are performed on bodies that are relatively fresh.
And fresh is the word that we use in the business.
Now let's return to talking about the changes that happen to a body after death and the
ways in which those changes either alter or help the death investigation process.
Remember that the early stages of decomposition relate to the failure of the cardiovascular
system to deliver oxygen and nutrients to cells and the biochemical changes that happen
as a result of the body's inability to make new sources of energy.
But the body still contains a lot of energy in the form of stored chemicals in its tissues.
The bacteria that live on and in the body will still continue to thrive after death,
but they aren't the only life forms that are interested in dead bodies.
They're just the ones that are first on the scene because they already live there, so
they get a head start in using the body's nutrients and promoting its decay.
Do you have any idea what the two main factors behind decomposition are?
Think about it for a minute.
We've already hinted at both of them.
What do you think?
If you said temperature, you're right.
Temperature is the number one factor that can prevent or promote decay.
Bodies decay slowly or not at all in really low temperatures, but bodies decay differently
in high temperatures.
Climate plays a role too, so I suppose climate is really a more accurate term than temperature.
Climate relates to the second main factor in the decomposition process too.
Does that help you?
If you said insects as your second choice, you're definitely on the right track.
But I would broaden that to include any other life forms that can feed off of a dead body.
We've seen that bacteria are involved initially and insects typically come next, but insects
are animals, right?
I mean, they're not bacteria, protus plants or fungi.
By the way, fungi and even plants can also participate in decomposition, but the main
players are insects and other animals.
Larger animals play a role in scavenging bodies and scattering bones.
And I don't just mean coyotes, bears or mountain lions.
It will probably gross you out to learn how many times forensic cases come to light when
the family dog brings a human leg into the yard.
It's really sad to think about, but sometimes when pets are trapped in the home of a person
who's died, they've been known to resort to scavenging their master's remains.
I don't think we need to talk about this topic any further, but it does emphasize the less
glamorous parts of forensic science that are never seen on television, like searching
through dog poop to look for bone fragments, which, yes, some of my forensic anthropology
colleagues and I have actually had to do.
I think you get the idea that this is going to be a pretty disturbing topic, but as I've
said before, death is not pretty.
I do try to think about things scientifically, though, and that helps me get through some
of my disgust.
Because when you think about it, organisms that participate in the decay process are
really nature's garbage men.
They were the original recyclers in the environmental movement.
When you think about every organism that has ever existed on this planet and then died,
well, we'd be up to our eyeballs are higher in death and decay if we didn't have these
kinds of life forms.
And it really is recycling, because every single atom and molecule in you or me that
wasn't present in the original sperm or egg that formed us, we borrowed from this earth.
Organisms of decomposition essentially then move chemicals around in an ecosystem and
make them available for new uses.
So let's get back to insects.
I've heard it said that a blowfly would know a person is dead before his own doctor would.
Their ability to detect the smell of death is more acute than in any human.
We've all seen flies buzzing around a dead animal or a nasty trash can full of garbage.
I think many people have the mistaken notion, though, that the flies want to eat what's
decomposing.
But insects, they're attracted to decomposition, and we call them sarcophagic insects, which
translates to flesh eaters.
Well, they're really looking for a place to lay their eggs.
The flies that you see buzzing around an unfortunate roadkill, or in my case that I see at a crime
scene or in the morgue, they're females looking for a moist, dark, nutrient-rich environment
where they can deposit their eggs.
And a logical place is the body of an animal, including a human.
There are quite a few different types of fly families that will be attracted to decomposing
flesh, and the types and distribution of them vary by geography.
But blowflies and flesh flies are among the most common, at least where I practice.
As I've mentioned before, forensic entomologists are specialists that use what they know about
insects, as well as spiders and other arthropod kin, to aid medical legal investigations.
You might be surprised at how much can be learned about a corpse by studying the insects
that inhabit it.
First of all, flies are usually only active during daylight, so if a body is deposited
in the environment at night, it'll probably be morning before the first eggs are laid.
And because flies undergo metamorphosis during their life cycles, there are some pretty characteristic
changes in their developmental stages.
The act of laying eggs, scientifically called ovipositioning, is usually done in any body
orifice, like the mouth, nose, eyes, genital, or anal openings.
But female flies will also be attracted to any break in the skin.
So a mass of eggs or newly hatched larvae seen in an area other than a natural opening
might indicate a location where trauma occurred, like a gunshot or a knife wound.
While that could be a big clue, it also has a downside in that these insects will quickly
alter the original margin of the wound, eventually obscuring not only the trauma, but also features
related to a person's identity.
So let's see how these flies do their thing.
After hatching, the first stage in fly development is the larval stage.
Most people call these maggots.
It's the larvae that use their little feeding mouth parts to begin to consume a corpse, incorporating
the nutrients in it into their own squirming little bodies.
And as they feed, the maggots go through phases called instars.
There's a first, second, and third instar stage where characteristic changes happen
until finally, in that third instar stage, larvae stop eating and will, if they can,
move away from the body to pupate.
Outdoors, larvae will typically migrate from the body to nearby soil or some other place
that's cooler and darker, since as they consume the corpse, they're basically eating their
home.
When a body decomposes inside a building, though, the maggot migration might take them
under a rug or to folds in the victim's clothing or in the bedding.
The pupal stage of a fly's life cycle involves the outer integument of the larvae hardening
into a shell called a pupa.
Inside the pupa, DNA directs this larval body to completely reorganize itself into an adult
fly.
And this is similar to the way a caterpillar changes to a butterfly within a cocoon.
When the metamorphosis is complete, the adult fly will emerge from the pupal casing and
go off to live a life of its own.
I mean, the whole thing's pretty remarkable if you ask me.
Now the timing of the life stages relates to the type of fly and definitely the environmental
conditions.
But let me give you just a basic idea of the timing at optimal temperatures, say 70 degrees
Fahrenheit, which is 21 degrees Celsius, for just one species of blowfly.
After being laid, its egg reaches the first in-star stage in about a day.
The second in-star stage a little over a day later and the third in-star stage by the next
day.
It'll stay in that third in-star stage until migration and pupal case formation, which will
all take just over about five days.
And then the metamorphosis within the pupa itself will last for about six days before
the adult fly emerges.
So the total time from laid egg to adult fly is a little over two weeks for that species
of blowfly under those conditions.
Because flies have such a scheduled life, scientists have learned how to use them to
help figure out how long a person's been dead.
In my business, time since death is often called the post-mortem interval.
And forensic entomology has increasingly become a great tool in that part of death investigation.
Through controlled studies, entomologists have figured out how to best collect and preserve
insects on a corpse and then use them in conjunction with the temperature data that's routinely
collected by meteorologists to develop mathematical equations used in approximating the time since
death.
I say approximate because there are other variables that come into play, like if the
body's heavily clothed, maybe wrapped in a plastic tarp or buried.
There can be other factors too, like if the body was held in airtight shipping container
or the trunk of a car or even put in a deep freezer before then later being dumped in
the environment.
So the thing that forensic entomology really tells you is how long the body's been available
to interested insects.
And it's not just flies that are involved.
There are lots of other kinds of sarcophagic insects.
Although flies are usually first at the food trough, it's not too much later that beetles
start to feed.
With beetles, some of the adults do use the corpse as a food source, perhaps while laying
their eggs.
There are lots of different families of beetles that will feed on decaying animals.
They're often called carrion beetles.
They also go through metamorphosis, but their larvae look significantly different than
fly maggots.
For one thing, unlike flies, beetle larvae have this hardened dark little head, and almost
all of them have tiny little legs, which fly maggots do not have.
These carrion beetles not only feed on the body, but also on the eggs and larvae that
are already present on the corpse.
I've seen wasps, bees, mites, spiders, centipedes, lots of different types of arthropods all
gathered at a corpse.
I've even seen lines of ants transporting fly eggs away from a body to their colony.
And I've seen spiders set up webs near a corpse to catch the flies.
In fact, every year in my forensic science course, we conduct our own little outdoor
decomposition project using lab rats that were sacrificed after serving as controls
in research projects at a local hospital.
And I have to say that for the most part, with only a few exceptions, after the students
get over their initial disgust, they find the whole process pretty interesting.
They really get the sense of what we call the insect succession patterns.
Even in the short time, it takes a rat to decompose.
We see that flies come in first, then beetles come in second, and then we see other opportunistic
arthropods get involved too.
The general rule of thumb is that flies are more active when the body is in the early
stages of decomposition when it still has a high water content.
While beetles prefer the drier stages of decay, some are even called high beetles because
they can consume tissue when it's really leathery.
I had one case years ago where a body was found in a corn crib on a farm.
It was one of those large, round, cage-like silos made out of wire where they dry out
feed corn, and there was literally nothing left of the man except skin and bones when
he was found.
His skeleton was completely encased in this leathery sheath that had been an insect paradise,
but by the time we found him, the only resident insects left were hide beetles that were trying
to work on his tough leathery skin.
In that case reminds me to make sure I mention the variability involved in the decomposition
process.
Even though there are generalizations that we can make, I've probably seen every stage
of decomposition imaginable because environmental conditions can vary so much.
Bodies can mummify if they desiccate in hot, dry environments, if they're in cold environments,
and they can mummify anywhere conditions are pretty stable year-round, like deep within
caves.
I've probably had a dozen different cases of mummification over my 25 years of practice.
One was a case where a woman had kept her dead mother's body in a storage locker in
the kitchen of all places.
What else would you do with it, right?
She kept her mother there for four years after mom died.
Another case was a young man, probably a runaway, who had rolled himself up inside of a piece
of carpeting in an old barn over the wintertime, maybe to keep warm.
In both of those cases, insects couldn't get to the remains, and so in one case that was
because of the lack of access, but in the other it was due to the cold time of the year.
In another case I had, even though a woman's body parts were buried in the woods for almost
a year.
When we recovered the remains, parts of them, like her feet, which were buried deepest in
the shallow grave, and that was no more than 18 inches deep.
Those feet looked almost completely fresh.
The skin was still pink.
And bodies decompose differently in water too, because different types of bacteria and other
microscopic life inhabit water.
So there, standard insect succession patterns just don't apply.
While I'm talking about some of my cases in decomposition in general, let me ask you
how quickly you think a body can decompose to not much more than bones, bugs, and smell,
let's say, in the heat of a Cincinnati summer.
What would be your estimate?
Keep in mind that Cincinnati is a temperate climate.
We've got four pretty distinct seasons each year, and it's about midway between the northern
most and southern most borders of the continental US.
Okay, what's your guess?
When I ask this question in class, I usually get estimates of six months, three months,
month and a half, things like that.
Most of my students are pretty shocked to hear that I've had several summertime cases in
which a full-sized adult body has pretty much fully decomposed in as little as two weeks.
In fact, I had one case involving a five-year-old girl who was rendered nearly to bones in a
single week.
I remember that case distinctly because I was at a Fourth of July picnic when I got the
call that the remains of this missing girl had been found.
Because my cases are usually skeletal, I said to the investigator, what do you need me for?
She's only been gone for a week.
So I thought maybe there was some bony trauma or something that they wanted me to take a
look at.
But he said she is nothing more than bones and a large maggot mass.
And even I was pretty shocked, and you can imagine I don't shock too easy.
In that particular case, the victim was only five years old.
So she was very tiny to begin with.
But the perpetrator had put her body in a plastic garbage bag, then wrapped it up in
a piece of carpeting and had taken it out to a local dump site.
There were apparently some holes in the bag allowing insects to get in.
And between the insulation provided by the carpeting in the heat of the sun, that bag
acted like an incubator and sped up decomposition.
When I performed my examination, the bones were even warmed to the touch as I pulled
them out of that writhing maggot mass.
It was a really awful case.
So how do we know what we know about decomposition and how it progresses?
In an earlier lecture, I mentioned the very interesting research facility at the University
of Tennessee in Knoxville commonly called the Body Farm.
It was started in the late 1980s by a really famous forensic anthropologist named Dr. William
Bass.
Those of us in the field are not supposed to call it the Body Farm.
So instead, we call it the Bass Anthropology Research Facility, which has the acronym B-A-R-F
or BARF.
Anyway, this amazing place, which I've been able to visit a couple of times, is where
state-of-the-art technology and just plain old scientific observation are used together
to conduct formal studies on the science of decomposition.
Now the Body Farm started as just one acre of ground with this 16-square-foot paved and
fenced-in area at the center of that acre where they could put a donated body and observe
it while it decayed.
Now a friend of mine, Dr. Bill Rodriguez, happened to be a doctoral student at the time
and had the enviable position of sitting in a folding chair and watching what happened
to the body.
Bill actually had to cover his head with netting to keep the flies away from his face while
he took notes and snap pictures to document the physical and environmental changes that
happened in real time as the body decomposes.
The research facility has now conducted over 20 years of scientific studies and has grown
to two and a half acres.
They currently receive about 120 donated bodies a year that serve forensic science in a couple
of different ways.
First and foremost, those bodies help us better understand the decomposition process so that
then we can extrapolate what's learned to our own forensic cases and come up with better
time since death estimates in our own work.
To that end, the facility has done all sorts of things.
They've submerged bodies in ponds of water.
They've wrapped them in plastic sheeting, closed them up in the trunks of cars and all
kinds of other realistic settings that simulate how bodies may be disposed of or deposited
in the environment.
The researchers have now even set up video cameras with night vision lenses and motion
detectors so they can see what goes on at night, like what kind of larger animals get involved.
The bigger animals are limited, though, to those like birds and tree climbing, opossums
and raccoons that can find their way past the razor wire and the electric fencing that
now surrounds that site to keep the local college fraternities out.
Okay, a second major way in which the Anthropology Research Facility at the University of Tennessee
has aided forensic science is by systematically analyzing all the skeletal remains that are
left after the decomposition studies have concluded.
Their work has led to new and improved ways to assess age, sex, ethnicity and stature
of unknown persons, which is a big part of the science of forensic anthropology.
Now, I mentioned that the extensive layers of fencing around the UT Research Facility
prevent large carnivores from getting access to the remains, but that doesn't mean carnivore
activity hasn't been studied, though.
A colleague of mine, Dr. Marcy Sorgh, in the state of Maine, has conducted studies on
how large carnivores consume and scatter pig carcasses in remote parts of the northeast
United States. While clear at the other end of the continental US, in the state of Washington,
another colleague, Dr. Bill Haglin, has done extensive research on how remains are transported
by water. So together, Marcy and Bill have produced a couple of edited volumes on the
science we call tephonomy, which is a professional term we borrowed from paleontology for the
study of what happens to remains of organisms when they're left in the natural environment.
This concludes everything from decomposition to fossilization. So through studies like
theirs and lots of others, we now have a better understanding of where to look for body parts
that have been scavenged by animals or disarticulated by water currents. This kind of stuff has
significant practical applications. For example, if a body parts found with tooth marks on
it, or fur on it, or animal poop called scat is found with it, and then that can be identified
to species like grizzly bear or coyote, then references can be consulted to see how far
those animals range and where they might take their scavenged food. Or with regard to the
water currents, if somebody falls off a boat in a river, the information that's known
about human disarticulation sequences in water environments can be used along with data about
local water currents to predict maybe where the victim's body parts are most likely to
wind up. This takes us to a discussion of where decomposed remains are typically recovered.
When we think of crime scenes, I guess most of us think about alleyways, buildings, cars,
things like that. But in my role as a forensic anthropologist, most of my crime scene investigations
are outside and often in more remote locations. I mean, if a person's murdered in New York
City, the body might be tripped over by somebody the next morning. But in smaller jurisdictions
and where there's less population density, bodies can fully decompose long before they're
found. There are also plenty of cases where bodies are taken out and dumped in remote
locations to help in the hopes of avoiding detection. Right now, as I'm speaking to you,
there are no doubt thousands of individuals, missing persons, whose remains are lying out
in places that may never be discovered. And that's just in the United States alone.
When I think about it, the majority of my forensic anthropology cases have been accidentally
discovered by somebody and then reported to police. Like a hunter and his dog walking
in the woods or a utility worker outlaying electric lines, a construction company putting
in a foundation, maybe a fisherman on a riverbank, or even kids playing near a lake or in a park.
You can imagine how disturbing that could be to somebody from the general public.
But there are other cases I've had where clues or tips have led investigators to believe
a body might be dumped or buried in a certain area. In those situations, I've been involved
in searches for scattered remains or for clandestine graves. Sometimes these have turned out to
be wild goose chases just based on some jailhouse talk. But in other cases, tips have panned
out and we've found what we're looking for. Let me give you some examples. When the situation
involves an open field or a wooded hillside, I usually recruit a group of my students.
They all know what bones look like and they'll work all afternoon for nothing more than pizza
and soft drinks just for the chance to get involved in some real forensic case work.
As we discussed at the beginning of the series, we use standard search techniques like line
searches and grid patterns to recover remains or exclude certain areas as being free of
bones or other evidence. Sometimes we're searching for individual skeletal elements that have
been scattered by animals or by soil erosion, water flow patterns. So it helps to know something
about the environment. My bachelor's degree in biology, combined with a love of the outdoors
and growing up with Fort Brothers, has paid off on more than one occasion. I mean, I'm
not afraid to stick my hand into a wood rat's hole or climb a tree and try to find hair
in a bird's nest. Well, at least not when I was younger. These days I'm more inclined
to send a student in for a job like that while I stand back and supervise. If we're searching
for a hidden grave, though, environmental clues can come in handy there too. When a hundred
and fifty pound body decomposes in the soil, it can be like dumping a hundred and fifty
pounds of fertilizer in just one spot. Sometimes the vegetation in the area over the grave
will be taller, more green or lush than the rest of the plants growing around it. On the
other hand, if the grave is pretty recent, there may be new early growth that's just
taking hold on the disturbed soil. There can also be like trampled and broken plants around
the grave, not only from the footprints of the criminals, but also from the spot where
they piled their back dirt that they took out of the ground when they were digging the
hole. Remember Locard's principle? Not only that, but the soil on the surface of the grave
will be different from the areas around it. And I have soil probes that I can push into
the ground to kind of let me feel my way around and help me detect the differences. If the
perpetrator replaces the soil above the body to ground level, but doesn't mound it up the
way they do at the cemetery, I might pick up on that too. Because I might end up seeing
a shallow depression at the grave site because soft tissues have decomposed and the soil
has settled into what was once the victim's body cavities. There I go, making smarter
criminals again. There are also some high-tech methods that can be used in certain geographic
areas. Everything from metal detectors in case maybe the body had clothing with metal
artifacts or something else with it. And there are also more sophisticated devices like ground
penetrating radar. But these have limitations. For example, ground penetrating radar can
really only be used on relatively flat surfaces, free of trees, and because it focuses on soil
disturbances, it really only detects any kind of soil disruption, not specifically a body.
Now what about cadaver dogs? I have often said that I will pit a forensic anthropologist
against a cadaver dog any day of the week. In fact, at one crime scene a couple years
ago where a body had been dismembered, I was the one that followed my nose and the trail
of flies to the place where the perpetrator had cleaned up his tools in the side yard
after killing and dismembering his wife. One of the pathologists at the scene even said
to the cops, see I told you she's better than a cadaver dog. I guess that's a compliment.
Now I'm sure there are a few good ones, but it's my personal opinion that quality cadaver
dogs are pretty few and far between. I've had occasion to work with alleged cadaver dogs
but have not personally witnessed a single success. In fact, in the case I mentioned
in the very first lecture, the case where the guy had buried Shannon in his backyard,
on two different occasions, while they were investigating that crime and that man, they
brought dogs to his yard. I was there and saw those dogs cover the same exact stretch
of ground where we eventually found Shannon's body, but those dogs didn't detect a thing.
Maybe someday the training will be improved, but there have been some really shady claims
put forth about the ability of dogs to detect human remains. Just google the story of a dog
handler named Sandy Anderson and her dog Eagle as the worst example. This woman talked her
way into some pretty high profile investigations, including with the FBI. It was later discovered
that she was planting evidence, including her own blood and some bone fragments and
even an amputated human toe for her dog to find at crime scenes. That's unbelievable.
So as we wrap up this lecture on decomposition, wherever and however the remains are found,
we all know that the most durable tissues in the body are bones and teeth. They can persist
long after all other tissues have disappeared. Because of this, the science of forensic
anthropology has emerged as a way to interpret the clues left when a dead person is no longer
a body. So we'll focus on bones and the stories they tell in our next lecture.
