Finally, after 22 other lectures about forensic science, we get to my home base, anthropology.
Because of all the references I've made to some of my cases, you probably already have
a pretty good feel for my role as a forensic scientist.
But let's back up from that a little bit.
Anthropology is the study of humans in all our manifestations, and so is a pretty broad
umbrella that covers a couple of different subfields.
The main four are linguistics, cultural, which some people call social anthropology,
archeology, and my specialty, which is physical anthropology.
Although I took courses in all four of those major fields, my studies in forensic anthropology
concentrated on looking at humanity through our physicality, our relationship to our
other primates, our evolution, and our bodies past and present, but with special emphasis
on the skeleton, since its durability is what links us to that past.
Today, modern physical anthropology also looks at things like blood types, human biological
adaptation to the environment, genetics in ancient and modern DNA, and particularly
in the last half of the 20th century, physical anthropologists armed with their knowledge
of the human skeleton have stepped into the realm of forensic science, again because the
skeleton is so enduring, and if you ask me, so endearing, how forensic anthropologists
typically examine human remains that may relate to legal questions.
And I say typically because I couldn't count the number of bags of deer bones, butchered
pig bones, and other non-human skeleton remains that have been brought to my lab for analysis
over the many years.
That's because most people, including police officers and even some coroners, don't always
recognize the difference between human and non-human bones.
I guess I should also say typically because one of my forensic cases was actually the
exhumation of the award-winning show horse named Wild Eyed and Wicked that was alleged
to have been poisoned in 2003, just before an important competition.
I think I'm the only forensic anthropologist ever called on for a forensic case like that.
And it all began one afternoon with a phone call to my office that started with the line,
Dr. Murray, you dig up dead things, right?
Now once bones are established to be human and not from some other animal, the next question
a forensic anthropologist addresses is whether or not the bones are of forensic significance.
Now living in the Ohio Valley where I do, which is a real hotbed of prehistoric Native
American activity, modern construction often turns up human bones that are prehistoric
or early historic.
And it takes a trained eye to recognize the context, things like the heavily worn teeth
and the bone qualities that point to really old remains.
There are some high-tech methods like radiocarbon dating that can be used to approximate the
age of bones.
But most of the time anthropologists rely on our years of training and experience to
judge whether bones are really too ancient to be considered a forensic value.
Now I guess if we found an arrowhead in the spine of a prehistoric Native American that
could be a forensic case, but the perpetrator is long gone.
I've also been brought old skulls with wires and screws in them, which have been clearly
prepared for anatomy teaching, maybe something a med student might have walked off with at
some point.
Anyway, I've been brought lots of remains that aren't forensic cases.
And usually the next responsibility of a forensic anthropologist is to establish what I often
call the big four.
That's age, sex, ancestry, and stature.
When put together, we call those four things the biological profile of a person, as judged
from skeletal remains.
The ability of a forensic anthropologist to figure out those things depends a lot on the
condition of the remains.
If I have a full skeleton, it's a lot easier to generate a biological profile than if I
have just a few isolated bones, a single bone, or even a bone fragment.
And sometimes that's the case.
Really, a forensic anthropologist does what could be called a nontraditional autopsy.
We examine remains when there's not enough of the body left to make the typical Y incision
and examine way and measure organs.
My cases include not only skeletons, which is the best case scenario, but also mummified
remains, isolated body parts like a severed limb or a dismembered hand, and also badly
burned or cremated remains.
To me, the worst cases are where the body is in some in-between stage of decay, like
underwater decomps or cases where active decomposition is in full swing.
And I don't mind telling you that these are pretty nasty, smelly, buggy, soupy messes
that I sometimes literally have to reach in and extract the bones from.
Other times, I have to do some processing to get the flesh off of decomposing, or sometimes
even fresh remains, maybe to look for trauma that could be matched to a tool mark.
Now anthropologists have their own secret recipes for that kind of processing, often
involving things like large crockpots, detergents, and other ways to slowly simmer off soft tissue
without using anything sharp that could introduce additional trauma.
So suffice it to say, without giving away my secret recipes, anything that isn't a skeleton
to start with can be turned into one if needed.
Beyond looking at a skeleton to develop a biological profile of a person's demographics,
which really is only class evidence, I also look for key indicators of individuality.
And anything in the skeleton that might be related to stress or injury, we'll talk more
about what makes skeletons unique in just a minute.
Anthropologists can also help determine the number of people involved in a mass fatality
if the remains are fragmentary and commingled, and that's part of what I did at the American
Eagle Crash I mentioned in an earlier lecture.
We also look for taffanomic changes.
Remember taffonomy is the study of what happens to remains after they're deposited in the
environment, and that can help estimate the postmortem interval in conjunction with the
things we talked about in the last lecture.
As I've said, I'm sometimes called to the scene for archaeology or surface recovery,
but I have to say that more than half of my cases are either brought to my lab or I go
to the coroner's office to examine them.
In the morgue, anthropologists often work side by side with pathologists to interpret
bone trauma, either directly or through x-rays.
And like the case I mentioned of the guy whose wife blew his head off with a shotgun, I've
reconstructed lots of fragmentary remains to get a better look at features related to
trauma or identity.
Sometimes I'm even asked to look at associated artifacts, like a knife or saw blade, to see
if I can say something about whether or not that could be the tool that was used in a
stabbing or dismemberment.
In one of my cases just a few years ago, the only injury I found on the entire skeleton
was a tiny cut mark on one of the vertebrae from the neck.
Not more than half an inch long, but it was there, I saw it, and I told the investigators
about it.
I said it looked to me like a small straight edge knife had made the wound.
Months later, after we linked that homicide to four others, none of which had any knife
wounds by the way, the serial killer admitted that out of all of his victims, he did cut
the throat of that one woman.
And lastly, in terms of my forensic involvement, although it's my second least favorite thing
to do, I have to prepare a formal report to submit to the agency that's in charge of
the investigation.
And that's especially important in case I have to someday do my absolute least favorite
thing to do, which is testify in court.
Okay, with that overview, now let's cover some of the science behind the skeleton.
Do you have any idea how many bones there are in the human body?
If you've had some anatomy, you can probably come up with a number.
Do you remember being taught 206?
Well, did you know that's really an average rather than an exact number?
It's only true for adults, not the skeletons of fetuses, children, and sometimes not true
for older folks.
In general, we go from having many bones to fewer bones throughout our lifetime.
For instance, a newborn skull is made out of 44 separate bones, but an adult skull is
made of just 28, counting the little tiny bones of the ear.
The numbers change over time because of the way bones form and how they mature.
When you see the skeleton of a newborn, it shows the same general pattern as the adult
skeleton, but the dimensions and shapes of the bones are pretty different.
The skull in particular looks a lot larger, so do the eye sockets.
That's because we're born with a bigger brain to body ratio than we have as an adult, and
the eyes are really an extension of the brain.
The bones of the rest of the fetal skeleton look pretty generic, too, in that they haven't
yet developed all of the nuances of shape that adult bones have.
You probably know about soft spots called fontanelles that are in a baby's skull, where
some of the bones of the brain case aren't yet fully formed.
These help facilitate childbirth, which is a scary time when the bones of the brain case
literally have to slide over one another in the birth canal.
Now, if you're around kids of less than about 18 months, you can usually feel that largest
fontanelle at the crown of the head.
Anyway, after the soft spots close up, they leave joints called sutures, where individual
skull bones connect, and these often persist throughout life.
Having some geriatrics, the sutures can completely seal up.
That's an example of something else that can decrease the number of bones in the skeleton,
because if that happens, an older person technically doesn't have 206 bones anymore.
The same will hold true if arthritis fuses the vertebrae of the spine or joints in the
hands and feet, so age and overuse can actually reduce the number of bones in the skeleton.
A different bones develop differently.
The clavicle or collar bone more or less just gets bigger in size throughout development
without really changing its shape much.
But the long bones of the body, like the ones in the arms and legs, they show pretty dramatic
changes.
When a long bone, like the humerus of the upper arm or the femur of the thigh, starts its
development, it begins as this stick-like cartilage precursor.
In the embryonic period is really a seven weeks of life.
The cartilage of the major long bones of the fetal limbs starts to turn into bone in a
process we call ossification.
By birth, the newborn humerus or femur is a shaft of bone that's capped on either end
with a knob of cartilage.
Later in childhood development, the cartilage margins at both ends of the long bones gradually
start to ossify too.
And this results in a bony shaft that's connected to two bony knobs at either end by cartilage
zones called growth plates.
Now, these units that are part bone and part cartilage, they function as one bone in a kid
during life.
But if I have an unfortunate case of the skeletonized child at the coroner's office, depending
on the age, each major long bone will usually be represented by one long cylinder of bone
representing the shaft, and then often two other pieces of bone that represent the ends
that were joined to the shaft by growth plates.
And that's true of every major long bone in the body.
So that's why a child technically has more bones or at least more bony elements than
adults do.
When a bone reaches its genetically determined adult length, and that varies for different
people, it's also affected by health and nutrition.
The growth plate will seal up, and then that bone is finished growing.
Fortunately, although there's a bit of an individual variation, there are general patterns
of growth plate closure, which have led to standards being developed that forensic cases
can be compared to.
Now, basically, growth plates around the elbows are the first to seal up, next to the ones
around the hips and the ankles, knees, wrists, and finally those around the shoulders.
Now, that's just a generalization, but there are specifics for every long bone in the body.
The last growth plate to close up is usually the one at the central end of the clavicle,
and that usually happens around 23 to 25 years of age.
So if a badly decomposed body looks to be adult-sized, but I want to make sure growth
is complete, I can just look at the clavicle, and if it's fully formed, that person's an
adult.
All the bony elements don't have to be exposed, either.
The cartilage growth plates can be seen easily on X-rays, too.
Assessing age in kids can also be done from their teeth, which is sometimes actually more
reliable than skeletal changes.
Tooth development seems to be slightly less influenced by things like malnutrition and
other health factors than bones are.
Now, as you know, we have two sets of teeth that develop during childhood, and their growth
and eruption patterns have been pretty well documented.
Teeth form from their crown to their root, and even at birth, the crowns of baby teeth,
also called primary or deciduous teeth, are already present in the jaws, and they can
be seen on X-ray.
And most kids, by about six months after birth, baby teeth start to erupt.
But by that same time, the crowns of permanent teeth are already starting to develop in the
jaws, in little pockets they call crips.
And don't you know I just love that term, crypt?
So using a combination of visual observations and X-rays, and by examining both teeth and
bones, a good physical anthropologist can usually do a pretty decent job of narrowing
down the age of a child.
We can often get within months for fetuses and newborns, but the range might span a couple
of years by the time a child reaches the toddler age.
And kids who are older, that range may spread to a few more years.
So as you can imagine, being able to come up with an age range, say, of two to four
years at time of death, can be really important in forensic cases that involve children.
Now while age assessments in kids are pretty straightforward and reliable, the downside
is it's impossible to tell whether skeletal remains come from a little boy or little girl
without DNA testing.
Before puberty rears its ugly head, and I can say that with confidence as a mother,
the skeletons of kids are pretty generic with regard to sex.
I mean sure, the plumbing is different since before birth, but when you look at little
kids on the playground, you can't tell the difference between little boys and little
girls from their body shapes.
The differences are only in how we dress them and style their hair.
But if you go to a cocktail party or other adult event this weekend, I'm pretty sure
you can tell the difference between males and females even from behind.
Or should I say especially from behind, at least I hope so.
Basically, when it comes to comparing sex and age assessment of kids and adults from
the skeleton, there are some opposites.
Age assessments are relatively easy in kids, but there's no way to confirm sex without
genetic testing.
And it's usually pretty straightforward to tell male and female adult skeletons apart,
but age assessments become ranges like 35 to 50 or 70 plus, things like that.
And realistically, the further we get from birth, the more different we become.
That's even seen in identical twins because of environmental influences and the way we
use and abuse our bodies.
Now I'll give you the sex talk in a few minutes, and it's going to be way different than what
you might have heard from mom or dad, but let's talk about age-related changes in adult
skeletons first.
Age features seen in children relate to maturation.
But once the skeletons finished growing, and remember that's usually in the early 20s,
age assessments in adults are based on degenerational changes, not growth and development.
So once we reach about 30, skeletally at least, it's all downhill.
Well, what I like to say about older ages is that I like what it's doing to my mind,
what I hate what it's doing to my body.
Okay, in trying to figure out age in adult skeletons, I look for things like arthritis,
especially in the spine and bone mineral loss, things like that.
Although activity levels, including injury or overuse in the case of arthritis, and underuse
in the case of bone density, they don't follow strict age patterns.
As I said, sutures of the skull can close up, but that's not as age-related as it was
once thought.
It can happen in younger people too.
There have been lots of scientific studies conducted on skeletons to try to help forensic
anthropologists better hone in on age patterns in adults.
And some of the best evidence can be found in places you might never consider.
For instance, there's a joint in the front of the pelvis between the right and left hip
bones called the pubic symphysis.
It goes through some characteristic age-related changes over time, probably related to the
biomechanics of our locomotion.
The ends of the ribs where they meet the breast bone called the sternum, they show characteristic
age changes as well.
Now, you might wonder how anthropologists ever came up with techniques like that, but
remember the scientific method.
Anthropologists' observations led them to hypothesize that the changes they were seeing
in the pubic symphysis and in the sternum rib ends were related to age.
So they did scientific studies on people of known ages to test those hypotheses.
And these scientific studies and others like them have generated standards that we can
compare to skeletons where the age is unknown.
But the methods aren't perfect because once you add in the standard deviations, you're
often left with a broad age range, sometimes a 30 or 40-year spread, and that's only going
to be of so much help in a death investigation.
It takes a lot of training and experience to feel confident assigning age ranges to adult
skeletons.
On the other hand, as I said earlier, adult remains usually show some pretty good evidence
of whether they belong to a male or female.
You know the best place to look on the skeleton for features related to sex?
And by the way, I'm using the term sex deliberately, not the more polite gender, because in anthropology,
those words have different meaning.
Sex is biological.
It's determined by chromosomes.
But gender is sociological and really defines the role someone assumes in society or how
they choose to identify themselves culturally.
So the two really aren't the same.
Anyway, one of the best places to look in the skeleton to judge sex is the pelvis.
At puberty, under the influence of hormones, the female pelvis gets wider from side to
side and wider from front to back.
Now if I asked you why, I'm sure you'd say, well, in preparation for childbirth, and of
course that's true.
But there's something even more fundamental behind that change.
After all, a female cow, giraffe, lion, or goat, they don't have an hourglass figure,
yet they deliver babies in pretty much the same way.
Did your dog get doggy curves when she went through puberty?
Even our closest living relatives, our fellow primates, don't show the same type of sexual
dimorphism between males and females when it comes to the pelvis.
Come on, you can think deeper than that.
And thinking really is the key here, so use your head.
OK, I've given you enough hints.
Think back to that fetal skeleton with its big head.
Your answer's right there.
As you sit there and I stand here, we have one of the biggest brain to body ratios of
nearly every other creature that's ever lived on planet Earth.
And we start our life that way.
The reason women get wider hips at puberty is because of our great big human noggins.
Now, I'm not sure if modern cesarean section will completely eliminate wider hips someday,
since now any skinny hip woman can have a baby.
But definitely in the past, our species experienced what amounts to an arms race between the increasing
cranial capacity that's happened over the course of human evolution and the wider and
roomier hips of human females.
Bada bing, bada boom.
That's pretty cool if you ask me.
OK, so besides the pelvis, where else can we look?
Well, the skull can show some pretty clear sex differences.
And you can even find some of this on yourself or see it or feel it on other people, at least
if you know them well enough to ask to feel their skull.
Now, I don't want you to get in trouble by staring at folks at the bank or in the coffee
shop while they're in line, but you can really see this in some people.
Now, take a look.
Males often have a brow ridge that sticks out further, and females usually have a higher
and smoother forehead.
Men usually have a more 90 degree angle at the corner of their jaw, and their chins
usually square it off in front with a point on either side.
Women on the other hand usually have a more obtuse angle at the corner of their jaw, and
their chin comes to more of a single point.
These are generalizations, but they relate to the fact that males typically have more
robust and rugged muscle attachment sites on their bones than females do.
Even if two bones, like the femur, of a male and female are exactly the same length, the
male typically has a larger joint surface.
And that's true whether a guy's a bodybuilder or a couch potato.
The testosterone he produces after puberty creates larger and sturdier bones on average
and bigger joints.
But I just can't go into court and say that a skeleton looked like a guy to me, right?
I have to have some statistical basis for my professional opinions.
So mathematical equations have been developed based on measurements taken on the bones of
people we know, whether they're male or female.
And then I can take a battery of measurements on an unknown skeleton.
Sometimes that means taking over 100 measurements and feed them into an equation or a computer
program that I have, and it'll tell me with a certain degree of probability whether the
bones most likely represent those of a male or a female.
And these same types of mathematical formulas have been developed to assess stature and
ancestry from the skeleton, too.
Modifications have been developed to extrapolate a person's height from any of the major long
bones of the body.
But to use them effectively, it helps to first figure out whether the remains are likely
from a male or a female, and even what ancestry the person might be.
That's because there are some limb-to-height proportional differences in women versus men
and even among people of different racial backgrounds.
Now the most complicated part of skeletal analysis is trying to figure out ancestry.
But there are some differences between certain landmarks on the skull, especially in the
mid-face region, that tend to differ among people whose ancestry comes from different
parts of the world.
So mathematical formulas have been developed that can help assess racial affinity using
the skull.
But you need a pretty intact skull to use them, and the methods are complicated by the
fact that very few of us have an ancestry background that's very pure these days, especially
as we become a more global community.
Now, I'll talk more about the usefulness of anthropology in other lectures, including
how biological profiles are used by forensic artists and the work I do to help identify
unknown persons.
But in the remaining time we have, I want to talk about another major contribution forensic
anthropologists offer to death investigations, and that's trauma analysis.
Now unless you really look up close, you might not realize that there are lots of little
nooks and crannies all over bones.
And like with that serial killer case I mentioned, where I found the one single tiny cut mark
to just one bone in that woman's neck, sometimes it takes a well-trained eye to figure out
what's supposed to be there and what's not.
And when trauma is found on bones, it can be really important to establish roughly when
it happened.
So when examining bones, I look for evidence of what's called anti-mortem trauma, host
mortem trauma, and importantly, paramortem trauma.
Anti-mortem trauma refers to things that happened before a person died, like a pre-existing
or healed fracture, maybe some screws from surgical repair, or evidence of some chronic
bone disease.
Things like that probably don't relate to the cause of death, but they can be important
clues about a person's identity if that's not known.
Post-mortem trauma involves things that damage bones after death, like when buried remains
are accidentally discovered by a construction crew.
I may have to sort out the fresh breaks done by the backhoe from any other types of skeletal
evidence.
And that's often way easier than it might sound, especially if the body was buried.
When remains decompose in the soil, they pick up the pigments from the earth, and the surface
of the bones get stained a reddish brown or dark brown color, depending somewhat on the
color of the soil.
But any fresh breaks look white in color.
Like when you break a pretzel and you see the color difference on the inside.
Post-mortem trauma is really a sub-category of toponomy.
Remember that's the science of what happens to dead things in the environment.
Post-mortem changes can come from lots of different sources, and they're not all as
easy to sort out as fresh and old breaks.
Even more complicated than that is perimortem trauma, which is a term used for bone damage
that happened at or around the time of death, and may even be related to the cause or manner
of death.
But there's a problem in that the perimortem interval is really ill-defined.
When does it start?
When does it end?
Plus, there are only so many ways a person can die that are going to show up in bone.
For example, if a decomposing body is found down in a well, and I can see a fracture in
the jaw, can I really say that happened at death?
Maybe the victim was strangled, and then the damage to the jaw happened when the person
was thrown down the well.
All I can and all I should really say in a case like that is that the jaw was broken
with no evidence of healing.
Remember, it's the coroner or medical examiner's job to determine cause and manner of death.
But if a body's buried and then discovered later, and I carefully do the exclamation
myself, and I see that the jaw is broken, and that there's dirt and soil staining down
in that fracture, then I can conclude that the jaw was broken before decomposition occurred.
But I still can't say exactly how or when that happened.
Now, one thing that's often touted as an exception to that rule is the fracture of
a tiny bone high in the neck called the hyoid bone.
If that's found to be broken, it's often taken by investigators as an indicator of strangulation
because it's said to be pretty hard to strangle somebody and not break that bone.
As you can imagine, I could spend hours talking about forensic anthropology, and I've only
really hinted at the ways in which we look for signs of age, sex, ancestry, and trauma.
But I really don't want to overemphasize my field in this general overview of forensic
science.
You already know me well enough to know that I'll talk more about anthropology and other
lectures, including specific cases, and I'll sneak in other information about one of my
favorite topics, how we can use clues in the skeleton to speak for the dead.
