We've spent a fair amount of time now talking about mortality, decomposition, and death
investigation.
And we've seen that forensic pathologists focus fairly strictly on people who've died.
The same is largely true of forensic anthropologists, with few exceptions.
But forensic dentists and forensic artists are professionals who definitely have one
foot in the world of the dead and another in the land of the living.
So let's talk about forensic dentistry in this lecture and forensic artistry in the
next.
We've met many fields of forensics that involve analyzing human evidence, as with hair, blood,
and DNA, the tissues used in forensic dentistry may come from the dead or the living.
Forensic odontologists are dentists trained to use their knowledge of human teeth primarily
in two ways, to help identify unknown persons and to interpret bite mark evidence on living
or deceased victims.
Teeth are even more durable than bones.
And like bones, teeth are sources of information throughout all stages of life, as well as
after death.
And because many people regularly visit a dentist for a variety of treatments like fillings
and other restorations, bridges and implants, dental therapy results in unique features
in many of us.
In cases of questioned identity, the dental records of a suspected person can be compared
to the teeth of an unknown person in the morgue.
But because there are also inherent differences in our natural teeth, forensic odontologists
also work with victims of bite marks, whether in the morgue or in a medical setting, in
an effort to match those wounds to the teeth of a suspected biter.
One of the most infamous cases where forensic odontology was used to seal the deal on an
investigation was that of Ted Bundy.
Bundy was ultimately suspected of murdering over 40 young women in a killing spree that
spanned the breath of the United States from Washington State to Florida and lasted about
10 years, including a couple of police captures and escapes.
Bundy is said to have had a chameleon-like appearance that allowed him to blend in nearly
anywhere and gain the confidence of unsuspecting young women.
Because Bundy moved around extensively, it took years for jurisdictions to recognize
they were dealing with the same perpetrator.
Bundy was not only diabolical, he was also extremely organized.
He meticulously planned and executed most of his crimes, but was ultimately executed
for them in 1989.
Two of the murders linked to Bundy took place in Tallahassee, Florida, in the early morning
hours of January 15th of 1978, when he killed 20-year-old college student Lisa Levy along
with her sorority sister Margaret Bowman.
Three other women in the same Chi Omega house survived his rampage that night, which detectives
estimated lasted only about 15 minutes.
Although Bundy made significant efforts to destroy any traces that could link him to
the crime scene, in fact, minimizing evidence was something he later admitted to working
very hard at.
But in this case, he left some very personal evidence on Levy's body.
During his attack, Bundy had bitten her.
After his capture on February 15, 1978, almost a month and several attacks later, Bundy
refused to allow a cast to be made of his teeth.
Investigators quickly got a search warrant in an effort to make sure Bundy couldn't
alter his teeth, for instance, by filing them down or breaking them.
Then police took photos and impressions of Bundy's dental pattern, showing tooth sharpness,
alignment, spacing, and several chip teeth that he had.
Detailed photographs of the wounds on Levy's buttocks were ultimately linked to the tooth
impressions taken from Bundy.
Comparisons made by several forensic dentists were presented as evidence at his trial, including
using photo overlays of Bundy's teeth on Levy's wounds.
This dental evidence at Bundy's trial, which, by the way, was the first nationally televised
trial in the U.S., was crucial in his 1979 double murder conviction.
The forensic dentists at Bundy's trial had several things going for them.
First, Bundy had some unique features in his dentition.
Secondly, he had bitten Lisa Levy twice in about the same location, once in one direction,
and then a second bite almost perpendicular to the first, giving them two pretty good
sources of compelling evidence.
Third, Levy, like so many of Bundy's other casualties, was apparently attacked first
and then sexually assaulted afterward, and we'll see later that the victim's condition
is just as important as the attacker's bite.
Now, let's take a scientific look at teeth in order to understand how they differ enough
to create some fairly distinctive patterns.
Like fingerprints, the dental pattern in each of us is unique, even between identical twins.
This is because both genetic and environmental factors shape tooth development.
Now, each tooth is composed of an exposed portion called the crown and an embedded portion
called the root, with an area between the two called the neck.
The root of each tooth is anchored in a socket called an alveolus, within either the upper
jaw called the maxilla or the lower jaw, which is the mandible.
Connective tissues called periodontal ligaments and a biological binder known as cementum
help hold each tooth root in its socket.
Other tissues that make up teeth include the outer covering of enamel on the tooth's crown,
which by the way is the hardest native substance in the body, and that's important to this
discussion.
As well as a bone-like core of living tissue called dentin, an inner chamber called a pulp
cavity and its extensions called root canals, they house the nerves and blood vessels associated
with each tooth.
Now when teeth form, they develop from their crown to their root, and as you know, we humans
get two sets of teeth during life, primary or baby teeth, sometimes called deciduous
teeth, which are lost, and secondary adult teeth, sometimes called permanent teeth.
A primary teeth actually begin their development at six weeks in utero, and then start to mineralize
by 14 weeks of fetal age.
The baby teeth are already quite developed at birth, in their crypts within the jaws
as I mentioned earlier.
Primary teeth typically erupt between six months and two and a half years of age, but
that's pretty variable as many of us know from being parents.
Then by around age six or seven, baby teeth usually begin to be shed and permanent teeth
start to erupt.
Humans like other mammals are known as heterodonts, and that means we have different tooth types
in our mouth, unlike a shark or an alligator that has a pretty consistent tooth shape throughout
its whole mouth.
There are usually 20 primary teeth fully erupted in a child's mouth by about age three, although
that can vary plus or minus a year, and this set includes four incisors, two canines, and
then four molars in each of the upper and lower jaws.
There are typically 32 permanent teeth, although patterns between 28 and 32 are fairly common,
depending on whether or not the third molars, commonly called the wisdom teeth, develop.
In a pattern of 32 adult teeth, there are four incisors, two canines, four premolars,
and then six molars in the upper jaw, and the same goes with the lower jaw.
These permanent teeth though, they don't wait until the baby teeth fall out to develop.
They start to form soon after birth.
Typically the six year molars erupt first, around guess what age, but what we don't see
is that even after its crown erupts, this first permanent molar will take about another
two years to complete its full root development.
And the six year molar doesn't actually replace a baby tooth, it comes in behind the baby teeth.
In fact, it's the permanent tooth crown formation in the front part of the jaws that actually
destabilizes all the baby teeth before they're shed.
As they're forming within the jaws, the adult teeth crowd out the roots of primary teeth.
Then as the roots break down and are reabsorbed by the body, baby teeth finally become so
unstable that they're lost, which is scientifically called exfoliation.
Remember back when you lost your own baby teeth?
There was no root, only a small bloody stump where a root had been.
As the standard ages of tooth development and eruption patterns have been so well documented,
they allow pretty good scientific age estimations.
Forensic odontologists assess age in children using a visual exam, along with x-rays that
show what's going on inside the jaws.
Now anthropologists trained to estimate age from teeth use these methods not only in forensic
case work, as I mentioned in our last lecture, but also when looking at historic or prehistoric
remains from archeology sites.
There are also occasions when teeth are used to help determine the age of a living child,
if that's necessary.
For instance, dental eruption patterns have been used as far back as 1837 in England to
establish the legal age of children when child labor laws came into being.
Despite or maybe I should say within these fairly standard patterns, there's also some
individual variation.
Not only in tooth development and eruption times, but in the structure of teeth as well.
All these similarities and differences are due to a combination of genetic and environmental
factors.
A person's genetic code helps determine tooth size, shape, and eruption times.
For instance, some differences within shape correlate with ancestry, like what are called
shovel-shaped incisors that are often seen in Native Americans and Asians, where the
front teeth, especially in the upper jaw, have a deep indentation on the tongue side
of the tooth.
There's also been research done on the variability of wisdom tooth formation.
I'll bet some of you developed all four-year wisdom teeth, while others only got two of
them, and others never formed third molars at all.
Patterns of four, two, and zero are the most common, but some people develop only one or
three wisdom teeth.
And I'm not talking about whether they were extracted.
I'm saying whether or not they ever developed at all.
Some people even form extra teeth called supernumerary teeth in their mouths.
And all these things seem to have genetic bases, including to some degree people whose
jaws are too small to accommodate their third molars, and so may need to have them extracted.
But there are also environmental factors that make some teeth more distinctive than others.
For instance, diet and stress.
Did you know that children all tend to carry what's known as a neonatal line in their baby
teeth as a result of the extreme stress to their systems around birth?
Anthropologists and odontologists have also long studied things called linear enamel hypoplasias.
These are horizontal lines that form in tooth enamel and are thought to reflect bodily stresses
in kids, like from weaning or childhood diseases.
These aren't only seen in the baby teeth, because remember by around six months of age,
the crowns of adult teeth are typically already forming up in the jaws.
Cavities, also known as dental caries, are other obvious environmental effects on teeth
that result when acids from bacteria eat away tooth enamel.
Some people seem to have stronger enamel than others, but sugary diets and poor dental care
are huge factors in tooth decay.
Other combination effects are seen in what's called meth mouth, where dry mouth from methamphetamine
use combines with poor hygiene, tooth clenching and grinding, and according to some sources,
possibly chemicals in the methamphetamine itself.
And that causes horrible tooth decay, especially right at the gum line.
Now other chemicals are definitely known to affect tooth formation.
Like the permanent yellow, gray or brown enamel staining that can affect developing teeth
when the antibiotic tetracycline is given to kids.
And even the growing baby teeth of fetuses if a pregnant woman takes tetracycline.
Also, elements from a person's diet, especially minerals from ground water, get incorporated
into teeth during their development and become a permanent record within each tooth.
Forensic scientists have actually tried to identify where an unknown person may have
lived as a child by looking at tooth chemistry in relation to what's known about worldwide
distribution of minerals in ground water, though this method is seldom actually used.
Now earlier, I mentioned clenching and grinding of teeth with methamphetamine use, but plenty
of non-meth users habitually grind their teeth, and that's scientifically called bruxism.
This can cause tooth wear that can be fairly distinctive, or at least diagnostic of someone
who grinds their teeth.
Even hobbies can alter teeth, like people who use their teeth like tools say while they're
sewing or using a pipe.
Tooth wear can also give clues about a person's age.
For instance, when an odontologist or anthropologist sees that somebody's third permanent molars
are worn down, they had to be using them for a while.
And since third molars don't typically erupt if they do at all until around age 17 to 25,
which makes me really question why they're called wisdom teeth, well if those third molars
are well worn down, it usually means the person's quite a bit older than about 30 or so.
Extremely worn teeth are also one of the ways I distinguish the teeth of prehistoric Native
American remains that I encounter in my forensic work.
Because the diet of prehistoric in the Ohio Valley, at least after corn agriculture, it
was so coarse.
Native American skulls usually have tooth crowns that are worn nearly completely flat,
often with exposed dentin, if their historic remains.
A big part of what makes one person's teeth much more different from another's involves
modifications done at a dental or orthodontic office, or accidental chips and teeth that
are not repaired.
Many of us have restorations like fillings or caps, or may have had orthodontic care.
It's also common for people to lose some or all of their teeth over time, and perhaps
get appliances like bridge work or implants.
You might not realize it, but when a tooth is lost, its alveolar socket closes up in
about six months.
So if somebody had a tooth pulled, especially if it was more than a year ago, there will
really be no evidence other than a gap where the tooth once was.
If a forensic odontologist or I see a healing alveolus in one of the jaws, we know the person
had a tooth extracted or somehow or other lost that tooth within about the last six
months of life.
There are also some modifications done for aesthetic reasons, like some historic and
modern cultures that drill into their teeth or file them into shapes for decorative purposes.
Then there's the relatively recent development of various types of what are called grills,
which became especially popular with the hip-hop music crowd.
There are all types of grills, and most of them are removable, but some of them are more
permanent, especially the earlier types.
And they're made out of gold, rhinestones, gems, and other kinds of materials.
Now obviously something like a grill can be a big clue in identity, especially if it has
an initial carved into it or something else really distinctive.
But fillings and other restorations, they're pretty unique too.
Even the 32 teeth in the typical adult mouth and the different surfaces of teeth that can
be restored, each of us has a pretty distinct pattern if we have dental work.
And differences mount too when considering the variety of materials that can be used
to fill teeth.
These include precious metals like gold, silver, and titanium, or their alloys, and
base metal alloys that have things like chromium, cobalt, and nickel in them.
More common restorative materials are made out of silver amalgam, which contains mercury,
and various dental composites and ceramics that are tooth-colored, but even plastics are
sometimes used in more inexpensive dentistry, especially in less developed countries.
Now orthodontic appliances can also be a clue if they're present, and you might think that
once they're removed, they're of no help.
Well that's true to the extent that they may leave little or no evidence on the teeth
themselves, but orthodontic work often leaves behind a tooth cast sitting in storage somewhere
from the person who once wore the braces.
The same is true for the x-rays of teeth that are commonplace record keeping in any dental
practice.
Dental charts, molds, and x-rays can be used for identification then.
In the event a person goes missing, investigators later want to compare the dental records
of the missing person to an unidentified body in a morgue.
We'll talk a lot more about forensic identification in a future lecture, but this will give you
some background to better understand how dental evidence is used as a means of positive ID.
But now that we understand how variable teeth and tooth patterns can be among people, let's
return to our discussion of bite marks.
Even if you knew that forensic odontology was used to convict Ted Bundy, you probably
didn't realize that the first bite mark evidence used in a criminal prosecution actually occurred
during the Salem witch hunts of 1692 when Reverend George Burroughs was accused of biting
a woman's wrist.
Ironically, even though the good Reverend was in jail at the time of the offense, since
witches have all manner of unusual powers, including potentially bilocation, Burroughs
was thought capable of committing the crime and they hanged him anyway.
Now, fast forward to more modern history.
In 1952, in the case of Doyle v. Texas, a man was found guilty of burglary after his
dental pattern was linked to a half-eaten piece of cheese he left behind at the scene.
And by the 1970s and into the 90s, bite mark analysis was really at its heyday in legal
systems around the world.
The forensic odontology organizations sprang up in America and elsewhere, and among their
many important contributions, they generated an increased awareness of bite marks as indicators
of abuse, especially in child and elder abuse cases and those of domestic violence.
The efforts of forensic odontologists led to new techniques used to detect and enhance
bite mark evidence on human tissues.
In the past decade or so, bite marks have been, however, among the many types of forensic
evidence coming under increasing scrutiny.
Lots of other scientific techniques used in forensics have this same current problem.
There's a measure of subjectivity to bite mark analysis that can't be overlooked.
And although scientific research continues to make bite mark analysis more objective,
new rules of evidence and the spotlight put on forensics by the National Academy of Science
in 2009, which we'll talk about in other lectures to come, well, that means more work still
has to be done to standardize bite mark evidence or limit its use in legal issues.
Now, bite marks are simply pattern injuries on a body produced by teeth rather than some
other weapon.
And as I mentioned, cases where bite mark investigation attempts to link living perpetrators
to victims not only include homicides, but also abuse cases, sexual assaults, and even
bites from non-human animals.
And that can be on the dead and the living.
Like many other types of evidence we've examined, bite mark analysis requires the ability to
compare a questioned wound to an impression made of a known suspect's teeth to look for
similarities and differences.
Now, before we delve deeper into bite marks, consider making your own impression evidence.
Get a styrofoam cup or a block of cheese like the one Doyle the burglar left his tooth
marks on.
Make sure it's thin enough to put between your upper and lower teeth, but thick enough
so that you don't bite clean through it.
Then carefully press your teeth into the surface just once by biting down gently but firmly.
Now examine your bite mark for features like tooth alignment, spacing, any chipped or pointy
teeth you have, or other features.
Then go to the mirror and see how well you think your impression evidence correlates to
the front on appearance of your teeth, which may or may not surprise you.
Let's start with some bite mark basics.
Did you know that almost nobody dies from being bitten, with the exception of bites
from venomous creatures?
But even non-lethal bites can still be pretty damaging, and may lead to infection and severe
scarring, maybe even loss of function of the body part that got bitten.
Both fatal and non-fatal bites can range from obvious to really subtle, so to investigate
a bite mark first it has to be recognized, and that's not always easy, particularly on
human skin, which is a lot more pliable than the styrofoam cup that you may have left your
own tooth marks in.
As we discussed earlier regarding autopsy, the anatomy of skin causes unpredictable
distortion, since skin is a very plastic material.
Because of this, bite mark evidence on a body will vary in a number of ways, including where
the victim is bit, whether or not they resist, whether the victim is dead or alive, and the
force used by the biter.
I alluded to some of this when we covered the Bundy case, let's go through a few specifics.
First related to the victim, areas of skin overlying muscle and connective tissues generally
retain bite mark patterns better than areas of skin over fatty areas.
So the health, age and sex of the victim matter, since those factors all relate to things like
muscle development and fat storage.
The more the victim is moving, the less distinct the bite will be, because then there's two
active forces working in two different directions when the victim struggles against a perpetrator.
Biting someone after death leaves a better pattern than when a living person is bitten.
Living tissue reacts to a bite with inflammation, like swelling, and people will usually try
to treat a bite immediately, even just if to rub the area.
The best evidence on a living victim needs to be examined within about eight hours after
the attack, and hopefully before it's manipulated by being scrubbed or treated in some way.
The wound should be photographed right away and then re-photographed repeatedly over a
period of about a week, in the hospital or wherever else.
We'll talk about special photography techniques in just a minute.
Now how do you think the force of the bite relates?
Most people think the more pressure applied, the more distinct of the mark will be, but
actually the harder the bite, the less distinct the impression is.
That's because aggressive bites leave bruising and may even tear tissues, making it tough
to see a pattern.
Really forceful bites can rip off patches of skin and deeper tissues, and these might
not even be recovered, especially if a non-human animal is involved in the bite.
Multiple bites in the same spot can also complicate things if they're superimposed on top of each
other and obscure the tooth pattern.
Pathologists can also use bite mark evidence and other skin injuries in the morgue to help
establish a time since death.
In the case of an anti-mortem attack, and remember that means before death, there will
usually be more diffuse bruising because blood's still circulating.
That's the typical kind of bruise spreading that we see on our own skin.
A bite made within about 5 minutes of death, which can be called a perimortem bite, causes
much more well-defined bruising.
But a post-mortem bite will leave defined indentations and no bruising at all because
circulation has stopped.
Bite marks can have different appearances, but can we say anything about the typical
pattern?
There would usually be big differences in a bite to skin than the impression you made
on a styrofoam cup or a piece of cheese.
You took something and put it between your teeth, but when a human or non-human animal
bites, they literally pinch the skin up between their teeth as they bite it.
So a typical bite mark will be more or less circular or oval and made up of two curved
arches that face each other.
When the biter stops, the skin's elastic properties will return it to its original position unless
a whole chunk of tissue gets torn off.
The bites don't always have that double-arched appearance, especially on a finger, a toe,
or other projecting body part like an ear or a lip.
And when there's clothing, hair, or something else over the skin, it can act like a cushion
and protect the skin from all or part of a bite.
That can leave a mark that looks like just one arch or just one side of the mouth.
Usually the pattern in a human bite mark shows a total of between 6 and 12 individual tooth
marks.
The other can be up to about 16.
That's 8 from the upper jaw and 8 from the lower jaw.
And this means that not all teeth, especially our molars, end up participating in most
bite marks.
Mostly front teeth are involved, as we'd imagine from the way we bite our food.
And as you saw, if you made your own impression, different tooth types make different marks.
Insizers make rectangles.
Canines make triangular or circular marks.
The marks are usually bigger for upper teeth compared to the lower partners.
So the top and bottom of the bite can sometimes be differentiated.
Other pattern injuries can mimic a bite mark, like the heel of a shoe or an animal hoof
mark from a stomping injury.
Even the fungal infection ringworm can occasionally look like a bite mark.
But if a bite mark is suspected, investigators have to take the same kind of steps we've
talked about with other forms of transient evidence.
Especially in a living victim, where the healing process, while good for the patient, will
quickly change that bite mark evidence.
As with other types of impression evidence, bite mark specialists often use alternative
light source photography to enhance patterns.
The forensic odontologist I work with in Cincinnati, my friend Dr. Frank Wright, is
an internationally recognized expert on bite mark analysis and the specialized photography
of pattern injuries in general.
And he teaches those techniques at forensic institutions around the whole world.
So in the remaining time we have, I'll say a little bit more about documenting bite mark
evidence.
A photos of a suspected bite mark need to be done with a measuring scale.
In fact, that was the clincher in Bundy.
The evidence wouldn't have held up without it, despite his pretty distinctive tooth alignment.
And alternate light source methods can be an amazing addition to the case documentation.
Alternative light doesn't penetrate the skin.
So UV photography can show good surface detail, like indentations and abrasions.
Because melanin absorbs UV light, UV photographs can show changes in skin color that aren't
visible to the naked eye.
In fact, healed bite marks can often be seen months after the initial injury using UV photography.
Infrared light, on the other hand, penetrates a few millimeters into the skin.
So that can be used to show what's going on in terms of bruising of deeper tissues.
Which can be especially helpful if the victim has dark skin.
Sometimes bruises that can't be seen on the outside are actually visible beneath the surface
with the use of IR photography.
As I said earlier, photographs of bite marks or other pattern injuries on a living victim
need to continue to be taken over time.
Because the bite mark pattern can actually sometimes appear more clearly over time than
it was at the initial attack.
A fresh bite mark should also be swabbed for other evidence.
Like salivary enzymes, ABO blood typing, DNA, and even microbes, because the bacteria in
different people's mouths differ.
So do the bacterial populations of human and non-human animals.
Investigators should also consider the victim's own dental pattern too, because self-inflicted
bite marks aren't out of the question.
If the bite mark's on a person in the morgue, it can actually be excised along with the
surrounding skin and preserved in formalin to stop decomposition.
Bite mark analysis is an important and interesting area of forensic odontology that continues
to be researched and used in case work.
But by far the most common application of forensic dentistry is in establishing positive
ID using dental evidence.
Next we'll take a look at another forensic discipline important in the identification
process, and that's the science of forensic art.
