We hold a lot of information in our memories.
Based on things we see or hear, some of it we readily divulge, but other things we tend
to hold private or even conceal.
That's part of human nature.
In a criminal investigation, the people involved may have as much or more to say about what
happened as the physical evidence itself, but it can be a challenge to get them to communicate
it.
In the next few lectures, we'll look at evidence that comes from people, not from their hair
or blood, but rather from their words and actions.
You've all probably been interviewed at some point in your life, whether for a job, a news
story, or some other reason.
What does the word interview give you the same feeling as the word interrogation?
Questions would be asked at both an interview and an interrogation, but in investigative
terms, those two fact-finding processes are not exactly the same thing.
And what about intelligence gathering?
That's an attempt to find out information, too, but it's done in a much less obvious
way than sitting down in a room with somebody and asking questions.
So let's take a look at the way information is gathered.
In order to advance a criminal investigation or to end one.
But let me start out by telling you that interview, interrogation, and intelligence are typically
not considered part of forensic science.
They're considered part of what some might call police sciences or applied behavioral
sciences.
Since the physical evidence is only part of the story in any legal case, though, these
topics need to be discussed.
We've alluded to interviews before when talking about the reconstruction of vehicular accidents,
the role of death investigators, and the work of forensic artists.
But there are very few forensic scientists who actually question people who are potentially
involved in criminal activity or suspicious deaths.
That's one major difference between real case work and what's shown on TV.
Television shows about forensics often show the scientists moving seamlessly from the
lab where they've just conducted some test to jumping in their cars to go interview a
witness or a suspect.
The only people I know who may spend part of the day in a crime lab looking at evidence
and part of it in the field are police officers.
And as I said in the very first lecture, as far as I'm concerned, they are the real heroes
in any investigation.
There are many agencies that still have police officers gather all crime scene evidence as
well as examine or test some of it, especially when it comes to examining fingerprints, footprints,
and tire track evidence, or performing preliminary tests for body fluids and illegal substances
like spot tests and breathalysers that are done out in the field.
These same officers may then turn around and interview people involved or potentially involved,
and they might interrogate a suspect.
On other occasions, they may gather intelligence through surveillance or undercover operations
to advance an investigation, or may even have to perform a raid where they break in to capture
suspects or retrieve evidence.
Forensic scientists just don't do that stuff, despite what you may see on TV or in the movies.
Police interviews go on all the time, on the street or at the station.
If officers see something suspicious, they can ask questions of those who are or might
be involved, or of bystanders.
So could you or I?
The people being asked can reply or not.
They have a right to refuse to answer.
Suspects have a right against self-incrimination, and a select group of people have privileged
communications, depending on the relationship to a suspect.
So a refusal to speak is legally acceptable.
But you know, it always surprises me on shows like Law and Order, when the detectives come
to somebody's door and ask a few questions, and then the person suddenly says, I think
you better go now.
Is it just me, or does that surprise you too?
I can't imagine telling police to get off of my porch, but maybe that's because I don't
have anything to hide.
If law enforcement isn't satisfied or doesn't get the answers they seek, and they believe
some type of crime has occurred based on evidence, statements, or a combination of the two, they
can start a formal investigation.
Before we go on, let me mention that investigations can really be broken down into three types.
Administrative investigations, which are fact-finding inquiries within an agency, like employee
background checks, safety violations, officer-involved shootings, professional misconduct, harassment,
discrimination, things like that.
And then there are criminal investigations, which will be our main focus here.
And there are also criminal defense investigations, which we'll talk about in a little bit.
There are three main steps in any criminal investigation.
First, determining whether or not a certain action constitutes a criminal act.
Second, figuring out who the offender is and locating him or her.
And third, showing the connections between the offender, the victim, and the crime.
Investigations are different from intelligence, and that investigations are reactive to a
complainer in action.
While intelligence-gathering is proactive and attempts to anticipate and hopefully prevent
illegal activity, we'll talk about intelligence later.
There are a few other important considerations as well.
For example, authorities have to make sure that the crime occurred in their jurisdiction
before they start investigating it.
Police officers need to understand local, state, and federal laws, and may have to link
with other agencies if a crime spans multiple jurisdictions.
Let's say a car was stolen in county A, then driven to county B, where a store was robbed
and a clerk was taken hostage, before moving on to county C, where the hostage was released,
and the stolen car was dumped.
Technically, each offense can be prosecuted in each county.
But typically, the prosecutor with the most serious offense, along with the best case,
will take the lead while working together with the other jurisdictions.
Another related task of law enforcement might be to find and recover stolen property, to
demonstrate criminal activity and figure out who might be responsible.
In cases of burglary, the stolen items that were removed from the crime scene constitute
important physical evidence.
This property may be sitting in the perpetrator's house, and he's not likely to let police in
to see it.
But it just might be at a nearby pawn shop, or even up for sale on the Internet.
Police may have to locate that property and maybe verify ownership in order to show that
a crime occurred.
So, when the police, the prosecutor's office, or the grand jury set forth that criminal
activity may have taken place, the formal investigative process starts.
This might mean going to the courts for a search warrant if the police are just beginning
to try to figure out who's responsible for a crime.
In other words, they don't have a firm suspect, but they do have a person of interest.
You've heard that term.
On the other hand, if there's enough evidence to pretty confidently suggest a suspect is
their guy, the police might request an arrest warrant right along with that search warrant.
So how do authorities know criminal activity has happened in the first place?
It's usually because somebody's told them.
You may have had to call police yourself at some point.
Maybe someone broke into your house, or your car, or you witnessed an accident happen,
or observed a crime take place.
Depending on the circumstances and how much you saw, the police may just ask you a few
questions over the phone, or maybe at your house, or they may want you to come down to
the police station for a more formal interview.
An interview is different from an interrogation, which we'll talk about in a bit.
The term interview is used for people who authorities expect are willing to divulge
what they know about what is or could be criminal activity.
If the crime happened to you, then you're a victim, but you're also a witness.
Witnesses whether victims or not are sources of sensory information about an event.
Visual observations are the most common, followed by things the witness may have heard, like
a scream or a gunshot, or simply something that was said.
Occasionally, a witness can attest to a certain smell, like marijuana coming in through the
apartment vent, or something they felt, such as in a rape case or other physical attack,
or even a strange taste that might indicate a drug or poison was put in somebody's drink.
During any type of interview, investigators will try to cover the same things we learned
about in grade school with regard to developing a story.
Who, what, where, when, and why?
They'll also want to add how, in other words, how the witness or victim believes the crime
was committed.
To get these facts, many agencies have standard reporting forms, sometimes called investigative
or complaint reports, to make sure that no critical information is left out.
During any actual questioning of the interviewee, authorities have to consider the person's
emotional state, their vantage point, motive for coming forward, things like that, which
would certainly be different for an eyewitness looking out of her apartment window who sees
a purse snatcher versus the lady whose purse was stolen.
We covered describing a suspect for a police artist in our last lecture, and that's part
of the interview process.
But victims may also be asked to describe stolen property.
Agencies typically have standard reporting forms for lost and stolen property, too.
These ask things like the manufacturer, model number, serial number, what the item's made
of, especially important in the case of jewelry, and any distinctive markings that could set
that item apart from others like it.
Now, as we've seen on television, not all witnesses jump at the opportunity to come
forth and tell police what they might know about a crime.
Reluctant witnesses might be afraid of the police or scared to death that the perpetrator
might retaliate against them, sometimes with good reason.
In fact, this reluctant witness phenomenon has been responsible for the anonymous tip
lines that are common in our local areas, like crime stoppers.
Some people just don't want to get involved in other people's business.
Witnesses, even victims, may just think that they can't afford to miss work.
If talking to the police means they'll then have to go before the grand jury, which could
then just be the beginning of what turns into a long trial.
In a police interview environment, anybody can refuse to talk, but witnesses and victims
can be compelled to testify in grand jury and other court hearings.
Obviously, officers have to approach reluctant witnesses differently than they would those
who are completely cooperative.
If confronted with a victim or witness who refuses to speak, officers might remind them
that they could be subpoenaed to give a statement in a more formal and less inviting place like
the courtroom, which could help alleviate some apprehension and help get that person
to open up.
Sometimes people are actually unaware they were a witness to a crime.
For instance, a person could have been sitting at a stoplight on their way home from work
and just happened to take note of a strange looking guy in a red pickup.
Later that night on the 11 o'clock news, it's announced that a local store was robbed
at gunpoint on a certain block and the getaway vehicle was a red pickup.
Maybe that person would then consider calling police to report what was seen that afternoon.
Sometimes police will even canvass an area for witnesses to try to find people that might
have seen a criminal or some criminal activity without even realizing it, but once they're
made aware they could end up giving police a pretty good interview.
Sometimes interviews require special consideration, as when questioning children or those with
diminished capacities.
This might include people of limited or marginal intelligence or people whose memory is or
was known to be impaired due to drugs, alcohol, or age-related memory loss.
Sometimes interviews have to be conducted in the hospital and we see that on TV a lot.
And sometimes an interview may happen years after the fact, like when reinvestigating
cold cases.
These cold case re-interviews can help affirm a witness's previous statement or maybe get
new information that was held back long ago at the time the incident occurred for any
number of reasons.
Maybe the person's lifestyle has now changed, they've matured, or they no longer fear retribution,
so they might now be more likely to cooperate.
Officers sometimes even give thought to the physical space in which an interview is conducted.
For example, whether they want to question somebody at home or down at the police station.
Other even specific guidelines that some authorities suggest for optimal information gathering
during an interview, based on considerations of things like the temperature and the size
of the room, which can impact the interview process.
They have to figure out if and how to record or video an interview and other strategies.
Some of this depends on whether the person being questioned is a victim, a witness,
or a suspect.
Now all this so far has related to interviewing a living person.
But sometimes the victim's deceased.
Did you know that investigators might still be able to do a highly modified form of an
interview called a victim profile?
Victimology, which is the study of the victim, may help lead them to draw inferences about
the offender, including things like motive or signature behaviors.
We'll talk about that in our next lecture.
Looking at a victim's associates, including his or her family, any pertinent financial
records, or any length the victim themselves may have to criminal activity, that's very
important.
People on the wrong side of the law are typically far more likely to wind up as the victim of
crimes or wind up in the morgue than the average law-abiding citizen.
Now let's move on to interrogation and see how it compares to other forms of interview.
Interrogation is a term typically reserved for the interview conducted of a suspect rather
than a victim or a bystander.
First off, law enforcement has to decide whether to arrest then interrogate a person, which
is called a custodial interview, and allows the possibility of the suspect invoking Miranda
rights or whether they want to interview first and then follow with an arrest if the results
of the interview weren't that.
Stories about how to approach the suspect are important.
This might even include choosing a specific investigator who's most likely to gain suspect
cooperation.
An obvious example of what not to do would be having an African-American officer interview
a white supremacist.
And throughout any suspect interrogation, the rights of the person being questioned have
to be maintained in order to make sure that the information gathered can be suitable later
in a court of law if that becomes necessary.
We've all seen many interrogations conducted on TV and in the movies, and you may wonder
how realistic those portrayals are.
I have a friend who's not only a seasoned law enforcement agent, but also teaches interview
and interrogation at the State Police Academy.
So I decided to ask him how what we see on TV compares to real life.
And Mark told me that he typically cringes when he sees the way interrogation is depicted
on most TV shows.
For one thing, he said that in real life an interrogation is usually conducted by only
one person, not multiple investigators at the same time, and certainly not by forensic
scientists.
And there's not all that yelling and getting into somebody's face.
In fact, investigators are trained not to get harsh during an interrogation.
To get the best results from the questioning, officers should speak in a soft and normal
tone and try to befriend and win the confidence of the suspect.
Now the goal is to get at the truth, which by the way is different than trying to get
a confession.
Getting at the truth is what's important during an interrogation.
People can confess to anything and they sometimes do.
Of course, law enforcement officers have their angles, but they're really not trying to trick
the person being questioned in the ways that you see on television.
In fact, a good approach is to simply tell the suspect that everybody has their side
of the story about what happened, and we'd like to get yours.
This is your chance to tell us your side of the story before other people, including the
prosecutor, tell theirs.
I found this interesting too.
Mark said he spends the first 15 to 20 minutes at the outset of each interrogation just getting
to know the person a little.
They need to establish their identity and to make sure that they have good mental faculties.
For instance, he'll ask them if they went to school and they may say, well, yes, but
I didn't graduate and he'll say, but you can read and write, can't you?
What he's really trying to do, even though they don't realize it, realize it, is to test
the person's competence at the time of the interrogation to make sure that they can't
later say they didn't understand what was going on.
I mean, the last thing an investigator wants is to have all of his or her hard work thrown
out the window later at a suppression hearing in a courtroom.
And Mark said he takes the exact same approach with any witness or victim during a standard
interview, too, because you just never know.
What starts out as an interview with a person who's not a suspect could change direction
rapidly.
An investigator always has to consider that somebody who's brought in or even comes in
as a witness could actually be the perpetrator.
But as soon as the interview turns in that direction, the officer will either need to
terminate the interview and collect more information or will have to apprise the person of their
constitutional rights before moving on.
What about audio or video recording?
Depending on the agency and the nature of the crime, the interviewer or interrogation
may be or in some jurisdictions must be recorded in some way.
Investigators may place an audio recorder right on the table during a standard interview
or an interrogation.
They may not tell the person they're also being videotaped if in fact they are.
People tend to become a lot more self-conscious on videotape than audio tape.
All in all, Mark said the biggest difference is that whole intimidation factor we see on
TV.
He said that kind of behavior on the part of law enforcement rarely works and will typically
backfire.
What you want to get is information, but yelling and screaming will usually just shut the suspect
down.
In order to have a successful interrogation, investigators should really try to minimize.
Put down the gun, take off the badge and sit across the table from another human being
and elicit the truth one-on-one.
Especially if somebody is an experienced criminal or has just been in prison, intimidation just
doesn't faze them.
Which also reminds me to tell you that a good investigator will learn as much as possible
about the person's character and background before going into an interrogation.
That will allow the officer to figure out and use the best method to try to get at the
truth.
And again, I emphasize what they're seeking is truth.
Justice for all but the most vicious and hardened criminals, and sometimes even in those cases.
A law enforcement officer is asking a person to talk about what might be the worst thing
they've ever done in their entire life.
Okay, let's change gears a little bit.
We've been talking about questioning people and gathering data from the law enforcement
side of the picture.
But near the beginning of this lecture, I mentioned there are other kinds of investigations
called criminal defense investigations.
These also really fly in the face of much of what we see on TV.
They almost never show these types of investigations.
Criminal defense investigators or CDIs work outside of law enforcement, and they're employed
by other agencies, by attorneys or maybe by private clients.
But they're more than what we think of when we hear the term private investigators.
Most CDIs are retired or former law enforcement officers, who are contracted on a case by
case basis.
But larger law firms in major metropolitan areas might have a criminal defense investigator
on staff.
These types of investigations are often misunderstood as simply trying to, quote, get the defendant
off the hook.
But just as another investigator, legitimate CDIs should be objectively trying to uncover
truth and facts.
After all, if all investigators worked for law enforcement, who would aid defense attorneys
in making sure that justice is blind?
You know that iconic image of the Roman goddess of justice, the lady holding the scales?
Well, she wears a blindfold, or at least she has since about the 16th century.
Now let's turn to intelligence and how it's used in investigations.
Beat cops gather intelligence all the time, just by patrolling an area and observing what
goes on that could relate to criminal activity.
But on a grander scale, intelligence typically means gathering information and using it to
thwart organized crime and terrorism.
One reference I use summarizes intelligence as involving three key elements.
Assessment, integration, and deduction.
Assessment means to judge the significance of the information gathered, which also involves
its pertinence and reliability, including the credibility of the source.
Integration is putting the parts and pieces together to come up with a composite story.
And deduction means to figure out what this series of linked facts and events signifies,
including how it can be used to predict what might happen next.
The general public doesn't usually think of intelligence gathering as something that
happens much on the local level.
But my police friend Mark tells me intelligence is being gathered and stored daily by even
the smallest departments.
Local law enforcement officers from across neighboring jurisdictions meet monthly to
share information that they gather.
Narcotics agents and drug task forces are typically the largest source of intelligence
because most criminal activity has some kind of connection to drugs.
Mark says that's even true for national and international terrorism.
He says his drug guys solve more property crimes than the property crimes detectives
themselves do.
And that's because of the intelligence gathered from informants in the narcotics world.
Let me mention a few specific tools that are used by agencies to help them gather and use
intelligence in the United States.
The Regional Information Sharing Systems, known as RIS, is a program for the law enforcement
community that began in the 1970s, mainly to help control organized crime like drug
trafficking, identity theft, human trafficking, violent crime, and terrorism.
RIS allows shared intelligence using a centralized database with secure communication through
an intranet, not the internet, and that gives agencies access to common investigative resources
and services like analytical services, funding, training, and loans of specialized equipment.
The RIS program is federally funded and administered by the U.S. Department of Justice's Bureau
of Justice Assistance Programs.
Specific to controlling drug trafficking is HIDTA, which is an acronym for the High
Intensity Drug Trafficking Area Program.
It came out of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988, which authorized the sharing of resources
within designated parts of the U.S. where serious drug trafficking activities were concentrated.
Analysts from HIDTA get and can act upon written search requests from any law enforcement agency
that inquires about a person or a place suspected to be involved in a homicide or drug-related
crime.
By examining both civilian and law enforcement databases, HIDTA can help find suspects, their
associates, and try to link them to vehicles, homes, and even financial assets.
Intelligence is also used to fight terrorism.
A colleague of mine who is a retired FBI agent from the Counterintelligence and Counterterrorism
Marinas was told the following statement in 1986 by a member of Israel Shin Bet, which
is the Israeli Internal Security Service, quote, if you look for bombs, you will miss
the terrorists.
And if you don't look for terrorists, you will be sorry.
That statement was made a decade and a half before the attacks of September 11, 2001.
Unfortunately, hindsight is 20-20.
And on September 11, investigators were looking for bombs, and so they missed the box cutters
that were the simple but key instigators in bringing down four U.S. planes in the most
massive single day of terrorism in the world's history to date.
We're living in a world that has recognized that to combat terrorism, you need to find
terrorists before they act.
And to do that, you have to understand something about their ideologies and their goals.
Terrorism is the use of extreme fear to exert influence on others.
It's been called by some politics by other means, after the words of the Prussian soldier
and German militarist Carl von Klauswitz.
We're familiar with too many types of terrorism from today's headlines.
The bombing of abortion clinics, product tampering, acts of eco-terrorism, illegal
activity of animal rights extremist groups, or acts of genocide and hate crimes against
minorities.
Terrorists like Unabomber Ted Kaczynski may act alone, and teams like Timothy McVeigh,
Terry Nichols and a handful of others form small terrorist groups.
But in some cases, mass acts of terrorism may be sanctioned and carried out by large
groups, including members of the government and the military.
Consider the Holocaust in Germany during World War II, Cambodia's Khmer Rouge in the late
70s, the so-called ethnic cleansing that took place in Bosnia and the former Yugoslavia
in the early 1990s, the Rwandan genocide of 1994, and too many other areas of the world
to name.
The motivations might range from political or religious to ethnocentric, but the results
are the same.
An uncompromising and fundamentalist ideology of intolerance and hatred is used as the basis
for a reign of terror against others who don't share or understand the terrorist beliefs.
I don't want you to take this the wrong way, but we must realize that in any such conflicts
as these, one side's terrorism is the other side's fight for freedom to express and exert
their beliefs.
I often remind my students that the 9-11 hijackers believed in their cause fervently enough to
die for it, so clearly they thought they were in the right.
So no matter how misguided terrorist ideas may be, they believe in them with an uncompromising
and non-negotiable conviction that's foreign to many of us.
And that may make them the most formidable type of enemies that law enforcement encounters.
So to effectively combat terrorism, extremism, drug trafficking, and other forms of organized
crime, investigators have to gather as much intelligence as possible about any significant
groups or movements who are or have the potential to become involved in illegal acts.
The law enforcement strategies used, though, still need to be carefully controlled in light
of the personal rights and freedoms provided by the U.S. Constitution.
Intelligence gathering includes all standard investigation tools, like surveillance of
suspects' activities, including communications and financial records, since these groups
have to be funded somehow.
In some cases, law enforcement officials attempt to infiltrate criminal organizations
using undercover tactics.
People are valuable sources of information for investigators.
What they see, hear, and say can be crucial pieces of evidence, but so can what they do,
including signals they may not even be aware they're sending.
So let's move on to a discussion of profiling and motive as we continue to explore the criminal
mind.
