You know, profiling may not even deserve its own lecture, I'll say that right up front.
It's one of the more controversial topics we'll discuss in this series, and it's not
used nearly as often as other forensic or investigative methods we've talked about,
at least not in any formal way.
In fact, even the experts agree it's more of an art than a science, but I decided to
include it because profiling is one of the more intriguing aspects of forensics.
The word profiling has different meanings.
It can be loosely applied as a screening tool, for example, to identify potential airline
hijackers by how they look or act.
It's also sometimes used in relation to traffic stops, in cases where law enforcement officers
stop people because of their race or other characteristics, and that could be quite legitimate,
like if a Hispanic female was just seen leaving the scene of a crime, but at other times profiling
is alleged to be prejudicial.
Beginning in around the 1960s, the term profiling began to be used to describe an attempt to
identify the characteristics of a perpetrator, like a lone assassin or a serial rapist.
This is mushroomed into some hugely popular portrayals in books and movies, like The Silence
of the Lambs, and television shows like Law and Order, Criminal Intent and Criminal Minds.
These depictions and even some advocates of the tool liken it to the be-all and end-all
for solving violent crimes, as if people go off to the FBI Academy at Quantico and come
back both a mind reader and a magician.
The FBI says that profiling applies only to the interpretation of the offender's behavior
in the commission of a crime to determine the unknown offender's personality traits
and characteristics.
Profiling is an art, not a science.
That's from the FBI itself.
In fact, it was a small team of FBI analysts who first began to use the term offender
profiling to describe how investigators could infer who an offender might be from the clues
they leave while committing one or more crimes.
A more formal term for this kind of analysis is criminal personality profiling.
Investigators who perform profiling are behavioral scientists or behavioral analysts, but use
an interdisciplinary approach incorporating a couple of different fields.
They need an academic background in psychology in order to understand human behavior.
They need a forensic science training of some sort to properly process and evaluate physical
evidence.
They also need extensive experience to put those aspects together in order to better
understand human nature and how it goes awry in the criminal mind.
The history of profiling really goes back before the FBI.
Clues have always used their past experience and their gut to try to identify criminals
and their motives by looking at crime scenes, looking at victims, and other clues.
Think about the golden age of literary and Hollywood detective work, which featured super
sleuths who could take minor clues and make accurate interpretations using a mix of behavioral
and forensic evidence, like Sherlock Holmes, Charlie Chan, Nick and Nora Charles.
But in reality, it really only makes sense that experienced investigators of crimes begin
to get a sense of the offender's traits based on similar crimes they've investigated in
the past.
As discipline formalized in the 50s and 60s, especially in the effort to solve violent
crimes, select law enforcement officers were chosen to attend the FBI's National Academy
at Quantico, Virginia.
There they received training in scientific investigative techniques, abnormal psychology,
and the latest findings in the study of violent criminal behavior.
This gave experienced violent crime investigators a chance to exchange ideas and experiences
to come up with new hypotheses about perpetrators and their motives for various acts of violence.
Officers were encouraged to bring their most challenging and unsolved investigations, and
then the cases were discussed and brainstormed among the group, which included special agents
called behavioralists from the FBI.
From here grew formal studies that examined rape, murder, arson, child molestation, bombings,
and what are known as equivocal deaths.
Those are cases where the manner of death, suicide, homicidal accident, is not determined.
The research this group conducted included both qualitative and quantitative data analyses
in an effort to create personality profiles of criminals.
The qualitative component consisted of things like face-to-face interviews with offenders,
sometimes over the course of days.
The team developed extensive protocols to guide and standardize these interviews, which
were intended to collect the offender's criminal history and document how his criminal
behavior, and I say his because although I'm not 100% positive, I'm willing to bet
they were all male offenders, especially considering the major crimes involved.
Anyway, these researchers tried to document how each criminal's behavior matured and escalated
until he became a master of his dirty deeds.
In fact, one account I read said that these agents who conducted the interviews would
do such extensive studies on the criminals in advance that sometimes the agent had a
better recall of the facts than the offender did.
The quantitative research compared and contrasted different cases in order to find commonalities
and patterns, and when this qualitative and quantitative data were melded, over time,
criminal personality profiles did evolve from this work.
In fact, many of them validated the anecdotal experience of the investigators in the FBI's
Behavioral Sciences Unit.
In other words, their data really did fit their hypotheses.
Out of this and other research emerged what's called criminal investigative analysis.
This is crime analysis from a behavioral perspective.
It's more scientific than what many think of as profiling because there's actual research
behind it.
Criminal investigative analysis ties both the investigator and a psychological researcher
together to help understand violent crimes and solve specific cases.
In this sense, theory has finally met practice.
Criminal investigative analysis is used by the National Center for the Analysis of Violent
Crime, or NCAVC, which became the operational successor to the FBI's Behavioral Sciences
Unit.
The kind of unsolved cases NCAVC works on include terrorism, threatened use of weapons
of mass destruction, homicides, rapes, arsons, bombings, workplace and school violence, extortion,
kidnapping, and missing persons cases.
NCAVC uses criminal investigative investigative analysis in these cases in three main areas.
First, the development of suspects.
Secondly, the interview and interrogation of potential suspects.
And third, the clearing of innocent persons from suspicion.
Now let's add some detail.
When these types of behavioral theories are applied with the goal of identifying a suspect,
the investigators are really looking to determine the offender's motivation.
His or her criminal sophistication and whether they had a prior relationship with the victim
of the crime.
To do this, they can study the victims.
They can also study the crime scene, and they can also consider any physical objects or
property that was taken during the commission of a crime.
To profile the perpetrator, analysts may first consider the victim.
We talked about victimology earlier.
Was the victim at a high, moderate, or low risk for this type of crime?
Let's use rape as an example.
In other words, was the rape victim a prostitute who was out on the street at three in the
morning?
Or was it a married woman asleep in her bed while her husband was away on a business
trip?
And keep in mind, we're not making value judgment on the victims.
We're looking for the type of perpetrator or the type of predator that would view these
ladies as potential targets and why.
If the woman's considered low risk, she may have been specifically targeted as a victim
by the offender.
He either knows her through a prior association, perhaps maybe even knew their husband was
out of town, or maybe he saw her as appearing vulnerable and followed her home.
In the case of the high risk victim, and putting yourself out on the street at three in the
morning is certainly high risk behavior.
In those cases, the rapist may have taken her simply because he saw her as available.
In other words, he was opportunistic.
Behavioral analysts may also consider the victim's personality.
Was she an outgoing person who was nice to somebody at one time, and ultimately that
person became a stalker?
Or was the victim known to be tough and mean, and maybe the perpetrator wanted revenge because
the victim made fun of him or embarrassed him at some time?
Investigators may consider how the victim dealt with her own personal security measures,
how she typically handled stress, or how might she react when confronted with untoward sexual
advances?
They might look into how the victim regarded relationships and sexuality, all kinds of
things like that.
Those things about the victim have the potential to help develop a suspect.
And what if the perpetrator took something away from the victim, or away from the crime
scene?
There are typically three reasons why that's done.
First, the item has evidentiary value.
Like the rapist might take a towel he used to clean himself, or the ski mask he wore
when approaching.
A second reason an offender might take something from a rape, or any other crime scene for
that matter, is because it has monetary value, like the victim's watch or jewelry.
But the third reason is that quirky reason often associated with profiling, and that's
a psychological motive for taking an object while committing a crime.
These are typically small, non-valuable items, sometimes something that won't be missed when
investigators work the scene, or maybe something that the victim or self might not even miss.
This trophy is used as a souvenir by the perpetrator for what he sees as an accomplishment, a
victory, or a way to fondly remember his event.
Criminal investigative analysis will also take into account evidence left at the crime scene
from a behavioral standpoint.
For example, in a homicide, why did the perpetrator smear blood on the living room wall when the
victim is dead in the bathroom?
What does that say about the killer?
Essentially, investigators are looking for things that don't fit the typical scenario,
to see if they could have meaning and somehow give insight into the killer or his motive.
For instance, a man kills his wife and wants the police to think she was murdered by a
burglar.
And he goes to all the trouble of staging the scene to look like a break-in.
He jimmies the door, he throws stuff all over the bedroom.
But when investigators look at the crime scene from a behavioral perspective, they realize
that the wife has been stabbed 32 times, which clearly doesn't fit the scenario.
It suggests anger and does not fit a run-of-the-mill burglary-gone-wrong scenario.
With regard to homicides, behavioral analysis breaks down offenders into two main categories.
Organized and disorganized.
Now Ted Bundy, that man was organized.
His crimes were planned and rehearsed.
They took into account the victims and their locations, what tools he would need to carry
out the crime, and what things he needed to take from the scene in order to minimize being
identified and apprehended.
But disorganized killers are impulsive.
They don't plan their attack and they use whatever tools are available at a crime scene.
They break a bottle and use it as a weapon.
They grab a kitchen knife or a lamp off the bedside table.
They don't come to the crime scene prepared.
These killers typically leave a lot more evidence behind.
But disorganized killers may, in time, if their crimes escalate and they mature in what
I hesitate to call their craft, they may become more organized if they're not caught early
in their career.
There are other related behavioral clues that analysts use when looking at homicide crime
scenes.
For example, was the body moved to another location or was the victim left where he or
she fell?
Did the perpetrator leave the body where the victim would be found in a reasonably short
amount of time or in such a way that the body might not be found for a long time, if ever?
I think about that, particularly when I'm exhuming a clandestine grave out in the middle of nowhere
or working with my students deep in the woods to try to find scattered bones, human remains.
My assumption in those cases is that this perpetrator probably knew this victim could
be associated with him reasonably easily in order for him to have dumped the body in
such a remote location.
In other words, finding the identity of this victim may certainly have the potential of
leading investigators to the killer.
Sometimes at homicide scenes, the body may be physically posed, like the scenarios featured
in the 1995 movie 7, where the killer chose his victims and posed them to represent the
seven deadly sins.
Investigators might look for behavioral clues such as was the body posed to offend the person
who discovers the victim, or to offend society in general, or to express his inner thoughts
toward the victim, or maybe who the victim represents, like hatred toward his mother,
prostitutes, or priests.
Analyzing violent crime scenes from a profiling perspective can also include a determination
of how the victim was approached or controlled.
And now I'm not focusing on the victim, but the clues from the scene that relate to understanding
how the perpetrator works in terms of his victim selection.
Does the scene say anything about whether the victim may have been specifically targeted
or just in the wrong place at the wrong time?
Does the scene say anything about the rules the offender had for choosing victims?
This isn't uncommon with serial killers, in that how the victim responds to the offender
determines whether he'll choose them or not as his victim.
I didn't mention this before, but Ted Bundy operated this way.
He had an idealized standard for his victim, and it wasn't just that they were pretty and
typically had long brown hair parted down the middle.
Bundy had a behavioral standard that he tested when he approached his victims.
They had to be worthy of selection in his twisted mind.
The lucky ones were not deemed worthy, apparently.
Several women survived encounters with Bundy, because for whatever psychological reason,
they did not meet his criteria.
And they lived to tell investigators of their close encounters with that monster.
What authorities learned from these women's accounts was that one of Bundy's approaches
was to put his arm in a sling or a cast on his leg, sometimes using a crutch, and then
he would pretend to need help getting something into his car in a parking lot.
If the young woman met Bundy's internal criteria, they were dragged into his car and taken off
to their death.
But if they didn't, he thanked him and drove away.
Maybe he was sniffing out their vulnerability, or whether they were a caring person or something
else that only he could understand.
Because in a very real and creepy sense, Bundy was actually profiling his own victims.
And I guess other serial predators do that, too.
Makes me shudder.
So what else does this type of criminal investigative analysis have to offer law enforcement?
Well, it definitely helps link serial offenses.
Traditionally, cases have been linked by modus operandi, simply abbreviated usually as MO,
which is the method of operation I've mentioned that before.
When perpetrators have a particular MO, it's a pattern that typically serves one or more
functions for them.
It helps enable them to successfully complete their criminal act in some way, either physically
or psychologically.
It helps prevent their identification, and or it eases their escape from the location
of the crime.
Now the problem is that modus operandi can change over time.
But if that's all that's available to investigators, that's what they have to use in order to help
link a series of crimes to a single individual.
Now another telling link between crimes is what's known as a perpetrator's signature.
A criminal signature is not something that's necessary to accomplish any particular purpose
like an MO.
Instead, a signature is based on some kind of inner or psychological drive that comes
from the offender's fantasies.
Here's a true example.
One rapist's murder had the MO of selecting black female prostitutes who wore blue jeans
and worked on the same street.
He would manually strangle them and remove their jeans.
All of that was his typical pattern.
But sometime during the commission of each of these offenses, he would rip the women's
jeans at the crotch, and that was his signature.
Using all the behavioral clues gathered from the victim, the crime scene, the modus operandi,
and any other particular signature, investigators can attempt to hone in on the perpetrator.
And then not specifically speaking of the perpetrator's identity here, although that's
the ultimate goal.
Criminal personality profiling is a way to narrow down the field of all potential suspects
to a more manageable and select pool of suggested individuals.
That's because the way an offender committed a crime and the interactions he or she had
with the victim or victims can allow certain descriptive traits and characteristics to
be attributed to that unknown offender.
That's classically what we think of when we hear the term profiling.
Criminal personality profiling can also lead to an understanding of a perpetrator's fantasies,
which can be positive.
For example, he loves and idealizes beautiful African American boys, or his fantasies can
be negative focused on power, control, and domination.
The offender's fantasies may be vague, repeated thoughts, or a very detailed, elaborately
thought out plans.
And these fantasies will often relate to the signature he's going to leave behind.
The more imagination the criminal has, the more considered and premeditated the plan
will be.
And the more criminal sophistication the perpetrator has, the less evidence he will
leave at the scene of the crime.
And the more difficult the task of identifying and capturing him will be.
That's why I keep repeating my fear that all this attention to friends' excites, including
my own work here, can contribute to making smarter criminals.
Propheters can also surmise clues as to a perpetrator's personality by things like whether
he shows concern for personal risk.
For example, did the offender take into account the time of day, the potential for witnesses?
Did he show the need to conceal his identity?
Did he appear to be wary of alarms or security cameras, anything like that?
So then what are the results of this type of criminal personality profiling?
Well, behavioral analysts have looked at broad groups of characteristics and collected them
into typologies.
Not all offenders in a given typology must have all the characteristics belonging to
it, but they have to have a certain number of them to be considered in that type.
This is the important thing.
The goal is to create a profile that can be released to the public, and that profile has
to sufficiently describe the offender in a way that his own associates will recognize
him and bring their suspicions to the authorities.
That's what a valid profile can do.
Depending on the amount of information authorities have, a criminal profile may include things
like the suspect's sex, race, approximate age, education level, criminal history, employment
history, where the person might live, how socially well-adjusted the offender is, what
kind of interpersonal skills the perpetrator may or may not have, and whether the criminals
thought to engage in alcohol or drug use, and if it's appropriate to the crime, how
sexually well-adjusted that perpetrator might be.
Once the profile is developed, investigators are still pretty tight-lipped about how they
figure many of these things out for obvious reasons, but once the profile is generated,
authorities will create a strategy for a series of media releases, and then typically sequence
those media releases in such a way as to present the most confident information first and see
where that leads the eyes and ears of the public, or what effect it could have on the
perpetrator, and then they'll add additional detail in subsequent releases.
One example of profiling gone bad, especially with regard to the media, was the Washington,
D.C. Beltway Sniper incident. Over a three-week period in October 2002, in a variety of settings
and locations, while doing simple everyday tasks, ten people were shot and killed and
three others badly wounded in sniper-style attacks.
As of the proximity to the I-95 corridor, it was suspected that the shooter was traveling
that stretch of highway, and then somehow suspicion centered on a white van as the likely
vehicle involved.
So-called profilers started jumping out of the woodwork, especially after four people
were killed within just two hours on the morning of October 3rd.
The general conclusion was that the sniper was a loner, a white male who had a background
in the military and drove a white box truck or white van.
Apparently, these ill-founded media accounts ended up driving, or at least steering, this
murderous machine. It seemed that every conclusion that was released caused the shooter to defy
it. They said that the sniper only killed adults, and then a 13-year-old boy was shot.
They indicated the shooter only attacked during the week, so he showed them wrong and hit
on the weekend. In fact, when finally apprehended, every single thing about the profile turned
out to be dead, or, should I say, deadly, wrong.
Because of the way it misled the public and investigators, and it potentially delayed
a capture, that's what made it so wrong.
These horrible killings that terrorized the nation's capital and truly the whole country
were perpetrated by a black male and his young black accomplice from their specially designed
trunk in a blue Chevrolet sedan. The pair later admitted to changing their MOs and their
victims based on the things they heard in the media.
Profilers learned a grave lesson from this incident, that you can get tunnel vision when
you focus solely on past tendencies in crime and crime statistics and generate a profile
that's one size fits all. And it's especially dangerous to allow the investigation to eliminate,
where at least narrow the pool of suspects with really so little to go on other than
keen marksmanship.
And what about the pair's motive? Was there anything behavioral analysts could glean
about motive from this terrible string of incidents? Not really.
As for the minor involved, he apparently thought these killings were prelude to kidnapping
children for a large sum of ransom money that would be paid by the government and then
after that these kids would be trained to carry out similar attacks and terrorize the
entire nation. In fact, among some of the evidence left at one of the crime scenes was
a note demanding $10 million dollars for the lives of DC children would be at stake.
The adult of the pair said that his real target was his ex-wife and he simply intended to
stage all those other killings until he could hunt her down and make her look like just
another random victim. So even the pair of snipers was apparently not operating on the
same wavelength. Incidentally, the judge did not allow the presentation of that motive
at trial.
Speaking of trial, I need to be clear that profiling is usually not permitted as part
of a courtroom presentation. But that's not its function. Criminal personality profiling
is only used as a way to narrow down a list of suspects. But profiling analysts who would
judge qualifies as an expert witness do frequently present the results they've collected from
criminal investigative analyses, especially as it relates to the crime scene, like evidence
that doesn't fit or maybe a signature element that could link multiple crimes.
Now, let's close with a case where criminal personality profiling really got things right.
There's an interesting book by John Douglas co-written by Mark Olshaker that's titled
The Anatomy of Motive. Douglas, who has also been called the FBI's mind hunter, was one
of the bureau's first criminal profilers. He was also the basis for the character Jack
Crawford in Silence of the Lambs in its prequel Red Dragon.
Douglas started his career with the FBI in 1970 and before retiring in 1995, he worked
on some of the country's most notorious violent crimes, with special attention to motive,
which is really the heart of any crime. And among those crimes was the bizarre case of
the American terrorist Ted Kaczynski. Over a nearly 20 year period, beginning in 1978,
Kaczynski meticulously planned and carried out 16 bombings across the United States.
He used homemade devices, as mentioned in our explosions lecture, which became increasingly
sophisticated over the years. They were sent by mail or in some cases delivered by hand.
Because Kaczynski's targets included universities and airlines, the FBI gave him the nickname
Unabomber, UN for university and A for airline. In his adult life, Kaczynski started out as
a Harvard graduate. And then he was a mathematics professor at UC Berkeley. But ultimately,
he became a recluse with a grudge against the whole world.
Essentially, the motive for Kaczynski's crimes was his notion that big corporations and modern
technology were destroying personal freedoms. All told, his attacks killed three people
and injured 23 others, not one of whom ever saw his face. Now clearly, this was not the
greatest death toll, although it seems a shame to even point that out. It was really
the number of attacks from this unknown subject and the almost two decades it took to capture
him, with sometimes years between bombings. That was what terrorized America and baffled
authorities. In 1980, John Douglas produced a criminal
personality profile of the Unabomber, describing him as a white male in his late twenties to
his early thirties, who was an obsessive, compulsive loner. He had connections to academia
and he was of above average intelligence. At the same time, physical evidence was being
used to provide other leads as to the identity of the perpetrator. For example, because there
were wooden components and wood chips in some of the homemade pipe bombs, and even the name
Wood related to some of his victims, that caused investigators to assume the Unabomber
had some connection with wood. And in fact, Kaczynski lived a solitary life in the woods.
He said that he was initially prompted to begin his reign of terror due to the destruction
of the natural environment he was seeing around his cabin.
Then Douglas expanded his profile. He believed the Unabomber had an issue with authority,
and despite his paranoia, would feel comfortable blending in at a university setting. Now others
argued that the Unabomber was a disgruntled airline mechanic, but Douglas persisted. He
believed that an intelligent man could make bombs easier than a blue collar worker could
feel comfortable strolling around a university campus.
Now eventually, in April of 1995, the Unabomber escalated to the point where he began communicating
with the media, and Douglas knew that was the beginning of the end. Kaczynski's communications
and threats escalated, and they culminated in a 35,000 word manifesto that he wanted
published in the New York Times and the Washington Post.
The manifesto verified everything Douglas had believed about the Unabomber and his motives,
and this time the media worked to the profiler's advantage. After the Unabomber's manifesto
was printed by the press in September of 1994, Kaczynski's brother came forward to
tell authorities what his worst fears had been telling him the Unabomber was his brother.
Like many others, including maybe you, I find it curiously interesting to peer inside the
criminal mind. Maybe it makes us all feel a little more sane just by contrast, or maybe
it's just compelling to see the ways in which human nature can go so terribly wrong. In
our next lecture, we'll see what else psychology has to offer forensic science.
