Ted Kaczynski killed and maimed people who never saw his face because he went after his
targets from a distance.
Ted Bundy's victims probably all did see his face, but very few lived to tell about
it.
When surely people saw the DC Beltway snipers without realizing it, partly because criminal
profiling had focused the community's attention in another direction.
But then there was that white van linked to the DC shooters by eyewitnesses.
How do we explain that?
In this lecture, we're going to take a look at the accuracy of human memory and eyewitness
testimony.
Let me tell you about an experiment I always do on the first day of my forensic science
course.
While my fellow professor, Dr. Mark Fisher, hands out emergency medical forms to our
25 or so students and instructs them to fill them out, I'm over at the side of the room
messing around with some lab materials.
We also bring a staff member named Marion on this game to make it a little more interesting.
This is something you can try with a group of friends if you want to.
It's pretty compelling.
Anyway, Mary's job is to walk into the room carrying a small stack of books, drop the
books in the front of the room, pick them up, walk over and say something to Mark, give
him the books, and then leave the room by another exit, but not before she just happens
to pick up Mark's laptop computer on her way out.
I'm sure you see where this is going already.
Now, the minute Mary leaves the room, I tell students to stop what they're doing and immediately
and independently write down everything they saw happen in those first few minutes of class.
A couple minutes later, I collect their papers and give them another form that has directed
questions such as, did you see a woman enter the room?
What did she look like?
What was she wearing?
How tall would you estimate she was?
By what door did she enter and leave the room?
What did she do while she was in here?
What were Dr. Fisher and I doing at the time?
In a sense, I'm conducting a paper interview and you would be amazed at the completely
mistaken responses most students give, or in many cases, the fact that they cannot give
any information at all, since about half of our 25 students often don't even realize
Mary was in the room, despite the intentional announcement she made by dropping that stack
of books.
Now, the very last part of this exercise is to put the students in small groups and have
them come up with a collective memory if they can.
This allows students to convince each other of what they saw, even when they're wrong.
It's interesting to see how persuasive some people can be in trying to insist that they
have the best recall.
It's equally intriguing to see how one person's memory can be tainted by someone else.
Like a person who wrote nothing on the first paper that I collected will adopt a memory
during the group work.
Then we have Mary come back so they can see her and what she's wearing, and she can tell
the students exactly what she did, at least as she recalls it, and that's the point.
This activity is my class's introduction to the importance of being observant, especially
if you intend to be a forensic scientist or a law enforcement officer.
But it also leads us straight into a discussion of eyewitness testimony.
If a student didn't see Mary enter the room, why was that the case?
Each student was in the same room at the same time, this small incident occurred.
But they all have different accounts.
And even the ones who saw Mary in her actions, could they have described her well enough
that she could be identified?
Or if I brought someone other than Mary in at the end of the activity, could I convince
the students that this other person was the one who came in?
Especially as the person of authority in the room, could I promote a mistaken identity?
In 1971, the United Kingdom's Criminal Law Revision Committee found that mistaken identification
was the single greatest factor behind real or potential wrongful convictions.
Law enforcement agencies around the world were waking up to the fact that there have
been too many times people were convicted of all kinds of crimes, including very serious
ones, on evidence that just doesn't rise to scientific standards.
And remember, at least based on the premises behind the U.S. justice system, one innocent
person's suffering is one too many.
In addition, today's technology, specifically DNA testing, has definitively proven that
people have been convicted of crimes they did not commit, and in some cases, after they've
been executed for those crimes.
Despite this increasing awareness and the growth of DNA technology, the Innocence Project
was born in 1992 at the Cardozo School of Law in New York City.
Today the Innocence Project is a non-profit legal organization that works to reopen criminal
cases, especially when there's the possibility that DNA evidence will exonerate someone who
was unjustly convicted of a crime.
Through the efforts of the Innocence Project, more than 250 innocent people have been exonerated
and released from jail.
Similar organizations have sprung up in Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand,
and I expect more to follow.
Now what's at the heart of these erroneous, guilty verdicts?
The Innocence Project states, and I'm quoting here,
My witness misidentification is the single greatest cause of wrongful convictions nationwide,
playing a role in more than 75% of convictions overturned through DNA testing.
Among the reasons I witness testimony is unreliable is the way the human memory works, or doesn't.
Various psychologists have tried to define what memory is, but it's easier to define
what it's not.
Memory is not a video recorder, where everything is seen in the mind's eye objectively and
exactly as it happened.
When we have a memory, it's more of an impression of an event, including input from all of our
senses, with some things noted correctly, but others possibly changed a bit by pulling
in elements from other events that may have created the same type of impression in our
minds.
Depending on our past experiences, our brains put different things we've experienced into
different categories, or schema, for future recall.
When an event occurs that fits one of our schema, our brain pulls out all the bits of
that schema to process the new information, and the overlap can mingle things a bit.
Although there are different classification schemes, some researchers have categorized
four types of memories, cognitive, motor vestibular, emotional or affective, and state.
Cognitive memories are things our brain processes based on sequences and patterns, for example
learning names, phone numbers, and language.
Motor vestibular memories are processed by our brain based on input from the body as
a whole, like remembering how to ride a bike even though you haven't been on one for years,
knowing how to type or play an instrument, or the steps to a specific dance you know.
Emotional sometimes called affective memories are things our brain handles based on input
from our gut emotions, like grief, fear, and anger.
When a situation happens that's similar to something from the past that made us feel
the same way, our brain may insert pieces of the first situation into the second.
The last category, state memories, are those our brain processes based on our senses.
For example, we might remember somebody from our past who used a certain type of perfume
when we smelled that same scent, or a military veteran might recall a combat situation because
of the sound of fireworks.
Now, since state memories can encompass input from all of our senses, they seem to be the
most helpful in developing eyewitness accounts.
There are also two stages of memory which you're probably already familiar with.
Short-term memory is the detail of now.
That's the stuff our brain doesn't process for future recall because it's seen as unimportant
data, like that person walking past you to enter the convenience store even though that
person may end up robbing the store.
On the other hand, long-term or permanent memory is what's been stored such that it
can be retrieved.
For any number of reasons, our brain chose to process this information as important data.
In those cases, we can say, oh, I remember such and such.
Most researchers believe information has to be processed in short-term memory first before
being stored in long-term memory, but others think that information can go directly to
long-term storage while an experience is happening.
So whether or not we remember an event or a person depends on how our brain dealt with
the relevant information at the time of the event or encounter.
And there are lots of variables that affect this processing, many of which have been figured
out and verified by scientific research.
Back in the 1970s, psychology professor Dr. Robert Buckhout of Brooklyn College took a
keen interest in eyewitness testimony, especially as it relates to identification, and he conducted
experiments sometimes right on campus to test the accuracy of eyewitness accounts and identification.
In one of these studies, Buckhout staged an assault on a professor in front of nearly
150 students.
Seven weeks later, the students were shown a lineup consisting of six photographs of
possible suspects.
Forty percent of the witnesses correctly identified the attacker, thirty-six percent identified
a bystander as being the attacker, and twenty-three percent selected a person who wasn't even
at the incident.
In another experiment, Buckhout conducted, he used, he had subjects witness a purse
snatching, only seven out of fifty-two witnesses.
That's less than fifteen percent picked the right suspect.
One of the most famous researchers on memory and eyewitness testimony is Dr. Elizabeth
Loftus, who wrote many books on the subject beginning in 1979.
Her book, Witness for the Defense, the accused, the eyewitness and the expert who puts memory
on trial, was published in 1991 and focused on her expert witness experiences in some
high-profile cases, such as Ted Bundy and John Demianuk, better known as the Nazi guard
Ivan the Terrible.
By 1995, some two thousand research studies had been conducted about the reliability of
eyewitness testimony, and the evidence was mounting.
The conclusion of most researchers, including Buckhout and Loftus, was that eyewitness testimony
is problematic for many reasons that are related to the unreliability of our human
information processing system.
As we all know, details get mixed up over time, and how and what we commit to memory
and are able to recall is selective.
Plus our memories are influenced by our beliefs, our motives, stress, stereotypes, as well
as different environmental factors, to name just a few.
It's clear there are many reasons that no two people come away from the exact same experience
with the exact same memory of it.
In relation to forensic eyewitness testimony and perpetrator identification, psychologists
have identified two main groups of influences, estimation factors and system variables.
Estimation factors are things about memory and recall that are related to the victim,
the perpetrator and the crime itself.
All system variables are influences on memory and recall that come from police and legal
procedures.
Here's a specific and common example of an estimation factor, known as cross-racial
identification bias.
For some reason, human brains are wired to more clearly identify individuals who are
of the same race as they are.
This isn't the same thing as being racist.
It's simply an inability of human brains to identify distinctions between faces of
other races.
Lots of studies have been conducted on this phenomenon.
And even in cases where individuals have lived in a multicultural setting for their entire
lives, the bias still seems to hold true.
It's sometimes joked about by comedians, but it really does appear to be true, to some
extent anyway, that all black people look alike to white people, just like all white
people look alike to black people.
The same goes for Asians too.
Another thing that studies have shown is that some faces are just easier to remember, easier
to recognize and easier to describe than others.
Faces that are more distinct, such as somebody who would be considered particularly attractive
or especially unattractive, tend to be better remembered than somebody who's considered typical
or average.
There are also just inherent differences between witnesses.
Children and elderly witnesses tend to remember things less correctly than younger middle
aged adults.
Their descriptors might mean different things as well.
Two a six-year-old, really old, could mean somebody who's 30, and to an elderly individual,
a kid can be 40.
People employed in a certain profession might remember details related to that profession.
My sister's a dental hygienist, and of course the first thing she notices about anybody
is their teeth.
Personally, I admit to having a certain thing about bone structure.
Research also suggests men tend to pay attention to different stuff than women do, and I don't
just mean facial features or even body parts.
Men may remember details, say, about a car, including the make and model, while a woman
may remember only that it was blue.
And I don't mean that to be sexist or specifically related only to a person's interests.
The brains of men and women seem to be wired differently in certain ways.
As I mentioned in our discussion of forensic art, some people are just better with faces
than others.
And even if someone's good at recognizing or remembering faces, sometimes they still
can't figure out how to describe that face to someone else.
Try this yourself.
You're a close relative whose face you know really well, maybe a spouse, a child, or a
parent.
And then try to describe that person to someone else.
Chances are you won't have an easy time of it.
In fact, while we're thinking about that, imagine if missing person's posters had to
be generated from a visual description rather than a photograph provided by the family in
distress.
That alone gives you some idea of how different the circumstances are when surveillance cameras
have captured a photograph of the perpetrator during a crime rather than when things hinge
on a victim's recollection of a suspect's face.
Studies suggest someone who was a crime victim may even inadvertently change the face of
the perpetrator as a subconscious defense mechanism.
This seems to happen especially in cases of sexual assault, where the victim's brain
actually tries to make the perpetrator's face more attractive, maybe to better cope
with the mental trauma.
The level of involvement and awareness as a crime takes place also plays a role in how
much attention is paid to the events and so how well things are going to be remembered.
A victim or bystander who realizes a crime is being committed will be paying more attention
as events unfold than a witness who doesn't even get what's happening until it's all
over.
Obviously if there was drug or alcohol use on the part of the victim or another witness,
the way something's going to be remembered won't be as accurate then.
Even if the person's very certain about how things happened, their testimony might not
work well in court because it could always be called into question by the defense.
The same can be said for someone say who has head trauma, regardless of whether it happened
before or after the incident they witnessed, or somebody with a condition that might affect
their ability to see, hear, or otherwise process an event into memory, like someone with poor
eyesight, hearing, or a cognitive disability.
Stress also plays a huge part in misidentification.
In one study it was determined that witnesses who were put in a stressful interview situation
misidentified the people who interrogated them nearly 70% of the time and this was face
to face for 40 minutes in a well lit room compared with 12% misidentification for witnesses
who were interviewed in a low stress setting under the same face to face conditions.
We talk about stress and what's known as a weapon focus effect.
If a weapon is present in the situation the witness will tend to focus on the weapon more
than the suspect, I mean who wouldn't, but this can cause incorrect or inadequate memory
of the perpetrator or other parts of the crime.
This setting also plays a role in how much somebody remembers.
Maybe a suspect seen in full daylight is more likely to be recalled with accuracy than
if the same person was walking down a dark street at night and somebody who sees a face
full on will usually see more and be able to recall more than if they saw the same face
only in profile.
The length of time between an incident and when it's recalled also has an effect on
the way things are remembered.
We all know this, in fact it's been shown that in as little as 20 minutes people can
have a sharp decrease in the number of correct things they remember about a particular event.
Okay, knowing that, consider the job of Dr. Elizabeth Loftus as a witness for the defense
and a Jewish woman no less, as she had to consider 35 year old memories used as eyewitness
identification testimony in John Demyanjuk's first trial as a Nazi war criminal in 1987.
Though Demyanjuk was convicted and sentenced to death in Israel, the case was overturned
as mistaken identity, allowing Demyanjuk to return to my state of Ohio where he had lived
before the trial.
But the story doesn't end there.
Demyanjuk was charged again in 2001 on different charges and eventually, though not until 2009
as an 89 year old man, he was deported to Germany where he was tried and ultimately convicted
in 2011, though his conviction has been highly criticized for a lack of substantive evidence.
So now let's talk about ways in which the legal system itself and the people and processes
that are part of it can also affect eyewitness accounts and suspect misidentifications.
Remember these are called system variables in which police and legal procedures can introduce
bias.
You've probably seen depictions of officers trying to get eyewitness accounts on TV or
giving instructions for an ID lineup or showing mug shots and you wonder how accurate those
portrayals are.
To try to minimize bias in system variables, in 1999 the Department of Justice recommended
some best practices that we'll use to frame this discussion.
When a witness is being interviewed, the way questions are worded or comments are made
can affect how something is remembered by the witness.
For instance, a question such as, did he have a gun, can sometimes cause an individual to
remember a gun even if one wasn't actually present during the crime.
A best practice to avoid this is to only use open-ended questions or maybe multiple choice
questions.
Two things you don't see on TV because it wastes precious airtime is that pausing before
asking another question may let the witness find another detail in their memory if given
enough time to think about it.
And remember, a person should always be told they can say, I don't know if they don't
recall something.
So that way they don't try to fill in gaps with details that aren't true.
I mentioned that when we talked about forensic art interviews.
Sometimes it's also helpful depending on the emotional state of the victim or witness
to have the witness physically walk through the crime scene and describe how events unfolded.
There may be details that were seen at the time that were filed in long-term memory that
don't come back to the surface until the events are replayed.
We've seen that on Hollywood dramas and it's sometimes used in real life.
And what about police line-ups?
You know, when a string of possible suspects is paraded before a witness?
Some of the problems with line-ups have included witnesses being pressured by officers, maybe
saying their testimony was the only evidence police had to go on.
Other times witnesses have said they didn't even know what the criminal looked like, but
when shown a line-up, they suddenly become certain of the guy.
In some situations, witnesses or victims were told by police they had picked the right person.
Or officers said things like, are you sure that's the guy?
That could be taken in multiple ways.
The current best practice for conducting a line-up is to have what's called a double
blind scenario.
In this situation, the officers interacting with the witness during a line-up, they don't
even know themselves which person is the suspect.
This double blind setup helps to eliminate experimenter bias, which occurs in many research
situations where the experimenter, in this case the police officer, leads the witness
to pick a certain suspect from the line-up, either intentionally or subconsciously.
What about when somebody, the police think is the criminal, goes into the line-up, but
that person is actually innocent of the crime?
It's been shown that the witness usually tries to pick the person who most closely resembles
the criminal.
That's a thought process called relative judgment.
In order to minimize the chances of this, it's recommended that the officer tell the
witness the perpetrator may or may not be in the line-up.
That way, the witness doesn't feel he or she has to make an identification from those
people shown.
As a test, authorities can also do what's called a culprit absent line-up, where the
criminal's not actually in the line-up at all.
It's also recommended that the members of a line-up be presented sequentially, one after
the other and one at a time, to try to minimize the effects of relative judgment by not allowing
the witness to look back and forth between several possible suspects to determine which
most closely fits the picture of the perpetrator in their mind.
When shown the suspects individually, the witness will most often compare each suspect
only to the mental picture they have and not other people in the line-up, but that's never
how we've seen it see it done on TV.
It's also recommended that everybody in a line-up or a photo array be an innocent filler
except the suspect, and that these other filler people fairly closely resemble the original
description of the suspect.
For instance, if the witness said that the perpetrator had a scar from his forehead to
the cheek on the right side of his face, all the innocent fillers should also have similar
scars on the right side of their faces.
If the witness picks one of the fillers instead of the actual suspect, law enforcement will
know that the witness's recall might be questionable.
There's also been cases where a witness wasn't 100% sure they picked the right person at
a police line-up, but during preparation for trial or under direct or cross-examination
at trial, the wording of questions posed by lawyers make the witness more confident about
the ID.
But that can also work the other way, too, where a witness who seemed pretty credible
up to that point becomes uncertain when questioned again.
In situations like these, it's imperative that there be other evidence besides a witness
to convict or exonerate a suspect.
There are also instances where a supposed witness knowingly and deliberately misidentifies
somebody.
This may be to get attention and sympathy or to direct suspicion away from themselves,
you know, by blaming another person for what they themselves have done.
A good example of this was the 1994 case of Susan Smith, who drowned her two young sons
by rolling her car into a lake in South Carolina.
She told police that a black man carjacked her car at a red light, kidnapping her two
sons in the process.
Susan Smith's case began to unravel almost from the start because the light where she
said she was carjacked only turns red if there's a car on the cross street.
Yet she said no other vehicles were around at the time when this guy approached her car.
It's been suggested that in cases where a suspect is fabricated, there are often some
telltale signs.
Sometimes the victim says she can't remember what the offender looked like because her
eyes were closed.
Or she says there were several perpetrators and she got them all mixed up.
These make-believe suspects also tend to commit their fabricated crimes in a copycat fashion
after some similar crime gets publicized in the media.
Police also look for damage or injuries that are inconsistent with the story given by the
self-proclaimed victim.
Basically the federal standard for eyewitness testimony in court is from the Manson v. Braithwaite
decision of 1977.
Basically if a witness is very sure of his or her testimony, it is admissible in court.
If there's an amount of uncertainty, it's up to the judge in the particular case to
decide whether or not to allow the testimony.
But here's the thing, studies have shown that the degree of certainty of a witness doesn't
necessarily correlate with the reliability of his or her testimony.
Here's an example of that.
In 1984, a man broke into college student Jennifer Thompson's apartment and he raped
her with a knife held to her throat.
Thompson said that she studied the face of her attacker intently, to be absolutely sure
to remember his face.
Here's her quote, I studied every single detail on the rapist's face.
I looked at his hairline, I looked for scars, for tattoos, for anything that would help
me identify him.
When and if I survived the attack, I was going to make sure that he was put in prison and
he was going to rot.
Now on the same day as the attack, Thompson went to the police station to work with an
artist on a composite sketch.
A few days later, the police showed her a photo array of possible suspects and Thompson
picked Ronald Jr. Cotton as her rapist, indicating she was positively certain he was the guy.
Cotton was convicted and went to jail for 11 years until, through the efforts of the
Innocence Project, DNA evidence showed that Cotton was not the rapist and that another
man, Bobby Poole, actually committed the crime.
Even more damning with regard to eyewitness testimony and suspect identification, Poole
had actually been presented in person to Jennifer Thompson after her attack, but at the time
she said she had never even seen Poole before.
As the evidence about the unreliability of eyewitness testimony continued to mount, especially
as DNA evidence continued to exonerate people whose lives were ruined by mistaken identification.
At that point, a variety of states, the U.S. federal government and other nations, including
England, began to take action.
In 1999, then Attorney Janet Reno, Attorney General Janet Reno, she ordered the National
Institute of Justice to develop those best practice national guidelines we talked about
for use by law enforcement when they collect eyewitness evidence.
An August 2011 ruling by the New Jersey Supreme Court deemed that trial courts in the state
are now required to more closely evaluate eyewitness testimony in light of all the
published criticism of its reliability.
But just one month later, a man named Troy Davis was executed in Georgia based largely
on eyewitness testimony.
Of course, nine witnesses did claim to have seen him kill a police officer in 1989, but
between his trial and his execution, seven of those people recanted their testimony.
So, clearly, we have a long way to go in terms of grappling with the fallibility of the human
mind in the legal system, especially when you consider that research on auditory memories,
in other words, ear-witness testimony of what someone thinks they heard during a crime,
those are even less reliable than what a person actually sees.
Yet ironically, studies have shown people are even more confident about what they hear
than about what they see.
