In the summer of 1991, a distraught man with a pair of handcuffs dangling from his wrist
flagged down the patrol car of two Milwaukee, Wisconsin policemen.
The man said that he had just escaped from a terrifying encounter with a guy in a nearby
apartment and he agreed to lead police to the scene of the attack.
The door was opened by Jeffrey Dahmer.
When officers began to look around Dahmer's home, the most gruesome stories of torture,
rape, dismemberment, necrophilia, and cannibalism began to unfold.
Between 1978 and when he was apprehended 13 years later, Dahmer killed at least 17 men,
ranging in age from 14 to 33 and of several racial backgrounds.
Apparently the only definitive thing all Dahmer's victims had in common was that they were males
and perhaps homosexual.
Dahmer's MO was to pick up men or boys, take them to his home, drug and then strangle them,
either before or after he had sex with them.
Dahmer began killing at age 18 when he murdered a hitchhiker in the Ohio house where he lived
with his parents.
And then, after dismembering the body in a crawl space, buried the remains in the woods
around the family property.
Despite a seemingly normal childhood, Dahmer began to withdraw in his adolescence.
His father even noticed a change in his son's body language, as if his muscles were tense
and his face blank.
Dahmer was fascinated with the decomposition of animals, but apparently didn't engage
in their torture or killing as some serial murderers are said to do.
In fact, Dahmer cared for pets throughout his life.
It was corpses that interested him.
So he rode his bike around the neighborhood and picked up rotting roadkill.
Dahmer admitted later that by age 14 he had fantasies about murdering men and having sex
with their dead bodies.
He also acknowledged he was an alcoholic by the time he graduated high school.
There are many twists in the Dahmer story and a criminal history that included several
sexual offenses in his early adult life, like indecent exposure, sexual exploitation and
abuse of children, and sexual assault.
There's also the horrible fact that one of his victims nearly escaped just a couple of
months before Dahmer was finally arrested in the summer of 1991.
But in a discussion with police officers on the street, Dahmer calmly convinced them that
this 14-year-old boy was actually his 19-year-old lover and they were in a drunken argument.
The cops actually told neighbors to mind their own business and handed the drugged young
victim over to Dahmer, who killed him that same night.
This was a case filled with forensic psychological issues, a case where the perpetrator dissolved
his victims' bodies in large vats in his home, but kept some body parts, like skulls and
genitals, sometimes in formaldehyde and other times in the refrigerator.
In fact, there was a human head in Dahmer's refrigerator the night police finally had arrested
him for the last time.
There were three more in the freezer.
Could no one have seen this coming?
Could no one have prevented this or intervened earlier?
Clearly, there were multiple opportunities on the part of police and the Dahmer family.
In fact, his grandmother, who Dahmer lived with beginning in 1982, finally threw him
out after six long years, during which time he was arrested for several sexual offenses.
He said she could no longer live with the terrible stench as he created in the basement
and his odd and dangerous behavior, such as a male mannequin hidden in his closet and
a 357 magnum under his bed.
How many clues to a disturbed and deranged person are needed before the depths of their
psychological depravity can be established?
Or maybe more accurately, can those things ever be truly established?
And if so, how?
For the past few lectures, we've looked at psychology and human nature by considering
ways in which the behavioral sciences intersect forensics, such as interviews, profiling,
and how reliable memories may be.
The study of human behavior is essentially what psychology is.
And when you think about it, the entire legal system is really all about managing human
behavior.
And that sense psychology has been a thread in the background of everything we've covered
so far.
The motive and the behavior it causes create crime scenes, evidence, and victims, both
dead and living, which in turn set law enforcement into action.
So in this lecture, let's talk about forensic psychology and forensic psychiatry, two formal
disciplines that work together to apply psychological and pertinent medical findings to legal processes.
And there are clear overlaps between the uses of psychology and psychiatry in forensic science
and also some distinctions between the two fields.
But let's begin with a little history as we delve into the ways in which mental health
experts both aid and inform the legal system.
In 1908, the eminent German-American psychologist, Dr. Hugo Munsterberg, was early to recognize
the contributions of psychology to legal settings.
He even wrote on eyewitness reliability.
And of course, Sigmund Freud has had his own psychological theories about crime and criminals,
including that feelings of guilt cause some people to engage in criminal behavior in order
to be punished, or perhaps even confess to crimes they didn't commit.
In our discussion of eyewitness testimony, we saw the proliferation of psychological studies
throughout the second half of the 20th century being applied to the criminal justice system.
And concurrent with that came the U.S. Supreme Court's increasing reliance on information
from psychological research, which in fact was cited for the first time back in 1954
in the Brown vs. Board of Education ruling that desegregated U.S. public schools.
Over time, mental health practitioners, mostly psychiatrists in the early days, began evaluating
and even treating criminal defendants in the U.S.
The bulk of the psychology mostly involved pretrial examinations to look at issues of
competency and responsibility, and some of the work was intended to help judges determine
how to sentence convicted offenders, especially those involved in sex crimes.
Sexual offenses like rape, child molestation and even exhibitionism have been around at
least since pre-modern times, and people have long recognized that this type of behavior
stems from abnormal psychology and is seldom a one-time act, which is very different from
the type of motives, including desperation or rage, which might drive somebody to steal
something or even kill another person, though as we know, there can be serial offenders
in any category of crime, from shoplifting to murder, maybe due to some of Freud's influence
in the first half of the 20th century, or because many people find sex crimes to be
among the most objectionable of illegal behaviors, especially when they involve children or other
vulnerable groups.
By the mid-1930s, psychologists and psychiatrists began working in many states to help diagnose
and treat serial sex offenders.
Many states even enacted sexual psychopath laws, mandating that sexual criminals be evaluated
and treated.
Throughout the 1950s, there was a lot of research devoted to serial sex crimes and their perpetrators,
with a great hope they could be rehabilitated.
By the end of the 1960s, almost every state in the U.S. had developed specialized diagnostic
and treatment programs for sex offenders, and by the 1980s, many serial sexual criminals
who had been undergoing all this state-sponsored treatment were deemed no longer dangerous.
But once released, many reoffended, and by the late 1980s, many states concluded these
types of sexual deviants and predators could not be successfully treated.
State rehabilitation programs were closed, incarceration became mandatory, and treatment
was minimized as a waste of time, effort, and money.
Another effect of the increasing interactions of psychology and the legal system throughout
the second half of the 20th century was the widespread development of outpatient community
health clinics, especially beginning in the 1960s.
These were established to help treat juveniles and adults who had substance abuse or other
psychological problems that appeared to be the cause of their criminal activity.
It was recognized that treatment was often cheaper than sending these people to jail.
Now with that history, let's look at some of the roles and responsibilities of forensic
psychologists and psychiatrists, which can be essentially divided up into three areas
– assessment, treatment, and testimony.
Assessment involves evaluating people under the supervision of the legal system using
a variety of psychological tests, which I'll talk about later.
Treatment can involve psychotherapy, behavioral modification exercises, and other mental health
therapy options.
Treatment medications can be prescribed by forensic psychiatrists who are medical doctors.
And of course, forensic psychologists and psychiatrists may be asked to provide testimony
as experts on human behavior and mental health issues.
Victims and psychiatrists work in both civil and criminal areas of the legal system.
Civil issues include things like family matters of custody, visitation, and other domestic
relations cases.
Also guardianship, adoption, foster care, and juvenile delinquency.
As well as other legal concerns of a non-criminal nature, such as wills and contracts, medical
do not resuscitate decisions.
And personal injury casers and workmen's compensation matters, they help to establish
disability and loss.
But criminal forensic psychology and psychiatry issues relate to things like competency to
stand trial, legal insanity, and sentencing matters.
Treatment of mentally ill offenders, we'll talk more about some of those later.
There are also administrative areas of the legal system in which both forensic psychologists
and psychiatrists may be involved.
Like using research and theory to help establish best practices, there are lots of matters
in the courts that can use the support and guidance that the behavioral sciences bring
to the table.
Things like confidentiality, privileged communications, and privacy issues that affect us all.
As well as patients' rights, such as the right to have or refuse treatment.
Psychiatrists are involved when it becomes necessary to decide if a patient is a danger
to himself or the community, and so should be committed to an involuntary hospital stay.
So if psychologists and psychiatrists address legal issues, including perhaps in a sense
speaking for, or at least about, somebody who's on trial, you might wonder more precisely
how their roles differ from those of lawyers.
But I'm going to use psychologists as my example here, those same could be true of psychiatrists.
First, lawyers have the job of trying to establish who's guilty of a crime, or responsible
for an accident.
Their job is to establish fault.
But psychologists are taught not to make moral judgments, but rather try to understand why
a patient or client did what they did.
For instance, was it due to an issue from the past?
Maybe a problem with substance abuse, some kind of mental health issue, or some other
reason.
Secondly, the legal system is always on a calendar or time clock.
Whether we're talking about a trial date, a continuance, a sentence, or an appeal, time
is of the essence for the legal system.
Psychologists tend to work to understand what happened or what's happening regardless
of how long it takes for them and their patient to get to that place.
Of course, clinical psychologists have goals for their patients, but like other forms of
evaluation, diagnosis, or treatment, the time parameters are difficult to establish, let
alone set on a calendar.
A third way in which lawyers and psychologists differ in legal matters is that lawyers need
definite answers to close a case.
Psychologists deal more with theories than answers.
There are many cases, just as in Dalmers, where the world will never know why a person
did what he did or the pathology behind his motivation.
We've seen that some types of evidence provide indisputable truth or accuracy, and other
types can allow estimations and probabilities, but psychological theory just doesn't work
that way.
Lastly, it's part of a lawyer's job to put a spin on the testimony or the evidence in
a case or attempt to choose only what parts of that information get presented in court.
An objective forensic psychologist should be more interested in telling the whole story.
Sure, he or she may have a specific theory or even a pet area of interest or expertise,
but whether testifying for the prosecution, the defense, or conducting an evaluation for
the court, a behavioral scientist is still a scientist and has to try to remain objective.
Okay, that's how a psychologist would approach a legal matter, but let's talk about how
forensic psychology compares to other forms of psychology, such as clinical psychology.
Well, for starters, forensic psychologists usually have a pretty narrowly defined area
of assessment about a specific event or a pattern of events in a client's past, and
a specific diagnosis or treatment plan is not their primary goal.
In clinical psychology, the practitioner is really focused on the patient's general problems
and treatment needs.
Another major difference is that the focus in clinical psychology is often on the patient's
view of a situation, while a forensic psychologist needs to get a picture of the entire situation,
not just the client's perspective.
This means forensic psychologists usually have to get information from other people,
like files from previous treatments and information from other doctors, to verify what the client
says.
A huge difference between clinical and forensic psychology is that patients generally go voluntarily
to see a clinical psychologist, but assessments by a forensic psychologist are done as a result
of a court order or an attorney's recommendation.
So you can imagine that the client slash suspect may not want to be there or may not
be cooperative.
Related to this is that clinical psychologists and their patients can decide together what
they want to do or not do while in the office.
But in forensic psychological settings, there are legal statutes that govern the interaction.
For instance, depending on the legal issue at hand, some may dictate the administration
of specific psychological tests, which we'll talk about later.
The patient of a clinical psychologist, if they're not interested in wasting their time
and money, will generally tell the truth.
Sure, a patient may consciously or subconsciously alter things some, but if they're there to
improve their life or mental state, they should be as honest as possible.
On the other hand, in a forensic psychology setting, suspects or criminals may purposefully
distort the truth to either make themselves look better or to help their case.
Finally, interactions between a clinical psychologist and a patient emphasize caring,
trust and empathy.
Most issues are to be kept confidential, but forensic mental health examiners may not be
seen by their patients as being there to help them, and they can't become sympathetic to
the defendant because that could limit their objectivity.
There also limits on the amount of information that's considered confidential in forensic
psychology, especially since criminal activities involved.
So we can see similarities and differences when the field of psychology is applied to
different settings, or has divergent goals.
The same general principles will be true of psychiatry.
What I'd call regular psychiatrists are physicians whose specialty is to diagnose and treat mental
disorders in the same kind of framework as a clinical psychologist would, but from a
medical perspective.
Forensic psychiatrists are subject to the same goals and constraints of the legal system
that I just mentioned for forensic psychologists.
Okay, what are some of the tools used by psychologists and psychiatrists in order to come up with
their evaluations and assessments of people's mental health and their stability?
Researchers have developed all kinds of standardized analytical tests to try to get quantitative
or otherwise objective results that may help understand a person who's being assessed.
You may be familiar with some of these tests from your own work or experience.
General personality inventories are used in all kinds of psychology, things like the Myers-Briggs
test based on the work of Carl Jung, and others called projective personality tests like the
famous Rorschach test.
Some like the Weschler Adult Intelligence Scale are used to gauge a person's general
intellectual capacity.
Psychologists have created tests of memory function like the Weschler Memory Scale, and
there are tests for neuropsychological impairments or specific disorders like the Beck Depression
Inventory.
But a host of specialized forensic psychological assessment tests have been developed for use
in legal settings.
Some relate to the comprehension of Miranda and other legal rights during interrogation.
Others gauge a person's competence to stand trial, which we'll talk about later.
A test called the Rogers Criminal Responsibility Assessment Scales can be used to evaluate
legal insanity.
There are also some forensic assessment tests that relate more specifically to civil law
like the Ackerman-Schoendorf scales for parent evaluation.
Those are used in child custody and related issues like that.
Other tests help determine somebody's competence within the community, like whether they need
a guardian.
The Hopkins Competency Assessment Test can be used to help gauge a person's capacity
for decision-making regarding medical treatment.
Both psychologists and psychiatrists can use these types of evaluative tools to try
to measure, if you will, a person's mental health, personality, intelligence, and risk
to others in society.
But because they're physicians, psychiatrists can add physical exams, lab tests, different
types of brain studies like electroencephalograms, CT scans, and other diagnostic tools that
aren't open to psychologists.
Keep in mind that in the forensic setting, the types of evaluations from any or all these
tests do not give any legal answers.
They just help authorities better understand the person being assessed.
In other words, even when psychologists and psychiatrists give expert testimony in court,
they're not there to officially answer legal questions, like whether or not an individual
is or was insane.
That's up to the judge or the jury.
Forensic psychologists and psychiatrists are simply called upon to give their best judgment
about a person in a legal setting.
Now, let's look at a couple of specific examples of some of the behavioral and psychological
issues encountered in forensic settings.
We'll talk about deception and then about competence.
As you can imagine, deception by defendants tends to be pretty common.
Psychologists break types of deception into different categories.
One of them is known as malingery, which is sometimes called simulation.
This is when a defendant is consciously pretending to have a mental illness, perhaps to try to
avoid being prosecuted by showing he or she could not be guilty by reason of insanity.
Interestingly, when defendants are trying to fake symptoms of a mental illness, they'll
usually pick one that's currently getting a lot of attention in the media.
Maybe something like post-traumatic stress disorder, often abbreviated PTSD, which has
been highly publicized in the news for the past several years, puts effects on military
personnel and mass disaster workers.
The same is true for multiple personality disorder, also known as dissociative identity
disorder, which has been heavily popularized in books and Hollywood productions, including
the Three Faces of Eve in 1957.
There was a big spike in this disorder after the book Sibyl was published in 1973, a story
which has lately been exposed as being highly fictionalized, if not downright fabricated.
In fact, even though multiple personality disorder was not included in the American Psychiatric
Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, mercifully abbreviated
as the DSM, it wasn't in there until 1980, but it's estimated that 40,000 cases of multiple
personality disorder were diagnosed between 1985 and 1995 alone.
Strangely, this controversial disorder was practically absent in cultures outside of
North America, but is now increasing in frequency in other developed parts of the world.
Multiple personality disorder has been used as a defense in plenty of criminal matters,
including some high-profile cases.
One of the ways that forensic psychologists and psychiatrists recognize the difference
between people who truly have a psychiatric disorder and those that are malingering is
that fake symptoms are almost always over the top.
The defendant believes that the more outrageous his or her behavior is, the more likely they'll
be deemed mentally ill, and so they act accordingly.
But it's hard to maintain the symptoms of a disease you don't have for very long.
These types of deceptions are usually pretty quickly figured out.
The polar opposite type of deception is known as defensiveness, sometimes called dissimulation.
This is one that defendant or somebody who's already been convicted consciously professes
not to have a mental illness, when in fact he or she does.
People sometimes try this in order to get released from a prison or mental facility
if that's where they're housed.
In rare cases, known as pseudomalingering, a mentally ill person will pretend to have
the mental illness they actually do have, often to try to give them a feeling of control.
For example, in one case, a man with schizophrenia believed that he had been told by God to wipe
out the human race, so he killed one of his sons and several other people.
In court, this man pretended to be a dog, which is how he thought a mentally ill person would
behave in order to avoid being found guilty.
Some defendants claim and may actually believe that a different motive than what their actual
intention was for a crime.
For instance, somebody who sexually assaulted his victim after breaking into a residence
may convince himself that some insignificant object he stole after the attack was the real
reason he broke into her home.
And then there are deceptive people, including criminal defendants who are just plain lying.
Obviously, this can simply be to avoid responsibility for their actions and the penalty that comes
with it, but also maybe to enhance their own mental image of who they are or have a feeling
of superiority over others by smugly thinking that everyone else is too stupid to realize
they're lying.
In criminal settings, forensic psychologists and forensic psychiatrists may be called
on to ferret out the difference between truth, deception, and mental illness.
Now, if you're asking me how they know those things, I'll have to cop out and say their
judgments are based on behavioral science research and the assessment tests and other
diagnostic tools they have at their disposal.
We all know many books have been written about lie detection involving body language
and other kinds of behavioral clues.
I have a former colleague who was an FBI expert on body language, and his conclusion is there's
no way to look at a person and tell that he or she's lying.
You can only use body language to detect a person's level of comfort or discomfort in
a situation.
And sometimes in the case of a true psychopath, their lies and their deeds don't cause them
to be uncomfortable in the least, not even one question.
Psychologists and psychiatrists can also be called upon to assess a person's competency
or mental state.
In civil matters, they may be called for consultation on competency with regard to wills, legal
affairs, contracts, and other kinds of commercial transactions, even competency to vote.
Investments in their surrogates can be examined for competency, sometimes as part of a domestic
relations case.
And in both civil and criminal matters, specifically related to the courtroom setting, people can
be examined to see if they're competent to testify or competent to waive legal representation.
In essence, with regard to the criminal justice system, people are evaluated to make sure
they can understand and participate rationally in what goes on in the courtroom, including
what may go on afterward.
In criminal cases, defendants may even be examined to see if they're competent to be
executed.
In other words, to make sure they understand the finality of what that means and why they
could receive the death penalty in a courtroom proceeding.
There are three types of competency related to criminal forensic psychology and psychiatry.
Competent in the present, competent in the past, and competent in the future.
Competency in the present addresses whether the person is capable enough to give a statement
to the police, to stand trial, or to testify.
This is usually done in the pretrial or trial phases of the case.
As the name implies, this is based on a current assessment.
The defendant may actually have been legally insane at the time of the crime, but is he
competent to stand trial now?
This is an important concern to make sure the defendant understands the nature of the
charges.
This is a courtroom procedure and is able to assist with his own defense.
If somebody's found incompetent to stand trial, they're usually hospitalized for treatment.
And if they get better, a trial might actually take place then.
Competent in the past has to do with legal insanity, and is typically part of the trial
phase in a case.
The definition of the term legal insanity varies, but most jurisdictions follow the
McNaughton rule that originated in England back in 1843.
Basically, if the defendant did not or could not understand what he or she was doing or
that it was wrong at the time of the crime, they're considered not guilty by reason of
insanity.
There have been modifications to the McNaughton rule, including that if a person did know
what he was doing was wrong, but couldn't control his behavior, either due to mental
illness or something else, he could still be considered not guilty by reason of insanity.
That was the standard used for would-be assassin John Hinckley, who shot President Ronald Reagan
in 1981.
He was deemed not guilty by reason of insanity.
Because of the Hinckley case, the concept of guilty but mentally ill was added, which
is not the same as guilty but insane.
Because insanity would mean there was a lack of intent, known as mens rea, which automatically
means the person would not be guilty.
But for all the attention it gets, only about one in a hundred cases includes an insanity
plea.
And of all those cases, only one in ten defendants is actually found insane.
That means out of every thousand cases, only one will involve a person who is legally considered
insane.
There's also the consideration called diminished capacity, which has different meanings and
different jurisdictions, but in general implies that the defendant broke the law, but due
to impaired mental functions, functions should not be held criminally liable.
Finally, there's competency in the future, which is really a prediction of a person's
dangerousness.
It's usually part of the post-trial phase in a case.
As you might imagine, this is pretty tricky because psychologists and psychiatrists have
to base future possibilities on past performance.
And as we saw with the attempts in the 1980s to rehabilitate sex offenders, the jury is
still out on how much can truly be known about a criminal's future.
So what about Jeffrey Dahmer?
Less than a year after his 1991 arrest, his first trial began in Milwaukee.
Seven of the eight mental health experts who scrutinized Dahmer testified at his trial.
Dahmer originally pled not guilty by reason of insanity, but the goal-oriented nature
of his crimes and his lack of delusions and other psychoses seemed to negate that plea,
and he ultimately changed it to guilty but insane.
Only two weeks later, Dahmer was found sane and guilty on 15 counts of murder.
The judge sentenced him to nearly a thousand years in prison, which was 15 life terms.
Next, Dahmer was extradited to Ohio, where he pled guilty to the 1978 murder of his first
victim before beginning his sentence.
And what about his dangerousness in the future?
Dahmer was beaten to death in 1994 by a fellow prisoner who claimed that auditory hallucinations
demanded he kill Dahmer.
I suppose that inmate got his own forensic psychology evaluation after that.
