Do you think that you could be called as an expert witness about a subject?
Maybe because of your work history, you have a deep and specific knowledge of some subject
that very well could qualify you as an expert witness.
It could be accounting, insurance, auto repair, certain medical procedures, architecture,
or some other field.
You might have a particular interest or hobby that would take your knowledge well beyond
that of most other people on the subject, maybe like stamps, birds, sewing, or photography.
Really anybody can serve as an expert witness so long as they have expertise on the topic
in question.
In the courtroom, an expert witness and his or her testimony vary greatly from that of
an eyewitness.
An expert can be any person who, through their training, education, experience, published
works, membership in professional organizations, or a combination of those, could assist a
judge or jury by giving an opinion on a disputed matter.
Remember how we talked about materiality and relevance with regard to evidence?
Those pertain to an expert witness just as they would anything else.
So the first thing that attorneys have to do is to make sure that an expert witness,
they plan to call to the stand, has something potentially important to say about the matter
in question.
They also need to research the expert's qualifications, like the experience, training, and education
that will satisfy the triers of fact that the person giving expert testimony really
is a bona fide expert on the subject.
Qualifying a witness to serve as an expert can be a lengthy process of questioning the
potential witness on his or her background, or it can be simply stipulated to by the attorneys
on both sides of the case.
And I've experienced both.
Most of the time, especially when I'm testifying in some of the counties where I've practiced
as a forensic anthropologist for over 25 years now, the prosecutor and the defense attorney
will just agree to stipulate for the record that they consider me an expert in forensic
anthropology.
They have my curriculum vitae, which is a fancy word for the resume of somebody who's
had a lifetime of experience in a particular field, and they don't question my qualifications.
But I did have one particular experience that I will never forget, where a public defender
in a capital murder appeal called me to serve as a second opinion expert witness.
And rather than to stipulate to my qualifications, the prosecuting attorney decided to go to
great lengths to show that his expert had far more background in forensic anthropology
than I did.
I mean, this was really a David and Goliath type of situation, where I was basically pitted
against one of the most prominent forensic anthropologists in all of North America.
The prosecuting attorney even went so far as to pull out his expert's curriculum vitae,
which is pretty much the size of the volume of Encyclopedia Britannica and set it next
to mine, which made mine look like a news magazine.
Although it probably was obvious to members of the jury that the prosecutor's expert
was nearly twice my age, I'm not sure that was factored into their thinking.
So when you see multiple experts being asked about their backgrounds in courtrooms or on
TV, that's not necessarily far from the way it happens in real life.
The prosecution gets to call their experts, and the defense gets to do likewise.
That's because no matter what else, one thing I firmly believe to be true is that in any
kind of legal dispute, both sides have the right to good science.
Remember, the case I'm talking about here was a capital murder appeal.
What if that defendant had been your brother or my brother, who was literally pleading
for his life to have his case examined again before being put to death for a crime he claimed
he didn't commit?
I'll say it again, both sides deserve good science, and the best thing I can do as an
expert witness is to do my best to present good science.
That brings me to a related topic.
I try very hard not to follow the cases in which I participate as an expert witness,
and try not to concern myself with their outcomes.
For one thing, listening to local media reports about a case from the time a skeleton is
discovered, all the way up until years later, when I may have to testify about it in court.
Well, I know that listening to media accounts or delving into other aspects of the case
has the potential to contaminate my objectivity, and good science requires objectivity.
For instance, if I hear on the nightly news that a skeleton's been discovered and the
police think they know who the victim is, and it's in my area, I try to tune out the
rest of the broadcast literally by turning off the radio or the television, and then
I wait to get the call from the coroner's office.
That's because I don't want to go into an examination with preconceived notions about
the age or sex of the victim based on what somebody else thinks.
And years later, if and when that case comes to trial, it shouldn't matter to me whether
I'm called by the prosecution or the defense, and it shouldn't matter who's sitting in
the defendant's chair.
I'm simply there to speak for a victim who can no longer speak for him or herself.
Or I'm there to testify about some type of scientific findings that may help the judge
or jury in sorting out the case.
Part of being an expert witness is that I'm not there to win or lose a case in the way
an attorney might be.
I'm there to help the jury or the judge understand things that aren't familiar to most people.
So I've actually taken a couple of continuing education workshops to help me be a better
expert witness.
And that doesn't mean to help me get more business as an expert witness, even though
that can be pretty lucrative.
In fact, that's one of the traps I was cautioned about at one of those workshops.
I was told that an attorney for the opposing side might sometimes ask an expert.
So Dr. Murray, you're being paid for what you say here today, aren't you?
And the suggested response to that question was, I'm being paid for my time today just
like any other professional here.
Now I guess that answer sounds a little sassy, but what I'd really probably be tempted to
say is, I'm a college professor, so I'm sure I'm not being paid half of what you're making
as an attorney.
Well, I'm sure that would not go over well with the judge.
But it does remind me to tell you that there are some forensic scientists who have their
reputation among their colleagues as being hired guns, meaning they'll say just about
anything to make a buck.
Now I won't say who they are, but you've probably seen some of them on television shows
like Nancy Grace.
It's basically the same bunch of forensic scientists that gallivant around the United
States and give their opinion on any and all high profile cases, whether they've seen the
evidence in them or not.
And while the media and some members of the public go wild for these high profile forensic
scientists, they don't often have the best reputation among their peers.
So really, use caution when you watch those kinds of programs and consider that there
are often big egos involved.
And as we've seen with politicians and movie stars, sometimes high profile individuals
begin to believe that their opinions on everything bear listening to, even when they stray far
outside their area of expertise.
The fact is that forensic scientists are bound by our common ethical principles to work only
for truth.
Anything more or less than that is unacceptable.
Here's a famous quote from a 19th century French pathologist named Paul Braudel with
regard to the courtroom, if the law has made you a witness, remain a man of science.
You have no victim to avenge, no guilty or innocent person to convict or save.
You must bear testimony within the limits of science.
So then what does an expert witness do to assist the triers of fact?
As we saw in the last lecture, ordinary witnesses can really only give courtroom testimony that
comes from the personal knowledge they've gained by using their eyes and ears, which
have, as we've seen, can't always be trusted.
Ordinary witnesses aren't allowed to give opinions about the things they saw or heard.
They can only report them.
But forensic scientists and other expert witnesses can testify not only about personal
knowledge gained from our eyes and ears, but can also form opinions based on our evaluation
of evidence through scientific testing.
And to be good expert witnesses, we have to be able to explain complex scientific topics
in a way that any person chosen to sit on a jury could understand them.
In fact, I really think that my background in teaching has been just as fundamental in
my ability to serve as an expert witness as my forensic training.
Because in the courtroom, I'm essentially teaching the jury about a topic they usually
know little or nothing about.
So it's important that I address my answers to the jury in a trial or the judge if it's
a bench trial.
In other words, although the attorney may be standing over here asking me questions, when
I answer those questions, I turn to the jury and give my answer.
They're the people who need to understand this scientific information in order to arrive
at their verdict, not the attorney.
That's not to say that attorney's questions aren't important, because a good attorney
is really directing the questioning in such a way as to make sure my answers give the
jury what they need to know.
And even though it can be uncomfortable, I know the attorneys need to make the appropriate
legal objections if I start straying into areas that could be damaging to their case.
In the courtroom, the attorneys and the judge carefully control the order and the amount
of information released, because they are the experts charged with making sure testimony
meets the appropriate legal standards.
And since our legal system is adversarial, like you see in TV or movie courtroom dramas,
the attorneys also try to push for or limit information in a way that will support their
side of the story.
I can give you a personal example of that that I will never forget.
Many years ago, I worked on a case that I mentioned before in our discussion of the decomposition
process.
This was the case of the five-year-old child who was abducted and murdered.
And because of her small size and the conditions in which she decomposed, remember she was
nearly fully skeletonized in only a week?
Well, eventually a suspect was charged with a crime and the case went to trial.
To my surprise, I got a subpoena to testify in that case.
I guess it's a good thing everybody at work knows I'm a forensic scientist, because it's
not every day that the police come to a college and serve a subpoena.
And I've definitely gotten more of those than even the worst kids that live in the dorm.
Now as I say, I was really surprised by this subpoena, because my involvement in the case
was pretty straightforward.
Most of the time, my anthropology report actually becomes part of the pathology report.
Since I often work side by side with the pathologist in a case, he or she is typically the one
called to testify, not me.
More often than not, both sides in a legal case stipulate to my report as part of the
autopsy report.
Anyway, I was pretty surprised that the prosecutor's office requested my testimony in this case.
As part of a pretrial conference, the prosecutor told me he wanted me to explain the decomposition
process to the jury, and that was all he was really going to ask me about.
I figured this was because he thought the jury might be confused or think there was
some question about identity, because it's difficult to comprehend that a body could
decompose so quickly.
And the little girl had only been missing for a week before her body was discovered.
So after I was sworn in and sat down in the witness chair, I was asked to explain how
soft tissues decompose away from the body, ultimately leaving only skeletal remains.
And as you can imagine, since you sat through it yourself in a previous lecture, that isn't
the most pleasant topic to have to explain to the jury.
But even worse, the little girl's family was sitting in the courtroom too.
So I really tried to phrase my words carefully, so as not to be so graphic in my descriptions.
But when I began to talk about how insects remove soft tissue, every time I said the
words insect larvae, the prosecutor would say, you mean maggots, right?
Now the first time he did it, I assumed he was just trying to make sure the jury knew
what the word larva meant, but he kept correcting me and trying to make me use the term maggot.
And even though I was facing the jury, I could see from the corner of my eye that this little
girl's family members were getting up one by one and leaving the courtroom, rather than
sitting there listening to the graphic description of how their little girl's body was consumed
by insects.
Now in my opinion, the line of questioning from that attorney went far beyond what any
lay person would need to hear to grasp the decomposition process.
Now I know this prosecutor, and later I wanted him to ask him why he had done that to me
and to the jury, but most especially to this little girl's family.
And he admitted to me that he wanted to inflame the jury, plain and simple.
I'm sure he did.
So that not only illustrates that attorneys have agendas, but also that an expert witness
doesn't have the right to refuse to answer a question just because it makes them feel
uncomfortable or others in the courtroom.
Okay, let's move on to talk about who the experts in forensic science are and how they
come to be experts.
Over the years, there's been a pretty big shift in forensic science that's been largely
related to technology.
In the old days, police officers were largely responsible for most of the standard forensic
work that was done.
Not just the investigation, but also recognizing, collecting and preserving forensic evidence,
as well as analyzing it.
Much of that work is still done today by law enforcement officers, especially when it comes
to things like fingerprints and motor vehicle accidents.
As I've said before, law enforcement officers certainly are still the heroes when it comes
to investigation.
Unlike what we see on TV, forensic scientists do not chase down leads.
We do not question suspects.
We don't interview witnesses.
We don't talk to the families, except in special cases like forensic artists.
Some of them interview witnesses.
The legwork out in the community that's necessary to figure out who done it, that's still done
by law enforcement officers.
But as technology has advanced, some aspects of forensic science, especially related to
analytical techniques, have become so dependent on an intense knowledge of chemistry, biology,
and physics that much of the related lab work has become the domain of scientists.
The first crime lab was established by Edmund Lockhart, remember of the Lockhart principle?
That was in 1910 in France.
And then in 1932, the FBI Forensic Lab originated.
But it wasn't until 1937 that the first U.S. Forensic Science College program began at
the University of California at Berkeley.
Today in the United States, there are well over 100 forensic science graduate programs
alone, and that's just counting programs beyond the four-year bachelor's degree level.
So because of the explosion of interest in forensic science, that's been largely prompted
in my opinion by television shows.
There's been a lot of pressure for colleges and universities to develop forensic science
programs to recruit the interested public.
Some of these are even online courses, which completely baffles me given the hands-on nature
of forensic science.
A very few of these programs are accredited by FEPAC, which is the Forensic Science Education
Programs Accreditation Commission, developed by the American Academy of Forensic Sciences
in the early 2000s.
The formation of FEPAC was based largely on a needs assessment that was conducted by the
U.S. Department of Justice's National Institutes of Justice.
Just so few of these college and university programs are accredited by FEPAC, if you or
anybody you know is interested in pursuing a career in forensic science, be sure and
do your homework.
And remember, there's a big difference between forensic science programs and criminal justice
programs in the United States.
In fact, my advice to students interested in a career in most aspects of forensic science
is that they get a broad high school and then college background in the physical and natural
sciences, including biology, chemistry and physics, and that they not attempt to specialize
in forensics until graduate school.
Because there are so many different disciplines within the overall umbrella of forensic science,
prospective students should look carefully at various programs to make sure they'll get
the depth of study they want and need in a particular area of interest, like DNA analysis,
trace evidence or anthropology.
Let's take a look at some of the career pathways to becoming a forensic expert.
The American Academy of Forensic Sciences, founded in 1948, is the premier professional
organization for forensic sciences.
It recognizes and encompasses 11 different sections.
Journalistics, Digital and Multimedia Sciences, Engineering Sciences, Jurisprudence, Odontology,
Pathology and Biology, Physical Anthropology, Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Question
Documents, Toxicology.
They also have an 11th section called the General Section, which is home to a variety
of forensic specialists like forensic artists, forensic accountants, forensic photographers,
crime scene investigator, investigators and polygraph examiners who don't yet have either
a large enough contingent to warrant their own section or haven't lobbied hard enough
for one.
Now let's look at those areas of forensic expertise one at a time.
It'll be a good review of who the players are in the many areas we've already talked
about in the series, and it will highlight the educational background needed in the typical
work settings that different forensic experts are employed in.
Criminalists, criminalists examine and test the broadest range of different types of physical
evidence.
They're the ones that look at hair, fibers, body fluids, chemicals, paint, glass, soil,
flammable substances, firearms and bullets, tool marks and fingerprints.
Depending on the size of the lab where they work, criminalists might be generalists involved
with most or even all of those many types of evidence.
But in big forensic labs there may be several criminalists who each specialize in one or
just a few of those areas.
Typically, criminalists have a bachelor's degree in some type of physical or natural
science, and many of them have master's degrees, especially in forensic science.
Like all forensic scientists, criminalists have to do continuing education, and they
may become certified by the American Board of Criminalists.
Lots of different types of forensic settings employ criminalists in a full-time capacity,
including sheriffs and police departments, medical examiner and coroner's offices, colleges
and universities that do forensic training, and state and federal agencies like the U.S.
Drug Enforcement Administration, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives,
the FBI, the CIA, Central Intelligence Agency, and the U.S. Department of Fish and Wildlife
Services and the military also.
The newest section in the American Academy of Forensic Sciences is the Digital and Multimedia
Sciences section, as you could imagine.
Experts in this field examine all types of digital devices and evidence, from computers
and networks to cameras and cell phones.
They might look at audio, image and video files to assess their authenticity or to figure
out whether they can use enhancement techniques to improve digital evidence.
The educational background for these forensic experts is typically a bachelor's degree,
usually in something like computer science, information technology or engineering.
There are career opportunities in the larger city and state law enforcement agencies, as
well as at the federal level.
But unlike many other forensic science fields, digital specialists may also be employed in
the private sector.
Forensic engineers, as we learned, look at the causes of accidents, structural and mechanical
failures, the origins of fires and explosions.
They work with anything from communication networks and bridges to surgical devices and
broken bones.
Engineers primarily get involved in civil suits, like personal injury or patent issues.
They usually hold an engineering degree that's then followed by more specific training and
expertise in narrower areas of engineering, and perhaps a graduate degree.
There really aren't many colleges or universities that even have specific courses in forensic
engineering.
So what usually happens is that an engineer seeks out opportunities to gain the experience
and knowledge needed to apply engineering to legal matters.
And like some other forensic science specialties, forensic engineers usually have their own consulting
business that's only partly devoted to their forensic work.
The American Academy of Forensic Sciences jurisprudence section is made up of lawyers,
including district and state attorneys, public defenders, judges, law college and university
professors.
And these professionals have a law degree after which they pursue continuing education
necessary to support, refine and advance the legal system, especially as it relates to
forensic science.
Students in the field of forensic odontology begin with a doctor of dental science, that's
a DDS, or a doctor of dental medicine, it's a DMD degree, but like just the same as any
other dentists, but they need specific forensic training in order to be qualified as an expert
in forensic dental identifications and bite mark analysis.
And there are a couple of professional societies, institutes and universities that offer additional
training to forensic dentists.
And the American Board of Forensic Odontology has a certification exam that forensic dentists
can take.
The most forensic odontologists do part time forensic consulting, aside from their full
time work in a regular dental practice.
The forensic dentist that I work with is drilling and filling by day, and when needed
he goes to the morgue after work to analyze a bite mark on a body or a dental exam, do
a dental exam on an unknown person.
He's also an internationally known expert on the forensic photography of bite marks
and other soft tissue injuries, and he teaches about that to forensic agencies all around
the world.
Experts who belong to the pathology and biology section of the American Academy of Forensic
Sciences are mostly forensic pathologists, and they're employed full time in coroners
and medical examiners' offices throughout North America.
This means they've gone to medical school, had a pathology residency, and an additional
one to two years in a forensic pathology fellowship program.
The American Board of Pathology has an exam to certify their expertise.
There are other types of forensic scientists who are members of the pathology and biology
section, like forensic entomologists, serologists, and DNA analysts, but only those whose credentials
are at the PhD level are accepted into the highest ranks of membership in the path biosection.
Serologists and DNA analysts who don't hold doctoral degrees have to go into the criminalist
section.
Experts in my field, physical anthropology, usually hold a PhD in anthropology or human
biology with emphasis on the human skeleton.
This means an average of seven years of graduate studies beyond the bachelor's degrees.
There are practicing forensic anthropologists who hold master's degrees, but currently
the American Board of Forensic Anthropology will only allow those of us with doctoral
degrees to sit for its certification exam.
And we have to have three years of experience beyond the PhD before even applying to take
the exam.
In 1999 I became board certified and was only the 59th person in the world to pass the exam.
And by now the numbers are only up to the high 80s.
There are a couple of reasons for that small number that go beyond the tough exam and the
credentials needed prior to it.
First, the ABFA has only been in existence since 1977.
But the main reason there are so few board certified forensic anthropologists is because
there's just not that much need for our services.
You consider how seldom you hear of a skeleton being discovered somewhere, and then you'd
realize that most forensic anthropologists don't get a lot of case work.
Most of us, like me, have part-time forensic consulting practices in addition to full-time
teaching responsibilities.
Now there are a handful of full-time positions in forensic anthropology in the larger medical
examiner and coroner's offices in the country, and some with the military, such as the U.S.
Army's Central Identification Lab.
But these full-time jobs are really few and far between.
There are also a few forensic anthropologists employed at the Smithsonian Institution and
a few with the FBI.
Forensic experts in psychiatry and behavioral sciences have backgrounds related to their
specific roles.
Psychiatrists are medical doctors who pursue a residency in psychiatry and then further
education that is specific to forensics.
There's a certification exam through the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology for forensic
psychiatrists.
Forensic psychologists have graduate training that typically includes a Ph.D. in psychology
and then postdoctoral work.
They may opt for a certification exam in forensic psychology through the American Board of Professional
Psychology.
And career opportunities in these areas include private practice, as well as state and federal
government positions in prisons, hospitals, and other kinds of settings.
Unlike many of the fields I just mentioned, question document examiners have traditionally
emerged out of law enforcement.
In fact, currently there aren't any degree programs in the U.S. that specialize in forensic
document examination.
So after a minimum of a bachelor's degree in science, criminalistics, or criminal justice,
somebody wanting to be a document examiner undertakes an apprenticeship or internship
with an already established expert in the field.
And there's a certification exam they can take through the American Board of Forensic
Document Examiners.
And professionals there end up working in both public and private sectors.
Really large law enforcement agencies will often have a full-time document examiner on
staff.
As we've learned, experts in toxicology examine body substances to look for chemicals that
may relate to cause of death or illness, or chemicals that might impair a person's abilities
or their judgment.
They also analyze question substances to determine their chemical makeup, or to figure out whether
or not a product has been chemically tampered with.
To be a toxicologist, somebody needs a minimum of a bachelor's degree, usually in chemistry,
with an emphasis in pharmacology.
Many professional toxicologists hold master's and doctoral degrees.
And the American Board of Forensic Toxicology, and another called the Forensic Toxicology
Certification Board, offer professional certification exams.
Most forensic toxicologists are employed full-time in medical examiner, coroner, and law enforcement
labs, but some also work in industry and government settings, like poison control agencies.
For close to the topic of expertise, I want to stress the importance of professional organizations
in allowing forensic scientists to share new research and advance knowledge among professionals.
My many years of membership in the American Academy of Forensic Sciences have allowed
me to continue to learn more about my field and contribute to advancements in forensic
science.
Our annual meetings are attended by forensic scientists from all over the world, and the
networking and educational value of those opportunities is really amazing.
In science, it's often said that we stand on the shoulders of giants, because each new
development builds on a growing body of knowledge.
And to be an expert, you need to learn from and exchange with other experts around the
world.
Personally, for me, my membership in professional organizations has allowed me to learn far
more about forensic science than in all my 13 years of college education.
I really treasure my associations with my many colleagues, experts in all areas of forensic
science, from whom I have learned so much.
