Well, we've come a long way now. From the crime scene to the courtroom, we've looked
at lots of different types of evidence and highlighted some interesting cases. You've
seen how the behavioral sciences come into play with collecting witness statements and
interrogating suspects. We stuck our head in the door of the courtroom and talked about
some of the legal issues intertwined with forensic science. And we focused on who the
experts are and how they're trained and certified to give the court their opinions about evidence.
But the thing that starts off each forensic investigation is a crime, or at least a suspected
crime or a suspicious death. So now let's focus on crime itself by taking a general
look at different types of offenses. We'll consider some sources of crime statistics
and how they may vary around the world. We'll briefly consider some of the types of evidence
that may result from a crime and take a look at the types of labs that analyze that evidence.
There are several ways that crime could be categorized. For instance, there are major
crimes and there are more minor offenses that don't cause as much harm to others or society.
Some crimes are classified as felonies, which are more serious and carry heavier penalties
than what are called misdemeanor crimes. And advances in technology make it possible to
commit crimes that pose new challenges to law enforcement every day. But many still employ
what we might call a more traditional MO. Remember, that's method of operations.
When you think about it, motives are as old as humanity itself. We even observe or project
them onto some of our fellow creatures. Things like greed, hatred, lust, jealousy, desperation
or just plain depravity, they seem to be part of human nature. And even though most people
don't break laws when confronted with those feelings, crimes like murder, rape and theft
are as old as time. What may differ over time is the MO that perpetrators use. In other
words, the offenses themselves are old, but the technology and weapons used to carry the
amount may change. You may have heard some kinds of crimes referred to as emerging threats.
Things like identity theft and internet fraud. But when you really think about it, posing
as somebody else, whether to avoid a past or get money out of someone, is certainly
not new. Only the MO has changed. Human trafficking and exploitation is often considered an emerging
threat. But human history demonstrates a long record of enslaving others, whether to force
them to work or otherwise use and abuse them. Child pornography, for instance, is nothing
new. But technology has given the offenders new ways to capture and share those images.
What about organized crime? You know, where a group of people with their own hierarchy
and objectives manipulates those around them often to their own gain? Well, some people
could say that's just another word for government. But seriously, human politics have always been
rife with corruption, bribery and organized crime. The only thing that changes may be
the means to the end. Some people consider hate crimes new, but a mention of the Nazi
Germany camps or the Ku Klux Klan quickly pokes holes in that notion. So do the 9-11
tragedies in the United States and the Protestant and Catholic holy wars in Ireland. Nothing
new there. How about cults and maybe those who engage in ritual activity that others
might find offensive? As an anthropologist, I would argue, and I'm not alone here, that
the difference between a cult and a religion may actually just boil down to the tests of
time and acceptance within the larger community. I mean, charismatic figures have led people
to bizarre acts of self and other sacrifice since human time began.
A workplace violence is a tough one. I really can't think of any easy historical examples.
I'm sure there have always been disgruntled employees, dissatisfied customers, or people
who took their domestic violence issues into the spouse's workplace. But this idea of
going postal, which is a sad term that's been used to describe a horrific string of
incidents within the U.S. Postal Service that began in the 1980s, well, that does seem
fairly new. And in my mind could qualify as an emerging crime, like its terrible companion
school violence. These types of crimes would still be investigated in the same way as any
other, though, even if the specific causes behind them are not well understood.
Let's take a look at two broad categories of crime. Those in which nobody's supposed
to get hurt and others where violence is intentional. The lines can be blurred, as we'll see, but
these cases can often be broken down into what are called property crimes and violent
crimes. Property crimes are those where the target is nonhuman, like arson, burglary,
and motor vehicle theft. Yeah, people may be killed in the commission of those types
of crimes, but the initial intent of the perpetrators was to take something that didn't belong
to them or to set a fire, either for their own gain or maybe to punish somebody else
or as we've seen for other psychological reasons all their own.
Violent crimes are those in which the offenders set out to harm people or at least threaten
to harm them. Homicide, rape, aggravated assault, kidnapping, and robbery, those are
examples of violent crimes. And to clear up some terminology, let's use an example.
As we learned about with manner of death, homicide is a broad term that means to take
the life of another person. But words like murder, manslaughter, and the different quote
degrees they might carry are legal constructs that vary in jurisdictions around the world.
In the U.S. and some other areas, murder generally implies homicide with intent, or in some cases
at least indifference toward the victim. To give you a possible example of the way
homicide charges could rank, an indication of first degree takes the killing to the highest
level of premeditation. While second degree could mean there was an intent to harm, but
not necessarily kill, but the victim died. Third degree might be used to indicate the
death happened by either indifference or neglect, like in drunk driving or child neglect, although
involuntary manslaughter is often the charge when drunk driving takes a life. A manslaughter
implies no specific intent to kill, and involuntary means that the perpetrator was engaged in some
type of criminally negligent behavior, but they didn't intend to take a life by their
actions. Now, voluntary manslaughter, on the other hand, is when somebody takes a life,
but it's during circumstances that so altered the killer's behavior that he or she just
couldn't help acting on their feelings, like so-called crimes of passion. Maybe when in
the heat of an argument a woman grabs a lamp and swings it at her husband, strikes him
in the head, and he dies. Returning to murder in the fourth degree, that could be used to
charge the accomplice in a homicide, or what's called aggravated felony murder, in which
a victim is killed during the commission of any crime that's considered a felony. Now,
adding the term aggravated to any charge means there's something about the particular case
that takes the crime to a more heinous level, like the age of the victim in a rape, or if
the particular MO in a killing is really tortuous. But what's called justifiable homicide, like
taking the life in self-defense, that's not a charge because it's not considered a crime.
There's a key difference between burglary and robbery that makes one a property crime,
and the other one a violent crime. In a burglary, there's intentional unlawful entry into a building
or somewhere else to steal things. But in a robbery, the property is stolen by violence or the threat
of violence. This means the perpetrator is confronting a victim, which can happen in a
burglary, but in a robbery, one or more people are threatened or actually hurt, and the criminal
anticipates that encounter going into the act. Okay, that gives you some idea of a handful of
offenses and how they're classified in the legal system. Illegal constructs differ from place to
place. They vary at local, state, federal, and international levels. There are also geographic
differences in crimes and crime rates, not just between small towns and big cities, but from one
country to another. Some of this will relate to how technologically advanced scenario is,
which will affect both MO and the ways in which authorities investigate crimes.
Because education and technology aren't evenly distributed around the world,
the training skills and techniques used by and available to forensic scientists,
those can vary greatly from place to place. Crime's an area of significant study.
Local, state, and federal agencies all collect data on different types of crimes and where and how
often they occur. Each year the FBI puts out their uniform crime report called Crime in the U.S.,
which breaks offenses into property crimes and violent crimes, and then subdivides those categories
even further. They also give clearance rates on the percentage of reported crimes that have been
resolved, and to some extent by what means they were resolved. The FBI Uniform Crime Report also
gives arrest statistics for nearly 30 types of crimes, including the ages, sex, and sexes,
and other demographics of the perpetrators. They also summarize information about police agencies,
from the national level down to even college and university police forces, including demographics
on the personnel each agency employs. All this stuff's really interesting. Some reporting goes
all the way back as far as 1960, and it's all available on the internet to the public.
Now, similar to the FBI report, since about 1970, the United Nations has regularly conducted its
surveys on crime trends and the operations of criminal justice systems. The survey poses all
types of questions to around 150 participating countries' governments, covering all kinds of
information. For instance, like the FBI, the UN requests data on reported crime and the numbers
of law enforcement and judicial personnel in a given country, and you can find the UN statistics
on the internet too. One of the things that the UN points out is that reported crime in no way
includes all crime. A large percentage of crime goes unreported to authorities, particularly
lesser crimes, for a variety of reasons. There are also some inherent issues with making cross
country comparisons that the UN points out. Because definitions and reporting processes vary,
the data isn't always apples to apples. But they do report their crime statistics per 100,000 people,
which treats large and small countries equally. Another factor to consider in worldwide crime
rates is that the more highly developed the society is, the more access people have to police
stations, telephones, and even insurance, and so the more likely crime is to be reported.
Also, in areas where governments are more corrupt and justice is less assured, where cases are not
likely to be prosecuted, reporting tends to be lower. Victims or witnesses basically just assume
what's the use. This is especially true where there's an autocratic government under the absolute
rule of one person or just a few people. In those cases, the police are often seen as an extension
of the regime and are not trusted by many citizens. There are also cultural considerations, like in
places where a woman could be considered adulterous or unmarriageable after rape. Well, then she's
less likely reported. In the U.S., there are some federal crime laws, but states and smaller
jurisdictions can add to those and develop their own legislation, so long as federal law allows
for that provision. You know, for instance, a township can't legalize murder, but it can make
its own law about leaving dog waste in somebody's yard. The FBI and the U.N. statistics are framed
in more general ways that are reasonably consistent. For instance, regardless of local laws, for purposes
of presenting statistics, the FBI defines burglary as, quote, unlawful entry of a structure to commit
a felony or theft. They go on to make sure that it's clear the term structure also includes offices,
apartments, and house trailers or houseboats if they're used by somebody as a residence,
but it also includes barns, stables, railroad cars, boats, and ships.
Cars aren't included because they get their own category of crime, and that's auto theft.
The FBI report further breaks down burglary statistics into those where there was an attempted
forced entry, those where there was forcible entry, and where there was no force just on
lawful entry. In the U.N. survey, burglary includes thefts from homes, factories, shops,
offices, or military establishments, and thefts using false keys, but it also excludes thefts
from a car, vending machine, parking meter, fenced outdoor area, or a container like a box
sitting on somebody's doorstep. The U.N. report states that in most countries the majority of
thefts happen at businesses and corporations, not from people's homes. When you consider
anywhere in the world a burglary might happen, the evidence could include fingerprints, toolmarks,
eyewitnesses, or surveillance camera footage, but that may depend on both the sophistication
of the perpetrator and the establishment that's broken into. And whether that burglary is solved
depends on the technology and other resources available to law enforcement in the area.
How about motor vehicle theft? Again, definitions vary between FBI reporting and the U.N. to some
degree, but both break this out as its own brand of theft. Motors behind stealing cars vary. We've
seen some of that depicted on TV shows and movies like 2000s Gone in 60 Seconds. Sometimes the vehicle
is taken for just a short time and then abandoned later after maybe joyriding in it or using the car
in connection with another crime like stealing a getaway car. Other times the thief wants to use
the car for his own transportation. Some vehicles are stolen specifically to resell in whole or in
parts, somewhere else either locally or overseas in what are sometimes known as chop shop operations
that are often run by organized crime syndicates. According to victimization surveys, motor vehicle
theft is likely to be reported to police, mainly because of the value of the vehicles involved.
In developed countries, especially due to insurance, it's estimated that 80 to 90 percent of vehicle
thefts are reported. At the end of 2010, the International Police Organization Interpol
had records of more than 7,150,000 auto thefts in their worldwide databases. You can also find
those on the internet. Not surprisingly, the highest rates of motor vehicle theft are in developed
countries, where there are just more vehicles to steal. As other countries become more developed,
they will likely see more thefts themselves. Conversely, as new car security systems in
already developed countries get better at deterring auto theft, like on-board black box
technologies, those areas might see a decreasing trend in auto theft. But it's also possible
that as car security systems become more advanced, the way that vehicles are stolen might change.
Remember, the motor stays the same, but the M.O. might change. For instance, we could see an increase
in car jackings if thieves need to steal running cars out of their owner's hands because of
computer chip ignition systems. There's always been a never-ending arms race between security
measures and criminals. With regard to arson, another major property crime, the UN doesn't
even report on incendiary fires, though the FBI does. I presented some of the FBI data earlier
in our lecture on arson. The FBI also gives stats on larceny thefts that the UN doesn't.
Examples of those kinds of offenses are things like shoplifting, pickpocketing, stolen car parts,
and bicycle theft, as well as attempts to commit any of those crimes. Larson, he doesn't include
things like embezzlement, forgery, check fraud, and the general class of schemes that people call
con games. Now, let's move to violent crime issues. Remember, robbery is taken out of the realm of
property crime because it's committed with violence or the threat of violence, not with
stealth like a pickpocket. Robbery includes muggings, purse snatchings, bank or business holdups,
and similar kinds of offenses, including carjacking. In some countries, the distinction between
robbery and some lesser charge is based on the monetary value of what's taken. But overall,
the definition of robbery is pretty comparable from country to country. The amount of reported
robberies is thought to be fairly close to the number of actual robberies because of both the
property loss and the possible trauma, physical or psychological, that's caused to the victims.
One thing that the UN statistics show is that in general, the more robberies there are in an area,
the more other crimes take place there, too. For instance, in South Africa, authorities report
that the higher the incidents of carjackings are in an area, the higher the level of criminal
gang activity there. The same is true for robberies and drug-related crime in the United States.
Assault, as defined by the UN survey, means any bodily attack that's not of a sexual nature.
Comparison among countries here is difficult because in some places, the definition includes
the mere threat of bodily harm. Other countries count punching or slapping, but then some places
only charge assault if there are visible injuries. FBI statistics report aggravated assaults in
their summary. Both the FBI and the UN collect data on rape. Two-thirds of the countries that
responded to the UN said they concur with a definition of rape as, quote, sexual intercourse
without valid consent. The other third of reporting countries either include attempted
rapes or sexual assaults in their rape data, as with Canada, which skews North American data higher,
or some countries have legal definitions of rape that don't count male victims,
as in some parts of Africa. That would skew the data lower for those countries.
As we've all heard in the news, there's an increased amount of rape for both women and men
in many war-torn areas of Africa and elsewhere. Robberies, assaults, and rapes all leave eyewitnesses,
as well as some transfer of physical evidence. Remember, low cards rule? But we've seen how
notoriously inaccurate eyewitness accounts can be, especially when the victim is confronted with a
weapon. Also, in all those cases, how quickly a victim comes forth will play a big role in what
kind of interview or physical evidence could be collected. In some places, people may not even
realize that minute bits of trace evidence they can't see with their naked eye even exists.
Remember, not everybody in the world watches CSI and other TV shows. Plus, we've seen that
sophisticated criminals often attempt to minimize the trail of evidence that they leave.
Suppose police get lucky and a robber leaves a ski mask behind with a few stray hairs in it.
Not only will they have to find the perpetrator to make a comparison,
they'll also have to possess the means to analyze those hairs. An interview of the witness's account
and a physical exam to see his or her injuries can be undertaken even in the most basic of
hospital or police settings. But the ability to collect the only individuating evidence belonging
to an attacker, meaning DNA, that'll depend on the technology available in the area.
Remember all the precautions to obtain a quality sample and avoid contamination with DNA?
There are parts of the world where that's difficult at best,
let alone to get that evidence to a lab that has the ability to generate a DNA profile.
As with other scientific advances, what most of us take for granted is often completely absent
in other parts of the world. We hear a lot about kidnapping these days, particularly in some parts
of the world, which is a worry for those of us who travel abroad. But one source I found said
that the US ranked sixth in the world with regard to kidnapping for ransom in 2010.
The UN survey's definition of kidnapping is kind of complex and not all countries would use the
same criteria. For example, Canada includes human trafficking of Canadians outside its
geographic borders as kidnapping, so their data would be skewed higher in the UN survey.
Now a kidnapping might leave little evidence behind, especially if a person is just grabbed
in a public place and put in a vehicle. In cases like that, the victim literally may disappear
without a trace. And unless he or she is found, investigators may have little to go on but eyewitness
accounts or maybe surveillance tapes depending on the location. Only when and if the kidnappers
make contact again might police have the opportunity to analyze a ransom note or use computer
technology to hone in on a location through cell phone use. And again, that's going to depend on
the sophistication of the culture involved. And only if and when a victim or suspect or maybe
a related location is identified could other evidence be collected to tie the suspect to the
crime of kidnapping. Finally, let's turn our attention to homicide. And I should point out two
things. First, homicide is considered the best overall indicator for the rates of all other
violent crimes. Secondly, when you think about comparing worldwide rates of homicides, you have
to consider that advances in medicine in places like North America, Western Europe, and other
developed countries, they dramatically increase the survival rates for what might easily be a
homicide someplace else. We've probably all heard that victims are far more likely to be killed by
people they know than by strangers. Research shows that the rate of homicides involving family
members or close relatives and associates stays fairly stable or changes very slowly over a long
period of time. So when you see high homicide rates, like some today in Central America,
authorities attribute much of the increase to things like drug trafficking, organized crime,
and gang-related violence. The drug trade increases crime across the board, partly because of violence
linked to it, but also because the more drug processors, traffickers, and users there are in
an area, the thinner police resources get spread, and that leaves more opportunities for other crimes
to occur. Worldwide data compiled between 2003 and 2008 show firearms as the most common weapon
used in areas with higher homicide rates. Guns were used in over 75% of all homicides in Central
America and the Caribbean, but were used in only about 10% of homicides in Eastern and
Southeastern Europe, where firearms are generally far more strictly controlled. Apparently the more
widespread firearms are in an area, the more homicides will take place there.
The availability of guns, though, is no predictor of the availability of opportunities to examine
the evidence that comes from them. Remember, firearms analysis not only requires finding
the suspected weapon and then test firing it to get a bullet in its casing, but also comparing
that ammunition under a microscope to one collected from the victim or the crime scene.
I think you've probably figured out my conclusion of this part of the lecture already.
As I stand here and as you sit there watching me on a DVD player or a computer screen,
forensically we are very lucky. Crime is everywhere. It's as old as humanity itself,
but access to the tools to solve crimes is not everywhere. The forensic services available
in different parts of the world to process and analyze evidence and help find criminals,
that varies tremendously around the world, just like other aspects of technology.
More developed countries have state-of-the-art laboratory facilities and equipment,
with proper evidence curation facilities to store items until trial or for future tests
that may be on the horizon. They have centralized services, good oversight, and budgets that let
them keep up with the latest technology, but other labs are makeshift operations with only the most
basic of tools and facilities. The good news is that there are increasing trends toward worldwide
cooperation in forensic science training. The American Academy of Forensic Sciences has organized
donations of outdated equipment to places in the world that have little or nothing to work with,
and each year we welcome new international attendees to our annual meeting,
where workshops are held and scientific advances are shared. I have colleagues who regularly travel
to less well-developed countries to teach the newest methods, or at least the best ones possible,
given financial and technological constraints. In 2004, I was privileged to travel to Guatemala
with a film crew working for National Geographic to share ideas with their forensic anthropology
foundation and hear about their work. Their efforts are helping to uncover Mayan genocide and other
human rights abuses from the political unrest of the second half of the 20th century that happened
in Guatemala. The anthropology lab was actually in a large house in Guatemala City, surrounded by
gates and guards due to the politically charged nature of their work. In fact, the anthropologists
there routinely get death threats. So to close this lecture, let's consider how lucky we are
and take a quick look at a typical high-tech crime lab and the types of evidence that will move
through it. In the U.S., there are several large forensic labs at the federal level,
but most states have one or more crime labs that also offer a comprehensive range of forensic
services. Counties in which there is a major metropolitan area have their own forensic labs
that may have all or most capabilities, especially for analyzing the most common types of evidence.
A 2005 study of 79 county forensic labs in the U.S. shows that 94 percent have the capability
to analyze controlled substances, and 61 percent have the technology for DNA and serology analyses,
though that's primarily nuclear DNA. Far fewer can do mitochondrial DNA testing.
59 percent of county labs have a trace evidence section and can handle firearms and tool mark
evidence. 53 percent of the surveyed labs said they have the personnel and technology to examine
impression evidence, but only 51 percent of county labs do latent print examinations. Why? Because
that's usually done by law enforcement officers at the municipal level, not in forensic labs.
49 percent of county labs said they have a toxicology section, since some send their samples
to state labs, and despite the way TV makes it look, only 46 percent of forensic labs have crime
scene investigators. Most scene work is still done by law enforcement officers, and when it comes to
question documents, only 22 percent of forensic labs do those analyses, and only 16 percent work
computer crimes. Some forensic labs are associated with the larger coroner or medical examiner's
offices in a state, but some county sheriff's offices have their own crime labs that typically
offer fewer services, and as we learned in the last lecture, anthropologists like me and forensic
dentists often serve as part-time consultants, and we're brought in on a case-by-case basis
for the services we can provide. So what are some commonalities among forensic labs? Well,
regardless of size or jurisdiction, they all need an intake system to receive evidence and ensure
a good chain of custody. Just that facet alone could employ several people in a larger crime
lab. That's how important it is. It's typical today that labs have computerized evidence management
systems and barcode technology that can be scanned at every step of evidence testing all throughout
the lab. Forensic labs also need secure storage areas, smaller lock-up rooms for some types of
evidence, but maybe even a warehouse or a garage for processing vehicles. If they do firearms
analysis, they'll need a large tank of water that I mentioned earlier or some other kind of chamber
where they can test fire weapons for comparison. So crime labs really are not one size fits all.
Increasing scrutiny prompted by things like the Innocence Project and the National Academy of
Sciences 2009 report on forensic science, those are putting even greater demands for accountability
on crime labs in the United States. There are lab certification agencies, like the American Society
of Crime Laboratory Directors, known as ASCLAD, and some states have mandated that all their labs
be so certified. It might surprise you this isn't already the case, but currently it's not. I'm
sure the future holds changes for crime labs in the U.S. and elsewhere. Now, let's move on to cover
some specific crimes and see how good forensic investigation and solid evidence can work together
to close cases.
