You've learned a lot about crime scenes, evidence, forensic labs, and how investigators
analyze cases.
So now it's time for you to practice applying that knowledge to some cases.
One of the first things we talked about was observational skills.
Did you happen to notice that some of the items on the set changed with each episode?
Not just the screen on the laptop on our front table, but other things were discreetly moved
around, added, or deleted.
If you didn't catch the nuances, you can go back and check for yourself.
Remember, the first thing investigators must do, or even we should do as potential victims
of crime, is take a careful accounting of the surroundings whenever suspicious or outright
illegal circumstances are noted.
Let's start with an illegal act that doesn't have a specific victim, but is still a crime,
as well as, sadly, a very dangerous and common occurrence.
When police officers use their observational skills and see somebody driving erratically,
they'll stop the car to see if the driver's intoxicated.
On Friday, July 28, 2006, actor Mel Gibson, then age 50, was caught doing 87 miles an
hour in his 2006 Lexus along the stretch of the Pacific Coast Highway in Malibu, California,
where the posted speed limit was 45 miles an hour.
After failing two roadside breathalyzer tests, both of which indicated Gibson's blood alcohol
content was .12, the star was arrested at 2.36 in the morning for driving under the influence
of alcohol.
Now, the legal limit in California and most of the rest of the U.S. is a maximum of .08,
and it's even lower in some states.
You may have remembered this incident because during his arrest, Gibson went on a bizarre
anti-semitic rant that ended up getting even more media attention than the drunk driving
charge did.
After he was taken to the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, another breath test
was performed and tape recorded.
And when investigators searched his car, they found a 750-milliliter bottle of tequila
that was only three-quarters full in a brown paper bag within easy reach of Gibson while
he was driving, meaning Gibson was also in violation of open container laws.
Gibson eventually pleaded no contest to misdemeanor drunk driving and was sentenced to three years
of probation, which he completed with no violations.
So how much of that tequila or whatever else might Gibson have consumed?
Since we have no idea of the timeline, we can only do some crude calculations.
To figure out how much alcohol somebody would need to go over the legal limit, you need
to know if the person's male or female and how much they weigh.
Now, I did a little celebrity sleuthing on the Internet and found that Gibson, who's
supposed to be about five foot nine, weighs around 150 pounds.
We also need to know that tequila as hard liquor is about 80 proof, which means it's
40 percent alcohol.
And we need to know a typical shot, which is about 1.25 ounces.
A rough generalization is that blood alcohol content, also called BAC, can be figured
out by what's called the Widmark formula after the Swedish physician who established it using
the following fraction.
The numerator is the product of the alcohol consumed in ounces times the percent alcohol
in the beverage times the numerical constant of 5.14.
Then that's put over a denominator of the weight of the person in pounds times the constant
factor of 0.73 for men.
If male had one shot of tequila, the numerator would work out to 1.25 ounces times 40 percent
alcohol times 5.14 for a total of 2.57.
If we use male's weight of 150 in the denominator multiplied by the constant of 0.73, we get
109.5.
If we reduce that fraction, we get a BAC of 0.023.
So it's very safe to assume that male had more than one shot of that tequila.
Two shots, which is 2.5 ounces, takes him to a BAC of 0.047.
Three shots, which is 3.75 ounces, takes him to 0.070.
Four shots is 5 ounces, which takes male over the legal limit to 0.094.
But he's not done yet.
Six shots or 6.25 ounces will take him to 0.117, which is very close to his stated BAC
of 0.12.
And I don't know if they round up.
So depending on when he started drinking, his tolerance, and a number of other factors
we can't know, male may have had more than six shots of that tequila to get him to that
level.
And remember, four already put him over the legal limit.
If you want to see how many drinks would take you to get to the legal limit where you live,
you can use this formula too.
The numerator is the alcohol consumed in ounces times the percent alcohol written as a decimal.
And then that's multiplied by our 5.14 constant.
Beer is typically 6% alcohol, so 0.06 would be the decimal there.
Wine's usually about 12% alcohol, so use 0.12 for wine.
And the proof of liquor varies, but its percent alcohol is half its proof.
So if you're drinking a 100 proof bourbon, the decimal would be 0.5, where males was
0.4 since most tequila is 80 proof.
The denominator will differ by your weight in whether you're male or female.
If you're a guy, it's your weight times 0.73, or your weight times the constant factor of
0.66 if you're a woman.
That sex difference is because male and female bodies carry different percentages of water.
In fact, since blood plasma is mostly water, when you see a blood alcohol level of say
0.10, it really means that person's blood is a tenth of a percent alcohol by volume.
Keep in mind this WIDMARK calculation doesn't take time into account.
In fact, it assumes somebody did all the drinking at once, but there's a rough modification
that can be applied if the alcohol is being consumed over the course of a few hours.
We estimate the hour since the drinking started, multiply the number of hours by 0.015, and
then subtract that from the BAC calculation we did a minute ago for whatever volume and
type of drink was consumed.
That will essentially also help a person figure out how long it will take them to sober up
and get their BAC down.
Other factors to take into account are that alcohol absorption is greater on an empty
stomach.
These calculations assume an empty stomach, and alcohols absorb faster when it's mixed
with carbonated beverages, although people tend to ultimately drink slower when they
use a mixer in a drink.
I tell my students of all the things they learn in our forensic science class, these
BAC calculations may be the most important thing I teach them, since they really have
the potential to save somebody's life.
Now, let's turn to another crime that many people fear today, and that's identity theft,
which can include everything from fraudulent use of credit cards to plans for stealing
hundreds of thousands of dollars from a corporation.
But here's an interesting case with a strange origin and a different motive.
In 1982, a three-year-old boy named Jason Robert Evers was kidnapped from my hometown
of Cincinnati.
While Jason's six-and-a-half-year-old sister watched, Adrian Williams, a 17-year-old who
had befriended the children, carried Jason Piggyback out of a Cincinnati area YMCA,
planning to kidnap Jason as a way to get ransom money to buy a car.
Jason was murdered and his body was found under a pile of boulders 43 days later.
Williams was convicted and sentenced to 14 to 50 years for involuntary manslaughter and
kidnapping.
Now, fast forward 28 years to 2010, when special agents with the U.S. State Department were
conducting a routine cross-check of names on passports against the list of names of
people who died.
This is part of a computerized record's data mining identity theft and anti-terrorism
program called Operation Deathmatch.
You might not even know that exists.
They found a man going by the name of Jason Robert Evers was working in Oregon for the
State Liquor Control Commission.
Now this Oregon Jason Evers had the same birth date and the same parents first and last names
as the three-year-old who had been murdered in Cincinnati 28 years before.
After authorities verified this as a stolen identity, the so-called Jason was arrested
and charged with falsifying a passport and identity theft.
However, he refused to tell the authorities his real name, saying that he feared for his
safety.
So how could investigators get to the bottom of this?
Well, federal agents circulated bulletins asking for help identifying this John Doe.
A tip from somebody who knew him from Denver as Daniel Kaser eventually led federal investigators,
again through mining computer records, back to a driver's license that had been issued
in the mid-90s in Colorado under that name.
They also found an older driver's license in North Carolina.
This Daniel Kaser also went by Danny, or the nickname Dutch, and worked as a waiter and
bartender in Denver.
Friends and acquaintances from that time knew that he spoke several languages, including
Romanian, but didn't know a lot about Danny's past.
He lived a modest, quiet life in the basement of an elderly woman's house, and would occasionally
go out with acquaintances to play poker, chess, or pool.
Somehow in 1996, Daniel Kaser obtained the real Jason Robert Evers birth certificate,
which listed his birth date and his parents' names, and that in turn made it possible for
him to get a Social Security card.
In 1998, a man called Jason Evers bought into a business called Dine and Delivery, which
delivered food from restaurants in Denver.
He eventually became treasurer for the business after investing thousands of dollars that
he claimed he had inherited.
In 2002, this Jason Evers used his birth certificate and Social Security card to apply for a passport,
and then moved to Portland, Oregon, where he was hired as an inspector by the Oregon Liquor
Control Commission.
Evers passed a criminal background and fingerprint check, but liquor control officials didn't
verify his credentials when he was hired, since the company Evers listed as a reference
was no longer in business.
This Evers moved up the Liquor Control Commission to regional manager and investigator.
But who was this man really, and how did he get the murdered Evers' voice identity?
Turns out Jason was really Deutsch and Kraschev, born in Sofia, Bulgaria, in 1973, during
communist rule.
His parents were prominent Bulgarian intellectuals who wanted a better life for their son.
An attorney for the U.S. Office of Management and Budget and his wife met Kraschev and
his parents while in Bulgaria, studying the effects of communism.
They proposed that the Kraschev teenager move with them to live with them in Virginia.
So in the early 1990s, Kraschev attended a prestigious college prep high school in Washington
D.C. and was awarded a scholarship to attend Davidson College outside of Charlotte, North
Carolina.
Soon after, Kraschev called his U.S. host family and told him he wanted to drop out
of college.
After that, he disappeared completely, and his host family had no idea what happened
to him.
That's apparently when he became Daniel Kaser.
Remember, the first driver's license police found in that name was issued in North Carolina.
At the time of his 2010 arrest, as Jason Evers, friends and coworkers described Kraschev
as straight-laced, clean-shaven, professional, and well-liked.
They said he was a good employee whose performance was stellar.
He was engaged to a woman who believed his story that he'd been raised in foster care
in Cincinnati since his father was in prison in Florida and his mother had died.
Kraschev pled guilty in November 2010 to passport fraud and identity theft, for which he was
sentenced to two years in prison.
At a sentencing hearing in January of 2011, Kraschev said that he took Jason Evers' name
after reading a newspaper article about the murdered three-year-old.
Around the time the boy's killer had the possibility of parole.
The fake Evers would have been several years older than the real Jason Evers, but that
apparently was never questioned.
Ohio has what's called an open records law, in that shockingly anybody can get a certificate
or a certified copy of anybody else's birth certificate, as long as they have the name
and the birth date.
And once Kraschev wrote the state for a copy of Evers' birth certificate in 1996, he was
on his way.
State Department officials say a birth certificate is what they call a breeder document, since
it's the gateway to all other forms of ID.
Kraschev said that he never intended to cause anybody anguish or pain, and that it was one
bad decision as a college student that snowballed for 15 years until he got caught.
After serving his prison sentence, Kraschev will be on probation for three years, and
almost likely be deported immediately after the sentence is completed, since he lived
in the U.S. as an illegal alien for over a decade.
Operation Deathmatch began in 2005, and has since found over 200 hits and made 120 arrests
and convictions of people who've stolen the identities of children who've died.
Kids are often targeted because of their lack of financial and criminal records, and because
a perpetrator might get more years of longevity from a kid's identity as opposed to a grown
adult's.
Although there has to be some rough correlation between ages, so as not to arouse suspicion.
The Evers case has prompted a reevaluation of open public records laws, and some states
that already didn't do so have minimally begun stamping birth certificates as deceased
when somebody dies in an effort to better thwart this kind of identity theft.
Now let's step back in time a little, and look at another interesting case with some
well-known identities.
Charles Urschel was born in Hancock County, Ohio in 1890.
He married into a family that had gotten rich in the oil boom, and by the early 1930s he
and his second wife, Baroness, were one of the wealthiest couples in Oklahoma City.
On Saturday night, July 22, 1933, Urschel, his friend Walter Jarrett, and their wives
were playing bridge on the front porch of the Urschel home around 11 o'clock.
When onto the porch walked none other than George machine gun Kelly and the accomplice
named Albert Bates.
The pair demanded to know which man was Charles Urschel, and when neither claimed the name,
Ben Bates abducted both men at gunpoint, put them in a car, and drove to the outskirts
of the city.
There, the kidnappers checked the two men's wallets, clearing up the question of who was
Charles Urschel.
After taking $51 from Jarrett's wallet, they left him on the side of the road.
Then they blindfolded Urschel and taped cotton into his ears.
As soon as Kelly left, Baroness Urschel contacted the local police and was told to immediately
call J. Edgar Hoover at the FBI in Washington, D.C.
This was shortly after the Lindbergh baby kidnapping, which had prompted new federal
laws allowing the FBI to be brought in when state lines were presumed to be crossed during
a kidnapping.
Hoover wanted to make an example of this case.
It also probably didn't hurt that Urschel was a friend of newly elected President Franklin
D. Roosevelt.
By Monday morning, the crime was headlined news across the country.
A few days after the kidnapping, Kelly's wife and accomplice, Katherine, met with a
local detective friend of hers to try and establish an alibi, saying she'd been in St.
Louis, Missouri when Urschel was nabbed.
But when the detective saw the red dirt on her car tires and an Oklahoma newspaper on
the front seat, he got suspicious and phoned the FBI with the tip that machine gun Kelly
could be the kidnapper.
Kelly showed Mrs. Urschel a mugshot of George Kelly, and she positively identified him as
the man who took her husband at gunpoint.
So what about Urschel?
The day after the kidnapping, Urschel was taken from Oklahoma to a ranch in Paradise, Texas.
That ranch was owned by Katherine Kelly's stepfather.
There he was held captive for over a week at a farmhouse and several other buildings
on the ranch.
He was blindfolded most of the time, but Urschel was no dummy.
He had his own plan.
You know, I've said that the things I'm presenting are just making smarter criminals, while Charles
Urschel is a great example of how to be a smarter victim.
He memorized everything he possibly could about the things around him.
On the way to the ranch, he heard oil pumps working, and he figured out he passed one
oil field about an hour into the drive and then another about a half hour later.
When they stopped at a gas station, he heard a woman talk about crops drying up because
of a drought.
Urschel memorized how many times the car had to stop to go through gates that had to be
opened and closed by hand, and he recognized they had been only on dirt and gravel roads,
no pavement.
At the ranch, Urschel figured out that airplanes passed overhead at 9.45 a.m. and 5.45 p.m.
every day except for July 30th when it was raining.
He noted which barnyard animals he heard outside.
He heard the squeaky pulleys on a well, and he even tried to identify the minerals he
tasted in the well water he was given in a little tin cup.
He counted the footsteps as he was moved from place to place to calculate the distances.
Later in the week, the kidnappers attached a chain to Urschel's handcuffs, allowing him
to move around the room a little more, and this gave him one of his most brilliant ideas.
He'll put his fingerprints on anything and everything he could get his hands on to prove
he'd been there.
Eight days after the kidnapping, Urschel's family paid the demanded ransom of $200,000,
which would be over $3.3 million today.
As in the Lindberg kidnapping, the bills were marked, meaning the FBI recorded all the serial
numbers and would have a way to trace them if they appeared in circulation again.
A friend of Urschel's made the drop in Kansas City, and he carefully memorized details about
the man who took the money and said that Urschel would be released within 12 hours.
The guy was about six feet tall, black hair, dark complexion, wearing a summer suit, two-tone
shoes, and a Panama hat.
The description matched machine gun Kelly to a tee.
Now back at the ranch, Urschel was cleaned up, had his nine-day growth of facial hair
shaved off before being driven to just outside of Oklahoma City, where he was dropped off
in the rain at a gas station, given $10 and told to call a cab.
Urschel made it home just before nine o'clock at night on July 31.
Then he started working with the FBI.
By reviewing flight schedules, the FBI figured out that the American Airways plane that looped
between Fort Worth and Amarillo, Texas would have passed over paradise at exactly the times
Urschel remembered, except for July 30 when it rained and the plane had to take a more
northernly route.
A meteorologist verified there was a drought around paradise.
The quorum was dried up, the first real rain in the area had been July 30.
Investigators next looked for connections to Kelly, and they found that Catherine Kelly's
mother and stepfather lived in paradise.
By August 5, the ransom money started showing up.
The FBI arrested five men in Minneapolis, St. Paul area who told them Kelly had given
them the cash.
On August 10, an FBI agent posing as an inspector went to the ranch.
He was able to identify all of Urschel's information right down to the squeaky well pulley.
After asking for a drink of water, he could also verify the mineral taste that Urschel described.
Two days later, the ranch and farmhouse were raided and accomplices were arrested, including
Kelly's in-laws.
On the same day, on a completely unrelated charge, Albert Bates was arrested at a hotel
in Denver, Colorado and was quickly identified as being the second kidnapper.
Now the Kelly's crisscrossed the country over the next month, with stops in Chicago, Denver,
Des Moines, among other places.
Finally, with the help of the informant, the Kelly's were arrested on September 26, 1933
in Memphis, Tennessee.
The next day, $73,250 of the marked ransom money was dug up from where it was buried
on Catherine Kelly's uncle's farm outside of Coleman, Texas.
About $80,000 has never been accounted for.
On October 12, 1933, George and Catherine Kelly were both found guilty and were sentenced
to life in prison.
Twenty-one people were eventually convicted in connection with the kidnapping.
George died in Leavenworth Prison in 1954.
Catherine Kelly and her mother were released from prison in 1958.
With our crafty victim, Charles Urschel, he died at age 80 in 1970.
Okay, for our last case in this lecture, let's consider a property crime, and one that sometimes
turns deadly.
During the 1980s and 1990s, a series of fires were set in California in the Los Angeles
area, ranging as far north as Fresno and as far south as Long Beach.
The arsonist's MO was to use an incendiary timing device, usually consisting of a lit
cigarette and three unlit matches wrapped in a piece of yellow legal pad-type paper
with a rubber band around the whole packet.
In a few cases, this packet was placed in a small foam rubber pillow, the kind you can
buy at a craft store, maybe, and then that would smolder until the fire caught.
This led to the arsonist's nickname of the pillow pyro.
Sometimes the devices were placed in stores during business hours and with customers inside.
The worst of these incidents occurred on October 10, 1984 at a hardware store in a South Pasadena
shopping center.
Four people died, including a two-year-old, and the store was completely destroyed.
The day after the fire, arson investigators from all over the southern part of California
came to the store to determine the cause of the fire.
Although one investigator, Glendale Fire Department's John Orr insisted that the cause was arson,
the investigative report said the cause was electrical and quickly got out of hand when
inflammable polyurethane products in the hardware store caused a flash over.
Some of the fires happened out in the grassy California hills, which would draw out the
local fire departments, and once they were dispatched, the pillow pyro would set another
fire in a more populated area that would be left without adequate fire department coverage.
One of those fires completely destroyed 67 homes in the Glendale area.
In January 1987, a series of several suspicious fires were set in Bakersfield, California,
at the same time a fire investigator convention was held in Fresno 100 miles away.
At this point, Captain Marvin G. Casey of the Bakersfield Fire Department began to suspect
that the perpetrator might actually be an arson investigator from the LA area.
There was just too much insider knowledge and an incendiary device that wouldn't be
typical of teenage vandals, and this time they were able to get some additional evidence
off that signature device.
Using the latent print chemical developer called Ninhydron, they found a single fingerprint
on a piece of the unburned notebook paper from one of the time delay igniters.
Without a suspect, they weren't able to match the print to anybody.
Two years later, in March 1989, another conference for arson investigators was being held in Pacific
Grove.
At the same time, another series of fires was set.
This time along the California coast, Bakersfield's Captain Casey compared lists of attendees
and was able to identify 10 suspects who attended both the Fresno and Pacific Grove fire conferences.
All 10 suspects were cleared, though, when the fingerprint found on the notebook paper
in 1987 failed to match any of them.
Then, in late 1990 and early 1991, another series of fires was set around the Metropolitan
LA area, including one that engulfed the preserved set of the beloved 1970s hit TV show The Waltons
on the back lot of Warner Brothers Studios, and a task force was formed to find the arsonist.
At a regional fire investigators meeting in March, a member of the newly formed LA arson
task force circulated a flyer describing the modus operandi of the suspected serial arsonist.
At that point, a guy from the California state fire marshals office told the task force leader
about Captain Casey's suspicions about the Bakersfield and Fresno fires, in other words
that the arsonist could be one of their own.
After meeting with Casey in obtaining a copy of the fingerprint from the notebook paper,
the LA task force investigators matched the print to none other than 17-year veteran of
the Glendale Fire Department Captain John Orr.
Remember that name?
Orr was the only fire investigator to insist that the lethal 1984 hardware store fire was arson.
During April of 1991, as the task force members sifted through each scenario, they quietly
collected evidence.
For instance, they learned that Orr had been the first on the scene for dozens of the arsonists,
to the point that people questioned how he was able to get to fire scenes so quickly.
Orr had been said to have an uncanny ability to figure out how arson fires start.
In one case, they heard Orr was able to determine, within minutes of arriving at the scene of
a smoldering fire, that the arsonist had tossed two incendiary devices into two toyotas that
were sitting under a carport in Glendale.
When they quickly figured out Orr's was not a case of instinct, it was in all likelihood
first-hand knowledge.
But the task force didn't tip their hand immediately.
Hmm, what could they do to catch him in the act?
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives carried out a sting operation
in May of 1991 by putting a tracking device under the bumper of Orr's personal vehicle,
but Orr discovered the tracker and removed it without any comment.
Orr's then installed a second tracking device behind the dashboard of his city vehicle in
November when he brought it in for routine servicing.
At the next suspicious fire, the tracker proved that Orr was present at the scene, and in
December of 1991, a grand jury handed down an indictment.
After his arrest, the evidence for the lethal hardware store fire was reinvestigated and
Orr was charged with arson, partly because his unpublished novel, Points of Origin, had
more than a few coincidental similarities with the actual fire of 1984.
In July 1992, a federal jury convicted Orr of three counts of arson and sentenced him
to three consecutive ten-year prison terms.
In March 1993, he pled guilty to three more counts of arson.
In September of 1995, a trial began for the four counts of first-degree murder for the
deaths that occurred in the hardware store in 1984, and over 20 more counts of arson,
including the Warner Brothers Studio and Glendale House fires.
The jury found Orr guilty of the killings and gave him life plus 20 years without parole.
Estimates are that Orr probably set nearly 2,000 fires between 1984 and 1991 when he
was caught.
After Orr was arrested, the number of brush fires in the California foothills decreased
by over 90 percent.
The fires Orr had set caused millions of dollars of damage and required hundreds of hours to
fight and then investigate.
What was his motive?
Orr had wanted to move up the ranks at the LA Fire Department, but couldn't get hired
on there.
Apparently, he thought by showing his near superhuman powers of solving arson on the
Glendale Force, he'd surely eventually run a much bigger department.
Orr might pleading guilty in his numerous court convictions, or Orr strangely continues
to maintain that he's innocent.
