In July of 2003, five members of the Harper family were found murdered in California,
including a young mother, her three small children, and their maternal grandmother.
Investigator's estranged husband and father of her children, Vincent Brothers, became
the prime suspect.
But Brothers was visiting family in Ohio at the time of the killing, so he couldn't have
done it.
Investigators did a simple thing.
They looked at the mileage on the rental car Brothers was using in Ohio and found he
put 4,500 miles on in just three days.
Then they took the cars from Endapart, sent pieces to entomologist Dr. Lynn Kimsey, and
in the radiator she found the remains of several species of insects only found in the West.
That's the power of forensic science.
In this lecture, we're going to examine four cases where one or more different types of
forensic evidence really closed the case.
Eight-and-a-half-year-old Sarah Payne was playing hide-and-seek with her brothers and
sister in a cornfield near her grandparents' house in West Sussex, England, when she went
missing on July 1st of 2000 shortly before 8 o'clock.
Sarah left the field to walk back to her grandparents' house just a short distance ahead of her brothers.
She disappeared through a gap in a hedge and was kidnapped within seconds.
Sarah's older brother Lee told police he saw a scruffy-looking man with yellowish teeth
in a white van drive down the lane, turn around, and head back towards where Lee was standing.
The driver grinned and waved at Lee as he sped off.
Once at his grandparents' house, Lee was surprised to find that Sarah hadn't returned.
The family searched the area, and when they couldn't find Sarah, they contacted police.
Within 48 hours, Sarah's parents were making televised pleas for her safe return, and a
nationwide search had begun.
A witness called police to corroborate that a white van sped down the lane and ran a stop sign
at about 7.40 p.m. on the night of the abduction.
The next day, a convicted sex offender, Roy Whiting, was visited by Sussex police who
were interviewing all sex offenders in the area.
Whiting's home was only about five miles from where Sarah disappeared, and he had a white
van.
Officers were suspicious of Whiting's behavior during the interview, and they kept his home
under observation.
As soon as he thought police were gone, Whiting started moving things around inside of his
van, and then he attempted to leave.
Based on that, he was arrested.
Although police found a gas station receipt in his van that threw Whiting's alibi into
suspicion, they found nothing in his home to show Sarah had been there, and they released
him after two days.
Sixteen days after Sarah's pain disappeared, a farmer clearing his field of weeds found
the nude body of a girl in a shallow grave 15 miles from where Sarah was last seen.
DNA testing was done on muscle tissue from the body, and a reference sample was taken
from a baby tooth that Sarah's mother had kept, and there was a positive association.
A farmer's field was just over three miles from the gas station Whiting had visited on
the night of the abduction.
And when new witnesses came forth to say they saw a white van near that farm between 11
and 1115 on the night of the abduction, Whiting was rearrested.
Ultimately, investigators seized the white van that Whiting bought just a week before
Sarah's disappearance, and this time they did a thorough forensic examination.
Over 500 bits of trace evidence, including hundreds of fibers and 40 hairs, were gathered
from the van and Sarah's body, and they were the things that closed the case.
The van had been refurbished, and the passenger and driver's seats were covered in different
fabrics.
Fibers from both were found on Sarah's body.
22 fibers from the van and items in it were indistinguishable from fibers taken from clumps
of Sarah's hair found at her burial site.
Fibers in Sarah's hair matched not only the passenger seat of the van, but also Whiting's
red sweatshirt left in the van, and a fiber from Whiting's sock.
Fibers found in the body bag used to transport Sarah's remains yielded another sock fiber
and a fiber from the driver's seat.
A black shoe found earlier by a neighbor, the only piece of Sarah's clothing to be
recovered, had 350 fibers on its Velcro closure.
Some of those matched fibers from Whiting's red sweatshirt, and the clowned, patterned
curtains he put in the van.
Others matched the blue polyester and cotton fibers from Sarah's school sweatshirt.
DNA obtained from a nine inch strand of blonde hair found on Whiting's red sweatshirt had
a one in a billion chance of belonging to someone other than Sarah.
Pathologists later told the jury Sarah met a violent death, likely on the night of the
abduction.
And although there was no evidence left to positively show it, she believed the death
was a sexually motivated homicide.
Decomposition had made it impossible to determine the exact cause of death, but the pathologists
believe that Sarah had been strangled.
During the murder inquiry, 20 forensic experts provided evidence, including entomology, pathology,
geology, archaeology, chemistry, and microscopy.
The full investigation involved the work of over a thousand people and cost over two million
pounds, the equivalent of over three million US dollars.
In December of 2001, Whiting was convicted of the abduction and murder of Sarah Payne
and sentenced to life in prison.
Immediately after his conviction, Whiting's previous kidnapping and indecent assault case
against the nine year old girl in 1995 was made public in the courtroom, leading to renewed
calls for greater public access to the UK's Home Office's sex offender registry.
After a 2008 pilot program was successful, the system was rolled out to cover all of
England and Wales in 2011 under what's called Sarah's law.
In 2001, authorities notified Sarah's mother that she was one of the victims of the News
of the World's phone hacking scandal.
At first, Mrs. Payne found this pretty hard to believe since Rupert Murdoch's News of
the World had been so instrumental in aiding the family's efforts.
Then she realized the phone that was hacked had been a gift to the family from the newspaper.
Even victims can be further victimized.
For our next case, let's go back to the early morning of February 17, 1970, when Dr. Jeffrey
MacDonald, a surgeon in Green Beret stationed at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, made an emergency
phone call to base dispatchers, reporting a stabbing at his home.
When four military officers, police officers arrived, they found MacDonald lying on the
floor of the master bedroom, alive but with a mild concussion.
He had cuts and bruises on his face and chest and a small, sharp stab wound in his torso.
MacDonald's wife, Collette, who had been five and a half months pregnant with their
third child, was not so lucky.
She was laying dead next to MacDonald, with her husband's torn pajama top wadded over
her chest.
The word pig was written in blood on the headboard of the bed.
An autopsy later determined Collette had been bludgeoned.
Both of her arms had been broken and she was stabbed 21 times with an ice pick and 16 times
with a knife.
The MPs also found the MacDonald daughters dead in their beds in their respective bedrooms.
Five-year-old Kimberly's head was beaten and she was stabbed with a knife in the neck
between eight and 10 times.
Two-year-old Kristen had been stabbed as well, 33 times with a knife and 15 times with
an ice pick.
MacDonald told investigators he had slept on the living room couch that night because
his wife had allowed the two-year-old to sleep with her and little Kimberly had wet his
side of the couple's bed.
He woke up later to hear his wife screaming and as he got off the couch to help, three
men attacked him.
A fourth intruder, a woman with long blonde hair wearing a floppy white hat and holding
a lit candle, was chanting, acid is groovy, kill the pigs.
MacDonald said the three men attacked him with a large piece of wood and an ice pick.
And when his pajama top got pulled over his head, it got tangled on his wrist and he was
able to use it as a shield against the ice pick.
Eventually, he was knocked unconscious only to wake up later next to his wife in the bedroom.
CID, the U.S. Army's Criminal Investigative Division, didn't believe MacDonald's story.
And less than three months later, the Army charged him with the murder of his wife and
daughters.
What was the evidence?
First, the living room where he supposedly fought three men showed no signs of an altercation
except an overturned coffee table.
Second, fibers from the pajama top that was allegedly torn in the living room were found
underneath Collette's body and in both daughters' bedrooms, including one found under five-year-old
Kristen's fingernail.
Underneath the headboard, where the word pig had been written in blood, were fragments
of surgical gloves identical to gloves Dr. MacDonald kept in the kitchen.
An ice pick, a paring knife, and a 31-inch piece of lumber were found just outside the
back door of the home.
All three were later determined not only to be the murder weapons, but also to have come
from inside the home.
But this was the major trail of evidence.
All four of the family members had different blood types, so investigators were able to
use bloodstain patterns to trace their movements in the house and figure out what probably
happened.
Here's the theory.
A fight between MacDonald and his wife began in the master bedroom.
Based on MacDonald's head wound, they thought Collette might have hit him with a hairbrush.
MacDonald retaliated by beating Collette with the lumber, which he had either brought to
the bedroom with him or retrieved after the fight began.
At some point, five-year-old Kimberly came into the room, and either accidentally or
on purpose, she was also hit with the lumber, some of her brain tissue was actually on the
doorway.
When Collette was dead, MacDonald carried Kimberly back to her room and then stabbed
her.
Next he went to Kristen's room.
Collette apparently regained consciousness, got to Kristen's room and threw herself over
the two-year-old to block her husband's attack.
In a rage, he stabbed them both to death with a knife.
MacDonald then wrapped his wife's body in a sheet, and leaving a footprint in her blood,
carried Collette back to the master bedroom.
Next, Dr. MacDonald took a scalpel blade from a hall closet, went into the bathroom, and
stabbed himself once in the torso.
He went to the kitchen, got the surgical gloves, and rode on the headboard with Collette's
blood.
Then he laid his pajama top over his dead wife and stabbed her with the ice pick, before
doing the same to his two-year-old.
Then he discarded the weapons outside.
MacDonald called police, positioned himself on the floor next to his dead wife, and waited
for the ambulance.
Oh, one more thing.
A copy of Esquire magazine was found in the living room with a blood smear on it.
That issue contained a story about the Manson family murders.
After MacDonald's arrest, a military hearing recommended that the charges be dismissed
as unfounded.
The CID colonel in charge of the investigation suggested civilian police should search for
the hippies who had clearly done this.
One month after the attack, MacDonald actually joked about the investigation on the Dick
Cabot talk show.
Collette's family could take no more.
Her stepfather, Alfred Casab, who had visited MacDonald in the hospital after the attack
and initially supported his story, got the transcript of the military hearing.
In it, Casab noted major differences between MacDonald's testimony and what Casab had seen
with his own eyes at the crime scene and at the hospital.
He filed a citizen's complaint with the Department of Justice to try to bring MacDonald to justice.
For over three years, the case was in legal limbo.
There were jurisdictional issues because MacDonald had been in the Army at the time of the murders.
In 1975, nearly five years after the murders, a grand jury finally indicted MacDonald.
But it wasn't until 1979 that the trial got underway.
Among the evidence was the audio tape of MacDonald's 1970 interview, a strangely detached
retelling of his story, becoming emotional only when investigators pointed suspicion
at MacDonald.
The tape also included evidence of extramarital affairs.
Prosecutors got the issue of Esquire with the story about the Manson family murders admitted
into evidence.
But a turning point was when forensic technicians testified that the shape of the ice pick holes
in MacDonald's pajama top had been made when the cloth was not in motion, making it unlikely
they were made during his fight with intruders.
Using dramatic demonstrative evidence, forensic showed that if the shirt was folded in just
the right way, all 48 holes in it could have been made with 21 stabbing motions that precisely
matched the 21 ice pick wounds on Collette, who was found with the shirt wadded on top
of her.
MacDonald was convicted on three counts of murder and given a life sentence for each
to be served consecutively.
In 1991, he was eligible for parole, but he didn't even apply on the grounds that he
was innocent and shouldn't be in jail in the first place.
Peels have been filed over the years.
DNA testing was done in 2000, and every hair that was tested matched a member of the MacDonald
family, except for one found underneath the fingernail of the two-year-old for which no
match has ever been found.
MacDonald's next parole hearing is scheduled for May 2020, when he'll be 77 years old.
Our next case also began in 1970, when an orderly discovered a stroke patient dead in
a hospital in the small town of London, Kentucky.
Three weeks later, an elderly woman connected to an oxygen tank was in the same hospital,
praying to die, and she did.
A month later, a disoriented patient went into shock and died four days later of peritonitis.
Over a 10-month period, at least a dozen more people died at Marymount Hospital, but deaths
are expected in hospitals, right?
17 years later, in 1987, a 44-year-old patient at Cincinnati's Drake Memorial Hospital died.
His name was John Powell.
This was surprising because, although Powell had been in a coma following a motorcycle accident,
he was showing signs of improvement.
An autopsy was performed by a young pathologist, Dr. Lee Layman, who was doing his post-residency
fellowship at the Hamilton County Coroner's Office, the same office where I had begun
to assist in my first anthropology cases just a year earlier.
Dr. Layman is a great guy and a personal friend of mine.
Lee is what's called an MD-PhD because he pursued both degrees simultaneously, earning
his medical degree and a doctoral degree in biochemistry.
In fact, one of Lee's areas of research was prompted by another case we talked about,
the 1982 Tylenol Poisons in Chicago.
After that case, Lee took an interest in the abilities of pathologists and morgue attendants
to smell cyanide, which, remember, was the poison that Tylenol had been laced with?
And Lee's research showed that not everybody can smell cyanide.
In fact, his study was among those that have concluded that only 80% of people can detect
the smell that's been likened to the scent of bitter almonds.
So morgue workers could actually be killed at autopsy if they don't have the sensitivity
to smell cyanide.
Well, it's a darn good thing that Dr. Lee Layman's nose can detect cyanide because when
he opened up the body of 44-year-old John Powell in 1987, that's exactly what he smelled.
Layman sent samples from the autopsy to two different labs to confirm his suspicion that
Powell had been poisoned.
Both labs substantiated the presence of cyanide in the Hamilton County Coroner's Office
notified Cincinnati police.
Authorities began to question Powell's family and friends, but that didn't lead to a motive
or any other suspicions.
First they began to look at Drake Hospital personnel, specifically those who had access
to Powell's room.
Employees were given the option to voluntarily take a lie detector test.
One nurse's aide was on the list, but called in sick the day the test was scheduled.
That employee was 35-year-old Donald Harvey, who friends at work actually jokingly called
the angel of death because he always seemed to be near when patients died.
Immediately investigators put their full efforts into Harvey, who had worked in hospitals
on and off since he was 18 years old, having begun his career at none other than Marymount
Hospital in the small town of London, Kentucky.
A search warrant was quickly issued for Harvey's apartment.
What they found there was stunning.
Over 30 pounds of cyanide that Harvey had apparently stolen in small quantities from
hospitals over the course of years.
They found arsenics, arsenic, books on poisons in the occult, and Harvey's own diary detailing
some of his murders.
In connection with Powell's death, Harvey was arrested and held on one count of aggravated
murder.
Investigators began looking at other mysterious deaths at Drake.
Hospital employees who had previously suspected Harvey began to talk to a news reporter who
was able to show that there was a pattern between the deaths and Harvey's work schedule.
The number of patient deaths had more than doubled over the course of Harvey's employment
at Drake, which was less than one year.
Bodies of patients who had died were exhumed, and toxicology detected more poisonings.
Harvey tried to plea bargain to avoid Ohio's death penalty.
He confessed to committing 33 murders between 1970 and 1987.
Later, Harvey said his true number of victims was actually 87.
A mental evaluation concluded that although he did have a history of head trauma and was
a victim of sexual abuse, Harvey was sane and competent to stand trial.
Surprisingly, there had been quite a few opportunities before 1987 to identify and maybe stop these
killings.
In 1971, only about a year after his first murder at Marymount, Harvey was arrested for
burglary and being drunk and disorderly.
While in custody, Harvey started rambling about murders he'd committed as an orderly
at the local hospital.
Although they took his claims seriously, authorities weren't able to find any evidence
to back up Harvey's claims.
In at least two cases, including one in early 1971, autopsies had been performed on victims
but the deaths were attributed to other causes.
In another case, a hypodermic needle found lodged in a clogged hospital toilet was never
connected with the death of a patient in that room, who Harvey had murdered with an overdose
of morphine.
Before Harvey worked at Drake Hospital, he had worked at Cincinnati Veterans Administration
Hospital, and two years before Dr. Lehman's discovery of the cyanide death, security guards
at the VA hospital noticed Harvey acting suspiciously as he left work, and they decided
to search his gym bag.
In it, they discovered a pistol, hypodermic needles, a surgical scissors, gloves, a cocaine
spoon, medical books, books on the occult, and a biography of serial killer Charles Sobroch.
Harvey was fined $50 for carrying a gun on federal property and asked to resign.
He did resign, but no notes were placed in his work record and no other investigations
were opened to see if that was the extent of the issue.
Harvey had worked at the VA for almost ten years, with little supervision and almost
unlimited access to all areas of the hospital.
He worked nights wherever he was needed.
He had worked as a nurse's aide, a housekeeping aide, cardiac catheterization technician, and
a hospital autopsy assistant.
Less than a year after Harvey had resigned from the VA hospital, he was hired as a nurse's
aide at Cincinnati's Drake Memorial Hospital.
When these pieces were finally put together, authorities concluded that between April 1986
to March 1987, Harvey killed 26 patients at Drake and tried to kill several more.
It's believed he killed about a dozen patients while working at the VA and 15 at Marymount.
Were all these mercy killings?
He did say he felt terribly sorry for most of these people, but ultimately admitted he
sometimes took patients' lives because he was mad at them for specific things they did.
And mercy killing certainly can't be said about the neighbor he poisoned in 1983, or
the poisoning of his boyfriend Doug, who recovered, or his lover Carl, who also lived, since
Harvey knew just a pinch of arsenic would only give Carl diarrhea for a day or two.
Carl's friend Diane survived, too, even though Harvey put live hepatitis virus in her salad
dressing.
But Carl's father died while he was a patient at Providence Hospital after an arsenic-laced
visit from Harvey.
There were others, too, who either died or suffered greatly at the hands of Harvey outside
of hospital settings.
Arsenic and cyanide were his two main toxins.
Sometimes he added the poisons to orange juice, or injected them into an IV tube, or directly
into a patient.
He'd mix cyanide or arsenic and pour them into gastric tubes in some patients.
Harvey also used overdoses of morphine, codeine, and demoral.
He suffocated patients with plastic bags and wet towels.
He sprinkled rat poison on patients' food and fed others adhesive remover.
He disconnected life support machines, turned oxygen flow down or off, and he knowingly
used faulty oxygen tanks.
But he even injected air bubbles into veins, causing pulmonary embolisms.
To this day, it's not known why Harvey's methods of murder varied.
In some cases, it may just have been what was available at the time.
In others, it seems to be more about experimentation or to specifically inflict pain on the victim.
That was especially true of people he felt had wronged him in some way.
Harvey dabbled in the occult, believing he had received commands from a spirit named
Duncan.
He sometimes drank the victim's blood after death, and sometimes took saliva or tissue
samples from them.
He also took trophies, including cookies which he ate in an occult ceremony, or a lock of
hair or fingernails which he ritually burned.
Harvey was convicted of a total of 36 counts of aggravated murder and one count of voluntary
manslaughter for which he's currently serving a life sentence.
Now, let's look at one more case where many people died at the hands of one.
In 1974, the Oterra family was being stalked in Wichita, Kansas.
In broad daylight, the phone lines were cut.
Their home was entered, and the Oterra parents, their 9-year-old son and 11-year-old daughter,
were murdered.
The couple's 15-year-old son discovered the bodies when he came home from school that
day.
Two other children also survived because they weren't at home.
The perpetrator was organized, and he brought the things he needed for these gruesome executions
with him.
He left a trail of semen throughout the house, but none of the victims were sexually assaulted.
The only thing apparently missing was Mr. Oterra's watch.
Nine months after the killings, a reporter at the Wichita Eagle newspaper received a
phone call, allegedly from the Oterra family's murderer.
The caller directed the reporter to a textbook on mechanical engineering on a shelf in the
Wichita Public Library.
Stuck in the book was a letter claiming responsibility for the Oterra murders and assuring there would
be more killings.
That contact brought investigators into what would become a hideous 30-year game of cat
and mouse with a serial killer.
He asked to go by the code named BTK, an acronym that described his predatory sexual fantasies,
which were bind, torture, and kill.
Nobody yet realized this man had already committed another home-invasion murder, just three months
after the Oterra family.
A 21-year-old woman was killed, although her brother, who was shot twice in the head, survived.
Authorities hadn't connected this crime to the Oterra murders, nor did the letter found
at the library allude to it, but that was the second strike of the BTK killer.
The next murder didn't happen until 1977, but the predator used the same MO on this woman.
At least this time, he locked the 26-year-old victim's three children in a closet rather
than killing them.
Later that same year, the BTK killer called police himself to report his seventh victim,
a 25-year-old woman.
Police were able to trace the call to a downtown Wichita phone booth, where witnesses described
a man they had seen using the public pay phone, but leads never panned out.
In early 1978, the killer mailed a letter to the Wichita Eagle newspaper, and then a
second one the next month when he felt he wasn't getting enough media attention.
He had written poems about some of his victims and letters describing details of the killings.
He put them in hands of investigators, too.
In 1979, a very lucky 63-year-old woman received a package at her home containing a scarf that
belonged to her with a note that said, be glad you weren't here because I was.
The evidence was mounting, but still they had no strong leads.
The trail went cold throughout the early 1980s, though.
Investigators continued to analyze the cases for any additional clues, and they did find
some.
They figured out that all the crime scenes were in a three-and-a-half-mile radius.
And after taking the 1978 letter to the Wichita Eagle newspaper, they took that to the headquarters
of Xerox.
And investigators learned it was a fifth-generation photocopy of the initial page the killer typed
his message on.
And they were able to determine that the machine used to make the copies was at the Wichita
State University Library.
BTK didn't take his eighth victim until 1985, but killed another in 1986 and the next in
1991.
All were Wichita females.
But he was strangely silent to the media and police throughout the 90s, and the investigation
again went cold.
That is, until something inside the killer apparently drove him to reconnect with police
again in 2004, through another letter to the Wichita Eagle.
That time he claimed responsibility for the 1986 killing, which up to them hadn't been
attributed to him.
Photos of the body and a photocopy of the victim's driver's license in the letter were
pretty convincing proof that he wanted to be known for that murder, too.
In that case, the 28-year-old victim had the killer's tissue under her fingernails.
And by 1986, forensic scientists knew what to do with DNA.
They just didn't have a suspect.
So like the England murders that prompted a massive DNA manhunt also in 1986, Wichita
investigators gathered samples from over 1,300 men, but still nothing.
Authorities continued to taunt and communicate with the BTK killer through the media, hoping
to bring him closer to the surface.
At one point, police even questioned whether the killer was one of their own, since he
seemed to have so much insider knowledge.
Eventually, BTK wrote to police and asked if it was possible to trace the author of
a document from a computer disk.
And communicating through an ad in the newspaper, investigators lied and told him it was not.
The killer sent authorities a floppy disk, and when they performed a metadata search
on it, they were able to recover a computer identity name of Dennis, and also found information
that pointed to a Lutheran church.
Using just four key words on the internet, Dennis, Wichita, Lutheran, and church, they
were immediately directed to Dennis Rader, who was president of Lutheran church in town,
not to mention a married man who was the father of two children and a leader for the Boy Scouts
of America.
Those are just a handful of examples that show the power of forensic evidence and sound
investigation in solving homicides.
Whether the perpetrator takes one life or kills many people over a string of years.
In our next lecture, we'll take a look at other circumstances in which so many lives
are lost in a single catastrophic event that investigators referred to it as a mass disaster.
