We know how forensic techniques are used to solve crimes, but forensic scientists are
often involved in mass disasters too.
Mass disaster is really a catch-all term that includes natural calamities like earthquakes,
floods, volcanoes, and tsunamis, as well as man-made events like genocides, bombings,
and fires.
Ecological disasters like oil spills are mass disasters in their own right too.
But in general and in my forensic experience, from a forensic perspective, an event-caught
old mass disaster typically implies a large loss of human life over a relatively short
span of time.
And the forensic science applied mainly involves two things.
First, examining the causes and effects of these types of devastating events, especially
to figure out whether criminal charges or civil lawsuits will go before the courts.
And secondly, but maybe even more importantly, identifying the large numbers of people who
can perish in these catastrophes if the disaster leaves them without a name or even a face,
and figuring out why they died.
The death of even one person can be devastating not only to a family, but even to a community.
And mass and serial killers may take several or many people's lives, either all at once
or over a period of years as we've seen.
So how many people need to die before applying the term mass to a disaster?
From a professional standpoint, a mass fatality incident is usually considered something that
causes more deaths than the local law enforcement, emergency, and forensic resources can handle.
A subway accident that kills 10 people in a major metropolitan area would not be considered
a mass disaster, although it certainly would be investigated and forensic science would
be involved, so the term somewhat relative.
Let's take a look at some of the different types of mass disasters before we look at
the forensic applications, but keep in mind that authorities and sources don't always
agree on the causes or all the facts in these examples.
Much has been written and discussed about historical situations that have resulted in the loss
of life from various natural and man-made disasters.
Do you know what type of natural disasters are the deadliest?
Floods.
When only one of two great floods in China in 1931, it's estimated that 3,700,000 people
died.
Numbers can't be accurate when whole towns are wiped out and many bodies not recovered.
The tsunami in the Indian Ocean in 2004 caused the deaths of over 230,000 people.
Obviously modern population measures and technology allow better estimates of death and damage
than in the past.
The 7.0 earthquake in Haiti in 2010 caused a loss of life nearly equal to that of the
2004 tsunami.
High poverty and poor building materials were partly responsible for the tremendous number
of fatalities and the difficulties in rescuing victims.
Japan experienced a 9.0 earthquake in 2011, but there were far fewer fatalities due to
better quality construction and higher educational and therefore technological levels.
Confirmed deaths were 15,641 and about 5,000 people are missing and presumed dead.
Other natural disasters where victims are hard to find and or identify include cyclones
and hurricanes.
Bangladesh lost 500,000 to a million people to a cyclone in 1970.
Then 1999 mudslides that followed a massive rain in Venezuela took the lives of over 15,000
victims.
Conversely, droughts that caused famines are other natural disasters and will leave victims
emaciated but presumably identifiable.
In the years 1984 to 1985 at least 1 million people died in Ethiopia due to starvation
from famine.
And East Africa suffered devastating losses in 2011.
In 1932 and 1933 a famine in Russia is estimated to have killed about 5 million people.
This was partly a man-made disaster though since Stalin controlled crops and food production
and that contributed to the massive amount of loss of life.
In fact, it's sometimes hard to separate the natural and man-made components of many
mass disasters because they were frequently overlapping issues related to building construction,
politics and population density.
Here's a good example.
Although sources vary between the years 1348 and 1350 about 25 to 100 million people died
from the bubonic plague also known as the Black Death.
Some estimates suggest 30 to 60 percent of the population in Europe was lost.
Although the natural vector was a species of bacteria carried by fleas on rats possibly
originating in China, the density of human populations in larger cities at that time
combined with a poor understanding of contagion definitely contributed to the massive loss
of life.
In modern mass fatalities from natural causes the role of forensic scientists in identifying
the large numbers of dead can confirm a family's worst fears but at least allow them to grieve.
We'll focus on identification methods in the next lecture.
Looking at engineering issues of structural collapse in these cases is important because
it has the potential to lead to designs for safer buildings, safer dams and bridges that
might better withstand future earthquakes, hurricanes and other unavoidable and sometimes
unpredictable events.
Other analytical sciences will be involved too depending on the type of disaster like
geologists, meteorologists or microbiologists if the cause is epidemic.
Policies related to prevention, intervention and emergency treatment and relief may also
change based on the analyses of natural disasters.
But some disasters are absolutely man-made.
Which of those do you think has led to the greatest loss of life?
Well pretty much by definition wars kill people often in great numbers.
World War I is estimated to have resulted in the loss of 15 to 65 million people but
that included deaths from the Spanish flu epidemic that was rampant among soldiers in
1918 and 1919.
World War II killed about 40 to 72 million, an estimated 2 to 3% of the total population
of the world at that time.
Some 5 to 11 million of those deaths were caused by genocide during the Holocaust.
In the United States the deadliest war was when we fought each other.
The U.S. lost an estimated 700,000 soldiers to battle and disease during the Civil War.
Although never proclaimed an actual war, some estimates state that up to 100 million
Native Americans died from the European invasion of North and South America.
Some were killed outright while many others died from new diseases introduced.
Also not proclaimed a true war was the political conflict in Guatemala during the years 1960
through 1996.
I mentioned earlier I visited the forensic anthropology foundation there.
For over 35 years government and guerrilla rebels skirmished throughout the countryside
and an estimated 200,000 people were killed, mostly indigenous Mayans, though others who
were protesting the conflict also went missing.
These types of human rights violations have taken huge numbers of lives in places all
over the world and forensic science has stepped in to help.
Other man-made disasters involve the release of toxic chemicals into the air or water from
our technologies.
In 1952 there was a phenomenon known as the London Killer Fog.
During an extremely cold winter, the excessive burning of coal caused sulfur dioxide and
nitrogen oxide in the soot to mingle with a natural fog event.
As black stagnant air descended close to the ground and lasted about four days, around
4,000 people were killed.
Over the next few months the total number of deaths attributed to this strange event
grew to 12,000.
The Chernobyl nuclear plant meltdown in northern Ukraine in 1986 was a serious mass disaster.
For a long time Soviet secrecy prevented an accurate death toll, but some say at least
six and a half million people were exposed to the radiation.
A couple years prior in 1984, the Union Carbide Pesticide Plant in Bhopal, India released
methyl isocyanate gas killing thousands instantly.
Ultimately there were about 20,000 deaths and some estimates are that as many as a half
million survivors wound up with health problems related to the toxic gas.
In that case there were some direct legal issues.
It's alleged that the Union Carbide Plant moved from the United States to India because
they knew this gas was a major health hazard and India had fewer safety standards.
Some experts even suspect that foul player sabotage was involved, but that's never been
forensically proven.
Another man-made toxic event also carried clear forensic ramifications.
In 1978, over 900 people died from cyanide poisoning in a mass suicide at Jonestown
in Guyana under the direction of American cult leader Jim Jones.
This mass disaster was highly unusual in that the majority of the victims voluntarily drank
cyanide-laced Kool-Aid, although it was administered to some 200 of the cult's children by their
parents or others.
Both people, including news reporters and California Congressman Leo Ryan, were shot
to death at a nearby airstrip just prior to this mass fatality at Jonestown when a congressional
inquiry attempted to intercede on behalf of concerned family members who were still in
the U.S.
Until 9-11 the Jonestown disaster was the largest loss of American civilian lives in
a single event.
Fires and explosions, both accidental and intentional, are other forms of man-made mass disasters.
In 2003, a nightclub fire in Rhode Island killed 100 people during a concert by the
band Great White when a pyrotechnic display started a fire that quickly spread along the
foam ceiling tiles in the building, although an accident investigators determined careless
disregard for safety codes was to blame.
Before 9-11, the record loss of life from airline terrorism was the 1985 Seek extremist
bombing of an Air India plane that crashed into the Irish Sea, killing 329 people, most
of whom were Canadian.
And we already talked about the deadliest man-made fire and explosion-related mass
disaster in U.S. history, the September 11, 2001 hijacking of four airplanes, two of which
were flown into the World Trade Center in New York City.
But we mustn't forget that a third plane was taken over by passengers and went down
in a field in Pennsylvania, and a fourth plane was intentionally crashed into the Pentagon
building by the hijackers.
An estimated 2,753 deaths were attributed to this coordinated act of terrorism.
We talked about the forensic engineering related to the Twin Towers, and we know of the forensic
investigations that were done to try to follow the terrorist's plans in reverse.
But did you know that more than 10 years after that incident, anthropologists are still
examining bone fragments that regularly come into the New York City Chief Medical Examiner's
office?
Each piece that comes in is DNA tested to see if it's a genetic profile that matches someone
already known to be dead or may generate a new DNA fingerprint which would confirm the
identity of another victim.
Our mass transportation modes have obviously contributed to mass disasters.
The largest number of deaths on board a ship was in 1945 when a Soviet submarine torpedoed
the German refugee ship Wilhelm Gustloff, killing over 9,000.
And we've all heard of the North Atlantic sinking of the Titanic in 1912 that took the
lives of 1,517 people after a collision with an iceberg.
But have you ever heard of the Sultana?
It was a steamboat built in my hometown, Cincinnati, Ohio, that exploded and sank on
the Mississippi River in 1865, killing a minimum of 30 more people than the famous Titanic.
The exact count isn't even known.
The Sultana was built for about 365 passengers, but it was estimated to be carrying 2,300
people when it sank.
They half-starved and wounded soldiers returning home to Illinois, Indiana and Ohio at the
end of the Civil War.
At Vicksburg, the ship's owner was offered $5 for each enlisted man and $10 for each
officer that the ship would carry, so they took on every man they could.
Just approaching Memphis, Tennessee, the boilers exploded, fleeing bodies into the Mississippi
River.
Some of those bodies floated for days.
This story has largely been lost to history, probably because it coincided with the killing
of Lincoln assassin John Wilkes Booth by Union troops and the passage of Lincoln's funeral
train through the Midwest.
With regard to aircraft, as technology has advanced to include bigger planes, the crashes
have increased the death tolls.
The collision of two airplanes in the Canary Islands in 1977 had the highest victim count
to date, 583, because it involved two planes.
A second close was the 1985 deaths of 520 people on a Japan Airlines crash near Mount
Fuji, which forensic investigators attributed to faulty maintenance.
The 1974 crash of Turkish Airlines near Paris killed 346 people when a cargo door burst
and the plane lost control.
And the worst airline accident prior to 9-11 in the U.S. was the 1979 crash of an American
Airlines plane shortly after it took off from Chicago O'Hare Airport and lost an engine.
273 people died in that crash.
Based on all we've learned, I'm sure you can come up with lots of connections between
the more recent of these mass disasters and forensic science.
But imagine how things used to be.
Before accident reconstruction techniques were advanced through engineering, investigators
could only guess it causes unless they saw something really obvious.
And prior to modern identification methods, many victims of ancient disasters were burned
in large funeral pyres or buried in mass graves without benefit of ID.
And in many parts of the world, that's still the case today.
In the past hundred years or more, though, forensic science and all of its tools have
been increasingly used to help unravel the causes of accidents and investigate acts of
intentional violence.
And forensic methods identify those killed in mass disasters and follow the trail of
evidence to serve justice on those responsible.
From police and emergency workers involved in the search and recovery of victims to legal
issues and court cases that may be decades later, these contributions to mass disaster
investigations are excellent examples of the multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary nature
of forensic science as a whole.
So let's take a look at some of the steps involved when a mass fatality incident is addressed
by law enforcement and forensic science.
Because in a sense, any mass disaster setting is like a monumental crime scene, and any
one, if not all, of the forensic techniques and technologies we've already discussed may
come into play.
Just as with a small crime scene, there are safety and security issues for emergency personnel
and other first responders.
And the area involved has to be secured to keep others from harm and prevent looting
or damage of evidence.
Victims need to be tended to, whether injured or dead, while at the same time proper protocols
have to be used to collect any evidence that might aid in the incident's investigation.
Ultimately, somebody's also going to have to figure out how to clean up the site and
make it usable again if that's even possible.
In order to walk us through some of the issues involved, I'm going to use some of my background
from over 15 years as a member of the Greater Cincinnati and Northern Kentucky International
Airports Mass Disaster Committee, as well as my experience at the Halloween 1994 crash
of American Eagle Flight 4184, which I've mentioned before.
It was a small commuter flight traveling between Indianapolis and Chicago.
But keep in mind these same principles would be involved in any type of major incident
involving extreme loss of life, such as a building collapse, a huge fire, a natural
disaster or an act of terrorism.
Depending on the mechanism that causes a disaster or a particular mode of transportation that's
involved, if that's the case, the response is going to differ.
The type of public place where an incident occurs, like an airport, a football stadium
or a university, will also affect how the scene is handled.
One of the things that we always say about mass disaster readiness is that you can be
as prepared as you want, but each situation comes with its own set of unique demands.
Still, there are some commonalities and I can discuss them here.
When a catastrophe happens, the first thing that has to be figured out is who's in charge.
And you'd be surprised at how complicated this can be at times.
Did the crash happen on airport property or did the plane go down inside the city?
When I worked at the 1994 American Eagle 4184 crash in Rosalind, Indiana, the county coroner
was a dentist.
He had to determine how much he could manage and he quickly decided that wasn't much.
So we called in the federal resources and I was dispatched to the morgue operations
by the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology at the time.
Often politics are involved in these decisions and entities either want the responsibility
for the emergency, sometimes for the prestige it brings them, and other times agencies prefer
to hand off the disaster to anybody who will take over.
Now all geographic areas typically already have emergency management systems in place
like police, fire, and emergency medical personnel.
On our mass disaster committee, the administrators have developed a call-out system that brings
in the necessary first responders depending on the scope of the incident.
Local hospitals are made ready for impending wounded and ambulance and fire companies begin
to report their estimated time of arrival to transport victims.
And these rescuers need to have the personal protective gear and other equipment necessary
to transport victims and recover the dead.
They may be facing biohazards like body fluids or toxins like jet fuel and lots of other
dangers.
Secure communication networks have to be quickly set up that will allow only those involved
to monitor the information going between police, emergency workers, and the disaster management
personnel.
The media has to be managed as well.
They can be a disaster's greatest resource at times, but can also turn into its worst
nightmare.
The necessary equipment to do the big jobs has to be quickly procured, whether that's
heavy equipment to remove rubble, search and rescue dogs, or refrigerated trucks to store
bodies until autopsy.
When American Eagle 4184 crashed, it went down into the middle of a huge soybean field,
leaving a big crater that quickly filled up with rainwater.
One of the first things that needed to happen was to haul in truckloads of gravel one at
a time and literally build a road back into the recovery site so vehicles could get access.
Those are things we don't even think about that may need to happen quickly in a disaster.
There are also financial concerns, such as who's going to pay disaster workers if they
aren't volunteers, as well as who's going to purchase the necessary supplies.
Mass fatalities also always require establishing what's known as a family assistance center.
Immediately once a mass fatality is known about, people whose loved ones were on the
plane or in the building that collapsed, they quickly descend on the area seeking news about
the victims.
Part of any emergency plan is to bring in social workers and clergy members to help the grieving
and at the same time computer operators who can start to collect anti-mortem information
about victims from the families to assist in identification, like their appearance and
available medical or dental records, as well as family reference samples for DNA testing.
If the incidents of plane crash, the airline involved will move into action to deal with
public and family concerns.
All airline carriers have disaster teams already in place among their staff.
Often the disaster management operations will need to secure a nearby hotel to house the
family members away from the site and avoid them seeing or overhearing things that may
just be too much for them to bear.
At the American Eagle site, they kept all the forensic and emergency personnel in one
hotel and all the families in another, just so no family members overheard anything that
would be really devastating to them, like if we were discussing morgue business in the
hotel bar or lobby.
It would also be tough for us to witness the unimaginable grief of the loved ones of the
people who died in the disaster.
Because forensic science is more involved with the dead than the living in these situations,
we are the ones that deal with the morgue operations.
Depending on the proximity to one or more major coroner or medical examiner facilities,
a temporary morgue may need to be set up in the area.
At the American Eagle crash, we used a National Guard Armory Gymnasium that was subdivided
into rooms using partitions made out of plastic tarp.
Steel gurneys were brought in along with portable x-ray equipment, photography gear, computer
terminals, and other tools and supplies we needed to process the dead.
And the morgue, depending on the condition of bodies and body parts that come in, autopsies
are conducted to establish cause of death, and together particulars that will assist
in identification, like tattoos or dental work.
As I said, we'll talk about forensic identification in our final lecture.
At the American Eagle crash, out of 68 victims, only two people were intact enough to warrant
a full-size body bag.
Other victims came in as body parts in ziplock bags or small biohazard bags.
The bags of tissue and body parts had already been assigned numbers in the field during
the recovery operations, which were handled by the National Guard and local law enforcement.
Then each bag was put onto refrigerated trucks, which they parked behind our temporary morgue.
As each bag came in through the morgue, it first went through a fluoroscopic x-ray machine,
like a luggage scanner, to see any initial specifics that could be discerned, like personnel
hazards, plane parts, or victim body features related to ID, like dental fillings or bridgework.
If that was the case, notes were made in the documentation that traveled with each bag.
After intake at the next station in the morgue, each bag was opened and photographed before
being taken to an autopsy table.
At the autopsy table, a pathologist, an anthropologist, and a morgue assistant worked together to
examine the remains.
All plane parts were removed so they could be passed to the Federal Aviation Administration
investigators who were at the site.
They cataloged the human tissue present in each bag and looked for features that might
help establish identity.
1994 was prior to the widespread use of DNA technology in these types of disasters.
Technology was still far too expensive at that time, so it wasn't used.
If we found any piece of the upper or lower jaw, we sent that fragment or body part to
the dental station where odontologists did an examination, and if we saw any hands,
feet, or fragments of them, we sent those to the FBI fingerprint station.
There was also an x-ray station.
It was set up in the restroom of the armory to shield the rest of us from the radiation.
In a disaster like this, an area is devoted to managing all the personal effects that
come in on or among the victims too.
Things like wallets, jewelry, luggage, cell phones, briefcases, and anything else people
may have with them during life, those things will also be at the scene of a mass fatality.
And these items need to be secured, and every attempt has to be made to return them to their
rightful owners if those owners survive, or to the necks of kin of deceased victims.
At the American Eagle Crash, the Indiana State Funeral Directors Association stepped in to
organize, catalog, and clean the victim's personal effects in another part of the temporary
morgue area.
The psychological needs of disaster workers have to also be addressed.
As you can imagine, the things we see here and smell can be horrific.
Even the most experienced morgue workers can be challenged in a mass disaster setting.
At the American Eagle Crash, those of us working in the autopsy side of the morgue were told
we probably shouldn't go over to the personal effects area.
We were warned that seeing the photos in wallets, the teddy bears of kids on the plane, or the
bridal gown that was in the suitcase of a woman who was traveling to her wedding.
That just wasn't a good idea.
By the same token, the funeral directors working on the personal effects side of the morgue,
they were told not to visit the carnage we were seeing on the autopsy tables.
I mean, there were 68 people on that plane, but there were 1,500 separate bags of human
tissue so you can imagine the fragmentation.
It was suggested for our own mental health we should try to disassociate the jobs each
group was doing and seek psychological assistance if we needed it.
Personally, my daily decompression was a couple of good stiff drinks, but others sought counseling
and clergy services that were made available to us.
Local massage therapists kindly volunteered to give us neck, arm, and shoulder rubs on
our breaks, which was really a welcome relief during a 10-hour day in the cold morgue.
As for investigating the cause of a disaster, we've learned that might require the expertise
of forensic engineers, accident reconstruction experts, fire and explosives investigators,
or others depending on the incident.
Figuring out what happened can also involve black box data recorders or any surveillance
equipment that might hold information.
Away from the site, the investigation could also employ high-tech analyses of things like
digital and financial data, particularly if the cause may have been terrorism.
Disaster or building occupant lists may need to be pulled to figure out who the victims
are likely to be and how many people still may be missing.
Establishing fault or potential safety violations that led to the disaster will have legal implications.
Cleaning up the site can be a massive and hazardous operation that can take weeks, months,
years, or even longer, depending on the extent of the property or environmental damage, and
decisions will need to be made about the disposition of any remaining biomass.
That's the term used for the unidentified human tissue that may be commingled with soil
or other contaminants.
It needs to be contained, incinerated, or buried.
Okay, I'd like to close this lecture with a brief account of the first mass disaster
that was ever handled by DMORT.
That's the United States Network of Disaster and Mortuary Teams.
The acronym stands for Disaster Mortuary Operational Response Teams, and it's a branch
of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services under the auspices of the National
Disaster Medical System.
DMORT's very first activation happened in 1993 in Hardin, Missouri, when the Missouri
River flooded its banks, displacing about 650 coffins and vaults from the Hardin Cemetery,
which dated back to 1828.
This was really an unusual mass disaster in that the victims were already dead and buried
as known individuals, but due to the flood, were now scattered as John, Jane, and Baby
Does for miles after the waters receded.
Now, I wasn't specifically involved in the recovery or analysis of the remains, but in
2004, I participated in the filming of a one-hour TV show for National Geographic about the
forensics of this strange disaster and its mortuary operations.
I was privy to some incredible background information, like video footage of police
officers on wave runners, you know those things like motorcycles on water skis?
They were navigating the flooded river and attempting to lasso coffins and vaults as
they traveled downstream.
The greatest distance a body was found from the cemetery wound up being 26 miles.
Amazingly, bodies were in all states of preservation when the waters receded.
There were mummified remains of people from the 19th century caught up in the branches
of trees.
There were visually recognizable and bombed bodies that family members identified after
recovery and bones were scattered throughout the entire county.
It took a dedicated DMORT team of pathologists, anthropologists, and other forensic experts
months to try to identify the dead all over again.
And many ended up being buried in common caskets without identification.
This was really a strange mass disaster because no victims were killed, but all of them were
dead.
Now let's move on to talk about how forensic science is used to identify unknown persons.
