Normally, making a custom chip costs tens of thousands of dollars, and don't forget
another hundred thousand dollars for renting the design software, oh and you'll have
to sign an NDA to get started, and that NDA means you can't share your design with anyone.
Tiny Tape Belt makes it easier, quicker and cheaper than ever before to get your designs
onto a real chip.
Open Source Tools, excellent documentation and a vibrant community helps to make it
much easier to get started and avoid common mistakes.
Tiny Tape Belt is for students, makers, hackers, universities and anyone interested in learning
more or getting their designs made into silicon.
All our learning resources and tools are free to use and they're online to avoid download,
installation and licensing problems.
If you're a total beginner, you can try Wokwi, our digital design and simulator tool, or
If you know what you're doing, you can use a hardware description language like Verilog,
VHDL or Amaranth.
Then use our GitHub Action based system to build the files you need for the ASIC.
Once the files are ready, you can explore the layout with this really cool 3D viewer.
The minimum size is 160x100 microns, about a thousand logic cells, and if you need more
space you can buy extra tiles.
Each design gets access to clock, reset and 24 IO's, with about 50MHz bandwidth.
Tiny Tape Out isn't just for digital designs.
For Tiny Tape Out 6 we've added analog and mix signal support, as well as support for
designs made with proprietary tools like Cadence.
Once the design is ready, we send it to eFabulous and they'll manufacture it on the open source
SkyWater 130nm process.
The first 100 submissions from individuals will get an early bird discount thanks to
eFabulous sponsorship.
And I want to say a really big thanks to eFabulous for sponsoring this project and making it
possible.
Once we get the silicon back, we save you time and trouble by mounting the chip onto a demonstration
board.
After plugging the board into your computer, you select which design you want to be active
with our MicroPython interface.
And that also lets you adjust the clock speed, set the inputs and monitor the outputs.
One of my favourite things about this project is that you're not only going to get your
design, but everybody else's design as well.
You'll be able to look through the chips data sheet and try out someone else's design.
In our previous runs, we've seen some really interesting designs, including RISC 5 CPUs,
FPGAs, Ring Oscillators, Synthesizers, USB devices and loads more.
To get started, follow the video tutorials.
Expect it to take between a few hours and a few weeks depending on how complex your design
is.
If you get stuck, join our Discord community chat.
Make sure you sign up to the mailing list to keep up to date with our progress.
So have fun, get involved and I'm really looking forward to seeing what you make on your first
ASIC.
