In this lecture, I'll talk about the joy of counting.
And this mathematics can really bring you joy because we're going to see how you can
use this to figure out problems that might be of interest to you, such as the number
of possible outcomes in a horse race, the chance of winning the lottery, even figuring
out your odds in poker, we'll be able to determine using the techniques of this lecture.
Now when I think of counting, I think of basically two principles.
There's the rule of sum and the rule of product.
The rule of sum says this.
If I own five long sleeve shirts and I own three short sleeve shirts, then the number
of shirts that I can wear on any given day would be five plus three, the sum of those
numbers.
Whereas if I'm thinking of, let's say I own eight shirts and let's say I own five different
pair of pants, okay, and I don't think about color coordination, which is true of most
mathematicians, I'm afraid, then the number of possible outfits that I can wear, I'd
have eight shirts and five pair of pants would be eight times five.
I'd have 40 outfits.
And if I had 10 different ties that I could wear, well, then that would multiply the number
of possibilities, the number of possible triples, shirts, pants, and ties by a factor of 10.
I had eight times five times 10, 400 different outfits.
Okay, let's start with simple questions.
Like how many ways can I arrange a bunch of letters, okay?
Like the letters A and B can be arranged two ways, right?
A, B, and B, A. How about A, B, and C?
Well those could be arranged six ways because we have A, B, C, B, A, C, C, A, B, A, C, B,
C, A, C, B, A as presented here, right?
So there are six ways of doing that.
There are 24 ways of arranging A, B, C, and D as we've displayed here.
Now what do these numbers have in common?
You might recognize these numbers from the previous lecture, right?
We have one is one factorial, two ways was two factorial, six ways is three factorial,
24 ways is four factorial.
So why should that be?
Well think of if there are six ways to arrange A, B, and C. Let's figure out the number of
ways of arranging A, B, C, and D. For every one of those six ways, there are four ways
of inserting the letter D, right?
So starting with A, B, C, we could put D in the first position, the second position,
the third position, or the fourth position.
That's going to lead to four new ways of arranging A, B, C, and D where A, B, and C are still
in their original position.
Whereas if I took, say, the next set of numbers A, C, B, there are still going to be four
places that I can insert the letter D among the letters A, C, and B.
So for every one of those six actions that we can start with, for any one of those six
arrangements, we can follow that up with four new decisions.
Where does the D go?
So that's going to be six times four, 24, or four factorial ways of doing that.
As we've noted before, factorials grow awfully large.
Here are the first 12 factorials.
There are, for instance, 12 factorial over 479 million ways of arranging the first 12
letters.
If you had 12 books on a bookshelf and you said, how many different ways can I arrange
those 12 books on a bookshelf, there are, believe it or not, over 479 million different
ways you can do this.
Another way of thinking about this, maybe more graphically, is imagine I have five
cards.
Okay, that's a more direct way of thinking about arranging.
I'm going to take these five cards and I say, how many different ways can I arrange them
on the table?
Okay, so your first choice is, well, which card are you going to put down first?
Okay, I've got five choices for what card I'll put down first.
Once I've chosen that, how many choices do I have for the next card?
There are four choices.
So there are four choices for what card goes next.
Once you've made those two decisions, you've got three choices for what goes next, then
two choices for what goes next, and finally one choice for the last card.
Therefore, the total number of possibilities is five times four times three times two times
one, five factorial.
And in general, the number of ways of arranging and different objects is going to be n factorial.
Okay, let's do another problem.
Let's say how many different zip codes are possible.
Okay, so a zip code consists of five digits.
The first digit is anything from zero to nine.
The second digit is from zero to nine, etc.
The last digit is from zero to nine.
How many different ways can you create a zip code?
Well, the first digit, we have ten choices, anything from zero to nine.
The second digit has ten choices.
The third digit has ten choices.
The fourth digit, the fifth digit, those each have ten choices.
Therefore the number of possible zip codes is ten times ten times ten times ten times
ten times ten, ten to the fifth, a hundred thousand possible zip codes.
Suppose I change the question now.
Suppose I say, all right, how many zip codes where none of the numbers are allowed to repeat?
So for instance, the first digit, we have ten choices, that's true.
The second digit, now we only have nine choices because it has to be different from the first
digit.
So for instance, if the first digit was four, then the second digit could be anything other
than four.
Let's say we made that the number two, okay?
Once we've chosen the first two digits, then how many choices do we have for the third
number?
Well, there are going to be eight possibilities.
In my mind, I like to actually pick a definite number, so let's say it's three as the third
digit of the zip code.
Okay, now the next digit, I have how many choices?
Seven choices.
And for the last digit, I'll have six choices.
So the number of five digit zip codes where none of the numbers are allowed to repeat
would be ten times nine times eight times seven times six would be 30,240 possible zip codes.
Okay, let's apply this to horse racing, okay?
A simple problem, really.
In a horse race with eight horses, how many possible different outcomes are there where
an outcome is a horse finishing first, another horse finishing second, and another horse
finishing third, win, place, and show?
Okay, well, there are eight choices for the horse that comes first.
Once you've done that, there are seven choices for the horse that comes second, and once
you've done that, there are six choices for the horse that comes third.
And so there are eight times seven times six, 336 possibilities for the horse race outcome.
Here's another question.
How many possible license plates are there if a license plate comes in two varieties?
Let's say type one license plate have three letters followed by three numbers, and a type
two license plate has two letters followed by four numbers, like the examples we see.
So first of all, let's answer these questions into two cases, because your license plate
is either of type one or of type two.
So the rule of sum is going to apply here.
How many type one license plates are there?
Well, let's see.
For the first three letters, we have 26 choices for the first letter, 26 for the second, 26
for the third, and then the three numbers that follow it, there are 10 choices, 10 choices,
10 choices, multiply those numbers together, and you get 17,576,000 different license plates.
Incidentally, I'm assuming that we can distinguish between the letter O and the number zero,
the number one and the letter I.
We won't pretend that there are any complications with that.
Okay, next, how many license plates are there of type two?
Well this time, we have two letters followed by four numbers.
So we have 26 choices for the first, 26 for the second, and then those remaining four
numbers are 10 choices, 10 choices, 10 choices, 10 choices.
So all together, 26 times 26 times 10 to the fourth, 6,760,000 possibilities.
Therefore the total number of license plates when we combine type one and type two is 24,336,000.
But what I like about combinatorics, that's the mathematics of counting things, combinatorics,
is that you can often take a problem and solve it lots and lots of different ways, and if
you're careful, you'll always get the same answer.
So for example, in this last problem we did, we can actually do it in one step instead
of taking two steps.
For instance, the first letter is 26 choices.
The second letter is 26 choices.
Whether we're of type one or type two, we've got 26 times 26 ways to get started.
But what about the third item on the license plate?
Well it could either be a letter or a number.
So how many choices do I have for that third item on the license plate?
26 plus 10, 36 possibilities.
And then the remaining three items, those all have to be numbers.
So I have 10 choices, 10 choices, 10 choices.
When you multiply those numbers together, 26 times 26 times 36 times 10, 10, 10, we get
the exact same answer we had before, 24,336,000.
Same problem as before, but now all the letters have to be different.
Now we have 26 choices for the first letter, 25 choices for the second letter, but that
third item could be any one of 24 letters or 10 numbers.
Therefore there are 34 possibilities for that third item.
And then the last three items all have to be numbers, and so we have 10 choices, 10 choices,
multiply those numbers together, and we get 22,100,000.
If all the letters and numbers must be different, then we can still do it in one step, but we
have to pursue a more creative strategy.
We have 26 choices for the first letter, 25 choices for the second letter.
I don't yet know what the third item's going to be, so let's skip that third item and go
on to the fourth item.
The fourth item, there are 10 choices for it, because it has to be a number, 9 choices
for the next number, 8 choices for the last number, and now we go to item number 3.
Item number 3 can be a number or a letter.
So there are 24 choices for the letter, 7 choices for the number, and therefore 31 possibilities
for item 3.
So we can multiply all those together to get 26 times 25 times 31, 10,9,8 to get our answer
of 14,508,000.
Okay, let me live up to my promise and talk about winning the lottery.
In California they have a game called Super Lotto Plus, and it goes like this.
Step one, choose five numbers from 1 through 47.
Step two, choose a mega number from 1 through 27.
The mega number is allowed to be one of the five numbers that you've picked, or it could
be a different one, it's up to you.
Step three, cross your fingers.
Alright, for example, let's say I pick the numbers 2, 3, 5, 8, and 13, those by the way
are Fibonacci numbers, and I'll have more to say about those later, and the mega number
21.
You'd say, well, how many ways can the state pick its numbers, and then we'll see which
of those are mine.
So the state has 47 choices for its first number, 46 choices for its second, 45 for
its third, 44 for its fourth, and 43 for its fifth.
So there are 47 times 46, 45, 44, 43 ways of picking the first five numbers, and then
the state has 27 ways to pick the mega number.
So that sounds like that would be the right answer, but unfortunately, you have overcounted.
That answer is wrong, because if I said the state, let's say the state chose the numbers
1, 10, 20, 30, and 45, that turns out to be the same as the state picking the numbers
10, 20, 45, 30, and 1, right?
They're the same group of five numbers, but you've counted them as different.
So how many ways could you have arranged those five numbers and still had the same set of
five numbers?
Well, by the way of dealing through the cards, we saw there were five factorial ways of arranging
those numbers.
So the correct answer to this problem takes the original number that we came up with and
divides it by five factorial.
This sort of reminds me of the problem of farmer, good, brags to another farmer says,
I can look in your, I could look in your farm and instantly count the number of sheep that
you have.
Second farmer's skeptical says, okay, how'd you do it?
Show me that you can do it.
So farmer walks in and says, hmm, I see you've got, oh, exactly 87 sheep.
He said, why, that's amazing.
How did you do that so quickly?
He said, oh, I counted the number of legs and divided by four.
So maybe that's not funny, but that's the analogy to the problem that we just did.
That is, we first counted the numerator, over counted the problem, and then divided by the
denominator to get things right.
Okay.
So we saw there were 41 million, 416,353 ways of the state picking its numbers, only one
of which are your five numbers, right?
And therefore your chance of winning is just one over 41 million, which is pretty small.
Incidentally, when we deal with products like 47 times 46 times 45 times 44 times 43, another
way of expressing that a little bit mathematically cleaner is to take the numerator and the denominator
and multiply them by 42 factorial.
So the numerator now looks like 47 factorial and the denominator looks like 42 factorial.
So those quantities are the same thing.
They just look, looks a little bit nicer in the second form.
And the number of ways of picking five different numbers out of 47 is that that quantity we
have divided by five factorial.
So you get this rather pretty looking expression, 47 factorial divided by 5 factorial, 42 factorial.
That's the number of ways of picking the first five lotto numbers.
In general, the number of ways to pick K objects from N objects by the same logic that we went
through where the order is not important is N factorial divided by K factorial times N
minus K factorial.
That's denoted N choose K. Mathematicians call that N choose K because it's the number
of ways from N objects that you can choose K objects.
So for example, in the game of poker, how many five card poker hands are there?
Well you have 52 cards.
You're going to choose five of them.
The order that you get the cards is not important.
We're playing a game like five card draw, not a game like five card stud, where order
would be important.
And so the number of ways of picking five out of 52 is 52 choose five, which has formula
52 factorial divided by 5 factorial, 47 factorial, which is 2,598,960, which is a pretty awesome
number.
So you might ask, well what are your chances of being dealt a specific kind of hand in
poker?
For instance, what are your chances of being dealt a flush, which is five cards of the
same suit in poker?
Well, to answer that question, we say, what choices do we have to make?
First of all, how many choices do we have for a suit?
If the poker hand is going to be five cards of the same suit, how many choices do I have
for the suit?
Four choices, right?
It could be a spade, heart, diamond, or club.
Once you've chosen that suit, how many ways can you choose the rest of your cards?
Well let's suppose you chose the suit of hearts, okay?
Now how many ways can you pick five hearts out of the 13 hearts in the deck?
Well by definition that is 13 choose five, 13 factorial over 5 factorial, 8 factorial.
So you multiply those numbers together and you get 5,148, and therefore your chances
of being dealt a flush in poker would be 5,148 divided by the 2,598,960 possible different
poker hands.
That's about 0.2 percent.
About one out of every 500 poker hands will you be dealt a flush?
All right, well let's try a different poker hand.
How about what are the chances of being dealt a full house in poker, all right?
So what's a full house?
A full house consists of five cards, three of one value, and two of another value, okay?
So how many ways are there to deal a full house?
Well the first decision that you have to make is to choose which value is going to be triplicated.
And there are 13 choices for the tripled value, okay?
Let's say you went with queens, okay?
Once you've chosen queens as the tripled value, then you say how many ways can you
pick the duplicated value, the value that appears twice?
Well there are 12 ways of doing that.
Let's say you went with sevens, okay?
Now once you've chosen queens and sevens, we have to decide the suits of those cards.
We'll start with the queens.
How many ways can you choose three suits for those three queens?
The answer is four, choose three.
That is from the four queens that you have, Spadeheart, Diamond, and Club, choose three
of them.
Now four, choose three is equal to four.
You could count them out, you know, Spadeheart, Diamond, Spadeheart, Club, and so on.
Similarly, how many ways can we choose two sevens out of the four sevens that we've had?
Well, we have to choose those suits.
Four, choose two ways of doing that.
That's numerically equal to six.
So the number of full houses is 13 times 12 times four times six.
Multiply them together.
You get 3,744, which is a smaller number than what we had for finding flushes, right?
With flushes, we had 5,148 flushes.
With full houses, we have 3,744, only about a 1 in 700 chance of being dealt a full house.
And that's why in the game of poker, the full houses are more valuable than flushes because
they are more rare.
You're less likely to have those dealt to you.
Okay, one more question.
This is an easy one to get wrong.
How many five card poker hands have at least one ace?
Okay, how many have at least one ace?
I'm going to give you the tempting answer, which unfortunately is wrong, but it's one
that people make a mistake that my students make so often that I have to show it to them
first so they're less likely to make it on their test.
Okay, so here's the tempting way to answer that question.
You say, hmm, how many poker hands have at least one ace?
Well, first I have to choose an ace, then I have to pick four other cards from the remaining
51.
Okay, how many choices do I have for that first ace?
Four choices.
Let's say I pick the ace of spades, then from the remaining 51 cards, I have to pick four
of them.
So there are 51 choose four ways of doing that.
So it seems very sensible that the answer would be four times 51 choose four.
Unfortunately, the logic in that is incorrect because let's suppose that, oh, here's a hand
that has at least one ace, right?
Here's the ace of spades, and let's pick four other cards.
All right, I'm going to be a little deliberate on the four other cards here.
Let's say the four other cards were the four of diamonds, the six of diamonds, the four
of clubs, and the ace of diamonds, okay?
So that's a hand that has at least one ace, but that's the same hand as if you had first
chosen the ace of diamonds, and then chosen these four cards, the ace of spades, four
of clubs, six of diamonds, four of diamonds, as your remaining four cards, you see?
So you were counting, there is no first ace in this hand.
This is a five card hand.
Order simply doesn't matter when it comes to a five card poker hand.
So to say, first choose an ace, your first card, and then pick four other cards is bringing
order into a problem where order does not belong, okay?
So that's why the first answer I gave you was wrong.
What's the correct way of doing it?
The correct way of doing it is to break the problem down into four cases.
I want to count the number of aces that are in the hand, right?
We have to have at least one ace, so I'm going to first count those poker hands with
one ace, then count those hands with two aces, then three, then four, then apply the rule
of some to add all those hands together.
So for example, how many poker hands have exactly one ace?
Well, first we choose the ace that we're going to use, exactly one ace, so there are
four aces in the deck, we've chosen one of them to be our ace.
Next, we have to pick four non-aces in the deck.
How many non-aces are there in the deck?
There are 48 of them, right?
You have to choose four of them.
So the number of ways of picking four non-aces is 48, choose four.
Therefore the number of poker hands with exactly one ace is four choose one times 48, choose
four.
How many poker hands have exactly two aces?
Well this time you first choose your two aces, four choose two ways.
Once you've done that, you have to choose how many more cards, three more cards, from
the remaining 48.
How many ways can we do that?
48, choose three.
Therefore the number of poker hands with exactly two aces is four choose two times 48, choose
three.
Similarly, the number of poker hands that have exactly three aces is four choose three
times 48, choose two.
First you choose the three aces, then you choose the two non-aces.
Finally, the number of poker hands with exactly four aces is four choose four, which is one,
choose 48, choose one, which is 48.
The number of ways of picking one thing out of 48 is 48, and therefore the number of hands
with exactly four aces is 48.
It's good sometimes by the way when you see a number like 48 to give it a sensibility
test like does that make sense?
How many poker hands have exactly four aces in it?
Well since the order of those four aces doesn't matter, all that matters is what is the odd
card, the non-ace, and there are 48 non-aces in the deck, so that answer makes sense.
So adding all those cases together we get 886,656 different poker hands.
Now like I said at the beginning of this lecture, one of the great things about combinatorial
problems, counting problems, is that you can do these problems many different ways.
So here's I think an even slicker way of doing that last problem.
The question is how many hands have at least one ace, but let's instead answer the question
how many hands have no aces, and then we'll subtract that from the total amount.
How many hands have zero aces?
Well that's easy.
There were four aces in the deck, so there are 48 non-aces in the deck.
Choose any five of them, how many ways can I choose five things out of 48?
By definition, 48 choose five, which is 1,712,304.
Once you have that, we can then say if those are the number of hands that have zero aces,
then when I subtract that from the 2,598,960 possible poker hands, we're left with the
exact same number as we had before, 886,656.
So we've answered your questions about horse racing, lottery, poker, but we've only scratched
the surface.
The possibilities for counting questions in these games are endless.
As endless as the variations of the games themselves, you might say well what happens
if you allow wild cards into your game?
What if you're playing a game like Seven Cards Stud or Texas Hold'em, or people seem to constantly
ask me questions about how can you apply all this to Blackjack?
Well the answer is you can apply some mathematics to solving these problems, but we don't want
to take all the fun out of the games now, do we?
