Welcome back. In this lecture, we will talk about the joy of pi. And whenever you think
of pi, you instantly think of circles. So let's get our definition straight, shall we?
So here we have a circle. Here is the center of the circle. From the center of the circle,
the distance from the center to any point on the circle is a constant, and that constant
is called the radius, usually denoted by the letter r. If you were to look at the distance
from the top of the circle to the bottom of the circle, well that's going to be twice
the radius, and that's known as the diameter. So the diameter is twice the radius. We say
D is twice r. And if you were to look at the circumference of the circle, that's what
you get when you take the entire start at the top of the circle, go all the way around
the circle, and the length of the perimeter of the circle is the circumference. Now what's
rather surprising is if you take any circle and you take its circumference and you divide
that by the diameter, you always get the same number. If you look at this circle, here's
the diameter, you say how many diameters would it take to go around the circle? The answer
is a little bit more than 3. You need about 3 diameters to go around the circle. In fact
that number is close to 3.14, and what's amazing is that you get that same ratio,
the circumference divided by the diameter for any circle at all, and that constant ratio
is called pi. Now why should you get the same ratio for any circle? Here's the best explanation
I can give. Imagine I'm holding the circle like this, and then you take a picture of
it, you just zap it to your computer screen. Then what do you see? It's still going to
be the case that the picture of me holding the circle, that it's going to be a little
bit more than 3 diameters as you go around the circle, right? Even though the circle
you see on your screen is much smaller than the circle that I'm holding, the ratio stays
the same. Okay, well that's the best explanation I can give. So the definition of pi is for
any circle, it's the ratio of the circumference to the diameter. Once we have that, we can
define lots of other quantities. In fact, maybe I should say better, we can calculate
other quantities. For instance, the area of a circle is pi r squared. That is, if a circle
that has radius r, the area of that circle is pi r squared. This is a theorem so nice,
I'll prove it twice. You can take your pick as to which one you like better. Okay, imagine
you have the circle in front of you, and I'm going to snip off, going to cut through the
top of the circle, right until I hit the radius, and I'm going to peel that circle down kind
of like an onion. Okay, so imagine we unwrap the first layer of that circle. Okay, lay
it down flat, and then that's going to have a length that's going to be on the table with
a length of 2 pi r. Then I'm going to peel off the next layer of that onion. That's going
to have a length that's a little bit less than 2 pi r. Then I'm going to peel off the
next layer, and the next layer, and so on until I can't peel it anymore. Once I hit
that radius center point right there at r, that's going to give me a nice little triangle.
And what is the area of that triangle? Well, we know that the area of a triangle is one
half the base times the height. The base of that triangle has length 2 pi r. The height
of that triangle is r. So the area of this triangle is one half 2 pi r times r, which
is pi r squared. Okay, let's try another example, another proof of this theorem. This one I
like even more. Let's imagine you take this circle and you slice it up like a pizza into
lots of triangles. Hey, maybe that's why they call it pi. Okay, so here we slice up that
circle into lots of little triangles, and now we're going to separate the top half from
the bottom half. Okay, so separate it just like we have on our screen, and watch what
happens. We pull out these little triangles standing up at the bottom, and we have triangles
on the top, and they interlock together to form what's almost exactly a rectangle. The
more and more triangles you have, the more and more slices of your pizza pie you have,
the closer and closer it is to being an honest to goodness rectangle, the length of the bottom
of that rectangle is pi r, because it came from half of the circumference, and the length
of the top of the rectangle is pi r, and the side of that rectangle is r. And so the area
of that rectangle is pi r times r, which is pi r squared. But that doesn't mean that
it doesn't say anything as to why pi should be a number like 3.14. I mean, we know that
it's a constant. We know that the ratio of the circumference to the diameter is a constant,
but exactly what constant is it? That's a question that people have been asking for
thousands of years. We know the number's a little bit bigger than three, but how could
we prove that? How can we prove that? Here is one way of getting a handle on the size
of the number pi. Let's look at a circle that has diameter one. Now remember, pi is the
ratio of the circumference to the diameter, so if you have a circle with diameter one,
then pi is just going to be the circumference of your circle. How do we get a bound on that
circumference? Well, one way is we're going to put inside of that circle, I'm going to
draw a square. You see that square inside the circle. Actually, it looks like a diamond.
Do you agree that the perimeter of that diamond is less than the perimeter of the circle? If
I can figure out the perimeter of that diamond, then I'll have a lower bound on the perimeter
of the circle. I'm going to break that diamond into four right triangles. Let's blow up one
of those triangles and move it out of here for a moment. What does that triangle look
like? Well, it's going to have two sides whose lengths are one half, because the diameter
of that circle was one, so the sides of that triangle is a half. What's the length of the
hypotenuse? Well, the Pythagorean theorem says that the length of the hypotenuse when
squared is going to be a half squared plus a half squared. That's one fourth plus one
fourth, which is two fourths. If I want the square root of that to get the hypotenuse,
then we have the square root of two over the square root of four, or the square root of
two over two. The hypotenuse of that triangle is square root of two over two. Therefore,
the perimeter of that diamond is going to be four times the square root of two over two,
which is two square roots of two, which is about 2.828, and therefore the perimeter of
the circle is bigger than 2.828. The next bound is even easier. I want to get an upper bound
for the size of pi. Well, now let's put the circle inside of a square. So what's going
to be the size of that square? Well, the diameter of the circle is one, so it's going to fit
causally inside of a one by one square. What's the perimeter of a square with side length
one? Well, four. So the circumference of the circle has to be less than the perimeter
of that square, which is four. So now we have a lower bound and an upper bound for pi. With
a little bit of work, we were able to show that pi, whatever that constant is, lives
somewhere between 2.828 and four. Now, if you take that little bit of work, we were able
to expand on that to do a lot more work, then you can get better bounds for pi. In fact,
one of the greatest mathematicians of all time, surely the greatest mathematician of
antiquity, Archimedes, took the same logic that we used, except instead of using four
sided squares, used ninety-six sided polygons. Now, if you take that little bit of work we
used ninety-six sided polygons, and with those polygons, with a circle that contained
a ninety-six sided polygon and was contained inside a ninety-six sided polygon, was able
to show that pi was bigger than three plus ten over seventy-one and less than three and
one-seventh. In other words, he was able to show that pi was between 3.1408 and three
point one four two eight, quite an amazing achievement. But you want to know what pi
is exactly, don't you? Well, if we were to write it out as a long fraction, it would
be three point one four one five nine two six five three five eight nine, it goes on
forever. Is there any pattern to that? You might look at some fractions that do a pretty
good job of approximating pi, one that most people are familiar with is twenty-two over
seven. Twenty-two over seven was Archimedes' upper bound for pi, that's three point one
four two eight five seven, one four two eight five seven, one four two eight five seven,
the one four two eight five seven repeats indefinitely. Another nice approximation to pi, my favorite
one, is three five five over one thirteen. What's pretty about that number is it has
two ones, two threes, and two fives in it. Surely a coincidence, but it makes it easy
to remember. And that's three point one four one five nine two nine, so close to pi. Maybe
if we looked at bigger numbers or we were a little bit more clever, we could find a fraction
that gives us pi exactly. But, as was proved by Lambert in seventeen sixty-one, all attempts
at that are futile. Pi is irrational. Just like we proved that square root of two is
irrational with a lot of extra hard work, you can show that pi is irrational. That means
that no matter how hard you try, you're not going to be able to write it as a fraction.
That means if you look at the decimal expansion for pi, you're never going to see any pattern
to it. It's not going to eventually repeat like the one four two eight five seven did.
It's not going to repeat. It's going to go on forever without any kind of pattern. Here's
a longer look at pi. There are other ways to calculate pi. Some of them are pretty efficient,
some of them are not. These next two aren't very efficient at doing it, but they're really
pretty beautiful. For instance, if you were to take one minus a third plus a fifth minus
a seventh plus a ninth minus an eleventh and so on and so on and so on. Just take all those
odd denominators. Take that quantity, multiply it by four, you get exactly pi. Now that's
not a good way to calculate it because it takes forever. I mean, what I'll mean forever.
I mean, it takes a long time for you to get any kind of accuracy. Even after you've looked
at 500 terms of that, you still only have a couple of digits of pi. Here's another pretty
formula that involves products instead of sums and differences. The reason people like pi
is because pi is everywhere. It touches on virtually all aspects of mathematics. In fact,
everything we've done in this course in some way connects to pi. Let me give you some examples.
It's not surprising to see pi show up in geometry. We know that pi is intimately connected to
a circle, but what about other shapes? Here's a squashed circle known as an ellipse. An ellipse
has the equation x squared over a squared plus y squared over b squared equals one. If
you look at the drawing of an ellipse, you'll see that the ellipse touches the x axis when
x is equal to a and over on the other side when x is equal to negative a. And the ellipse
touches the y axis when y is equal to b and negative b. You can see that, right? If you
plug in x equals a and y equals zero, you'll get a squared over a squared plus zero squared
over b squared, which is one, as you're supposed to. Well, the area of an ellipse is very easy
to remember. The area of an ellipse is pi times a times b. Now, what happens if a and
b are equal? Well, then your circle isn't squashed anymore. Your ellipse becomes a perfectly
round circle. If a is r and b is r, then that equation x squared over a squared plus y squared
over b squared equals one becomes the equation x squared over r squared plus y squared over
squared equals one, which when you multiply that by r squared becomes x squared plus y
squared equals r squared, which is our famous formula for the area of a circle of radius
r. And in that case, the area of the circle would be pi times r times r or pi r squared.
Here are some other geometrical shapes. For instance, the volume of a cylinder. Let's
say your cylinder had a circular base with a radius of r and a height of h. Think of
it like a can of soup, okay, with a base radius of r and a height of h. Then it's no surprise
that the volume of that cylinder is pi r squared h. Why did I say that was no surprise? Well,
the base of the tin can that you're looking at is has an area of pi r squared. And if
you now want to give it some dimension, you want to raise that up a height of h, then
we're going to multiply that pi r squared times h to get a volume of pi r squared h.
How about the surface area of that can? How would we calculate that? Well, we're going
to calculate the area of the bottom of the can, the area of the top of the can, and the
area that goes around the can. The area of the bottom part of the can is pi r squared.
The area of the lid, the top of the can, is also pi r squared. And now, what about the
area of the body of the can? Well, if we were to unwrap that, okay, so take that round
can and flatten it out, then it would still have a height of h. And what would be its
length? Well, its length would be the original circumference of that can. And that circumference
was 2 pi r. So the area of that rectangle that we have is 2 pi r times h. So when you
put it all together, the surface area is 2 pi r squared plus 2 pi r h. How about a cone?
The volume of a cone, believe it or not, is pi r squared h divided by 3. Now, this cone
looks like an ice cream cone. I've turned it upside down, where it's called a right
circular cone. So you have a circle of radius r on the bottom, and the cone goes straight
up, okay, up to a height of h, and then goes all the way down to the circle. And the volume
of that cone is 1 third of pi r squared h, which means that you could fit exactly three
of those cones into a cylinder. And that is not geometrically easy to see. That was proved
by Archimedes, and he was very excited when he proved that. The surface area of a right
circular cone is pi r times r plus the square root of r squared plus h squared, but I'm
not going to try and prove that. The volume of a sphere of radius r is 4 times h squared
or 3rd pi r cubed. And the surface area of a sphere is 4 pi r squared. To derive those,
those are best derived using calculus, which we'll do in a subsequent lecture. I said that
we see pi showing up in all kinds of unusual places. I mean, with geometrical figures,
that makes sense. You're used to seeing them there. But take a look at this sum of numbers.
1 plus 1 over 2 squared plus 1 over 3 squared plus 1 over 4 squared plus 1 over 5 squared.
If you were to add those up forever, then that sum is getting closer and closer and closer
to the number pi squared over 6. Exactly. Hard to believe, and yet it's true. If you
were to add 1 over 1 to the 4th plus 1 over 2 to the 4th plus 1 over 3 to the 4th and
so on, going out forever, that gets closer and closer to pi to the 4th over 90. Isn't
that bizarre? Here's a place where pi intersects number
theory. If we take two enormous numbers, let's call them a and b, we just pick two big numbers
at random, then I claim the probability that the greatest common divisor of a and b is 1
is exactly 6 over pi squared, about 60%. In other words, if you took two very large numbers
at random, there's about a 60% chance that they don't have any factors in common.
Another number that we saw appearing early in our lectures was the number n factorial.
The number of ways that you can arrange n objects. Believe it or not, n factorial has
a nice approximation that uses pi. It's almost exactly equal to, especially when n is large,
n over e raised to the n times the square root of 2 pi n. Now e is itself a rather magical
number that we'll have a lot more to say about in a subsequent lecture, but that's a number
that's about 2.71828. We'll see more about that one later.
Remember the golden ratio, phi or phi, depending how you like to pronounce it? Well, phi we
saw had this beautiful continued fraction, 1 plus 1 over 1 plus 1 over 1 plus 1 over
1, et cetera, going on forever. So pi, not to be outdone, also has a rather pretty
continued fraction. Look at it here. Pi is equal to 3 plus 1 over 6 plus 9 over 6 plus
25 over 6 plus 49 over 6 plus 81 over going out forever. We're going to have those sixes
down there going on forever. And what we're going to have in those other numbers, we have
1 squared, 3 squared, 5 squared, 7 squared, 9 squared, and so on. I don't even understand
why that one is true. Remember the Fibonacci numbers? 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21. Pi even
has a connection to them, especially when we study trigonometry. Here's a beautiful
formula, that pi over 4 is equal to the arc tan of a half plus the arc tan of a fifth
plus the arc tan of a 13th plus the arc tan of 1, 34th, and so on. As you add up more
and more of those arc tangents and skip every other Fibonacci number, you get closer and
closer and closer to the number pi over 4.
When we talk about probability later on, we're going to encounter the famous bell curve,
you know, the curve that explains so many properties of nature, heights, weights, exam
scores, often fall over a nice bell curve, and the original bell curve, the standard
normal distribution, has a height of 1 over the square root of 2 pi. So as I said, the
pi is simply everywhere. People have become so enthusiastic about pi that people, often
with tongue in cheek, or maybe pi in their cheek, will celebrate pi in some fun ways.
For instance, I've taken part in many celebrations of pi on what's called pi day. And pi day
because of the digits of pi is celebrated on March 14th, right, that's 3, 14, at 159.
So you have 3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 9. Incidentally, March 14th also happens to be the birthday
of Albert Einstein, so he usually gets dragged into these celebrations as well. People have
memorized pi to an ungodly number of places. The world record right now is over 40,000
digits of pi. And there are many unusual ways to memorize pi. Here's one way. I'll begin
by reciting a poem that sounds like a paraphrasing of Edgar Allen Poe's poem, The Raven. This
was written by Mike Keith, Poe, near a raven. Midnight so dreary, tired and weary, silently
pondering volumes extolling all by now obsolete lore. During my rather long nap, the weirdest
tap, an ominous vibrating sound disturbing my chamber's anti-door. This I whispered quietly,
I ignore. Now I know it doesn't sound nearly as poetic as once upon a midnight dreary as
I pondered we can weary, but it has the property that if you look at the number of letters,
in each word we have, starting with Poe, near a raven, we have 3, 1, 4, 1, 5. And midnight
so dreary, tired and weary, 9, 2, 6, 5, 3, 5, and so on. Now I don't advocate this as
a way of actually trying to memorize pi because even if you could recite this beautiful constrained
writing, it would be very hard for you one word at a time to be able to visualize and
figure out how many letters are in each of those words. So I'm going to give you a better
way to memorize pi. First I want you to repeat after me the following silly sentence. My
turtle poncho will my love pick up my new mover ginger. Can you say that? My turtle
poncho will my love pick up my new mover ginger. Say that several times and you'll have that
unfortunately memorized. But once you do, you can use that sentence to memorize the
first 24 digits of pi pretty easily. Let me show you how I do it. Here are for instance
the first 60 digits of pi.
Now let me show you how to do that. It's all based on what's called a phonetic code
where every digit has an associated consonant sound. For instance, the one has the 10th
T or the D sound, the T or D sound, the two has the N sound, the three has the M sound
and so on. Here's the list in front of you. Now I know you're thinking, how am I supposed
to memorize that? This code's been around in the English language for over a hundred
years. Okay, I did not invent it, but you can use it to turn numbers, meaningless intangible
numbers into meaningful, memorable words. Okay, so let me go through the list a little
further. So four is the R sound, five is the L sound, six is one of the sneezing sounds,
the cha, cha or ja sound, seven is the K or a G sound. That's a hard G like goat, not
a soft G like giraffe. The giraffe G has been used for the J sound. Eight is an F or a V
sound, F or V, nine is the P or B sound, S is zero is the S or Z sound. Okay, once you
have those sounds memorized, and there are even mnemonics for learning that list, you
can then turn numbers into words by inserting vowel sounds however you'd like. Let's go
back to that sentence that I told you to memorize. My turtle poncho will my love pick
up, my new mover ginger. Okay, so let's look at those first five digits of pi. We've got
three, one, four, one, five. And by inserting vowel sounds, you can turn three into the
word my, right? Three is the M sound. And then one, four, one, five, we have the T sound,
the R sound, the T sound and the L sound. Those become, that becomes the word turtle.
So the first five digits of pi become my turtle. Okay, the next three digits of pi, nine, two,
six, we had the P or B sound, the N sound, the C H S H or J sound. You could make a word
like punch or banjo. I made the word poncho. The five is the L sound. And the kind of the
consonant sounds of H W and Y are not represented on our list. So we could use them freely.
So I made the number five, I made the word will. Okay, and then so on. The whole sentence
then the first 24 digits turn into my turtle poncho will my love pick up my new mover ginger.
And if once you know that code and I encourage you to sit down and learn that code, it'll
be helpful to you, not just for memorizing numbers, but it will be helpful for remembering
dates, phone numbers, all kinds of things. Now, once you know that code, you can turn
that sentence into the first 24 digits of pi. If you want to keep on going, the next
17 digits become my movie monkey plays in a favorite bucket. The next 19 digits are
my favorite. They say ship my puppy, Michael to Sullivan's back rubber. If you want to
go beyond 60 digits, if you want to go up to 100 digits, then the next 40 digits become
the next two sentences. A really open music video cheers Jenny F. Jones, followed by have
a baby fish knife. So Marvin will marinate the goose chick. Now, since this is the end
of our pie lecture, this is our 12th lecture here, I thought I'd celebrate by doing something
that I rarely do in my lectures. I'm going to sing. I'm going to sing a song that was
written by a mathematician friend of mine named Larry Lesser. He sometimes goes by the
name Coral Larry, and he wrote a very long song called American Pie, written to a popular
tune by Don McLean of the same name, but pie is spelled differently. I'll just sing a couple
of stanzas from that parody. It goes like this pie pie find the value of pie twice 11
over seven is a mighty fine try. A good old fraction you may hope to supply, but the decimal
never dies. Decimal never dies. Or you might like this one pie pie find the value of pie
3.141592653589. A good old fraction you may hope to supply, but the decimal expansion won't
die.
