In this lecture we explore the joys of trigonometry.
The word trigonometry comes from the Greek, trigonmatria, literally the measurement of
triangles, and it allows us to calculate areas and measurements, often pertaining to triangles,
that would not be so easily done just using the standard techniques of geometry.
Like here are some questions that we'll address later in the lecture.
Find the lengths of the missing sides of the first triangle, or find the missing side
and the area of the next triangle.
We'll be able to answer that by the end of this lecture.
Now all of trigonometry really is based on two important functions, known as the sine
function and the cosine function.
And we will initially define these in terms of a right triangle.
Let's look at this triangle, and it has a right angle of course.
It has two sides and a hypotenuse.
Now let's focus on that angle labeled A, the side that is literally opposite A, we call
that the opposite side, and the other side adjacent to A, that isn't the hypotenuse,
we call that the adjacent side, naturally enough.
And we define the sine of A to be the length of the opposite side divided by the length
of the hypotenuse.
We abbreviate that by saying sine is equal to opposite over hypotenuse.
And then the cosine is defined as the length of the adjacent side divided by the length
of the hypotenuse.
So we say cosine is equal to adjacent over hypotenuse.
And then the third most commonly used trigonometric function is the tangent function.
But all you have to remember is that the tangent is defined to be the sine divided by the cosine.
So if you know the sine and the cosine, then you can figure out the tangent.
In fact, since the sine is opposite over hypotenuse, and the cosine is adjacent over
hypotenuse, then the tangent is, they're quotient, is opposite over adjacent.
Now there are lots of tricks for memorizing these definitions, right, that sine is opposite
over hypotenuse, cosine is adjacent over hypotenuse, tangent is opposite over adjacent.
My trigonometry teacher in high school would say, remember the famous Indian Soka Toa,
right?
S stands for sine and that would be OH opposite over hypotenuse.
And cosine is AH adjacent over hypotenuse.
And Toa, the tangent is opposite over adjacent.
Or sometimes if you knew that we were going to go in the order of cosine tangent, they'd
get rid of the first letters and it would be, Oscar has a heap of apples.
Of course in my high school we would change that to something like, Olivia has a hairy
old aunt, but we never told the teacher that.
Anyway, once you know these definitions, we can calculate some of their trigonometric
values.
For instance, let's look at the classic right triangle, the 3 4 5 triangle, right?
3 squared plus 4 squared is 5 squared.
And if we look at the angle A, we see that the sine of that angle, A, is the opposite
over the hypotenuse.
That would be 3 over 5, 3 5ths.
The cosine of A is adjacent over hypotenuse.
That would be 4 5ths.
And the tangent of A would be the opposite over the adjacent.
That would be 3 4ths.
Notice by the way, if we looked at the other angle of the triangle, if the first angle
was measured A, then the other angle, the complementary angle, would have a measure of 90 minus A.
And the sine of that angle would be its opposite over hypotenuse.
That would be 4 over 5, 4 5ths.
Its cosine would be 3 5ths.
And its tangent would be 4 3rds.
It's no coincidence that the sine of that second angle is the cosine of the first angle.
And the cosine of that second angle is the sine of the first angle.
Those come straight from the definition.
The sine of 90 minus A is cosine of A. Cosine of 90 minus A is sine A.
Those facts will come in handy later.
I also want to mention a few other functions, or really just three other trigonometric functions
that should be part of your vocabulary, although they won't play any part in the rest of this
lecture.
You should just be aware of them.
The function that represents the reciprocal of the cosine function, 1 over the cosine,
is called the secant function, and it's abbreviated SEC.
And 1 over the sine function is called the cosecant function.
It's abbreviated CSC.
And 1 over the tangent, which is cosine over sine, is called the cotangent.
And that's abbreviated COT.
Now we began by defining the trigonometric functions in terms of triangles.
And that's important.
You absolutely have to memorize those definitions, but they have a little bit of a shortcoming.
That is, they only allow us to define the sine and the cosine and the tangent for angles
that live between 0 and 90 degrees, because that's all we can fit in a right triangle.
I'm now going to give you a more enlightened, a more general view of trigonometric functions
that allows us to define these for any angles, not just for angles between 0 and 90 degrees.
So to do this, I'm going to ask you to look at the unit circle.
That's a circle that has a radius of 1 centered at the origin.
It goes through the points 1, 0, 0, 1, negative 1, 0, 0, negative 1.
Normally a circle has equations x squared plus y squared equals r squared.
The unit circle has equation x squared plus y squared equals 1.
So let's look at the unit circle with the equation x squared plus y squared equals 1.
And I'm going to draw an angle here, an angle of measure a.
And I'm going to look at the point on the unit circle that corresponds to the angle a.
Let's label that point x, y.
And now if we drop a line from the point x, y until it hits the x-axis, then we create a right triangle.
Let's blow up that triangle and take a close look at it.
So what do we know about that right triangle?
Well, the length of the base of that triangle is x.
The height of that triangle is y.
And the hypotenuse of the triangle, remember it came from the radius of my circle,
the hypotenuse of that triangle is 1, OK?
Now let's look at that triangle and I ask you the question, what is the cosine of the angle a?
Well, the cosine is the adjacent divided by the hypotenuse and the adjacent side is length x.
The hypotenuse side has length 1 and so the ratio is x over 1, which is x.
The cosine of a is x.
And similarly, the sine of a is the opposite over the hypotenuse, that's y over 1, that's equal to y.
So the cosine of a is x, the sine of a is y, and the upshot is that that original point on the circle that we called x, y is nothing more than the point cosine a, sine a.
And so we're going to define the cosine and the sine to be the point on the circle that corresponds to your angle, OK?
So let's just take a look right there, right?
So here we'll define the cosine a and sine a to be the point on the unit circle that corresponds to the angle a.
Now if that's the cosine of a and the sine of a, and I introduce a new angle, which I'll call b, then where would the cosine of b and the sine of b be?
Well, you would just look for your angle b, measured counterclockwise from the x-axis, and see where it intersects the unit circle over there at the point cosine b, sine b.
If we wanted to say, suppose I asked you for the cosine of 180 degrees, well if you go 180 degrees from the x-axis, then you wind up at the point negative 1, 0.
That is to say the x-coordinate is negative 1, and the y-coordinate is 0.
Therefore the cosine of 180 degrees would be negative 1, and the sine of 180 degrees would be 0.
Let's take another look.
Suppose we were to look at the, I asked you for the cosine of negative a, and the sine of negative a.
So we see our angle a up in the top half of the circle.
If we reflect that over the x-axis, then we are looking at the angle negative a.
Well look at the cosine of negative a and the sine of negative a.
How does the x-coordinate change?
It doesn't at all.
We have the same x-coordinate for that lower point as we did with our upper point, right?
So the cosine of negative a is the same as the cosine of a.
Although we have the same x-coordinate, the y-coordinate for angle negative a is the opposite of the y-coordinate for angle a.
And therefore the sine of negative a is equal to the negative of the sine of a.
What would happen if we were to take our point, our angle a, and we were to add 360 degrees to that angle?
Well that just takes us literally full circle.
We're back to the point that we started with, and therefore the cosine and the sine will be exactly the same as they were before.
That is to say the cosine of a plus 360 is the same as the cosine of a.
And the sine of a plus 360 is the same as the sine of a.
What else can we determine?
Well, if we look at any point cosine a, sine a, that's on the unit circle, remember what the equation is of the unit circle?
It's the set of points x, y that satisfy x squared plus y squared equals 1.
So since cosine a, sine a, lives on the unit circle, it's a card carrying member of the unit circle,
then that means that the cosine of a squared plus the sine of a squared is guaranteed to be 1.
In other words, cosine squared of a plus sine squared of a is 1.
We frequently abbreviate that without even mentioning the angle a.
So the most famous formula in trigonometry is cosine squared plus sine squared equals 1.
Now there are a few other things that are worth memorizing.
Here are some angles that you should know.
I mean, they just should be part of your trigonometric vocabulary.
I've put them out here.
I would say the most important ones to memorize are, first of all, the sine of 0 degrees is 0 and the cosine of 0 degrees is 1.
That corresponds to the fact that at 0 degrees, you're looking at the point 1, 0.
The x coordinate is 1 and the y coordinate is 0.
The sine of 30 degrees is a half and the cosine of 30 degrees is square root of 3 over 2.
The other important fact is when it comes to 60 degrees, the sine and the cosine are reversed.
That is, the sine of 60 degrees is square root of 3 over 2 and the cosine of 60 degrees is a half.
Finally, I would encourage you to remember the sine and the cosine of 45 degrees.
That's where we split the first quadrant of our circle exactly in half and at that point, the sine and the cosine are equal.
So at 45 degrees, the sine and the cosine are equal to square root of 2 over 2.
Those are the most important facts to memorize.
I've listed some of the others out here.
You'll notice I did not list any of the tangents because you don't have to memorize the tangents.
I don't have any of the tangents memorized because the tangents are just the sine values divided by the cosine values.
I suppose if there's only one that I know off the top of my head, it's that the tangent of 45 degrees is 1 because it's the sine divided by the cosine.
And since they're equal at that point, it's easy to see and remember that the tangent of 45 degrees is 1.
Let me mention one other piece of vocabulary.
If I ask you then, what is the arc tangent of 1?
What is the angle whose tangent is 1?
Then you simply say it's 45 degrees.
Or if I asked for the arc tangent of, well, let's say the arc sine of a half,
that's asking what is the angle whose sine is a half and that would be 30 degrees.
Okay, now we're ready to answer some of the questions that we posed in the beginning of the lecture.
So for instance, if I said find the lengths of the other two sides of this triangle, we see this triangle with an angle of 30 degrees.
And I'll ask the question, what is the sine of 30 degrees?
And we'll answer it two different ways.
On the one hand, you just memorized the fact that the sine of 30 degrees is one half.
On the other hand, according to this triangle, the sine of 30 degrees is going to be the opposite over the hypotenuse.
That's 10 divided by b.
Since 10 over b is equal to one half, that says that b is equal to 20.
In other words, the length of the hypotenuse is 20.
To find the length of a, well, we could either do the same sort of thing with the cosine function or for the sake of variety,
we could use the Pythagorean theorem.
Now that we know that b is 20 and we have a right triangle in front of us, then we know that 10 squared plus a squared is equal to b squared.
But we just calculated that b squared is 20 squared is 400.
So that tells us that a squared is 300.
Therefore, a is the square root of 300 or 10 square root of 3.
Or if you want a decimal equivalent, approximately 17.3.
Here is another question we asked.
Can you find the area of this triangle?
OK, so look at this triangle here and we see that we have an angle of 15 degrees.
So let's calculate the sine of 15 degrees in two ways.
First of all, I'm going to draw a new line in this triangle.
OK, I'm going to draw a right angle so that my triangle splits into two right triangles.
And so the sine of 15 degrees will be the opposite over the hypotenuse.
The opposite has a height of h and the hypotenuse has length 21.
On the other hand, what's the sine of 15 degrees?
Pull out a calculator and it will tell you that that's equal to 0.2588.
So the hypotenuse is equal to 21 times the sine of 15 degrees.
That is 21 times 0.2588, which is approximately 5.435.
Now that we know the height of the triangle and we already know the length of the base
of the triangle that was given to us as 26, then we know the area of the triangle is one
half base times height.
That's one half 26 times 5.435 to give us 70.66.
OK, here are some more identities that you should be familiar with.
We've already said that the cosine of a plus 360 is the cosine of a.
The sine of a plus 360 is the sine of a.
The cosine of negative a is still the cosine of a.
The sine of negative a is negative sine a.
Sine squared plus cosine squared is one.
We've seen that the cosine of 90 minus a is the sine of a for any angle between zero
and 90 degrees.
And we've seen that the sine of 90 minus a is the cosine of a for any angle between
zero and 90 degrees.
In fact, those last two relationships we'll later show are true for all angles, not just
the ones between zero and 90 degrees.
I'm now going to prove another identity that's a lot trickier to show than the other ones
we have.
And the tool I'm going to use for this is something that we saw earlier in our geometry
lecture for the equation of the length of a line.
Recall that if I have a line that goes from the points x1, y1 to the point x2, y2 of length
L, then by the Pythagorean theorem we can show that L squared is equal to x1 minus x2 squared
plus y1 minus y2 squared.
I'm now going to prove one of the most difficult identities to prove in basic trigonometry.
It's an important result and it's one that you should know.
The proof might take you a couple of times going through before it all sinks in.
That's okay if it does, okay, but I just wouldn't feel right about myself if I didn't show
you at least one really rigorous proof in trigonometry.
The good news is once we have established this, all the other identities will come very,
very easily.
So the identity I want to show is that the cosine of a minus b is equal to the cosine
of a times the cosine of b plus the sine of a times the sine of b.
Take a step back and just look at it, doesn't it look pretty?
The cosine of a minus b is cosine a cosine b plus sine a sine b.
The way we're going to prove that is we're going to look, again, we're going to start
looking at our unit circle.
We're interested in the angle a and the angle b and look at the triangle whose vertices
are the origin, the point 0, 0, the point cosine a sine a and the point cosine b sine
b.
So let's focus our attention on that triangle, okay?
We know that the two of the side lengths of that triangle are both 1 because they are
radii of the unit circle.
And what we want to calculate is the length of that line, the length L of the line that
connects cosine a sine a and cosine b sine b.
Now from our L squared formula that we saw a moment ago, we see that L squared is equal
to the cosine of a minus the cosine of b squared plus the sine a minus the sine b squared.
All I did there was I looked at the change in the x coordinates squared plus the change
in the y coordinates squared.
Okay, now we do algebra, the rest is just algebra, we expand out what we have.
So the first thing expands to cosine squared a plus cosine squared b minus 2 cosine a cosine
b.
The second thing expands out to sine squared a plus sine squared b minus 2 sine a sine
b.
You look at this and you go, oh my gosh, what a mess.
But luckily things simplify.
Notice we have a cosine squared a and a sine squared a and when they get together, when
you add them together, you get 1.
Here we have a cosine squared b and a sine squared b and when you add those together,
you get 1.
So the expression we have simplifies a little bit.
It says 2 minus 2 cosine a cosine b minus 2 sine a sine b.
Okay, hold that thought.
I'm now going to take that same triangle and I'm going to rotate it, okay, just physically
take it and go, rotate it until the side, the lower side is lying on the x axis, okay?
So when you tilt it, then the lengths of those sides are still 1, right?
And the length of that line L, that length L hasn't changed either.
What's the angle that we're looking at?
The angle was the angle of a minus the angle of b, that's the angle a minus b.
So, but that length L hasn't changed at all, right?
So what is the length of L when we look at it here?
Well we look at our change of x coordinates and we look at our change of y coordinates.
Now since we're lying on the x axis and we have a length of 1, that lower point is the
point 1, 0 and the upper point of that triangle, since it lies on the unit circle with radius
1 and since it has angle a minus b, has coordinates cosine a minus b, sine a minus b.
So the L squared formula says take the change in the x coordinates squared plus the change
in the y coordinates squared.
Let's do that, okay?
So we have the cosine of a minus b minus 1, that thing squared, plus the sine of a minus
b minus 0, that thing squared, when you expand it you get cosine squared a minus b plus 1
minus 2 cosine a minus b plus the sine squared of a minus b.
It's not as messy as it looks because cosine squared of anything plus sine squared of the
same thing is always 1.
So we have a 1 in there combined with the other 1 gives us 2 minus 2 cosine a minus b.
We're almost there.
All we have to do now is equate the two expressions that we came up with for L squared.
On the one hand, we just showed that it was 2 minus 2 cosine a minus b.
On the other hand, in the previous diagram, we showed that it was equal to 2 minus 2 cosine
a cosine b minus 2 sine a sine b.
Having those equal to each other and dividing everything by 2, we get the desired formula
cosine a minus b equals cosine a cosine b plus sine a sine b.
Once you have that equation at your disposal, we can now prove lots of useful identities.
We call any truth in trigonometry is typically called a trigonometric identity.
For instance, look what happens when I set a equal to 90 degrees.
So it says the cosine of 90 minus b is the cosine of 90 times the cosine of b plus the
sine of 90 times the sine of b.
But if you memorize the cosine of 90 is 0 and sine of 90 is 1 or just look at the unit
circle below, that simplifies to say cosine of 90 minus b is equal to sine b.
And we can calculate that the sine of 90 minus a, which is the cosine of 90 minus 90 minus
a, is the cosine of a.
So those formulas that we showed that were only true initially for angles between 0 and
90 degrees, we now have them true for any angles.
How about the cosine of a plus b?
We had a formula for the cosine of a minus b.
What about the cosine of a plus b?
No problem.
Let's replace the b with negative b so it reads cosine of a minus negative b is equal
to cosine a cosine negative b plus sine a sine negative b.
But what is the cosine of negative b?
What would that be?
Well, the cosine of negative b is the same as the cosine of b and the sine of negative
b is the negative of the sine of b.
So when you plug those in, we get the useful equation cosine of a plus b is cosine a cosine
b minus sine a sine b.
In the case, by the way, when a and b are the same angle, I encourage you to memorize
this formula.
That is, what's the cosine of 2a?
This is called the double angle formula.
Plugging into what we just derived, you get that that's equal to cosine squared a minus
sine squared a.
You can do similar calculations with the sine function and show that the sine of a plus
b is equal to the sine of a times the cosine of b plus the cosine of a times the sine of
b.
And in particular, when a and b are equal, it says that the sine of 2a is equal to 2sine
a cosine a.
And by the way, there's nothing special about the letter a.
In my mind, I might remember it with the letter x or the Greek letter theta, right?
The sine of 2x is 2sine x cosine x.
The sine of 2 theta is 2sine theta cosine theta.
Now we've been doing all these calculations with angles measuring from 0 to 360 degrees,
but I have a confession.
Real mathematicians, instead of using degrees that go from 0 to 360, instead they use a measurement
called radians.
Because there's really, look at a circle.
Look at the unit circle.
There's nothing 360 about it, right?
But instead, we define 360 degrees to be 2 pi radians.
If you go all around the circle, what's your circumference?
Your circumference on the unit circle is 2 pi.
And so why don't we call that angle, instead of calling it 360 when you go around the circle,
let's call that angle 2 pi, because that has a natural identification with the circle.
Here's a picture of one radian.
That's when I've gone one radius around my circle.
How much will it take me to go all around the circle?
It's going to take me 2 pi, about 6.28, of those radians to get all around the circle.
The graphs of trigonometric functions are also very interesting.
Because they come from this nice circle, they have a nice periodic property.
That is, here's the graph of cosine of A. It goes up and down and up and down in a nice
rhythmic way.
The sine graph also goes up and down, up and down in a nice rhythmic way.
You can combine the sine function and the cosine function to create practically any function
that goes up and down in a periodic way.
These functions are used to measure things like, oh, seasons and sound waves and the
beating of your heart are all based on trigonometric functions, sines, cosines, occasionally even
the tangent function comes in handy.
I want to show you a couple more formulas, important trigonometric formulas that you
ought to know, even though we're not going to prove them.
The first is called the law of sines.
Take a look at this triangle.
Any arbitrary triangle doesn't have to be a right triangle with angles A, B and C.
If you look at that triangle and let's call the opposite sides of that, let's give them
corresponding lengths of capital A, capital B and capital C.
The law of sines says, rather magically, for any triangle, the sine of A divided by A,
the sine of B divided by B, and the sine of C divided by C, so the numerators, the A,
B and C are angles, and the denominators, the A, B and C are lengths, all of those ratios
are equal for any triangle.
The law of cosines is also very useful.
In fact, you could think of it as a generalization of the Pythagorean theorem.
The law of cosines says, for any triangle, A, B, C, okay, and let's look at that angle
a little C, it says that C squared, capital C squared is equal to A squared plus B squared,
so far it sounds like Pythagoras, minus 2AB times the cosine of C. With the law of cosines,
we can now prove the last of the questions that we asked in the beginning of this lecture.
Let's take a look at that.
So the last of our questions was, in this given triangle, find C, the length of that
missing side.
Well, from the law of cosines, we see that C squared equals A squared plus B squared
minus 2AB times the cosine of C. That's 26 squared plus 21 squared minus 2 times 26 times
21 times the cosine of 15 degrees by our calculator is about 0.9659, plugging that
all in, we get that C squared is 62.2, solving for C we get approximately 7.89.
Now if you end up taking an exam and you wind up a little stumped, let's say you forget
what the law of cosines is and you're faced with that problem, you're looking at that
triangle that says find C, then I'll offer one other piece of advice.
You can try it.
A student of mine tried this on me once.
The question is, look at that triangle, find C, what do you do?
Circle the letter C and say, here it is, and see what your professor says.
You might get a few points of partial credit that way.
