In our lecture on imaginary numbers, we saw Euler's equation, actually sometimes I referred
to this as God's equation, e to the i pi plus 1 equals 0.
Now when talking about that equation you have to either talk about e first or i first, but
you know the rule, it's i before e except after calculus I think.
Anyway, we know about i, we know about pi, we certainly know a lot about 0 and 1, but
what is this mysterious number E?
E is considered by many to be the most important number in calculus, which we'll be talking
about later.
Okay, let's create E in front of us.
We'll start with the number 1 and then we're going to take 1 plus 1 tenth and raise it
to the tenth power, okay?
So if you have a calculator go ahead and take 1.1 and raise it to the tenth power and you
get some number 2.593, great.
Okay, now what do you think is going to happen?
If instead of doing 1 plus 1 tenth to the tenth power we did 1 plus 1 over 100 to the
hundredth power, okay?
So if you have a calculator take it out, do 1.01 and raise it to the hundredth power.
Now we're doing two things here, we're making our number closer to 1, right, 1.01 is closer
to 1, but we're making our exponent much bigger, it's 100 instead of 10.
So what do you think is going to happen?
Is that number going to get bigger or is it going to get smaller?
Well, let's see, on your calculator you get 2.70481, okay?
Well that's pretty close to the last number we had.
All right, let's play this game again.
Let's do 1 plus 1 over 1000 and raise it to the thousandth power, that is 1.001 raised
to the thousand and you get, you think it's going to be really big, you think it's going
to be really small, well it turns out it's still, it's about 2.7, 2.71692 I think, all
right?
And in general if you take this number and you raise it to higher and higher powers,
that is 1 plus 1 over, let's say even a million and raise it to the millionth power, now when
I ask my students what do you think that's going to be, some of them say, well the number
you're raising to a power is getting closer and closer to 1, right?
And if you take 1 even to the billionth power, you're going to get something real close to
1.
So a lot of people expect to see 1 at the end of this process.
Others say, well it's not exactly 1 though, right?
You're taking a number like, you know, 1 plus a millionth say, it's bigger than 1 and if
you raise something that's bigger than 1 to a bigger and bigger and bigger power, you
ought to get infinity.
And yet you see the number we get when we go through this process is always something
around 2.7, in the case of the millionth power we have 2.7182 something, okay?
As we take this process farther and farther out, as n gets larger and larger, 1 plus 1
over n raised to the n gets closer and closer to this magical number, e, which is 2.718281828459.
It goes on forever.
I'll talk about that later, okay?
But in this tug of war between 1 on the one hand and infinity on the other hand is this
number, e.
The notation that mathematicians use is they say that the limit, as n goes to infinity
of 1 plus 1 over n raised to the n is equal to e.
And let me just say one more thing.
We can generalize this so that for any number x, if I take the limit as n goes to infinity
of 1 plus x over n to the n, we get e to the x.
So if you have that, you could do this on your calculator.
You take 1 plus x divided by some really big number, like 100 or 1,000, raise it to
that same really big number, and what you're going to get out of it is going to be approximately
e to the x.
And if you allow that big number to get bigger and bigger and bigger and bigger, it's going
to get closer and closer and closer to e to the x.
Now I said at the beginning that e is an interesting number, and I'll put my money where my mouth
is here, because e has everything to do with compound interest.
Let me give you an example.
Suppose you put $1,000 in a bank that earns 6% each year.
Then after the first year, after one year, how much money are you going to have?
Well you have $1,000, and since it earns 6%, we can do that on our calculator by multiplying
that $1,000 by the number 1.06, and that gives you $1,060.
Okay, now how about after two years?
Now you didn't, assuming you didn't take that interest out of your account, you just kept
it in, you let it ride, then how much are you going to have after two years?
Well you have that $1,060, and what you'll do is you'll, to give it 6% interest, you'll
multiply that again by 1.06.
So after two years, you'll have 1,000 times 1.06, times 1.06 again, about $1,123 in change.
After three years, you'll have that $1,000, but you'll have multiplied it by 6% 3 times.
More precisely, you'll have $1,000 times 1.06, times 1.06, times 1.06, you'll have about
$1,191.
In other words, after three years, you'll have $1,000 times 1.06 raised to the third
power.
And after T years of time, you'll have $1,000 times 1.06 raised to the teeth power.
So let's put this in real practical terms, okay?
If your money is compounded annually, then you have that $1,000 times 1.06, giving you
$1,060.
Let's just focus on one year now.
And suppose instead of your money being compounded annually, suppose it was compounded semi-annually.
What that means is that the bank will give you, instead of giving you a lump sum of 6%
at the end of the year, they'll give you 3% after half the year has gone by, after six
months, and then another 3% when the year ends, okay?
So how much money would that give you more money in the end instead of giving you 6%
at the end?
Should you do 3% after half a year, then 3% after half a year?
That ought to give you more money.
Let's see what it does.
That's like taking $1,000, taking 1.03, and applying it twice.
And you see you'll get $1,060.90.
So by doing it semi-annually, you've earned $0.90 more than you would have if it was just
compounded annually.
Okay, suppose your interest was compounded quarterly.
That means that your 6% interest is going to be broken down into four pieces, and every
three months they'll give you 1.5%, 1.5%, 1.5%, 1.5%.
Okay, so they give you 1.5% four times a year.
Then how much money are you going to have at the end of that year?
Well then you'll take that $1,000, and now your interest rate is 1.5%.
So you'll take 1,000 times 1.015 and raise it to the fourth power because it's being
applied four times.
That's what happens when your interest is compounded quarterly.
If it were compounded monthly, then that 6% would be broken into 12 pieces.
So you'd get half a percent of interest applied each month.
So you would take your $1,000 times 1.005 raised to the 12th power.
Suppose we're not getting rich by this method.
We have something like $1,061 and 68 cents.
But let's take this to the limit.
If the money were compounded daily, then that 6% interest would be broken into 365 pieces.
Say this tiny interest rate, 6% divided by 365, but you're raising it to a higher power,
to the 365th power.
That would give you at the end of the year $1,061.83.
Now if we truly take this to the limit, and the bank says we're going to compound this
interest continuously, not every day, not every hour, but practically every second you're
going to earn an infinite, decimal amount of interest, then the way you would write that
is you'd say, OK, so we're going to break it into n pieces.
Here's the big point.
We're breaking it to n pieces where n is some huge number.
You'll take that $1,000.
Your interest rate is going to be 6% divided by n.
So you're going to do 1.1 plus 0.06 divided by n and raise that to the nth power.
And as we know from the formula that we came up with for e to the x, if you take 1 plus
0.06 divided by n and raise it to the nth power, as n gets larger and larger and larger,
you're getting closer and closer to e to the 0.06.
So x in our earlier equation would be equal to 0.06 here.
So we would have 1,000 times e to the 0.06, which when you apply that on your calculator
tells you you get $1,061.84.
So going from that interest being compounded daily to being compounded continuously earned
you an extra penny.
But you also have a much nicer, a much simpler equation than you had before.
The general formula for compound interest is at the end of one year, you'd have 1,000
times e to the 0.06 if your interest were compounded continuously for one year.
If you were doing this for t years, then you would have 1,000 times e to the 0.06 times
t.
That would be the number of dollars that you would have at the end of t years if your interests
were compounded continuously.
The general formula for interest is if you start with a principal amount called p and
an interest rate r, then after t years with continuous compounding, you would have this
rather pretty or should I say pert equation p times e to the rt dollars.
Okay, let's do another application of e that doesn't have to do with money.
This has to do with homework, something I give to my students all the time.
Now suppose I got lazy one day and I decided, you know, I've got all these homeworks and
I don't want to grade them.
I'm going to let my students grade them.
So I'm going to take these homeworks and I'm just going to randomly return them to
all the students.
Okay, not even paying attention to who's getting what.
Now that works out fine, but I don't want any student having to be put in the position
of grading their own homework.
So my question is, how easy is it to return homeworks in such a way that nobody gets their
own homework?
All right, let's do some examples.
So for instance, suppose I had three students, a, b, and c, then how many ways can I return
their homeworks?
We know from our earliest lectures that there are three factorial, six ways of returning
three homeworks.
So I could give homeworks a, b, and c to a, b, and c respectively, or I could give them
to, I can give homework a to a, homework b to c, homework c to b, that would be the arrangement
a, c, b, or b, a, c, b, c, a, c, a, b, c, b, a.
There are six ways of returning the homeworks, but only two of them out of those six resulted
in nobody getting their own homework back.
So if I randomly return my homeworks, the chance that no one gets their own homework
back is two out of six.
All right, suppose I have four students, all right, then there are four factorial, 24 ways
of returning the homeworks.
I've listed those for you here.
And of those 24 ways, exactly nine of them result in nobody getting their own homework
back.
So the chances that nobody gets their own homework back would be nine out of 24.
That's 3 eighths, 0.375.
And so that would be the chance that nobody gets their own homework back.
What about five students, six students, and so on?
If you look at these numbers, these numbers are getting closer and closer to the same
number, right?
With five students, it's 0.366.
With six students, it's about 0.368.
With seven students, it's about 0.367, 0.368.
With a hundred students, it's like 0.3678.
And that's, first of all, that's weird.
That's really weird.
It says that if I'm returning a hundred homeworks to a hundred students, the chance that nobody
gets their own homework back is the same.
It's like 0.367, 0.368.
Whether I'm returning a hundred homework backs to a hundred students or ten homeworks
back to ten students, or in fact, a million homeworks back to a million students, the chance
that nobody gets their own homework back is practically 0.368, regardless of how many
students are there.
What is this magic number, 0.368?
Well, that turns out to be the number 1 over E. If you take E, 2.71828, and take the reciprocal
of that number, you get 0.3678.
Now why that works, I'll give you some intuition as to why this rather bizarre result happens.
If you have, let's say, N students in the classroom, in fact, I'm looking out in this
classroom here, and I think I have exactly N people here.
That's great.
All right.
Now what's the probability?
What are the chances that, if you're looking at student 1, what are the chances that the
first student gets his or her homework back?
The chance of that is 1 over N, right?
There are N homeworks.
The chance that he or she gets his or her own is 1 over N, okay?
What about the second student?
Well, they also have a 1 in N chance.
Every student, when a student walks in the room and says, I wonder if I'm going to get
my own homework back, that student has a 1 over N chance of getting their own homework
back, right?
So the chance that you don't get your own homework back is 1 minus 1 over N, right?
I mean, if there's a 1 in 10 chance that you get lucky, then there's a 9 in 10 chance
that you won't, right?
So if it's a 1 over N chance that you get your own homework back, then there's a 1 minus
1 over N chance that you don't.
And therefore, the chance that nobody gets their own homework back is approximately 1
minus 1 over N raised to the Nth power.
We're multiplying each individual's probability of getting their own homework back.
And if the chance is that, if one person getting their homework back doesn't have much of an
effect on the chance that somebody else gets their own homework back, then it's legal to
multiply those probabilities together.
So we get something that's approximately 1 minus 1 over N to the N.
But if you go back to that formula that we had, that 1 plus x over N raised to the Nth
power goes to e to the x, as N gets large, that's the situation we have here, except
the x is the number negative 1.
That is, we have 1 plus negative 1 over N raised to the Nth power.
And as N goes to infinity, that number is e to the minus 1.
Otherwise, our good friend, 1 over e.
And where did the number e come from?
E was first used by Isaac Newton, but it was really studied and analyzed and actually named
by the great Swiss mathematician Leonard Euler.
And in fact, Euler, I believe, named e after himself.
He put it as a small e.
He was being modest, but I think of so many things he accomplished and discovered, I think
he was very proud of this number e.
I mean, e is just so many amazing, amazing uses.
First of all, as a function, how does the function e to the t grow?
I mean, our money is growing, after all, like p e to the rt.
That's our PERT formula for how compound interest grows.
We were interested in this function a lot.
So how does e to the t grow?
That grows really pretty quickly.
If you take a look at the graph of that function, e to the 2t grows even faster.
e to the 3t grows even faster than that.
In fact, these are called exponential functions.
They grow exponentially quickly.
Even the money equation that we had that said y was equal to 1,000 e to the 0.06t.
Now it looks like it's taking its time.
It's sloping up gently, but it's going to, over time, grow very, very quickly.
But what's so special about e to the t?
Well, it's a function that has very nice properties.
But even if you take something like 5 to the t, is that any, that's a natural function to look at.
Well, the good news is 5, 5 to the t can be written as e to the t times something.
Well, let me show you what I mean.
The number 5 lives between e, 2.718, and e squared, which is about 7.389, right?
5 lives between those numbers.
That means that 5 to the t is going to live between e to the t and e squared to the t.
But e squared to the t is e to the 2t.
So that says that 5 to the t lives between e to the t and e to the 2t.
And therefore, 5 is equal to e to some power between 1 and 2.
So 5 is, let's say, e to the r.
r is some real number between 1 and 2.
So that means if you're interested in the function 5 to the t,
you can replace 5 with the number e to the r and raise that to the t-th power.
So 5 to the t is the same as e to the r to the t.
But by the law of exponents, that's e to the rt.
So even a function like 5 to the t can be written in the language of e.
So e's a very versatile number.
But now you may ask the question, well, that's fine.
But you're telling me 5 to the t is e to the rt.
But how do I find this number r?
What is this number r that'll work?
Well, that brings us to the topic of logarithms.
Logarithms are based on, initially, the powers of 10.
So let's look at our powers of 10.
10 to the 0 is 1.
10 to the 1 is 10.
10 squared is 100.
10 cubed is 1,000, and so on and so on.
If we were to go negatively, 10 to the negative 1 is 1 tenth.
10 to the negative 2 is 1 hundredth.
10 to the negative 3 is 1 thousandth.
We say that the logarithm of x, denoted log x,
solves the equation 10 to the log x equals x.
Now that looks horribly abstract.
What am I saying?
The logarithm of x is the exponent you
have to raise 10 to in order to get x.
For example, the log of 1,000 is 3,
because when you raise 10 to the third power, you get 1,000.
The log of 100 is 2, because 10 squared is 100.
The log of 1 million is 6, because 10 to the 6th is 1 million.
The log of 10 to the y power is y,
because y is what you raise 10 to to get 10 to the y.
What about the log of the square root of 10?
Can we figure that one out?
Well, the square root of 10 is 10 to the 1 half power.
So the log of the square root of 10
is the log of 10 to the 1 half power.
But the log of 10 to the y is y.
So the log of 10 to the 1 half is 1 half.
How about the log of 512?
Well, for this one, you're best to pull out a calculator.
Look at the press the log button,
and it will tell you that the log of 512 is about 2.709.
Now, should we trust our calculator?
Does that seem reasonable?
Well, we know that the log of 100 is 2.
We know that the log of 1,000 is 3.
So 512 lives between 100 and 1,000.
So the log of 512 should live between the log of 100
and the log of 1,000.
So it should live between 2 and 3, and it does.
It's 2.709.
So that seems pretty reasonable.
There are other useful rules for logarithms.
For instance, we've said that the log of 10 to the,
I said y before, but we can say x now,
the log of 10 to the x is x for any x.
Another sensible rule is 10 to the log of x is equal to x.
Again, if you think about the definition of log,
that makes sense.
When I raise 10 to the exponent I
have to raise 10 to to get x, then I get x.
Here's a beautiful rule.
Maybe the most commonly used property of the logarithm
is that the log of the product is the sum of the logs.
You don't see this kind of rule too much
in your arithmetic classes.
But here's a case where the log of the product
is the sum of the logs.
Log of x, y equals log x plus log y.
Now let me try and give you a proof as to why that's true.
If you were to take 10 to the log x plus log y power,
what do you get?
Well, the law of exponents says that 10 to the a plus b
is 10 to the a times 10 to the b.
So that would equal 10 to the log x times 10 to the log y.
But we know 10 to the log x is x and 10 to the log y is y.
So that gives us x times y.
On the other hand, if I take 10 to the log of x, y,
we know from our useful log rule that that is also equal to x, y.
So what have we done?
We've taken 10 to something and gotten x, y.
We took 10 to something else and got x, y.
Therefore, that's something, and that's something else
had to be equal.
In this case, log x plus log y had to equal the log of x, y.
And that's why that works.
As a corollary of that last rule,
you can show what I call the exponent rule
that the log of x to the n is equal to n log x.
You get used to it.
You see that little exponent?
You have to bring it down in front of the log.
The log of x to the n is n log x.
And for similar reasons is what we saw before.
So let's do a couple of examples of this.
Log rhythms are very useful historically.
They allowed people to take hard multiplication problems
and turn them into more straightforward addition
problems.
So for instance, if your calculator tells you
that the log of 2 is 0.301 n change
and the log of 3 is 0.477, then if you
had to find the log of 6, you could say, well, the log of 6
is the log of 2 times 3.
But the log of the product is the sum of the logs.
So that's the log of 2 plus the log of 3,
which is 0.301 plus 0.477 is about 0.778.
How about the log of 5?
Can you get that knowing the log of 2 and the log of 3?
It's kind of a trick question, because you're not
going to need to use the log of 3 in this.
You will, however, use the log of 10.
We know the log of 10 is 1.
So the log of 5 is the log of 10 times a half.
That's the log of 10 plus the log of a half.
Do we know the log of a half?
Well, we do, because a half is 2 to the negative first power.
So that's the log of 10 plus log of 2 to the negative 1.
But by the exponent rule, the log of 2 to the negative 1
is negative 1 times the log of 2.
So this is equal to 1 minus the log of 2.
That's 1 minus 0.301.
That's about 0.699.
Therefore, there's one more application.
The log of 512, remember you looked at that number earlier?
I didn't pick that number entirely by accident.
512 is 2 to the 9th power.
So the log of 2 to the 9th by the law of exponents
is by the law of log exponents is equal to 9 times the log of 2.
And since the log of 2 is 0.301, that gives us again 2.709
as we saw.
By the way, we've been talking about logarithms
using the base of 10, but you can also
use logarithms in other bases.
We say that the log base B of x is the exponent for which,
when you take B to that power, you get x.
So for instance, since 2 to the 9th is 512,
the log base 2 of 512 is 9, because you
have to raise 2 to the 9th power to get 512.
And there are similar rules for these kinds of logarithms
in other bases as there are for base 10.
In fact, the rules are virtually unchanged.
The log base B of B to the x is x.
The log of the product is the sum of the logs,
no matter what base you're using.
The law of exponents with logarithms
works just the same as it did before.
The log of x to the n is n log x.
In fact, you could change from one base to the other base,
to any other base.
If you know one logarithm, you know them all.
The log base B of x is the log of x divided by the log of B,
where that log could be the log base 10,
or any other base that you want.
I won't go into the proof of that right now,
but it's not too hard to do.
Now, what base do you want to use?
Well, probably depends on what science you're in.
In chemistry and in the physical sciences,
the base 10 logarithm is probably the most popular.
In computer science, base 2 is the most popular log.
Sometimes they'll abbreviate that with an LG or a log base 2.
But in math, physics, and engineering,
by far the most popular base of the logarithm
is the log base E, the natural log.
I'm so inspired by E that I'd like to end with a poem that I wrote.
I think that I shall never see a number lovelier than E, whose
digits are too great to state.
They're 2.71828.
And E has such amazing features.
It's loved by all, but mostly teachers.
With all of E's great properties,
most integrals are done with E's.
Theorums are proved by fools like me,
but only Euler could make an E.
