In this lecture, we'll explore the joy of infinite series.
Now, as a mathematician, I give a lot of lectures and people often ask me this question.
They say, Professor Benjamin, is the number 0.999999 going out forever?
Is that number equal to 1?
And I won't keep you in suspense.
The answer is yes.
Mathematicians consider those two quantities to be the same.
And I get a lot of resistance on this.
They'll say, well, I don't know.
It seems like they are almost equal.
They're really, really close to being equal, but you really say that they are equal.
So a bold statement like that requires proof.
So I'm going to give you several different proofs of this fact.
And that will be motivation for other topics that we'll be giving in this lecture.
But let's first convince you of this fact that why those two numbers are considered
the same.
So maybe here's the most elementary proof.
You probably have no difficulty saying that 1 third is equal to 0.3333333 going out forever,
right?
That's what you learned in elementary school.
So if I take 3 times 0.3333333 multiply those together, then we would get 0.999999999.
On the other hand, we know that 3 times 0.3333333 is 3 times a third, but 3 times a third is
exactly equal to 1.
So if you follow that chain of logic, we have 0.999999 is 3 times 0.3333333, 3 times a third
is 1, and therefore they are equal.
Here's another proof.
Suppose we were to, let's call 0.999999.
We don't know what number it is yet.
Let's just call that number s.
So if it's equal to some number s, let's multiply that number by 10.
So algebraically, we would be looking at 10s, and numerically, we'd be looking at 9.999999.
When you multiply that thing by 10, you get 9.999999.
So I have an expression for 10s, 10s, anyone?
I have an expression for s, and now if you take 10s minus s, you get, algebraically,
you get 9s.
On the other hand, you have, look at all those 0.999, those all cancel, those all disappear,
and you're left with 9.
So 9s is equal to 9, which says that s is equal to 1.
But what was s after all?
S was 0.999999, so you've shown that 0.999 going out forever is equal to 1.
Here is yet another proof.
Say we, you, no one has any trouble with accepting the fact that 0.999999 is, can't be bigger
than 1, right?
So it must be less than or equal to 1.
Now that means that if I take 1 minus 0.999 going out forever, that that is greater than
or equal to 0.
But what is 1 minus 0.999999?
That would be 0.000000 going out forever, which you can either say that's 0, I mean most people
wouldn't have objected to the fact that that thing is 0, or if you do object, you can say
it's a number that's smaller than any positive number, so it has to be 0.
So I've got two quantities, 1 and 0.999999, whose difference is 0, and if two things have
a difference of 0, then they have to be the same.
In summary, we could say that 0.999 is close to 1.
0.999 is even closer to 1, but 0.999999 going out forever is as close to 1 as desired, right?
And so for that reason, we say that those quantities are equal.
Now the number 0.999999 is, another way of looking at it is as an infinite sum, and that's
what we're going to be talking about this lecture, right?
It technically, it's equal to 0.9 plus 0.09 plus 0.009 plus 0.0009, and we're going to
be interested in what happens when you add an infinite number of numbers together.
In general, we say that a sum like a1 plus a2 plus a3 plus a4, just adding up a bunch
of real numbers, we say that that has a sum of s if the sum gets arbitrarily close to s.
Let me give you an example.
I mean, the 0.999, 0.999, et cetera, that got arbitrarily close to 1.
Here's another one that's a little bit more visual.
Let's look at the example 1 plus a half plus a quarter plus an eighth plus a sixteenth
and so on.
I claim that that is equal to 2, and I want to show that to you in a way that's a little
bit more visual.
Let's imagine, I'm going to take a step back here, and let's imagine that there are two
feet between me and this table.
If I walk halfway towards the table, I've just walked one foot.
Now I'm going to take, I'm going to walk half the distance again.
I've just gone half a foot.
Now I'm going to go half the distance again.
I've gone a quarter of a foot, and half the distance again, I'm going to have to lose
some weight here.
I've gone an eighth of a foot, and at every step that I take, I'm going half as much as
I did before, right?
So I've gone a foot, a half a foot, a quarter of a foot, an eighth of a foot, a sixteenth
of a foot, and so on and so on and so on.
Now technically, do I ever reach the table?
Technically no, but I get arbitrarily close to the table.
So that's why we would say that the sum, one plus a half plus a quarter plus an eighth,
et cetera, is equal to two.
I actually travel two feet when I do that infinite sum.
That sum gets as close to two as we desire.
The vocabulary that we use as mathematicians is when an infinite sum gets closer and closer
to a single number, we say that the sum converges.
Otherwise, if it doesn't converge, we say that it diverges.
So for example, the one that we just did was that one plus a half plus a quarter plus
an eighth plus a sixteenth, et cetera, that converges.
It converges to the number two.
The earlier example, .9 plus .09 plus .009 and so on and so on, that sum converges to
the number one.
On the other hand, if I were to add lots of big numbers together, like one plus two
plus four plus eight plus 16 plus 32, does that sum get closer and closer and closer
to anything?
Well, that sum is blowing up.
We say it diverges.
You might say that it's going to infinity.
You might say it's diverging to infinity, but you would not say it's converging to infinity.
In order to converge, it has to get close to some real number.
Now, a sum can diverge without blowing up.
For instance, if I said, all right, what's the sum of one minus one plus one minus one,
et cetera, one minus one plus one minus one, well, that's not, at first it's at one and
then the sum is zero and then it's one again and then it's zero again, one zero.
That's not getting closer and closer to any real number, so we say that that diverges.
You might say it's oscillating, but it's not converging.
In order for a sum to converge, one thing that absolutely has to happen is that the
terms of your sum have to be getting closer and closer to zero.
Otherwise, it doesn't have any hope of getting closer and closer to a real number.
For example, the series that we saw, one plus a half plus a quarter plus an eighth plus
a sixteenth, that was actually a very special kind of series, actually one of my favorite
kinds of series, known as a geometric series.
A geometric series is something of the form one plus x plus x squared plus x cubed plus
x to the fourth and so on.
The series we just saw was an example of that because we have one plus a half plus a half
squared plus a half cubed plus a half to the fourth and so on.
That's an example of a geometric series.
If we want to have any hope of that geometric series converging, those terms have to be
getting closer and closer to zero.
That means that the number x that you're raising to higher and higher powers has to be between
negative one and positive one if we're going to have any hope of getting that series to
converge.
Here is the beautiful formula for the geometric series.
It says, for any number x, strictly between negative one and positive one, that the series
one plus x plus x squared plus x cubed plus x to the fourth and so on is equal to one
divided by one minus x.
Let me give you a proof here.
It's not 100% rigorous, but it's easy to remember and it allows me to say a bad joke, so I like
this kind of proof.
It says, let's let s be the set 1 plus x plus x squared plus x cubed plus x to the fourth
and so on.
You got that equation in front of you?
Now take x times s.
If you multiply that whole equation by x, then on the left you have x times s.
On the right, you're going to have x plus x squared plus x cubed plus x to the fourth
and so on.
You've got your s, you've got your xs.
Take away your xs.
Then you have, on the left side, you'll have s minus xs and on the right, all that you're
going to be left with after those x's and x squared's and x cubed's and x to the fourth's
after they've all canceled, all that you're left with is one.
So again, on the left, you have s times the quantity one minus x.
On the right, you have one and so solving for s, we have s is equal to one over one
minus x.
So that's the beautiful formula for the sum of a geometric series.
So for example, let's do the example that we saw earlier and do it a little bit more
rigorously.
When x is equal to a half, that says that one plus a half plus a quarter plus an eighth
plus a sixteenth and so on is equal to one divided by one minus a half.
But the denominator one minus a half is equal to a half, so I have an answer of one over
a half, which is two.
How about let's do an example where x is negative.
In this case, we have one minus a half plus minus a half squared becomes positive a quarter
plus minus a half cubed, that's negative an eighth, plus minus a half to the fourth,
that's a positive one over sixteenth, and so on.
When you do this alternating series, one minus a half plus a quarter minus an eighth plus
a sixteenth and so on, then the formula for the geometric series says you have one divided
by one minus negative a half, that's one divided by three halves, which is two thirds.
Let's go back to the question that we started this all with.
What about 0.99999?
If we write that as a geometric series, well it's 0.9 plus 0.09 plus 0.009 and so on, it's
not a geometric series yet, but we can factor out a 0.9 from everything, leaving us with
the series 0.9 times one plus 0.01 plus 0.001 plus 0.0001 and so on, and those objects are
just the quantity one tenth raised to higher and higher powers.
In other words, we've pulled out a factor of 0.9 and what we're multiplying it by is
one plus a tenth plus a tenth squared plus a tenth cubed plus a tenth to the fourth
and so on and so on, adding that infinite series is one divided by one minus a tenth.
That's what the geometric series formula tells us.
In other words, we have nine tenths times the fraction ten ninths and nine tenths times
ten ninths is one, so there's my last proof of the fact that 0.99999 is one.
Now be careful when you use the formula for the geometric series, you want to be careful
that the x that you're using is strictly between negative one and one, because if x is greater
than or equal to one, or if x is less than or equal to negative one, then that formula
does not work.
So for instance, if you want it to just for fun, try one plus two plus four plus eight
plus sixteen and so on, then their x is equal to two, then the geometric series would tell
you that that's equal to one over one minus two, one over negative one, which is negative
one.
The formula would tell you that one plus two plus four plus eight plus sixteen is negative
one, which is of course silly.
All right, let's do an application of the geometric series.
Suppose a ball is dropped from a 50 foot building, a big rubber ball that's dropped from a 50
foot building, and it always rebounds to 80% of the height that it was dropped from.
The question I'm going to ask is, how far does the ball travel?
How far does it, I mean obviously it goes 50 feet down originally, but then it travels
up 80% of that, it goes up 40 feet, and then it's at 40 feet, so it's going to drop the
whole 40 feet, and then it's going to rebound up 80% of that, it's going to go up 32 feet,
and down 32 feet, and up 25.6 feet, then down 25.6 feet, and so on, and so on, and
so on, until it's just doing all this tiny little vibrating at the bottom.
What's the total amount of travel that it does?
So it's down 50, and up 40, down 40, up 32, down 32, up 25.6, down 25.6, okay, so adding
up all those numbers, 50, 40, 40, 32, 32, and so on.
Well, let's write this out as a geometric series, so we had 50 feet, and then we went
up 50 times 0.8 times, and then we did that again, that's why I'm multiplying it by two,
because it has to go down that, and then it goes up and down 50 times 0.8 squared feet,
so that's why that quantity is multiplied by two, because it went up and down, plus
50 times 0.8 cubed multiplied by two, then 50 times 0.8 to the fourth multiplied by two,
and so on. In other words, we have 50 plus, now 50 times 0.8 times two is 80, I can pull
that out of every term, leaving me with an infinite series, one plus 0.8 plus 0.8 squared
plus 0.8 cubed and so on, that's a nice geometric series, I like geometric series, because we
know what those equal, so we have 50 plus 80 times the quantity one divided by one minus 0.8,
that's 50 plus 80 times one over a fifth, but one over a fifth is five, five times 80 is 400,
add it to your 50, you get a total travel distance of 450 feet for the ball.
Okay, now we ask the question, if a sum a1 plus a2 plus a3 converges, then what do I know about
the terms, and one thing that we know about the terms of that series is that they have to go to
zero, the objects you're adding have to be getting smaller and smaller and smaller for it to have
any hope for the sum to converge. The question I want to ask is, if the terms go to zero, then
does that guarantee that the sum converges? And the answer, surprisingly, is no. Let me make this
clearer with an example. This is one of the most famous series in mathematics, it's called the
harmonic series, one plus a half plus a third plus a fourth plus a fifth and so on. And even though
the terms are getting smaller and smaller and smaller, the sum of those terms is not converging.
Now, before I go into the proof of that fact, you may say, what's so harmonic about the harmonic
series? Why is it given that name? It was given that name because if the ancient Greeks noticed
that if you had strings, tight strings that had length one and a half and a third and a quarter
and a fifth, if they were in those proportions, that when you plucked those strings, that those
tended to produce harmony. That's why we call it the harmonic series. Okay, well I want to convince
you that this harmonic series goes to infinity. That is, it gets bigger than any sum, than any
number that you could ask for. Here's my proof. Okay, if we take one plus a half plus a third up
through a ninth, how many terms am I adding there? Nine terms. And you agree that each of those terms
is bigger than one tenth. You'll agree with that? So the sum of those first nine terms
has to be at least nine tenths. I'm going to be real crude here and not try and get it any
estimated any better than that. Okay, now let's look at the next 90 terms. I want to look at the
numbers one tenth, one eleventh, all the way up through one ninety ninth. How many terms have I
just added? Ninety terms. And each of those 90 terms was bigger than one over a hundred.
So the sum of those 90 terms is at least 90 times one over a hundred, which is also
nine tenths. So the sum of those next 90 terms is bigger than nine tenths. Now let's look at the
next 900 terms, each of which is bigger than one over a thousand. So those next 900 terms
will have to be bigger than nine tenths. And then the next 9,000 terms will have to add to
something bigger than nine tenths. And the next 90,000 terms will add to something bigger than
nine tenths. So the sum of all these things is bigger than nine tenths, plus nine tenths,
plus nine tenths, and so on. Okay, so this sum gets arbitrarily large. It will eventually get
bigger than five. It'll eventually get bigger than a hundred. It'll eventually get bigger than
a million. I've taken awfully long time before it gets bigger than a million, but it will. It's
bigger than nine tenths, plus nine tenths, plus nine tenths, plus nine tenths, but that is obviously
infinity. So that sum diverges. So the original sum was bigger than nine tenths, plus nine tenths,
plus nine tenths. So if you're bigger than something that diverges to infinity, if you're
bigger than something that blows up, then you blow up with it. And that's why the harmonic series
diverges. Now you might say, well maybe we can scale down the harmonic series somewhat.
Maybe we could like, oh what if we cut down every term by a hundred? All right, what about
one over a hundred plus one over two hundred plus one over three hundred plus one over four hundred?
Does that converge or that diverge? Well you could factor out a one over a hundred out of that,
and you're then left with one plus a half plus a third plus a fourth plus a fifth. But we know
that thing diverges to infinity, and one hundredth of infinity is still infinity.
Interestingly, however, if I take the denominators of my harmonic series, you know, instead of using
the denominators two, three, four, five, six, if instead I increase them ever so slightly,
all right? So instead of using, instead of two, I use two raised to the 1.01 power,
and I use three to the 1.01 power and four to the 1.01 power. Okay, so that makes those denominators
a little bit bigger, which makes those fractions just a little bit smaller, that when you add that
infinite series, believe it or not, that's enough of a change to get that infinite series
to converge. It's less than infinity. I can't tell you what the exact sum is,
but I can tell you that it will be less than infinity. Let's go back to another question.
What if I take the, let's look at what mathematicians call an alternating series. So
this would be a series of the form where you start with something positive, and then you
subtract something, and then you add something, and then you subtract something. Okay, so for instance,
let's say I have the numbers a1, a2, a3, a4, where a1 is bigger than a2, which is bigger than a3,
which is bigger than a4, and let's say all of those terms go to zero. Okay, then I claim
that if you take a1 minus a2 plus a3 minus a4 plus a5 minus a6 and so on, that that is going to go
to, that's going to converge to a specific number. Let me be clear. Let's look at this example.
Let's say one minus a half plus a third minus a fourth plus a fifth minus the sixth. I claim
that that is going to converge to a single number. And the proof, now I'm going to embarrass myself
because I've never danced on camera before, but I'm going to do this for you. Okay, the proof of this
is actually a proof by doing a jig of some sort. Okay, here's what you do. Yeah, it's sort of like
the time warp dance. You jump to the left, and then you jump to the right, and so on. So I'm going to
jump by one, and then I'm going to subtract a half, and I'm going to add a third. I'm going to
subtract a fourth, add a fifth, subtract a sixth, a seventh, an eighth, and so on. And I'm going to
get closer and closer and closer to a single point. Maybe the graphic will illustrate this
better. So your sum will start at zero, and first you add one, and then you subtract a half.
So you've jumped all the way to one, and you've jumped part of the way back to a half,
then you jump a little further plus a third. Okay, now that puts you at I think the number
five six point eight three three, then you subtract a quarter, then you add a little bit,
a little bit, a fifth. You subtract a six, and so on, and you get, you're honing in on a single
number. That single number, incidentally, turns out to be point six nine three dot, dot, dot,
turns out to be you're honing in on the natural log of two. And the explanation for that actually
involves a little bit of calculus, which we'll see in a subsequent lecture. But here's where things
get really interesting. Let's look at the series that we just saw one minus a half plus a third
minus a fourth plus a fifth minus a sixth, and so on. Let's take a look at that series for a minute.
Notice that we the denominators consist of the all of the positive numbers, right, and all the odd
denominators are counted positively, and all the even denominators are counted negatively. Okay,
so I'm just going to add that series up in a slightly different way and just take those same
numbers. But what I'm going to do, I'll start with one, and then I'm going to subtract two even
denominators for every odd and add every odd denominator. So this is the same as one minus
a half minus a quarter. Now I'm going to add a third, and then I'm going to subtract a sixth and
an eighth, and then I'm going to add a fifth, and I'll subtract a tenth and a twelfth. See, I'm
adding every odd denominator once, and then subtracting each even denominator once. Okay,
plus a seventh, minus a fourteenth, minus a sixteenth, plus a ninth, minus an eighteenth,
minus a twentieth. Now, even though I'm adding odd denominators once and subtracting the even
denominators twice, I'm still summing the same numbers, right? Every odd denominator is added
in that series exactly once, and every even number in that series, every even denominator,
is subtracted exactly once. So even though I'm doing it in this funny order, it's still the same
numbers that are being summed, and the same things that were being added are still being added,
and the same things that were being subtracted are still being subtracted. You agree with me there?
Okay, now I'm going to group those numbers. So one minus a half, you admit is equal to
a half, okay? And that one third minus a sixth, that's equal to a sixth, okay? I still have the
minus eighth, that one fifth minus a tenth, that's equal to a tenth, and the seventh minus a fourteenth
is a fourteenth, and one ninth minus an eighteenth is one eighteenth. And so look at the numbers that
we have. This is equal then to one half minus a quarter, plus a sixth, minus an eighth, plus a
tenth, minus a twelfth, plus a fourteenth, minus a sixteenth, plus an eighteenth, minus a twentieth,
and so on. Well, wait a second. That's equal to a half times one minus a half, plus a third minus
a fourth, plus a fifth minus a sixth, plus seventh minus an eighth, and so on. It's half the original
series. So I started with that series, okay? One minus a half, plus a third minus a fourth,
and I rearranged it, and somehow we wound up with half of the original series. So we know that first
thing was supposed to add up to log two or something, and now after rearranging it, I got half of log
two. In fact, what's really odd is that we can rearrange these numbers, these same sets of numbers
to get any sum that we want. If you give me time, and I could rearrange those same numbers,
one minus a half, plus a third, minus a fourth, plus a fifth, to get pi, or e, or the golden ratio,
any number that you want, I can rearrange those numbers to get. The lesson to that is that the
commutative law, a plus b equals b plus a, can fail when adding infinite numbers of positive
and negative terms. That's really rather bizarre. There's so many more things to say about infinite
series. I could go on forever about infinite series, but in fact, if I gave you a book
to read on infinite series, followed by a smaller book to read on infinite series,
plus another book, plus another book, plus another book, plus another book,
you know what you'd have? You'd have a book series, wouldn't you? Thank you very much.
