At last we come to our last lecture on calculus.
Calculus is typically broken into two parts.
There's differential calculus and integral calculus.
Differential calculus, as we've studied in our last two lectures, is the mathematics
of how things change and grow.
Whereas integral calculus, we're interested in calculating things like areas and volumes.
The big idea in calculus, both differential calculus and integral calculus, is to take
things that we understand perfectly, typically things made of straight parts like lines and
rectangles and use those to be able to approximate or actually calculate exactly quantities that
don't have straight lines in them, things that have more of a curve to them.
For example, in differential calculus we understand perfectly the slope of a straight line.
But we were able to use that trivial observation to be able to come up with slopes of things
that weren't straight, like parabolas and trigonometric functions.
In integral calculus, where our goal is to calculate areas, we'll begin by looking at
areas of things that we understand perfectly, like the areas of a rectangle, and use that
to be able to figure out things like the area under a curve.
For instance, what would the area be under a parabola?
Initially, you wouldn't expect there to be much of a connection between the calculation
of slopes and the calculation of areas, and yet there are intimately, those two concepts
are intimately connected through the fundamental theorem of calculus.
I'm going to show you, first of all, what the fundamental theorem of calculus says.
Then we'll learn how to use it, how to apply it, and then I'll try and give you some justification
as to why it works.
So let's begin.
The original problem of integral calculus is to find the area under some kind of a curve.
Now I know what you're thinking, when in my daily life do I ever have to figure out areas
under curves?
Well, there are times, for instance, let's say you want to calculate the square footage
of a room.
Now if that room happens to be rectangular in shape, then there's no problem.
But if the room has some kind of a curve to it, maybe because of some bay windows inside
of it or a fireplace, or maybe you're cutting carpet, and you're not going to carpet the
entire room, but you're carpeting around certain objects, then the problem becomes a little
less easy.
And we can answer questions like this through the fundamental theorem of calculus, assuming
of course that you know some kind of formula for the shape of your curve.
For example, let's suppose our room looks like this, and where our room goes from A
to B, it's straight from A to B, and then we have up there a little curve section described
by the function y equals f of x.
The fundamental theorem of calculus says if I want to find the area of that shaded region,
here's what you have to do.
Find a function, which I'll call capital F of x, that has a derivative of little f
of x, okay?
That's step one.
Find a function whose derivative is little f of x.
Once you have found that function, big f of x, then to find the area is a piece of cake.
You simply calculate big f of B minus big f of A, and amazingly, that gives you your
answer.
Let's look at a specific example.
Let's look at the parabola, our good friend y equals x squared, okay?
And let's suppose we want to find the area under that curve as x goes from 1 to 4.
So I'm interested in the area of that shaded region.
So step one of the fundamental theorem of calculus says find a function whose derivative
is x squared.
I'll tell you the answer, x cubed over 3.
You don't trust me?
Let's differentiate it, right?
If you differentiate x cubed over 3, we know from the power rule, you get 3x squared
over 3, the 3's cancel, and you're left with x squared.
So we found a function whose derivative is x squared.
Step two, take that function that you just found, x cubed over 3, and plug in your end
points, okay?
So we're going to calculate x cubed over 3 when x is equal to 4, and when x is equal
to 1, and then we're going to subtract.
So we have 4 cubed over 3 minus 1 cubed over 3, that's 64 over 3, minus 1 over 3 is 63
over 3, which is exactly 21.
And therefore, by the fundamental theorem of calculus, the area under that parabola,
between 1 and 4, is exactly 21.
The notation that we use for this, just so we don't have to use up so many words when
we're describing this sort of problem, is we write this as the integral from 1 to 4.
That integral sign looks like an elongated S sign, and I'll have more to say about that
later, of the function x squared dx, and I'll say a little bit more about the dx later
also.
So when you see that expression, integral from 1 to 4 of x squared dx, that means find
the area under the curve from 1 to 4 of the function y equals x squared, is equal to x
cubed over 3 with n points 1 and 4.
When you calculate that, you get 64 over 3 minus 1 over 3, which equals 21.
Let's do another example.
Here's the function y equals sine of x, our favorite trigonometric function, and let's
just calculate the area under the curve as x goes between 0 and pi.
Before we look at it, before we use the fundamental theorem of calculus, let's do a little bit
of common sense guessing here.
We know that the sine function never gets bigger than 1, so at its peak, it has a height
of 1.
So I can enclose that entire curve inside of a rectangle that has a height of 1 and
a length of pi.
So I know that the area under that curve can't possibly be any bigger than pi.
Looking at it, it looks like it should be less than 3, and let's see what the fundamental
theorem of calculus actually gives us.
Okay, so in order to apply the fundamental theorem, we have to find a function whose
derivative is the sine of x.
Our function has derivative sine of x.
If you said cosine, you'd be close, right?
The derivative of cosine is negative sine of x.
So the function that we want is the negative cosine of x.
And all we have to do is evaluate negative cosine of x at the endpoints, 0 and pi.
Negative cosine of pi minus negative cosine of 0.
But the cosine of pi, that's a cosine of 180 degrees, is negative 1.
So we have negative negative 1 plus the cosine of 0, which is 1.
And there we have 1 plus 1 equals 2.
And there's your answer.
The area under the curve is 2.
It's as easy as 1 plus 1.
Incidentally, if we're looking at a curve that actually goes above the x-axis and below
the x-axis, then we have to interpret the integral slightly differently.
So for instance, if we're looking at the function y equals sine of x, as x goes from
0 all the way to 2 pi, then the area that's below the x-axis actually gets counted negatively.
Now with that information then, what would you expect the integral from 0 to 2 pi of
sine of x to be?
Looking at the curve, is there more area above the curve or more area below the curve?
Or are they equal?
Well, the function looks pretty symmetrical.
So we would expect the answer to be that the positive part and the negative part should
cancel each other out completely and give us an answer of 0.
Let's see if that actually happens.
So we apply the fundamental theorem of calculus again.
The antiderivative of the sine of x is still the negative cosine of x.
We evaluate it at our end points 0 and 2 pi, but the cosine of 2 pi is the same as the
cosine of 0.
So this time when we calculate negative cosine 2 pi plus cosine of 0, that's negative negative
cosine 0, those things cancel out each other exactly, negative 1 plus 1 equals 0.
So sure enough, the integral is 0 as we expected.
So you ask, why does this magical process work?
What is it that makes the fundamental theorem of calculus do its magic?
And we're almost ready to answer that question.
Before I do, though, I've got one simple question for you.
Suppose I have two functions that have the same derivative, question, must those two
functions be the same?
Okay?
If prime of x is g prime of x, does that mean that f of x and g of x are the same?
The answer is almost, but not quite.
For example, if I said, what functions have derivative of 2x?
We know that x squared has a derivative of 2x, but are there others?
Sure we've seen that x squared plus 1 has a derivative of 2x.
And for that matter, x squared plus 17 or x squared minus pi, all of those have a derivative
of 2x.
And so the key idea here is that anything that's of the form x squared plus a constant
has a derivative of 2x.
And in fact, the only functions that have a derivative of 2x are of the form x squared
plus a constant.
So here's the theorem that I want you to be able to remember, is that if two functions
have the same derivative, then those two functions differ by a constant.
Or to put it more mathematically, if f prime of x equals g prime of x, then f of x equals
g of x plus a constant.
Okay, now that you know that theorem, we're ready to answer the question, what makes the
fundamental theorem of calculus do its trick?
Let's remind ourselves once again what the fundamental theorem of calculus says.
It says if I have a function y equals f of x, and if I'm interested in finding the area
under the curve between the points x equals a and x equals b, then the fundamental theorem
says find a function capital F whose derivative is little f, and then evaluate f of b, that
is capital F of b minus capital F of a, and that will give you the area.
So why should this magic work?
Well, I'll begin by coming up with a quantity that I'm going to call r of x.
r of x is going to be the area of the region under the curve between a and x.
Think of r as standing for region.
Notice that as I vary x, as I change x, like if I move x a little bit to the right, then
my region gets bigger, and so the area under that curve gets bigger.
If I move x to the left, then the area under that curve gets smaller, right, if I'm calculating
the area from a to x.
Here's a question, and I'm going to need the answer for this later.
What if I moved x all the way over to a?
Okay, x gets really, really close to, in fact, I let x land right on top of a.
And what's the area of that region?
The answer is zero, right?
There's no, even all we're looking at there is the area of a straight line, and though
a straight line has length, it doesn't have any width, so it doesn't have any area.
So just remember this for when I need it later in the proof.
r of a, the area of the region from a to a is equal to zero.
Our goal with the fundamental theorem is to show that the area under the curve from
a to b is capital F of b minus capital F of a.
But the area under the curve from a to b, by definition, that's r of b.
So the goal of this theorem, and I'll jump up and down when we get to this point, is
we want to conclude that r of b is equal to f of b minus f of a.
When we get to that statement, then we're done, okay?
So how are we going to get to there?
Remember r of x is the area under the curve as we go from a to x.
Next question, what's r of x plus h?
Well, by definition, that will be the area under the curve as we go from a to x plus
h, okay?
Fair enough.
What's the difference in those quantities?
What's r of x plus h minus r of x?
Well, that's the area as we go from a to x plus h minus the area as we go from a to
x.
So most everything got canceled there except for this little tiny region between x and
x plus h.
Let's take a blow up of that region, look what we've got here, okay?
Now if h is really, really small, like a hair's width, okay?
And that region we have is almost rectangular, okay?
It might have a little bit of a lip at the top, but it's really almost a rectangular
region.
So the area of that region is approximately the area of a rectangle.
That's a base times a height.
Now the base of that rectangle is h.
And the height of that rectangle is, well remember, here we are at the point x.
Because the height of that rectangle at the point x is f of x.
So the area of that rectangle is approximately h times f of x.
If I divide both sides of this equation by h, we get r of x plus h minus r of x divided
by h is approximately equal to f of x.
As we let h go to zero, the left side becomes the derivative of r at x.
In other words, it's r prime of x is equal to f of x, okay?
So what have we just established?
We just showed that the derivative of r is little f of x.
But hold on a minute, wasn't the derivative of capital F also equal to little f of x?
Yes, so r prime of x and capital F prime of x are the same.
Now if two functions have the same derivative, then what do we know about those functions?
They differ by a constant.
Therefore r of x is equal to capital F of x plus a constant.
I just have to figure out what that constant is.
Well that constant has to work for every value of x that you plug into it.
In particular, it better work when you plug in the value of x equal a.
So let's do it.
If I plug in x equal a, it says that r of a is equal to capital F of a plus c.
But wait a minute, what is r of a?
Remember that's equal to zero.
So solving for c, that says that c is equal to negative f of a.
Plugging into the formula above, that says that r of x is equal to f of x minus f of
a for all values of x.
And since it works for all values of x, in particular it has to work for x equal to
b, and therefore r of b is equal to f of b minus f of a.
Wait a second, that was the goal, right?
I said I'd jump up and down when I said it, okay.
So r of b equals f of b minus f of a, that's what we wanted to prove, and that's the proof
of the fundamental theorem of calculus.
I realized that was a pretty lengthy proof, and I normally wouldn't subject you to all
of that argument, but this is, after all, the fundamental theorem of calculus.
So it's worth spending a few minutes understanding why it works.
If you'd like, you can rewind and review this proof a few more times, and I'll bet by the
second or third time it'll actually make sense to you.
Another thing that'll make our job easier is some notation of how to find anti-derivatives
of functions.
You know the fundamental theorem of calculus tells us to do, right?
Find a function whose derivative is little f of x.
So we use this notation, it's the integral symbol without any numbers on top, just to
represent the integral of f of x is the set of all functions that have derivative little
f of x.
So let me clarify with an example, the integral of 2x dx is simply asking for all functions
that have a derivative of 2x, okay?
And we know that all functions with a derivative of 2x are of the form x squared plus a constant.
So the integral of 2x dx is equal to x squared plus a constant.
There are other nice rules for calculating integrals.
The power rule for derivatives has a reverse power rule for finding integrals.
The integral of x to the n dx is equal to x to the n plus 1 divided by n plus 1 plus
a constant.
For example, if we want the integral of x cubed dx, then the reverse power rule says
that's x to the 4 over 4 plus a constant.
Multiplying through by constants by real numbers is also a piece of cake just like it was for
derivatives.
So if we know the integral of x cubed is x to the 4 over 4 plus a constant, then the
integral of 7x cubed will be 7x to the 4 over 4 plus a constant.
Remember the derivative of the sum was the sum of the derivatives?
Well, the same sort of rule works for antiderivatives.
That is, the integral of the sum is the sum of the integrals.
So for instance, we know the integral of 7x cubed, we know the integral of 2x, therefore
we can calculate the integral of 7x cubed plus 2x just by adding our previous answers.
So that would be 7 fourths x to the 4 plus x squared plus the ever present constant.
How about something like the integral of the product is the product of the integrals?
Wouldn't that make life easy?
Well it would, but it wouldn't be true.
It didn't work for derivatives, and so we have no reason to expect that it will work
for antiderivatives.
But there are some techniques of integration that can actually help us do these kinds of
problems.
For example, let's say we were, here's a curve that shows up practically every day of the
year.
This is called the bell curve.
Now the bell curves actually come in lots of different shapes and sizes, but they all
have this basic shape.
Here's a typical bell curve.
Looks like f of x equals 1 over square root of pi e to the minus x squared.
The bell curve is used for describing numerical quantities like exam scores, heights, weights,
scientific measurement errors.
They typically, they start off small, and then you get there's sort of a clumping in
the middle, and then there aren't as many at the tails, and that's basically what these
bell curves look like.
If you wanted to find something like the average value of something that came from a bell-shaped
region, like the average value on an exam or the average scientific measurement error,
then turns out you'll want to calculate an integral like o x e to the negative x squared.
So let's say you wanted to calculate x e, the integral of x e to the negative x squared,
the x.
Okay.
Well, here's my favorite technique for calculating integrals.
It's called integration by guessing.
In fact, let me say something.
It may sound like a joke technique of integration, but the truth of the matter is the more calculus
problems you do, the more likely you are to use the method of integration by guessing.
That is, as you get more experience, you become a much better guesser.
Okay.
So let's say I wanted to integrate x e to the negative x squared, all right?
So you might start as a guess and say, I'll guess e to the negative x squared.
See how well that guess does, all right?
Well, we're going to differentiate.
We'll cross our fingers and we'll see if we get x e to the negative x squared out of
it.
Well, by the chain rule, when we differentiate that, we get negative 2x e to the negative
x squared.
Oh, that was so close.
If it wasn't for that negative 2, we'd have the answer exactly.
So how do we handle that?
Well, we divide through by the negative 2 in our original guess.
And if we do that, then we'll get the answer exactly.
So the exact answer, the integral of x e to the negative x squared dx is exactly equal
to negative 1 half e to the negative x squared plus a constant.
By the way, this problem reminds me of a story that may or may not be true, but it's a husband
and wife.
They're both math teachers.
They walk into a restaurant and the wife's upset because she feels that not enough people
know mathematics as part of their daily life.
He thinks that, no, no, I think more people know math than you give them credit for.
Anyway, they have a debate on this.
And later on, when the wife leaves the table, husband calls over the waiter and says, I've
got a favor to ask.
When my wife gets back, I'm going to ask you a question.
And I want you to give the answer of x cubed over 3.
Okay?
Do you think you can do that?
He says, x cubed over 3.
Okay.
So gives the waiter a nice tip and he goes off.
Later on, the wife comes back.
They get back into their conversation again about whether enough people know mathematics
and the husband says, look, I'll bet even that waiter over there understands calculus.
Wife looks skeptical.
He says, no, no, I think so.
Here, come here.
So he calls the waiter over and says, okay, I got a question for you.
What is the integral of x squared dx?
The waiter thinks about it for a minute and says, x cubed over 3.
Husband looks at the wife triumphantly and the waiter says, plus a constant.
Okay.
So here's another curve that you might be interested in integrating.
That is, we looked at the integral of x e to the negative x squared.
What if we just wanted to find the area between two different points on a bell curve?
Like for instance, if you wanted to find the area between O negative 1 and 2 on under
this bell curve e to the negative x squared, then how would you go about doing that?
Well the fundamental theorem of calculus would say, find an antiderivative.
Well now I have some bad news for you.
This function e to the negative x squared has no simple antiderivative.
There's no function that you can find.
No matter how intelligent a guesser you are, whose derivative is going to be e to the negative
x squared.
Okay, so are you out of luck?
Well, not entirely.
We can still resort back to this naive idea of calculating the area by summing up a bunch
of rectangles, at least theoretically.
Let me show you what I mean.
In fact, in the process, let me justify that notation that we talked about earlier.
The integral from a to b of f of x dx.
What do all those strange symbols mean?
It comes actually, literally, from summing a bunch of rectangles, okay?
So we imagine breaking up our region from a to b into a bunch of little rectangles.
Here's a typical one right over there with right endpoint equal to x.
If you draw the rectangle that starts at the bottom at x, goes all the way up to the top
of the curve that has a height of f of x.
And you just give that a tiny little bit of the base, make it just a tiny little amount.
We'll call that amount delta x.
Then the area of that rectangle is f of x times delta x.
If I throw in a whole bunch of rectangles so that I completely cover that spectrum,
as x goes from a all the way to b, then what we're literally summing is a bunch of these
things of the form f of x delta x, as x goes from a to b, okay?
And then that sum, literally, the integral sign s means sum, as the width of those rectangles
gets tinier and tinier, we get the integral from a to b of f of x dx.
So that when those delta x's go to zero, then that delta x poof becomes a dx.
Now that may sound a little confusing.
Let's put this into practice by looking at another area, one whose answer we know already,
the area of a circle, okay?
So we'll bring out a visual aid here, okay?
So here is a, here's a circle, we'll ignore the rest of the stuff behind it, interested
in the circle, and I can calculate the area of this circle simply by adding up the areas
of all of these little rings inside of it, okay?
So these little rings, let's say, here's the center of my circle, and let's say it has
a radius of capital R, what's the, what's the area of this tiny little ringlet that
has radius little r?
So let's say I was able to extract that ringlet, okay?
And I'm interested in the area of this piece here, okay?
Well, what would that area be?
If it had a radius of little r, then this has a circumference of 2 pi r.
And now when I flatten this out, then I am looking at the area of this edge, whose length
is 2 pi r, and whose thickness is just some tiny amount delta r.
So the total area is going to be the sum of 2 pi r delta r, as the radius goes from zero
all the way to big r.
Well that is the integral.
That is, as that delta r gets smaller and smaller, that sum becomes an integral.
We're looking at the integral of 2 pi r dr, as little r goes from zero to big r.
Well now we know the antiderivative of 2 pi r is pi r squared.
Evaluate that when r is zero, and when r is capital R, and we get the area of a circle
is pi capital R squared exactly as we expected.
Now the word integration comes from the fact that we can answer our big problem by chopping
it up into little simple problems, then putting all those little simple answers together.
That's where the word integration comes from.
It's a very powerful idea, and it can be applied to more than just areas.
It can solve problems in higher dimensions, three dimensions and higher.
For example, let me show you how to figure out the volume of a sphere.
I brought some modeling clay with me to help me out.
Here's a sphere, and I'm going to figure out the volume of this using the logic of calculus.
Now one way to create a sphere is by taking a lid and rotating it like this, and as we
rotate it around the x-axis, we get a sphere.
And then we can calculate by chopping up the sphere into little tiny parts.
Here we go.
And here's a typical part that we've chopped off.
Now what's the volume of this chopped off part?
Well what do we have here?
We have a circle with a little bit of thickness.
If that circle has a radius of y, then on the face we have an area of pi y squared.
And if that thickness, if I call that thickness delta x, then the volume of this piece is
pi y squared times delta x.
And if I sum over all possible values of x, actually we can simplify that just slightly
since the equation of my original circle was x squared plus y squared equals r squared,
I can replace y squared with r squared minus x squared.
So the sum of pi y squared delta x, in fact, can be written as the sum of pi times r squared
minus x squared delta x.
We're summing this as x goes all the way from negative r to positive r.
In other words, as we let the widths of those slices to get smaller and smaller, we get
the volume is equal to the antiderivative of pi r squared minus x squared dx as x goes
from negative r to r.
And now just finding the antiderivative of that is a pretty simple matter.
When you do the algebra and the dust settles, you get 4 thirds pi r cubed, which is the
volume of a sphere.
Let me conclude by saying that integrals can calculate physical quantities like center
of mass, energy, work, fluid pressure, more than just areas and volumes.
In fact, along with differential equations, they describe everything from heat to light
to sound, electricity, virtually everything we experience.
Without a doubt, calculus is an integral part of our daily lives.
