Well, we've just completed our lectures on calculus, and the next three lectures are
going to talk about topics in probability.
We'll use a little bit of calculus in those lectures, but we're also going to be using
some discrete mathematics that depends on one of the most beautiful objects in mathematics,
Pascal's Triangle.
Behold Pascal's Triangle.
Here it is.
Here are the first oh ten rows of Pascal's Triangle.
You could spend your life looking and studying patterns that live inside of this beautiful
triangle.
We're going to, in this lecture, define the triangle, we'll explore the triangle, and
ultimately understand the triangle.
Almost sounds religious, doesn't it?
Let's begin by looking at the first six rows of Pascal's Triangle.
We label these rows starting at row zero.
For reasons that will become clearer later.
So we have row zero, row one, two, three, four, and five.
And you'll notice that on the rows we have ones along the edges, the beginning and end
of each row is a one, and the way we create numbers in the triangle is by adding two consecutive
numbers in a given row, and those produce a number below it.
So for instance, in row number four, the four plus the six add together to create the number
ten.
Now formally, mathematically, we define all this process by saying that the entries of
row n of the triangle, we will denote that by T n zero through T n one all the way up
to T n n.
So for instance, in row number four, we have T four zero, T four one, T four two, T four
three, and T four four, okay?
And the rule for creating the rows of Pascal's Triangle is that T n zero equals one, T n
n equals one, that's just saying that the row begins and ends with a one, and the way
we come up with T n k is we look at the row above it, and we take T n minus one, k minus
one, plus T n minus one, k.
In other words, the kth element of row n is obtained by taking the k minus first element
of row n minus one, and adding to that the kth element of row n minus one.
So just as we said before, the ten that appears in row five, that first ten would be known
as T five two, and that's equal to T four one plus T four two, sounds like I'm ready
to break into a song and dance, T four two, okay?
So those are the elements of Pascal's Triangle, and starting with those first five or six
rows, right?
Rows zero through five, we can then use that same method to create the next row.
So for instance, row number six would begin with a one, and then the six would be obtained
by taking one plus five, and then five plus ten is fifteen, ten plus ten is twenty, ten
plus five is fifteen, five plus one is six, and we end with a one again, and so on and
so on and so on.
That'll give us the first ten rows, rows zero through nine of Pascal's Triangle.
Let's take a look at some patterns that we can find inside this.
For instance, notice that each row is symmetric.
It reads the same way when you read it left to right, as it does from right to left.
We say that formally by saying that Tnk is equal to Tn and minus k.
What other patterns can we find in the triangle?
If we were to add the numbers row by row, okay, the first row adds up to one, the second
row adds up to two, the third row adds up to four.
When I say the third row, maybe I should say that more precisely.
Row zero adds to one, row one adds to two, row two adds to four, row three adds to eight,
sixteen, thirty-two, sixty-four, one, twenty-eight, they're the powers of two, and in general
row number n sums to the number two to the nth power.
So we seem to have this formula, Tn zero plus Tn one, all the way up to Tnn equals two to
the n, and later in the lecture we'll see exactly why that pattern persists.
Here's another one of my favorite patterns, one that will come in handy later in the lecture.
I call this one the hockey stick identity.
It happens when you add the diagonals of any diagonal in the triangle.
So for instance here we've added one plus three plus six plus ten plus fifteen plus
twenty-one plus twenty-eight, and when you add those together you get the number eighty-four,
which lies just below and to the right of the number twenty-eight.
We call it the hockey stick identity because you've got this long stick and then it just
juts out in the new direction to give you the next entry of the triangle.
Let me give you some insight as to why that is true.
If you trust me or verify for yourself that one plus three plus six plus ten plus fifteen
plus twenty-one, if I stop at the twenty-one, then that gives me fifty-six, okay that's
a smaller hockey stick, well look what happens when you add the twenty-eight of the original
hockey stick.
Now you're adding twenty-eight to that previous total which was fifty-six, but twenty-eight
plus fifty-six is eighty-four, that's how the eighty-four was created, this was essentially,
this is essentially the basis for an inductive proof of why the hockey stick property works.
The hockey stick rule works whether you're adding diagonally going to the left like we
just did or if you're going diagonally to the right, then the hockey stick identity
also works, right?
If I look at one plus five plus fifteen plus thirty-five plus seventy, now the hockey stick
has to change direction by going over to the first of the one twenty-sixes and that's why
one plus five plus fifteen plus thirty-five plus seventy is one twenty-six.
Now anything that has all these patterns has to have a good combinatorial reason for happening,
in my book anything that can be, any pattern involving numbers ought to be understandable
through basic counting ideas.
Let's recall way back when we were talking about counting, the joy of counting, the number
n choose k, n choose k can be defined a number of ways, mathematicians typically say n choose
k is the number of size k subsets of the numbers one through m.
I like to think of it a little bit more casually, n choose k is the number of ways to choose
k students from a class of n students where order is not important.
So for instance, if I had n students in my class and I needed k of them to form a committee,
then the number of ways of creating such a committee would be n choose k.
Now there's a formula for n choose k that we saw earlier, I'll write it down again,
that n choose k is n factorial divided by k factorial times n minus k factorial.
And this number n choose k, whenever k is too small or k is too big, like if k is less
than zero or k is bigger than n, then we don't even think of the formula, we just think of
the definition and we get zero.
In other words, if I said how many ways can I create a committee with negative five students,
of course that's zero.
Or if I have n students, how many ways can I create a committee with n plus seven students,
of course that's zero.
What does n choose k have to do with Pascal's Triangle?
Absolutely everything.
In fact I claim that Pascal's Triangle is nothing more and nothing less than those numbers
n choose k displayed in a very nice way.
So I claim, in fact, that the nk element of Pascal's Triangle, tnk, is equal to n choose
k.
So when you look at the first five rows of Pascal's Triangle, 1, 1, 1, 1, 2, 1, 1, 3,
3, 1, 1, 4, 6, 4, 1, I look at them as n choose k terms.
So that that last row, 1, 4, 6, 4, 1, is actually 4 choose 0, 4 choose 1, 4 choose 2, 4 choose
3, and 4 choose 4.
Right, remember we saw that, I mean if you calculate, for instance, 4 choose 2 by the
formula, that's 4 factorial over 2 factorial times 2 factorial.
That's 24 over 2 times 2, which is 6.
So at least initially in the first five rows, it looks like we're getting that the nk element
of Pascal's Triangle is equal to n choose k.
But let's prove it.
This is such an important idea, I want to make sure we're absolutely convinced of this.
We know that the boundary numbers for n choose k, that is n choose 0, is equal to 1, right,
the number of size, number of ways to create a size 0 committee from a class of n students
is 1.
Here's a committee with nobody on it.
Similarly, n choose n is equal to 1, which we could either see by the formula for it,
n factorial over n factorial, 0 factorial, or by the combinatorial definition, the number
of ways from a class of n students to create a committee of n students is just 1.
You have to use everyone.
So that shows us that the boundary conditions are working just fine.
What about the rest?
We remember that the triangle condition was that tnk was equal to tn minus 1 k minus 1
plus tn minus 1 k.
Will that growth condition, that recurrence relation, still be true as I look at the numbers
n choose k?
In other words, can I show that n choose k is equal to n minus 1 choose k minus 1 plus
n minus 1 choose k?
Well, there are a couple of ways of showing this.
One way is algebra, all right, that is we could take n minus 1 choose k minus 1 plus
n minus 1 choose k, we could add those together using the factorial definition.
We could put those things over a common denominator of k factorial n minus k factorial, you add
your fractions, and when the dust settles you get n factorial over k factorial n minus
k factorial.
In other words, you get n choose k.
That proof shows that it works, but it's not a very insightful proof.
I prefer a more combinatorial proof, something that says these things are counting the same
thing.
That is to say, n choose k, why does it equal n minus 1 choose k minus 1 plus n minus 1
choose k?
I look out at my class here and I say, from a class of n students, how many ways can I
create a committee of size k?
Well, we know by its very definition the answer to that is n choose k.
Now I'm going to answer that same question in a different way.
I'm going to, by what sometimes we call weirdo analysis.
Imagine student number n is your weirdo and we're interested in those committees that
contain the weirdo and those committees that don't contain the weirdo.
Among those n choose k committees, how many of them do not use the weirdo?
How many of them do not use student n?
Well, that means we're looking at size k committees from the class of students 1 through
n minus 1.
How many ways can you do that?
n minus 1 choose k, okay?
How many of those committees must use student n?
Well, student n, if your weirdo is on the committee, then what remains for you to do
is to choose k minus 1 more students to be on the committee from the remaining n minus
1 students.
And how many ways can we do that?
Again, by definition, n minus 1 choose k minus 1.
So in summary, there are n minus 1 choose k of those committees that do not contain the
weirdo, n minus 1 choose k minus 1 committees that do contain the weirdo, so their sum is
the total number of committees.
Now which answer was right?
Answer 1 or answer 2?
Well our logic was impeccable both times, therefore those answers are the same, hence
n choose k equals n minus 1 choose k minus 1 plus n minus 1 choose k.
What we've shown is that these n choose k terms, what are called binomial coefficients,
they begin, they have the same boundary conditions as Pascal's Triangle, they will continue to
grow like the entries of Pascal's Triangle and therefore by Golly they are the elements
of Pascal's Triangle.
And so now all the patterns that we saw in Pascal's Triangle before can be expressed in
terms of Pascal's Triangle.
For example, let's take the pattern that we saw earlier, that the sum of the elements
of rho n add up to 2 to the n, okay?
So n choose 0 plus n choose 1 plus n choose 2 all the way up to n choose n, those are
the elements of rho n of Pascal's Triangle that's got to equal 2 to the n, at least that's
what the pattern is saying, that's what it's suggesting, right?
If rho n adds up to 2 to the n then n choose 0 plus n choose 1 up to n choose n is 2 to
the n.
So we express that using what's called sigma notation, okay?
It looks more intimidating than it is, right?
It says that the sum of n choose k as k goes from 0 to n is equal to 2 to the n.
All right, so here's a combinatorial proof of this fact, we can prove this fact just
by counting and what could be more basic than counting.
Here's the question, how many committees can you form from a class of size n?
So I look out at my classroom here, I see I have n students, how many ways can I create
a committee?
Well, one way is to break up the answer into depending on the size of the committee, right?
There n choose 0 committees of size 0, n choose 1 committees of size 1, n choose 2 committees
of size 2 and so on and so on, n choose n committees of size n, add up all those answers,
all those possibilities and there's one way to answer the question, it's n choose 0 plus
n choose 1 all the way up to n choose n.
Now the fun part is how can we take that same question and answer it as 2 to the n?
Why is the number of committees 2 to the n?
Well now we use the rule of product which says look at, to create a committee, go through
your classroom student by student and decide yes or no, is the student going to be on the
committee or off the committee?
So for each student you have two choices, on or off, on or off, on or off, so student
1, on or off, student 2, on or off, student 3, on or off, all the way to student n, on
or off.
How many ways can we create our committee?
2 times 2 times 2 times 2 times 2, n times we get 2 to the n.
So that's the combinatorial proof of that theorem.
Another very useful theorem in all of mathematics is called the binomial theorem.
The binomial theorem lives inside of Pascal's Triangle.
Remember from basic algebra, x plus y squared equals x squared plus 2xy plus y squared.
Hey look at the row number 2 of Pascal's Triangle, it looks like 1, 2, 1.
And x plus y cubed you could work out, is x cubed plus 3x squared y plus 3xy squared
plus y cubed, and hey look at the coefficients, 1, 3, 3, 1.
And x plus y to the fourth, is x to the fourth plus 4x cubed y plus 6x squared y squared
plus 6x plus 4xy cubed plus 1y to the fourth, look at those coefficients, 1, 4, 6, 4, 1.
And in general, if you take x plus y to the nth power, then the coefficients of x plus
y to the n are going to be the numbers on the nth row of Pascal's Triangle.
Specifically, the coefficient of x to the k, y to the n minus k, is going to be the number
n choose k.
And let's see why.
If you take x plus y to the n, you could think of that as x plus y times x plus y times x
plus y times x plus y, all that n times.
Now how do you get an x to the n term?
Well there's only one way to get an x to the n term, that's by taking x from the first
thing times x from the second thing times x from the third thing, all the way down to
x from the last thing.
There's only one way to create an x to the n.
How about an x to the n minus 1 y term?
Well one way to create it is to pick the first y and then all the rest x's.
And when you multiply those, you get x to the n minus 1 y.
Or you could have picked an x from the first thing, a y from the second thing, and then
all the rest x's.
That's another way to create an x to the n minus 1 y.
And in general there are n ways to create an x to the n minus 1 y term simply by deciding
which of those y's you're going to take and the rest of those terms are going to be x's.
Let's do one more example.
How about the coefficient of x to the n minus 2 y squared?
Here the idea is you have to choose two of those terms to be y's and then all the rest
x's.
But how many ways can you choose two of those y's from those n terms?
n choose two ways.
And that's why the coefficient of x to the n minus 2 y squared is n choose 2.
Okay so let's summarize what we have is the binomial theorem says that x plus y to the
n is the sum of n choose k x to the k y to the n minus k as k varies from 0 to n.
With this simple formula can be applied to produce all kinds of beautiful identities.
For example if we let x equal 1 and y equal 1 then what do we get, what does the binomial
theorem tell us?
Well on the one hand we know that 1 plus 1 to the n is 2 to the n.
On the other hand if I let x equal 1 and y equal 1 in that sum formula then 1 to the
k is 1, 1 to the n minus k is 1, those ones are effectively invisible and we have the
sum of n choose k times an invisible 1 to the k 1 to the n minus k.
So when you let your 1's disappear you get the sum of n choose k as k goes from 0 to
n is equal to 2 to the n.
Okay that's the formula that we proved combinatorially.
Here we did it in one line of arithmetic essentially.
Take the binomial theorem and plug in x and y equal 1 and you get your first pattern in
Pascal's Triangle.
Here's another identity, how about this one's a little more complicated.
It says the sum of k times n choose k is equal to n times 2 to the n minus 1.
I'll give you two proofs of this fact.
One way is that you can take the binomial theorem and let's let y equal 1 in the binomial
theorem so it says x plus 1 to the n is equal to the sum of n choose k x to the k times an
invisible 1 to the n minus k.
Now let's apply a little bit of calculus since we know it, differentiate both of the sides
of this with respect to x.
When you differentiate the left side with respect to x you get, well nothing to panic
we bring the exponent down, n times x plus 1 to the n minus 1 times the derivative of
what's inside but the derivative of x plus 1 is just 1 so that stays invisible is equal
to the sum, the derivative of the sum of n choose k x to the k.
Now I know you're saying oh no I don't know how to differentiate n choose k but that's
okay you're just differentiating with respect to x so the only thing that's getting differentiated
is the x to the k term and the derivative of the sum is the sum of the derivatives.
The n choose k is a nice constant term so when we differentiate that we get the sum
of n choose k times k x to the k minus 1.
Phew, set x equal to 1 and all of your x's disappear and you get the sum as k goes from
0 to n of n choose k times k is equal to n times 1 plus 1 to the n minus 1 that is n
times 2 to the n minus 1.
We can also prove this theorem combinatorially and I think combinatorial proofs are prettier
than algebraic proofs so let me give this one to you as well.
Let's imagine I ask from a class of n students how many ways can you create a committee of
any size with a chair okay that is a leader of that committee okay how many ways can you
do that?
You could say well depending on the size of the committee if the committee had size
k there would be n choose k ways to create the committee okay once you've created the
committee of size k there would be k ways to choose the chair of the committee so the
number of committees of size k with a chair is n choose k times k therefore the total
number of committees over all possible values of k would be the sum as k goes from 0 to
n of k times n choose k.
On the other hand I tell you there's a more direct way of answering that counting question
you could say well to create a committee of any size from your class of n students first
pick a chair right decide which of those n students will be the chair of the committee
got n ways to pick the chair once you've done that what remains you have to choose a subset
of the remaining n minus 1 students to serve on the committee how many possible committees
can you form from the remaining n minus 1 students 2 to the n minus 1 we've been there
before of the remaining n minus 1 students you can decide yes or no yes or no yes or
no whether they'll be on that committee so the number of committees of that type is n
times 2 to the n minus 1 just like we've done before both of those answers were correct
and therefore both of those answers have to be equal.
Here's my favorite pattern from Pascal's triangle we sum the rows of Pascal's triangle now let's
see what happens when we sum the diagonals of Pascal's triangle I've written it as a
right triangle this time because it makes the pattern easier to see I want to sum these
numbers up say in angles of 45 degrees okay so we know summing up the first diagonal we
just have a 1 and the second diagonal just has a 1 and the third diagonal has 1 plus
1 which is 2 the next diagonal has 1 plus 2 equals 3 then the next diagonal is 1 plus
3 plus 1 which is 5 and the next diagonal is 1 plus 4 plus 3 is 8 and the next is 1
plus 5 6 1 which adds to 13 look at the numbers you see there 1 1 2 3 5 8 13 oh no it's our
friends the Fibonacci numbers 2 3 5 8 who can't we eliminate Fibonacci I won't go into
the proof of that one here but just to let just to remind you that Fibonacci numbers
are everywhere here's another nice pattern in Pascal's triangle suppose I ask for the
odd numbers in Pascal's triangle I ask in any given row how many of those numbers are
odd let's count them we see the top row just has one odd number itself and the second the
next row has two odd numbers 1 and 1 and the next row has two odd numbers 1 and 1 and
the next row has 1 3 3 1 that has four odd numbers and so on we see two odd numbers 4
8 2 staring at those numbers it's hard to see a pattern immediately you might say well
they always seem to be powers of 2 and that's correct and here's the amazing fact the number
of odd numbers in row n of Pascal's triangle is 2 it's always a power of 2 but what power
of 2 it's 2 raised to the number of 1's in the binary expansion of n and that's just
kind of weird for example when n equals 6 we write 6 in binary now 6 equals 4 plus 2
which has binary representation 1 1 0 which has 2 1's in it so row 6 will have 2 squared
that is 4 odd numbers as we see in fact the odd numbers are in the positions that can
be created from 2 and 4 namely positions 0 2 4 and 2 plus 4 which is position 6 suppose
n equals 81 how many odd numbers do we have in row 81 of Pascal's triangle well you could
say well 81 is we'll write it in binary 81 written in terms of powers of 2 is 64 plus
16 plus 1 which in our binary notation is 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 writing that in base 2 and so
how many 1's are in that binary expansion of 81 there are three of them so that's our
exponent the number of odd numbers in row 81 of Pascal's triangle is 2 to the 3 which
is 8 and just like before the 8 odd positions are those numbers that can be created using
64 16 and 1 let me end in a sort of festive holiday spirit we all know the 12 days of
Christmas right and on the first day of Christmas you got one partridge in a pear tree and in
the second day you had two turtle doves and a partridge and then third day three French
hens two turtle doves and one partridge let's just we're going to be greedy here we're
just going to count gifts okay so day one you got one gift day two you got three gifts
one plus two day three you got six gifts one plus two plus three and the question is what's
the total number of gifts that you received by the end of the twelve days of Christmas
okay well let's see let's figure out first of all how many gifts you received on any
given day so on the case day of Christmas as a mathematician might say you count one
plus two plus three up through K but gosh we've seen that formula from long ago that's
equal Gauss figure that one out for us that's equal to K times K plus one over two but that's
also equal to the binomial coefficient K plus one choose two so for instance on the 12th
day of Christmas you received one plus two plus three up through 12 that's equal to 12
times 13 over two which is 78 gifts that's also equal to 13 choose two so all those numbers
of gifts one three six ten those actually lie on Pascal's triangle let's take a look
at them there they are one three six ten fifteen fact when we sum those numbers before we were
getting the hockey stick identity that is if we sum of two choose two choose two choose
two plus four choose two all the way up to eight choose two we got 84 which is nine choose
three in general if you sum two choose two plus three choose two plus four choose two
let's go all the way up to 13 choose two because that's what you had on the 12th day of Christmas
you got those 78 gifts then the hockey stick identity will tell you that you get 14 choose
three gifts all together 14 choose three when we calculate that is 14 times 13 times 12
over three factorial which is equal to 364 so if you think about it on the by the end
of the 12th day of Christmas you've received 364 gifts that's one gift for every day of
the year except Christmas
