Well, at last we come to the final lecture of the course, the joy of mathematical magic.
Now, on the last day of my classes, I like to celebrate a little bit.
Sometimes I bring refreshments for the class, but since that's not going to do you much
good, instead, I'm going to finish by treating you to a little bit of a mathematical magic
show.
And I hope some of this magic won't be so mysterious to you now that you have this
extra training and have experienced the joy of mathematics.
I'm going to start by doing a trick that, for some reason, people tell me about constantly,
about once every month, somebody emails this trick to me, even very educated people saying,
you know, how on earth does this magic trick work?
Can you explain it to me?
And I think you'll be able to explain it yourself as we do it.
So let's demonstrate it first, and then we'll go through the math behind it, okay?
In fact, if you have a calculator with you, bring it out right now so you can play along.
It's a trick that involves your phone number.
Now I'm going to use a sample phone number to go along with it.
This is a phone number that belongs to a Mr. E, but it's no Mr. E where the number comes
from.
Those are the first seven digits of the number E, okay?
So here's what I want you to do, and we'll follow along with Mr. E's example.
Namely, start by taking the first three digits of your phone number, okay?
Next, multiply that by 80, add one to that, now multiply by 250.
Once you've done that, add the last four digits of your phone number.
Now once again, add the last four digits of your phone number.
Now subtract 250, and finally divide that number by two.
And if you followed all the steps correctly, you should now be staring at your phone number.
Now let's see why that works.
Let's start by, I don't know what your phone number is, of course.
Let's call the first three digit number of your phone number, the first three digits,
let's call that X, and let's call the last four digits of your phone number Y, okay?
So we start with the first three digits, that's X.
When you multiply that number by 80, you now have 80X.
Next you add one, giving you 80X plus one, multiply that quantity by 250.
Now what do you do?
Add the last four digits of your phone number, so now we add Y, and we add the four digits
again, so we add Y again.
Next you are to subtract 250, so we do so, and before dividing it by two, let's simplify
the number we have so far, right?
We take 80X plus one times 250, when we multiply through, that's 20,000X plus 250, plus Y,
plus Y minus the 250, so the 250's cancel, and you're left with 20,000X plus 2Y.
Finally, you take this number, divide it by two, and you have 10,000X plus Y, and I claim
that is in fact your phone number.
For instance, with Mr. E's phone number, when X was 271, and Y is 8281, look at the
number 10,000X plus Y.
When you take X and you multiply it by 10,000, that's just attaching four zeros to it, which
is just enough room so that when you add the number Y, 8281, in this case, you get the
entire phone number, 271, 8281.
And now you know the mystery behind that magic trick.
Something else I love to play with are magic squares.
What I've brought here is in fact the smallest magic square you can create using the numbers
one through 16.
If you took the time to verify, you would see that every row and every column adds to
the same number, in this case 34.
Now I've done such an extensive study on magic squares that I propose to create one
for you right before your very eyes, but I want to personalize this one a little bit.
So I'm going to do this with any birthday that you give me, but since you're not here
to give me one, I'll choose one that's special to me.
My daughter Laurel's birthday, her birthday is December 3, 1998.
So let's commemorate that by writing that in the first row of the magic square.
That would be 12, 3, 9, 8.
Now to create a magic square out of this, let's add those four digits together.
12 plus 3 is 15, plus 9 is 24, plus 8 is 32.
And now what I'm going to try and do is to fill out the rest of this magic square such
that in such a way that every row and every column and in as many possible ways that I
can get everything to add up to 32.
Okay, here we have it.
Let's see how we've done.
Now we know that the first row adds up to 32.
Let's check out another row.
Let's say row number two.
If we add that together, we have 8 plus 9 is 17, plus 11 is 28, plus 4 is 32.
The other rows were 9, 19, 21, 32, 3, 13, 23, 32.
Choose a column.
One, two, three, or four.
Which one would you like?
Column one.
Okay, look, 12 plus 8 is 20, plus 9 is 29, plus 3 is 32.
The others were 3, 12, 22, 32, 9, 20, 22, 32, 8, 12, 23, 32.
How about that?
Now before you get too excited, I actually decided that since this was Laurel's Magic
Square at no extra charge, I would give you these diagonals as well.
Check it out here.
3 plus 10 is 13, plus 11 is 24, plus 8 is 32, 12, 21, 23, 32.
But I didn't stop there either.
I decided that since this was Laurel's Birthday Magic Square, wouldn't it be great if we
could get these four in the center to add up as well?
Check it out here.
9 plus 11 is 20, plus 2 is 22, plus 10 is 32.
But I didn't stop there either.
You may have noticed I put a little extra attention in that corner.
I did that so I could get these four squares.
12 plus 3 is 15, plus 9 is 24, plus 8 is 32 to add up.
And I figured, heck, as long as we got that group of four, let's have a party.
We may as well get this group of four, 9, 17, 21, 32, 9, 19, 29, 32, 2, 13, 22, 32.
But did I stop there?
No, I figured Laurel wouldn't be happy unless we got this group of four, this group of four.
Now I have to apologize.
I was not able to get this group of four nor that group of four to add up.
But I had to do it that way if I was going to get these four in the corners.
I knew that would be important to you, 12, 20, 29, 32.
But wait, here's the cool part.
Not only do those four numbers in the corners add up to 32.
If you look at them carefully, we have the original four numbers, 12, 3, 9, 8.
I was able to give Laurel her birthday a second time.
And that is the birthday magic square.
Now let's see how you can learn to create a birthday magic square of your own.
We begin by taking...
So let's suppose that the original birth date had numbers A, B, C, and D, okay?
We'll begin by writing A, B, C, and D, those same four numbers in every row and column
and diagonal in this special way.
Don't worry about memorizing this magic, the arrangement I have here.
You do not need to memorize it.
Just take a look at it.
Notice that every row and every column and every diagonal, in fact, every group that
I pointed out earlier has the same numbers or letters, if you will, A, B, C, and D, okay?
So of course they all add up to A plus B plus C plus D.
Now that wouldn't be a very magical magic square.
As a matter of fact, there's a special name for this kind of magic square.
It's called a Latin square, where every row and every column has the same four numbers.
So to disguise our Latin square and make it a little bit more magical, here's what we're
going to do.
I'm going to start by writing the number B in the lower left hand corner, okay?
That's a given.
I'm going to take that C, the one that's in the third row, second column, and I'm going
to add one to that number.
So instead of writing C, I'm going to put C plus one, and I designate that just by writing
C plus, okay?
Now look at that first diagonal.
Right now it's got a B, a C plus, an A, and a D. That's not going to add up correctly,
so I fix that by changing that A to an A minus.
Now that diagonal adds up to A plus B plus C plus D. Next, look at that group of four
in the upper right corner, right?
We have an A minus, a C, a D, and a B. We change that B to a B plus, and now that group
of four adds up to A plus B plus C plus D. We say that that group of four balances, okay?
It's the middle group of four at the top.
In order to get that to balance, I change that D to a D plus, and then for that other
group of four, I will change that C to a C minus.
It kind of has a feeling like doing Sudoku, doesn't it?
Okay, next we go down the first column.
Notice we have A, C minus, and a B, so that D has to become a D plus.
Actually, I'll let you on a little secret.
Notice that that D plus is the same as the D plus in the second row, second column.
So I can just repeat those numbers, because those will always be the same.
Next I go into the middle, and I have a C plus, a D plus, and A minus, so that B has
to become a B minus.
Next I go to the bottom group of four.
Now here's where things get a little interesting, right?
We've got a B, a D plus, and a C plus.
What do I have to do to that A in order to get things to balance?
In order to get things to balance, I have to change that A to an A minus minus.
Now that group of four is balanced.
Likewise, for the D, in order to get the middle group of four on the bottom to balance, I
have to change that D to a D plus plus.
Okay, so by doing that, that group of four balances, and similarly, the number, once
your brain is starting to get tired of all this, the third row, fourth column entry,
that's an A minus, and that is going to match up with the other A minus, so those two numbers
will always be equal, and that C stays put as before.
If you take a look at this magic square now, you'll notice that every row, every column,
every diagonal, every group of four that we want is balanced, okay?
So even the ones we weren't trying for are balanced.
Now let's put this into practice.
Since we want the birthday to appear in the four corners, I will need to put a three in
the lower left corner, and eventually a nine in the lower right corner, but I won't write
the nine too soon because I don't want to be too obvious about it.
So following the model of our diagram, here we go.
I'll start by writing a three in the lower left corner, okay?
And the next thing we do is we write a ten in the next spot in the third row, second
column.
Here we're writing the number C plus one, and since C is nine, we write the number ten.
From this point on, everything will be forced.
Now we look at those numbers, three, ten, and eight, along the diagonal.
Those numbers add up to 21.
So what has to go in that fourth spot so that the diagonal adds up to 32?
Well right now, three plus ten plus eight is 21.
We have to put an 11 there in order to reach 32.
Now to get that group of four in the top right to balance, we have 11 plus nine plus eight
is 28.
So what has to go there in order to reach 32?
That has to be a four.
Now we do the middle center, 11 plus nine plus three is 23.
So what has to go there to get the 32?
Nine.
As I said, this feels a lot like Sudoku, doesn't it?
Nine plus three plus 12 is 24, so that becomes your eight is 32.
Now to get the number in the first, the first number in the third row, we don't have to
do any calculation.
We just bring that nine down because we know those two numbers will always be equal.
Then I go to the middle.
I have a ten, a nine, and an 11.
Those add up to 30, so the next number has to be two.
It's a good mental arithmetic workout, isn't it?
Okay, the bottom left, we've got three, nine, ten.
Those add up to 22, so that's missing a ten.
The bottom middle, we've got a ten, a ten and a two.
Those add up to 22, so again we're missing a ten.
Once your brain starts feeling tired of all the calculating, you're essentially done.
You just write down that 11 because those two numbers will always be equal, followed
by writing the nine, which you get from the original birthday, the 12, 3, 98.
And then if you check it out, you've just created the magic square as promised.
Here's another mathematical game that was actually inspired by a TV show.
It's called Mathematical Survivor.
Okay, here's how the game goes.
You take any six numbers, keep them positive one-digit numbers just to make life easy,
but in fact this can be done with any number of numbers, and this will always work.
But let's keep it simple.
Give me six numbers that you'd like.
You say three, one, four, one, five, nine.
Oh, I like those numbers.
The first six digits of pi, you and I think a lot alike, but you could have chosen any
numbers, okay?
Now, here's how the game goes.
I want you to choose any two of those six numbers and circle them.
We're going to remove those numbers from our list and replace them with a new number,
or a new cast member if you will, of our show of Mathematical Survivor.
So you remove the three and the five, so you're left with one, four, one, nine, and here's
what you replace it with.
You take the two numbers you removed, you multiply the two numbers, you add the two
numbers, and then you add those two numbers.
So for instance, with three and five, you multiply them to get 15, three plus five is
eight, and with the 15 and the eight, you add them to get 23, and that becomes your
fifth number.
Now you're looking at the numbers one, four, one, nine, and 23, and you repeat the process.
Choose any two numbers.
Let's say you chose one and four.
You're going to get rid of those numbers, you're going to multiply them, that gives
you four, you're going to add those numbers, that gives you five, then add those two numbers,
four plus five is nine, and that becomes the fourth member of your list.
Now you have one, nine, 23, and nine, and you do the same sort of thing, right?
You take, let's say you wanted the nine and the 23 to be removed.
So you take those numbers out.
Your product is, oh, 207.
Their sum is 32.
When you add those two numbers together, you get 239.
So now your list is left to become 19239, okay?
Remove two of those.
Let's say one and the 239, take their product, take their sum, add those numbers together,
you get 479.
You're now left with just two numbers.
You have to pick those two, nine and 479, you multiply them, you add them, and the result
is 4799.
Now here's the cool part.
The cool part is that the answer that you get when you do this process, starting with
three, one, four, one, five, nine, you will always end up with 4799.
No matter what order you do this in, you'll always end up with 4799.
And that's pretty interesting.
Now first let me show you how you can do the trick, and then we'll explain why the
trick works, how it works.
First of all, when you say the numbers three, one, four, one, five, nine, I will write down
secretly or with a calculator, I'll take the numbers that are each one larger than yours.
So if you go three, one, four, one, five, nine, I'll take the numbers four, two, five,
two, six, ten.
And with my numbers, I simply multiply them together.
So if we do four times two times five times two times six times ten, use a calculator
if you need to, you'll get 4800.
From that answer, subtract one and you'll get 4799.
And that's going to be the answer that you're going to get with three, one, four, one, five,
nine, guaranteed.
In general, if you start with the numbers a one, a two through a n, the mathematical
survivor of that list will be the product of taking all of those numbers except taking
one bigger than all of those numbers.
You're multiplying them together and then subtracting one.
In other words, it's a one plus one times a two plus one all the way up to a n plus
one minus one.
Now why does that work?
Okay.
Suppose you start with the numbers a one through a n.
I start with the numbers a one plus one all the way up through a n plus one.
And while you're playing your game, I'm going to play a much simpler game.
That is whenever you circle two numbers, I will also circle the same corresponding numbers,
but all I do is multiply mine together.
None of this multiplying, summing and summing.
I just multiply mine together.
So at the end of the game, my numbers are simply going to be the product of all the
original numbers because I'm not doing anything fancy, right?
I just take two of them and replace them with their product and choose two more, replace
them with their product.
So at the end of the game, I'm going to end up with the product of all my numbers.
Now notice what happens every time you choose the numbers a and b and you get a b plus a
plus b, their product and their sum added together.
And I'm replacing a plus one and b plus one with their product, giving me a b plus a plus
b plus one.
So that means that our lists began with one apart everywhere.
They're still going to be one apart everywhere.
So at each step, my numbers are each one greater than yours.
To take an example, suppose you start with three, one, four, one, five, nine, and I start
with four, two, five, two, six, ten.
When you replace three and five with 23, right?
Their product is 15, their sum is eight, add those to get 23, I simply multiply four and
six together to get 24.
So my 24 is still one bigger than your 23.
That is my list of five terms is term by term one bigger than your list of five terms.
And that's going to stay true at every single step, including the very end.
And since I know that my list is guaranteed to end up with the product of those six numbers,
4,800, then you're going to be left with a single number that's one less than mine, 4,799.
And so that's why this trick is going to work in general.
All right, here's one more thing I want to show you.
I've shown you how to do all kinds of amazing mental calculations in this course.
The last calculation I'm going to teach you to do is how to do instant cube roots in your
head.
Okay.
Ask a friend of yours to pull out a calculator, take a two digit number and cube it that is
multiplied by itself and then by the original number again.
Okay.
So for instance, suppose your friend tells you that the cube of their number is 74,088.
You can, once you know the secret, immediately tell them that the original number was 42.
Now let's see how you can do that.
In order to do this, you first have to memorize a table of cubes, the cubes of the numbers
one through 10.
Now don't panic.
That's not too hard to do.
In fact, probably five or six of them you can do in your head already, right?
One cubed is one, two cubed is eight, three cubed is 27, right?
Four cubed is 64, right?
Four times four times four, five cubed is five times five times five is 125.
And I'll bet you know 10 cubed without having to think too hard, right?
That's 1,000.
Exactly.
Okay.
The other four cubes you might have to memorize to get comfortably with, right?
Six cubed is six times six times six is 216.
One cubed is 343, eight cubed is 512, nine cubed is 729.
Take the time to memorize this list.
Know it backwards and forwards.
Once you do, you can now figure out the cube roots instantly.
And here's how it goes.
Notice if you look at that list, you'll notice a very curious feature about these numbers.
If you look at the last digits of the numbers of the cubes, all those last digits are different.
It is to say only one number when cubed ends in one, namely one.
Only one number when cubed ends in two, namely eight, right?
Eight cubed is 512.
Only one number when cubed ends in three, seven cubed is 343 and so on.
In fact, another curious pattern you'll notice is that when you cube a number, it's either
going to end in the same number, like one cubed ends in one, four cubed ends in four,
or it's going to end with 10 minus that number.
For instance, two cubed ends in eight, and eight cubed ends in two, okay?
Once you know this pattern and you know all these numbers, you can figure out the cube
root.
And here's how to do it.
Let's take our original example, okay?
Everybody tells you that the two digit number cubed is 74,088.
Here are the two things you pay attention to.
First listen for the thousands.
In this case, it's 74,000.
Now we know that four cubed is 64.
That means that 40 cubed is 64,000.
And five cubed is 125.
That means 50 cubed is 125,000.
Now since this cube is equal to 74,000 in something, that means that it must lie between
64,000 and 125,000.
That is, it lies between 40 cubed and 50 cubed.
What that tells us is that our answer must be in the 40s.
It's 40 something.
But 40 what?
Ah, but now that we know, since we know that our answer is a perfect cube, all we have to
do is look at the last digit of that cube.
The last digit of that cube is eight, right?
74,088.
And only one number when cubed ends in eight, namely the number two.
So the last digit of the original two digit number had to be two.
So it starts with a four.
It ends with a two.
So that number has to be 42.
That was the original cube root.
Let's do one more example just to make sure you have it.
Because I cube, say on my calculator, the, a two digit number.
And I tell you that I have a six digit answer, 681,472.
Okay.
Figure out what the cube root is.
All right.
Once again, listen for the thousands.
That's 681,000.
Now 681 lives between eight cubed and nine cubed, right?
It lives between 512 and 729.
That means that the original number had to begin with eight.
That the, the original two digit number was in the eighties.
So the first digit is eight.
Okay.
What's the last digit of our answer?
Well, we go to the last digit of the cube.
We see that the, the six digit number ends with a two.
Only one number when cubed ends in two, that's also the number eight.
So the original number had to be 88.
You've now figured out the cube root.
Okay.
I'd like to end finally with a card trick.
And I'm not going to give you the secret to this card trick right away.
On the other hand, I have confidence with all the math that you've learned in
this course, that if you watch this trick, and
you might have to watch it a few times, you might be able to figure it out.
Okay, so here's how it goes.
Now, normally you would give, this trick works with 20 cards.
These are the tens, jacks, queens, kings, and aces from the deck.
Okay, I've taken all those cards, and you give your friend the 20 cards to shuffle
to her heart's content.
Okay, now, since I'm here by myself, I will just shuffle these until you tell me
to stop, until you are content with the shuffle.
Are you content?
Are your hearts content?
Okay, so we'll stop here.
Now, I'm going to keep these cards in the same order that we have,
except I'm going to turn some of the cards face up, some of the cards face down,
move some of the cards together, but I'll give you choices.
Do you want these two cards to be face up or face down?
Your decision.
You want them face up, that's fine.
How about these two cards?
Would you like these cards to be face up or face down?
You say face down, okay.
How about these two cards?
You want them face up, or do you want them face down?
You say face up?
No problem.
All right, I'm going to bring these two cards together like this.
Do you want these cards to be, do you want me to keep them like this?
Or should I flip them?
Keep or flip?
Keep, okay.
How about these two cards?
Face up or face down?
Face up, okay.
And how about these two cards?
Should I keep or flip?
Flip you say.
Okay.
How about these?
Keep or flip?
Another flip.
How about these two cards?
Would you like them face up or face down?
You tell me.
Face down, okay.
How about these two?
Keep or flip?
You say keep.
And how about these two?
Keep or flip?
You said flip.
Okay.
That's what I thought I heard you say.
All right.
Let's go.
Let's randomize these cards a little bit more.
I've got, I'll bring them in groups of four and you tell me, should I keep them or flip
them?
Keep or flip?
Keep you say.
All right.
How about these four?
Keep or flip?
Flip.
How about these four?
Keep or flip?
Keep.
These four you want to keep, okay.
And these four cards will flip.
Okay.
Finally, I'm going to deal these cards out into four rows of five and I'll go left to
right here, but you want the next row to be right to left or left to right up to you.
Right to left, you say.
Okay.
We'll go right to left.
How about the next row?
Also right to left.
You sound like a right to left or to me.
All right.
How about the next row?
Right to left or left?
You say left to right this time.
Okay.
Very good.
All right.
Now we've, these cards are pretty darn random.
I'm now going to consolidate the cards, bring the cards together.
Instead of cutting the cards, we're going to fold the cards.
Okay.
I'll show you what I mean.
I'm going to fold either the left edge, the right edge, the top or the bottom.
Which one do you want me to fold?
The bottom one?
Okay.
I'll take the bottom edge and I will fold these cards up just like that.
Okay.
Now which one?
The top or bottom?
You say left.
Okay.
I'll fold the left edge in like this.
Now which one?
Left, right, top or bottom?
Left again?
Okay.
No problem.
Just like that.
Now which one?
Left, right, top or bottom?
The top.
Okay.
Now which one?
Left, right, top or bottom?
The right.
Okay.
And now which?
Top, bottom, left, right?
The top.
Okay.
Now which one?
Left, right, top or bottom?
We'll go with the right.
Okay.
Now wouldn't it be amazing if after all this randomization, all the cards were now facing
in the same direction?
It would be amazing, but it wouldn't be true.
But you recall, you started this whole process by letting me shuffle the cards to my heart's
content, to your heart's content.
I could tell your hearts were very content because if you look at the cards that are
now face up, we have here the ten, the jack, the queen, the king, and the ace of hearts.
I hope in this course you've been able to experience the joy of math, indeed the magic
of math as much as I have.
Thank you very much.
