Here we are at the fifth lecture in this course. And to be honest, you've gone through a lot already.
You've accomplished quite a bit. I want to congratulate you. There's been some deep ideas.
We've learned that realities made of quantum fields, that particles are simply what we see
when we look at quantum fields, that there are symmetries of nature that are gauge symmetries
that can be independently acting at different points in space, that these gauge symmetries imply
the existence of certain quantum fields called connection fields, that those connection fields
give rise to the forces of nature from gravity and electromagnetism to the nuclear forces.
And finally, we've learned a long list of actual fields and particles, the quarks, the leptons, the gauge bosons.
The reason why we've been rushing through this tremendous amount of material so quickly
is because we wanted to get to the Higgs field itself and the Higgs boson, which is evidence for it.
And that's where we are now. So everything is a field. Everything in the universe is made of fields.
Fields have values. What is a field? It's something that every point in space has some numerical value.
There's a big difference between the Higgs field and every other field that we know about,
which is that other fields, the electron field, the gravitational field, what have you,
in empty space in the vacuum, in the lowest energy state that you can imagine,
the other fields are sitting there at zero. Their value, which they have at every point, is just zero everywhere.
What distinguishes the Higgs field from everything else is that the Higgs is not zero in empty space.
It's there. It is a background through which everything else moves.
The Higgs is an invisible energy field that suffuses space itself. That is the idea.
So why would anyone come up with that idea? Why would anyone suggest that there is such a field that is non-zero,
even in empty space? To understand that, we have to go back to the 1950s.
Remember, in the 1950s, we were trying to understand the nuclear forces.
We understood a lot about how nuclei worked. We'd already built nuclear reactors and nuclear bombs,
but as physicists, people wanted to know the mathematical structure that governed the strong nuclear force and the weak nuclear force.
So what does that mean? To understand the mathematical structure, it means we want to write down a field theory,
a certain set of fields, a certain set of equations, which means masses, spins, interactions,
that would explain the weak nuclear force and the strong nuclear force.
Now, we didn't at the time know what the particles were that were the excitations of the fields that gave rise to the strong force
and the weak force. All we really knew was that these forces had a very short range.
So remember, electromagnetism and gravity were long-range forces,
and the weak nuclear force and the strong nuclear force are short-range forces.
That's sort of qualitative description of what's going on.
So what about a little bit more quantitative understanding?
Well, think about Newton's law of gravity, right?
Isaac Newton said that gravity obeys an inverse square law.
The further you get from something, the weaker gravity gets, that makes sense,
and the particular quantitative way that it gets weaker is one over the distance squared.
And really, it doesn't matter how strong a force is.
Any force that obeys an inverse square law like that, we will call long-range.
Even though the strength of the force gets weaker and weaker as you get further away,
it never quite goes to zero, or it doesn't go to zero really very dramatically.
When we talk about a short-range force, we mean something that doesn't obey an inverse square law,
something that falls off in strength much faster than that.
Typically, a short-range force falls off exponentially fast,
which means that instead of one over the distance squared,
the strength of the force goes as some number to the power of minus the distance.
If you're quantitatively inclined, if you're a physicist or a mathematician,
you usually take Euler's constant E, which is about 2.7, to be the thing that you raise to powers.
And that's where the word exponential fits in.
E for exponential, we say that you go as E to the minus the distance
if you fall off as a short-range force.
That's what the weak and strong force apparently do.
The question is, why?
And the reason why this question is subtle is because the fact
that electromagnetism and gravity are long-range forces is not just an accident.
In some sense, it's a built-in feature of the geometry of space itself.
Think about gravity, just to pick one example.
Think about the sun and the lines of force that are coming out of the sun.
This is much like our lantern example.
The lines of gravitational force emitting from the sun or going into the sun
are very much like the paths of the photons or the lines of the light rays coming out of the lantern.
We mentioned that the lantern also obeys an inverse square law.
Brightness or the intensity that you see goes like one over the distance to the lantern squared,
and there's a simple reason why that's true.
If you think about all those photons leaving, the intensity is proportional to how many photons you're seeing.
So if you think about all those photons spreading out in a spherically symmetric pattern,
their density dilutes away as they get further from the lantern.
Roughly speaking, if we were to draw a big sphere or a small sphere for that matter
that surrounded the lantern, the same number of light rays would be piercing the sphere,
but their density would be much less if the sphere were bigger.
It would be diluted away as the area of the sphere which goes like the distance to the sphere squared.
That's why the intensity of a lantern obeys an inverse square law.
It's basically because space itself has three spatial dimensions.
So basically, it makes sense to us to get an inverse square law for intensity.
Similarly, it makes sense to have an inverse square law for forces.
There are lines of forces of gravity coming from the sun,
and they get diluted as they spread over spheres at larger and larger distances.
Mathematically, in quantum field theory, what that implies is that a long-range force
is mediated by a massless particle.
Photons, which are the particles of electromagnetism, have zero mass.
Gravitons, which are the hypothetical particles of gravity, also have zero mass.
When you have a long-range force, you have massless particles and vice versa.
It turns out that this all fits together in a very, very nice, elegant story.
If you have a gauge symmetry, remember gauge symmetries have connection fields
that tell you how to relate the symmetry transformations from one point to another.
The bosons, the particles that are associated with those connection fields,
are always massless. It is a mathematical fact.
So you expect that gauge symmetries give rise to long-range forces.
Somehow, the nuclear forces, weak and strong nuclear forces, are not long-range.
What is going on there? How can you possibly fit that together?
A possible answer came about in the 1950s, 1960s with the idea of breaking symmetries.
You can have a symmetry that is sort of underlying your equations,
but then you can pause it while maybe there is a field that fills all of space,
and the existence of this field breaks the symmetry.
This was a number of physicists who suggested this idea, including Yoshiro Nambu of the University of Chicago.
He won the Nobel Prize for this idea in 2008.
So this gives you a clue. Maybe the weak and strong nuclear forces are gauge theories.
Maybe they are associated with massless bosons, but maybe those symmetries are broken
and breaking the symmetry gives a mass to the bosons.
If the math says that symmetry implies masslessness,
then maybe breaking the symmetry gives you a mass, and that would explain the short-range forces.
Alas, it's not that simple. Geoffrey Goldstone, a British physicist, proved a theorem called Goldstone's theorem,
which says that you can break symmetries by putting a field in empty space,
but then even if you give masses to the gauge bosons, there are a new kind of boson that is invented,
which we now call Goldstone bosons, which are also massless.
Goldstone's theorem seemed to imply that whenever you had a symmetry, you would get a massless particle of one form or another.
And whenever you have massless particles, they're easy to make. They're easy to make in a particle accelerator.
They're easy to find. The conclusions seem to be that the nuclear forces could not be Yang-Mills theories,
theories based on gauge symmetries, because those theories would necessarily lead to massless particles,
and we didn't see such massless particles.
In fact, that logic was wrong. That's what people believed in the 1950s, early 60s. Now we know better.
And there's a principle in physics that says that the universe arranges itself to be as complicated as possible
for graduate students studying particle physics. So the reason how nature gets around this argument
is completely different for the strong nuclear force and for the weak nuclear force.
So think first about the strong nuclear force. It is gluons that carry the strong nuclear force.
It turns out gluons are exactly massless, just like all the theorem said.
It's a perfectly good, sensible Yang-Mills theory based on a gauge symmetry.
The difference that people hadn't thought about is that the strong nuclear force is strong,
and what I mean by that is not only does it have a very strong interaction strength,
but the gluons interact with each other.
Photons of electromagnetism interact with electrically charged particles,
but the photons themselves are not electrically charged,
but gluons interact with colored particles, like quarks, and the gluons themselves are colored.
This leads to a phenomenon called confinement in the strong interactions.
If you think about our lantern example, it's like the lantern has a shutter around it,
like a mirrored shutter that keeps all the light rays inside.
If you're outside the lantern, you see nothing.
If you put your head inside the lantern, suddenly it's very, very bright.
Likewise, the gluons that are inside a proton or a neutron are interacting with each other,
and it's more like a big old ball of yarn than a bunch of lines of force spreading out to infinity.
When you're outside the proton, there's almost no evidence of the strong nuclear force,
but if you could put your head inside a proton, it would be very, very strong indeed.
It took years to figure this out, and it made people very skeptical about the very idea of quarks,
because you couldn't actually see them.
It turns out they are confined inside the proton and the neutron.
The particles, the gluons, the particles that are carrying the force are massless,
but we don't notice because the gluons never escape to the outside world.
So what about the weak nuclear force? It's a different issue.
A different thing makes the weak nuclear force short range.
Think once again about our lantern.
Think about our lantern walking away, gets dimmer and dimmer according to the inverse square law,
but now imagine that the person walking away from us is walking away on a foggy night.
Now the lantern actually gets dimmer faster, and that's because the light is being absorbed by the fog.
So imagine that there is some fog-like thing filling the universe that absorbs the lines of the weak nuclear force.
It obscures the weak nuclear force.
It would effectively give mass to the bosons that carry the weak nuclear force.
Well there is such a fog suffusing space, and that fog is in fact the Higgs field.
That's the logic that led people to suggest the Higgs field.
If there were only some field filling all of space that absorbed the weak nuclear force,
it would make it short range, and it would give a mass to the W boson and the Z boson.
That is the idea that we currently believe is true.
The reason why we think that the Higgs boson fills space with a non-zero value
is because if there is such a field, it would allow us to build a gauge symmetry theory
underlying the weak interactions, and also explain why the weak interactions have such a short range.
The lines of weak nuclear force are absorbed by the Higgs field.
And ultimately that's why it's the Higgs field filling space, not the particle that we found in the LHC,
that is really interesting to us.
It's the field that is doing all the work.
If you imagine what truly empty space looks like, there's a whole bunch of fields,
but almost all of them are at zero.
A tiny fluctuation in the field might exist because of quantum mechanics,
but basically it's just sitting there, except the Higgs field.
Every other field is at zero, the Higgs is at some whopping big value.
That's what makes it so interesting.
Now this idea sounds familiar to us.
A field that is invisible in filling space goes back to the late 1800s.
There was the idea of the ether.
The ether was a hypothetical field that filled space and it explained what electromagnetic waves moved through.
Back in the 1800s, people weren't quite as comfortable with the idea of a field all by itself.
They wanted to have the waves of electricity and magnetism be waves of some stuff,
and that stuff was the ether.
The problem is we couldn't find it.
We looked for it, there was no evidence for it.
It's something like the ether is coming back when we think about the Higgs field.
Well the answer is no.
The really important thing about the ether field was you could measure your speed with respect to it.
The ether has a rest frame.
It turns out that the Higgs field has no rest frame.
And also it has nothing to do with electromagnetism.
It's the weak force that it is affecting.
So even though in some sense the Higgs field reminds us of the ether,
it's fundamentally a very different thing.
In the very last lecture of this course we'll talk about the possibility
that the Higgs field is related to dark energy, which is causing the universe to accelerate,
but to be honest the chances are that that's probably not true.
Now this idea of a field-filling space giving mass to gauge bosons breaking symmetries,
this is a very general mechanism, which we now call the Higgs mechanism.
It might work for all sorts of different symmetries.
For example, grand unified theories posit that there are many other gauge bosons,
many other forces we haven't yet discovered, and some Higgs-like field is giving them mass.
It turns out that the sort of most easy to find version of the Higgs field
is the one that is responsible for the weak interactions.
That's a very interesting historical story to tell about how we came to realize
that there was a Higgs field suffusing space that was responsible for the weak force.
And remember the goal that people had in mind was circumventing Goldstone's theorem.
Goldstone's theorem says that if you don't have broken symmetry there's a massless gauge boson,
but if you do have a broken symmetry there's a massless goldstone boson.
So the physicists of the 50s and 60s were asking themselves,
how do we make theories without any massless bosons at all?
The first person to really do it successfully was a guy named Philip Anderson.
He is a very successful condensed matter physicist.
So condensed matter physics means you're looking at actual material stuff,
not just individual particles, but like collections of electrons.
If you study superconductivity or fluid mechanics, you're a condensed matter physicist.
And indeed it turns out that the physics of superconductivity is very, very similar to the physics of the Higgs boson.
So way back in 1963, Phil Anderson suggested that maybe there was some kind of field filling space
that gave weak interaction bosons a mass and explained why they were not long range.
Now it turns out that nobody listened to him.
Phil Anderson was a condensed matter physicist which means he spoke the language of condensed matter physics.
The people doing quantum field theory and particle physics spoke a different language.
For one thing, they spoke the language of relativity and Anderson's model had no relativity in it whatsoever.
So he was more or less ignored at the time.
Fortunately for him, he won the Nobel Prize in 1977 for something completely different.
In 1964, only one year after Anderson, the particle physicists really started to tackle this problem themselves.
And the first work on the subject was done by two physicists, François Anglert and Robert Brout in 1964.
It's really a great story because these two people, Anglert and Brout, became best friends.
They met each other quite young.
Brout was a professor at Cornell and Anglert came from Belgium, his home country, to work as a post-doctoral researcher.
They proposed this idea, which we now call the Higgs mechanism, and they found it so much fun working together
that when Anglert went back to Belgium to get a faculty job, Brout was also offered a job in Belgium and he went with him.
And the two of them kept collaborating for years and years.
Sadly, Robert Brout passed away in 2011, so he didn't quite get to see the Higgs boson discovered.
But Anglert, of course, shared the Nobel Prize with our next inventor, Peter Higgs.
Peter Higgs was a British physicist who in 1964, working completely independently of Anglert and Brout, suggested the same basic idea.
In fact, he wrote two papers. One paper he said, in principle, you can imagine violating Goldstone's theorem.
In other words, he said that Goldstone's theorem didn't quite apply to gauge symmetries, to local symmetries that were true everywhere.
They only apply to global symmetries that you need to do all over the place.
And then in his second paper, he actually built a very specific model in which that happened.
We now call it the Higgs model.
His second paper, interestingly enough, was rejected.
It was a very strange thing to have a paper accepted that said, you can violate a theorem, then have a paper rejected saying, and here is a model that doesn't.
But what Higgs did is he added some more paragraphs to the paper and submitted it to a different journal and there it was accepted.
Most interestingly, the paragraphs he added to his second paper said, oh, by the way, this model predicts a new particle.
That's the particle we now call the Higgs boson.
So even though Higgs was not the first to invent the Higgs mechanism, he was the first to invent the Higgs boson.
He was not even the last to invent the Higgs mechanism.
There's a trio of physicists, Tom Kibble from England, and Gerald Gorolnik and Richard Hogan from the U.S., who also wrote a paper suggesting basically the same idea.
They were literally just a couple of months after Brout, Unglair, and Higgs, but that is enough to mean that none of those three guys shared the Nobel Prize.
But in the physics lore, they get just as much credit.
There's really these six people, or seven if you include Anderson, who really should get credit for the Higgs mechanism and the Higgs boson.
Finally, we should also give some credit to Gerard Etouft, one of the great physicists of the second half of the 20th century,
when he was still a graduate student in 1971.
It was Etouft who showed that the mathematical framework of the Higgs mechanism made sense.
So if you are at all familiar with the history of particle physics and quantum field theory,
you know that Feynman and Schwinger and Tom Monaga won the Nobel Prize for showing that electromagnetism was something called renormalizable.
A renormalizable theory is one where you might get infinity if you do a calculation halfway,
but when you're done doing the calculation, you're guaranteed to get a finite answer.
Etouft showed that the Higgs mechanism was also renormalizable.
Before he came along, no one took it seriously.
After Etouft's paper came out, everyone figured this Higgs mechanism is on the right track, we need to learn more about it.
So all of these guys were attaching their attention to a kind of general question.
How can we have a gauge theory whose force is short range rather than long range?
Probably most of them had in the back of their minds that it would be the strong interactions that this applied to.
It turns out that it's a weak interactions.
And the guy who really put this together was Stephen Weinberg in 1967.
He wrote a very short paper called A Theory of Leptons, which nobody read.
In fact, you look at the number of times that Weinberg's paper was cited.
The first two years after he wrote it, there were less than five total citations.
A few years after that, it was the most cited paper in all of physics,
because it was really Weinberg's paper that took the idea of the Higgs mechanism
and showed how it explained the weak interactions.
So think about where Weinberg's mind was.
He knew about the Higgs mechanism.
He knew about the idea of breaking symmetries.
And he was trying to apply this to the strong nuclear force.
He wasn't really getting anywhere.
It didn't fit the data in a very precise way.
But it turns out that Weinberg had a classmate back in high school named Sheldon Glashow.
You remember, Glashow was Schwinger's student.
It was Glashow who was stuck with a thankless task of trying to unify electromagnetism with the weak force.
And he sort of broke all the rules in doing it.
Glashow made up a bunch of symmetries.
He broke the symmetries by hand by giving the W and Z bosons masses for no good reason.
He predicted a new particle that we now call the Z boson that no one had ever seen before.
So again, not a lot of people paid attention to Glashow's model.
But Weinberg had remembered it.
Interesting, even though Weinberg and Glashow were high school classmates,
they didn't actually collaborate on physics very much.
Once they grew up, they did, however, end up sharing the Nobel Prize.
That's because Weinberg took Glashow's model with enough symmetry to give you the W bosons, the Z boson, and the photon.
And he used the Higgs field to break those symmetries.
Glashow had just broken them by hand.
He just said, I'm going to write down these terms that are mathematically disreputable.
Maybe no one will notice.
Weinberg said, no, no, no, there's a good way of doing it.
I'll put this field in empty space that Brout and Unglair and Hogan and Kibble and Guralnik and Higgs have told us about.
It turns out to work beautifully.
There's a very similar proposal of Glashow's by another physicist named Abdus Salaam,
working with John Ward in England.
And Salaam, soon after Weinberg, proposed something very, very similar,
a model with the same symmetries that gave rise to the same particles.
So the Nobel for what we now call the electroweak theory was shared by Glashow, Weinberg, and Salaam.
And the great thing about this electroweak model is it explains something that we didn't even know needed to be explained.
That's when you know that your physics theory is on the right track.
Weinberg's theory, remember, he was faced with a puzzle that Glashow and Schwinger had been faced with.
How can you unify the weak interactions with electromagnetism
when the weak interactions violate parity and electromagnetism doesn't?
In Weinberg's theory, he violated parity by basically saying that the weak interactions couple to particles spinning clockwise,
but not particles spinning counterclockwise.
In the technical jargon, Weinberg said that the weak interactions couple to left-handed particles and not right-handed particles.
Now, what this means is that how the weak interaction couples depends on how you look at the particles.
If you look at a particle spinning clockwise, but then you look at it from the other side, it'll look like it's spinning counterclockwise.
This is a big puzzle. How can a force of nature, like the weak nuclear force, know whether a particle is spinning clockwise or counterclockwise?
The answer is, imagine particles that are massless.
Imagine that the electron, the neutrinos, the quarks.
Imagine that all these particles were massless, so imagine a different world than we live in.
If a particle is massless, you can define its spin with respect to the direction in which it's moving.
A massive particle can sit still, but a massless particle needs to move at the speed of light.
That's something that Einstein taught us. Every massless particle moves at the speed of light and no other speed.
So you can't have a massless particle just sit stationary.
Massless particles moving at the speed of light always have a direction of motion.
You can say, is it spinning clockwise or counterclockwise with respect to its direction of motion?
That's the trick that Weinberg used.
He realized if he had massless fermions, like electrons and neutrinos, they could couple the left-handed ones to the weak interactions but not the right-handed ones.
Only massless fermions can violate parity.
There is, of course, an obvious problem, namely that the electron is not massless in the real world.
And Weinberg was not daunted by this problem because, as you've seen with other physicists already,
part of being a genius is not giving up when your theory does not completely fit the data.
Weinberg realized that if he added the Higgs mechanism to his theory,
it would not only do its job, namely give mass to the W and Z bosons as they are now called,
give mass to the gauge bosons of their theory,
but this Higgs field in empty space would also interact with the fermions.
The influence that that Higgs in the background would have on the electron, the muon, the tau, etc., would be to give them mass.
You can imagine a would-be massless electron moving through space.
If there were no Higgs there, it would be moving at the speed of light. It would be massless.
But because the electron keeps feeling the influence of the Higgs field all around it, that is what gives it mass.
If you like, imagine that I go to a party and Angelina Jolie comes to the party at the same time as I do.
If the two of us were to walk across the room and the room were empty,
we would get from one side of the room to the other in approximately the same amount of time.
We would move at the same speed if we're walking at the same rate.
But now, because it's a party and it's filled with other people,
when Angelina and I walk across the room, it's going to take us different amounts of time to do our journey,
because I can walk across the room more or less unimpeded,
but an important celebrity is going to constantly be mobbed by the people in the room.
They want to talk to where they want to get an autograph, they want to say hi, etc.
Essentially, I am like a little low-mass electron that is slightly feeling the Higgs field around me,
which is the other party-goers, whereas Angelina Jolie is like a top quark.
She has a strong interaction with the medium around her, in this case the party-goers.
The actual top quark feels the Higgs field.
So what Weinberg realized is that adding the Higgs field to his model of the weak interactions
gave him a bonus, a spin-off, an unexpected happy consequence,
that he could have a theory that violated parity, but give mass to all of the fermions.
And that's what we now think is how fermions actually get their mass in the real world.
This brilliant idea has influenced, of course, particle physicists ever since.
If you ever do become a grad student in particle physics, you will remember the moment when you're
sitting in class and they teach you about Weinberg's theory of leptons,
that not only does it explain the weak interactions being short-range,
it also gives mass to the electron and to the other particles.
Furthermore, there's very little wriggle room in Weinberg's theory.
The amount of mass that you get is not arbitrary,
it's proportional to how strongly you interact with the Higgs field.
So every particle, electrons, up quarks, top quarks, whatever,
there's a number that they come along with which is how strongly do you interact with the Higgs field.
And once you know that number, you know the mass of the particle.
Now this doesn't seem like a big step forward because for every particle it's different,
you just go out and measure it.
But the thing is that this one number, the strength of the interaction with the Higgs field,
predicts two different things.
It predicts the mass of the particle, like the electron or the top quark,
but it also predicts the interaction between a real Higgs boson and that particle.
So as far as explaining the physics of 1967, when Weinberg was inventing his theory,
there were just a whole bunch of arbitrary free parameters, the mass of the electron,
the mass of the tau, the mass of the charm park, etc.
But when we came to looking for the Higgs boson, we knew what to look for.
Because by measuring the mass of the electron and the other fermions,
we knew how strongly the Higgs boson coupled to them.
Weinberg's model is incredibly constrained.
There's not a lot of choice you have once you've built the model in the first place.
You begin to understand why physicists were so confident it was on the right track
even before we had actually found the Higgs.
And there was indeed quite a bit of confidence in physics or in other sciences.
One way of measuring confidence in ideas is by measuring the number of Nobel prizes
that those ideas receive.
Remember that people weren't really paying close attention to Weinberg's model
or to Solom's model until a tuft came along in 1971 and showed that it all made mathematical sense.
And the other big event was the discovery of what are called weak neutral currents in 1973.
This is basically a fancy way of saying the interactions that are mediated by the Z boson,
for which there had prior to 1973 been no evidence.
So after a tuft, people got excited.
They looked for these weak currents with the Z boson.
They found them at an experiment called Gargamel at CERN.
And finally in 1983, Carlo Rubia and collaborators discovered literally the W and Z bosons.
And because of all that coming together, many Nobel prizes were awarded.
Glashow, Weinberg and Solom got the Nobel Prize in 1979 for the theory.
Carlo Rubia shared the Nobel Prize with Simon Vandermeer in 1984 for finding the W and Z bosons.
And a tuft and his advisor, Weltmann, won the Nobel Prize in 1993 for renormalizing,
for showing that the electroweak theory made mathematical sense.
All three of these Nobel Prizes relied absolutely centrally on the idea of the Higgs boson,
which we had not yet, at that time, discovered.
So as one final question for this lecture, why do we call it the Higgs boson?
If it was discovered by Anderson and Brout and Unglaire and Higgs and Geronik and Hagen and Kibble and a tuft and so forth.
Well, the answer is, again, because people weren't paying attention.
It didn't become a popular idea until after a tuft, but once a tuft's paper came out,
showing that these theories made mathematical sense, the whole community of particle physicists scrambled to catch up.
And it turns out just by accident that a couple of the places where they went to catch up
mentioned Higgs' name before any of the other names.
In Stephen Weinberg's paper, there was actually a typographical error that put Higgs' paper before Brout and Unglaire.
And there was a famous lecture given by a physicist named Benjamin Lee, where he kept calling it the Higgs boson.
Besides which, the Higgs boson is a great name, and you wouldn't want to call it the Anderson, Brout, Unglaire, Higgs, etc. boson.
So we have to remember that Higgs is a name that's a perfectly good label for the new particle.
The actual credit belongs to many important physicists.
