By now, you should appreciate the majesty of the idea of the Higgs boson and the Higgs
field that it's based on.
It's an audacious concept, empty space is filled with an invisible field that is affecting
all the other particles that move through it.
But of course, it's not enough to have an idea, we want to go test that idea, we want
to go figure out whether it's right or not.
So you might want to rush out and start building particle accelerators, but it's a little
bit too premature for that.
Before we start building an experiment to look for the Higgs, we have to know exactly
what we're looking for.
So it's not enough to simply know what list of particles you have in the standard model,
we actually have to do some calculations.
We have to know how they interact, what is the rate of production of something like the
Higgs boson, and then how does it decay, what are we going to get out, were we to make the
Higgs in the first place.
Fortunately, for this course, we're not going to do a lot of detailed mathematical calculations,
but I will give you the same tools that a real particle physicist would use to calculate
these rates in these cross sections, namely Feynman diagrams, named after Richard Feynman,
the famous physicist from Caltech.
In fact, my claim to fame at Caltech is that the desk I use in my office used to be Richard
Feynman's old desk.
It's a desk that goes to the most senior physicist in the Caltech theory group who is not senior
enough to get a brand new desk.
So Feynman was faced with the task of calculating the rates of different particle physics interactions,
and he figured out back in the 1940s and 50s a cute diagrammatical way of doing it.
He saved himself a lot of effort that you could do the exactly the same thing purely
with equations, but he figured out a shortcut to get there.
In fact, he got a lot of flak for it because Feynman's shortcut involved drawing little
pictures where particles are represented by lines.
Now you and I know that that's not quite right.
The world is not made of particles.
The world is made of fields, and a lot of the senior physicists thought that Feynman had
misunderstood at this point.
But it turns out that for the purposes of these calculations, Feynman figured out how
to do field theory by using little diagrams with little lines representing the positions
of particles.
So Feynman gives us a recipe for turning questions that we have in quantum field theory and particle
physics into these little diagrams that give us the answer.
And by questions we mean either questions like what can possibly happen, but also what
is the exact rate at which it can happen.
The Feynman diagrams are really all about calculating the actual numbers.
They're not just the pretty pictures there.
So what is Feynman's recipe?
He says start with some fundamental interactions, some vertex, like for example an electron
can come in and it can spit off a photon.
So we draw a little picture of an electron line coming in and out goes an electron line
and a wavy line for a photon.
And then we put things like that together, these little vertices, we hook them up like
little Lego sets into all the different possible pictures we can draw.
For example, consider two electrons scattering off of each other.
Physically we know that what happens is two electrons come in and they repel each other
through electromagnetism.
In terms of Feynman diagrams, that means that one electron spits off a photon, the other
electron absorbs that photon and they scatter and go each other's ways.
But what Feynman tells us is that that one little picture is not enough.
This is one contribution to the final answer.
So you have something where an electron comes in, spits off a photon, the other one absorbs
it.
You also have an electron comes in and the two electrons exchange two photons or three
photons or any number.
You have more complicated diagrams where the electron comes in, it spits off a photon and
then that photon can decay into an electron-positron pair which then gets reabsorbed back into
the photon and that is what is absorbed by your other particle.
So these diagrams become arbitrarily complicated and what Feynman tells us is that we're supposed
to take the number for each diagram and add up every one of them.
The good news, however, is that the more complicated diagrams become smaller and smaller contributions
to the final answer.
So there's a little bit of a competition.
The more you draw in your Feynman diagrams, the more complicated they become, the harder
they are to calculate, but the good news is the less important they are as well.
In fact, with just very, very simple diagrams you can go very, very far in getting the right
answer in particle physics, at least for some interactions that's the case.
For the strong nuclear force, for example, the strong nuclear force is so strong that
even complicated diagrams become very important.
So modern particle physics, there's a lot of challenge in figuring out how to calculate
these Feynman diagrams as efficiently as we can.
So let's think about what it would actually mean to draw such a diagram and we're speaking
now the language of drawing pictures and diagrams, but it's not the diagram that matters.
What you should try to keep in mind are the concepts going on behind it.
Only these diagrams are simply shorthand for what can happen between the different particles
that we're talking about.
So as you know, we have your bosons and we have fermions.
We're going to represent each different kind of particle by a different kind of line in
the Feynman diagram.
So bosons, for example, we have the gauge bosons, the force carrying particles, and
we have the Higgs boson.
The gauge bosons are the photon, the graviton, the w, the z, and the gluons.
These are all represented by wavy lines.
Sometimes the physicists try to become a little bit more clever and have slightly different
kinds of wavy lines for the different gauge boson, but the basic idea is that wavy lines
are gauge bosons.
The Higgs boson, remember, is not a gauge boson.
It's a different kind of thing.
And in particular, the spin of the Higgs is zero.
The spin of the gauge boson is all, the gauge bosons are all one, except for the graviton,
which is spin two.
But a spin zero boson is something special.
It's a name.
It's called a scalar boson.
In fact, some people who didn't like the fact that Peter Higgs got his name attached to
the boson said we should be calling it the scalar boson instead.
But in fact, any particle that is spin zero is a scalar boson, and in a Feynman diagram,
that means it is represented by a single dash line.
As opposed to fermions, fermions are also simply straight lines.
They're not wavy like the gauge bosons, but fermions have a little arrow attached to them.
And that's because unlike the Higgs, which is a single particle all by itself, fermions
will have antiparticles.
So we attach a little arrow to the fermion lines to represent the difference between
a particle, like an electron, a muon, a tau, a neutrino, or a quark, and an antiparticle
like the positron, the antimuon, and so forth.
Roughly speaking, if our Feynman diagrams move left to right, then a particle going left
to right has an arrow pointing from left to right.
An antiparticle moving from left to right has an arrow pointing from right to left.
So the actual direction in which the antiparticle is moving is opposite the way we draw its
arrow.
And that's actually not just a clever nomenclature.
It's reflecting a deep fact about physics, which Feynman pointed out to us, namely that
antiparticles are kind of like particles traveling backward in time.
That is why we reverse the direction of the little arrow on the diagram.
And this is actually going to become very important when we think about what kinds of
diagrams there are.
So finally, we have not only the individual lines, but we put the lines together.
This is when it becomes fun.
This is when we get the interactions between the different particles.
So typically, most of the interactions that we'll be dealing with in particle physics
really only have three particles involved.
Either one comes in and two go out, or two come in and one goes out.
That is almost all of the interactions.
So these are called vertices.
It's like a little tricornered place where one line comes in, another one comes in, and
the third one intersects both of them.
And the secret to Feynman diagrams is that every such vertex is attached to a number,
the coupling constant, the interaction strength.
So for example, the Higgs boson, it can decay into a quark and an anti-quark.
So that would be represented by a little diagram where a Higgs boson line comes in, that's
just a straight line, and then two lines go out.
One with an arrow going left to right, that's the quark.
One with an arrow going right to left, that's the anti-quark.
And to this diagram, there's a number, a number that is hidden there in the rules of particle
physics, and we use that number to calculate something.
For example, if instead of the Higgs, we were looking at an electromagnetic interaction,
that number is called the fine structure constant.
It's a famous number in particle physics.
It's called the letter alpha, the Greek letter, and it's approximately equal to 1 over 137.
It's really a magic number in particle physics, because that tells you how strong the electromagnetic
interaction is, and electromagnetism is one of the most fundamental important interactions
that we have.
The Higgs boson, on the other hand, is kind of a mess.
For every interaction the Higgs has, with a fermion in the standard model, there is
a separate coupling constant, and it's of course that coupling constant that determines
the mass of that particle, but for our purposes in this lecture it also helps us calculate
the rate of decay of the Higgs into these other particles.
The Higgs is a heavy particle, it will decay into other things, and the rate of that decay
is fixed by that interaction constant, that number that is attached to this vertex, this
Feynman diagram with three legs coming out.
Here is one of the magical facts about Feynman diagrams.
If you have a diagram where one particle comes in and two go out, you automatically have
other diagrams that are obtained from that diagram by moving the lines around.
That is to say we can take any line that is on the left hand side and rotate it over to
the right, or any line that is on the right and rotate it over to the left.
So if we start with Higgs coming in, quark, anti-quark coming out, we can move that Higgs
to the right side, move the anti-quark, rotate it over to the left, and of course by doing
that we flip it around, so the anti-quark becomes a quark.
So if one Higgs can decay into a quark and an anti-quark, it is also true that a quark
can spit off a Higgs, it can emit a Higgs boson, and not only can we draw that diagram,
but the number we attach to it is the same.
There's a wonderful symmetry deep in the heart of quantum field theory called crossing symmetry.
Once we know the number attached to any one of those diagrams, it's the same number attached
to any of the other diagrams we get by rotating it.
Then we can rotate further, we can take the quark on the right hand side and move it over.
So now we have a quark and an anti-quark coming together and annihilating to make a Higgs
boson.
Another very important interaction, as you might imagine, because we want to make Higgs
bosons at the LHC, and finally we could have a quark absorb a Higgs boson, or for that
matter an anti-quark do the same thing.
You see the magical flexibility of Feynman diagrams that once you draw the simple ones,
a whole bunch of implications immediately follow.
Now it's not true that you can just draw any old Feynman diagram.
Some of them are real and exist and contribute and some don't.
And really the way to think about which ones do and don't, there's two rules that you have
to keep in mind.
One rule is that there are quantities that are conserved in particle physics interactions,
like electric charge, for example.
Electric charge is neither created nor destroyed, it stays the same.
And what that means is that at every single vertex in the Feynman diagram, the same amount
of charge comes in and goes out.
So you can have, for example, an electron and a positron come together, annihilate and
make a Higgs boson.
That's because the electric charge of the electron is minus one, the positron is plus
one, the Higgs is zero, and minus one plus one equals zero, that works.
But you could not, for example, have two electrons come together and make a Higgs boson, because
two electrons would have a total electric charge of minus two, and the Higgs has zero,
so that diagram doesn't exist.
Another quantity that is conserved is a little more subtle, it's called fermion number.
You would think that fermion number is the total number of fermions, but that's not
exactly right.
So think, for example, about the Higgs boson coming in and decaying into a quark and an
anti-quark, you start with zero fermions and you have two at the end.
But really the way that we calculate fermion numbers to take the number of fermion particles
minus the number of anti-particles, so a quark is fermion number plus one, and anti-quark
is fermion number minus one, so the Higgs can decay into a quark and an anti-quark.
The Higgs cannot decay into, let's say, an electron and a W boson.
Even if the electron has electric charge minus one and the W has a plus charge, electric
charge would be conserved, but fermion number would not be.
You're making one fermion and another boson, that's a different number.
So there's a crucial consequence of this feature, which is that fermion lines never end.
You should think about these conserved quantities as really flowing through the diagram, whether
it's electric charge or fermion number, and since we draw our little arrows on our fermion
lines, the arrows keep lining up with each other as you go through the diagram.
It makes constructing Feynman diagrams much easier than it otherwise would be.
So there's another subtlety to keep in mind, which is that we can draw diagrams that obey
the rules, but they don't necessarily correspond to real processes.
For example, one of the basic fundamental processes in particle physics is an electron
and a positron can annihilate into a photon, or a photon can convert into an electron and
a positron.
So it turns out, these are perfectly good diagrams, perfectly good vertices, but the
processes never happen by themselves.
And why is that?
It's ultimately because of another conserved quantity, namely energy.
Remember that mass is not conserved, because mass is just one kind of energy.
We can convert different kinds of energy back and forth, but the total energy is conserved,
and so we can use the mass of the photon to argue that you can't just take a positron
and an electron and convert them into a photon.
So why is that true?
Well we know that there's a minimum energy that you have to have if you have an electron
and a positron.
You add up their masses, even if they're not moving at all, that's a minimum amount of
energy they have.
So if you annihilated them, the photon that they made would have to have at least that
much energy.
But the energy of a photon depends on how we're looking at it, depends on our speed.
If you move away from a photon, from your perspective, it becomes lower and lower energy.
It becomes red-shifted.
If you move toward it, it becomes blue-shifted.
So there will always be some observer for whom that photon has a very low energy, an
energy lower than the combination of the electron and the positron.
So simply the demand that energy is conserved means that it is impossible for a single electron
and a single positron to annihilate into a single photon.
So you might ask, then why are we even drawing these diagrams?
And the answer is this wonderful, deep, profound fact that we have virtual particles.
We have not only real particles that get out there and can be observed, we have virtual
particles in quantum field theory.
And now that you know what a Feynman diagram is, the definition of a virtual particle is
simply a particle that only appears on the inside of a Feynman diagram never on the outside.
So imagine we have a diagram where an electron and a positron come in, they annihilate into
a photon, and then, after a little while, for a little bit of time has passed, that
photon re-emits an electron and a positron.
That diagram is perfectly well-defined.
You could make that photon in the middle as a virtual particle because it doesn't last
to the end.
So why are we allowed to do that?
What is going on?
The answer is, and it's deeply buried in the mathematics of quantum field theory, but
take it on faith, virtual particles have a mass that is different than the particle would
have as its mass if it were a real particle rather than a virtual one.
In other words, inside that Feynman diagram, that photon that appears between the incoming
positron and electron and the outgoing positron and electron does not have zero mass.
Inside the Feynman diagram, the virtual particles can have any mass at all.
And the reason why that's true, if that's a confusing fact, is because, you know, really
these aren't particles.
These are really vibrations in quantum fields.
We only associate mass with them when they become real particles later on.
So when we're putting these virtual particles inside our Feynman diagrams, they don't need
to have the masses that the particles usually have.
However, remember the whole point of the Feynman diagram is to calculate a number, the rate
at which this interaction happens.
It turns out that if the particles inside the diagram have masses that are close to
the masses that the real particles would have, the contribution from that diagram will be
larger.
This sounds like it's not going to be very important to your life because you're not
going to calculate any of these diagrams, but later when we go looking for the Higgs,
this will become a very important fact.
Another important feature of virtual particles is that it lets us have loops inside Feynman
diagrams.
Remember, we have the simple thing where, let's say, an electron and a positron scatter
by making a photon, and then they go their separate ways, but they could also scatter
by emitting two photons.
And what's happening there is we're actually summing over all of the possibilities.
So summing over all the possibilities doesn't just mean draw all the diagrams.
It means that for every diagram where there's a loop, you sum over every possible way that
energy and momentum can flow through the lines in the loop.
In mathematics terms, that means you're integrating, you're doing calculus and integrating over
all the different possible ways that momentum can move through the diagram.
That turns out to be difficult.
Calculating the actual effect of loop diagrams is a very hard thing.
It's something that if you're a physics professor, you want to give that to your graduate students
to do.
You don't want to do it by yourself.
All right, that's the basic rules, that's the basic ways of thinking about Feynman diagrams.
Let's actually think about the real diagrams that we have in the standard model of particle
physics.
So some diagrams exist and some don't.
For example, fermions, the quarks and the leptons, do not interact directly with other
fermions.
Fermions interact with bosons, but you never get a diagram where let's say one electron
comes in and an electron and a neutrino go out.
Of course, that would violate fermion numbers, so you know that's not true.
But you also don't get a diagram where an electron and a positron hit each other and
immediately convert into another electron and positron.
You don't get diagrams where there's four fermions and no bosons.
You always need bosons involved in your standard model diagrams.
So when listing all the possible diagrams, it's actually easier just to run down the
bosons to make a list of all the bosons and ask what do they interact with?
Because bosons can interact with each other and with fermions.
Gluons can interact with gluons, Higgs bosons can interact with Higgs bosons, etc.
So with that in mind, let's just think about all the bosons in the standard model and ask
what they do.
The first one we can think about is the photon, the particle of electromagnetism.
So we ask ourselves, which particles do photons interact with?
And the answer is very simple.
Photons interact with particles that have electric charge.
They do not interact directly with particles that are neutral.
So you can have an electron spit off a photon, for example.
We will never have a Higgs boson directly interact with a photon.
And I use the word directly and I emphasize it because of course we can build up more
complicated Feynman diagrams when it can happen.
But there's no fundamental vertex where a Higgs boson emits a photon or a photon emits
another photon because photons themselves are not electrically charged.
What do we have next?
Well, what about gluons for the strong interactions?
Pretty much like the photons, just like photons interact with charged particles, gluons interact
with colored particles and the colored particles are simply the quarks and the gluons.
Quarks and gluons are the things that gluons can interact with.
So a down quark can come along and emit a gluon.
It stays a down quark, but its color changes.
A Higgs boson cannot emit a gluon because Higgs bosons have no color.
Like photons, the gluons themselves do carry color.
That's because the strong interactions are based on a more complicated symmetry group
than the electromegatic interactions are.
So you can have a vertex where a gluon comes in, spits off another gluon.
As you can imagine, this means that strong interactions have diagrams that get very complicated
very quickly.
Moving on down the line of the bosons in the standard model, we have the Z boson.
Now the Z boson is part of the weak interactions along with the W boson, but it's also a neutral,
fairly simple particle.
Roughly speaking, the Z boson interacts in a way similar to what a photon does, but instead
of interacting with charged particles, it interacts with every particle that feels the
weak interactions.
And basically what that means is all the fermions feel the weak interactions, all the quarks,
all the leptons, and the Z and W bosons themselves feel the weak interactions.
And finally the Higgs boson, very crucially, feels the weak interactions.
That's the whole point to what the Higgs is doing.
So you have vertices where a strange quark or a charmed quark will come in and emit
a Z, a Higgs boson can come in and emit a Z, the Z boson itself can emit one of its
own things.
One Z can turn into two Z bosons, but you'll never have something where a gluon
or a photon comes by and emits a Z boson, because gluons and photons do not directly
interact with the weak interactions.
Similarly we have the W bosons.
The W bosons are the other particles that carry the weak interactions, but they have
a crucial difference with the Z because the W bosons are electrically charged.
There's two of them.
There is the W plus with positive charge and the W minus with negative charge.
You think about it, the W bosons are the only gauge bosons that have electric charge and
that turns out to be an absolutely crucial feature.
Because what it means is, if let's say an electron comes along and spits out a W boson,
because electric charge is conserved, the electron cannot stay an electron.
The electron has to change its identity.
All of the other gauge bosons that we've talked about so far, or all of the bosons
period, including the Higgs, when a particle emits one of them or absorbs one of them,
the particle keeps its identity.
An electron stays an electron, a top quark stays a top quark, etc.
But when you emit or absorb a W boson, you change your identity an important way.
So what this amounts to is, we have what you might call up type quarks.
The quarks that have a charge plus two-thirds, that's the up, the charm quark, and the top
quark, they can emit a positively charged W boson and turn into a down type quark.
A down, a strange, or a bottom quark, one of the quarks that have a charge minus one-third.
Likewise an electron, or a muon, or a tau, with charge minus one can emit a W minus,
a negatively charged W, and convert into a neutrino.
An electron converts into an electron neutrino, that's why it's called that.
A muon will convert into a muon neutrino, the tau into a tau neutrino.
So this is how particles in the standard model change their identity, by emitting W bosons,
W minus, W plus, or by absorbing those bosons.
The Higgs, of course, plays a role in the weak interactions.
So a Higgs, it's neutral, but it can decay into two W bosons.
It can decay into a W plus and a W minus, whereas something like the photon, or something
like the gluon, particles that don't directly feel the weak interactions will not have vertices
in Feynman diagrams, where they directly interact with W's.
So it can all be a little overwhelming that all these diagrams get complicated, but once
you get some facility in drawing them and pushing them around, they really do provide
insight into the fundamental processes that make our universe go.
Let's think, for example, about the decay of the neutron.
We said that if you take a single neutron and remove it from a nucleus, so it's all
by itself, that neutron is going to decay in about a few minutes, maybe 10 minutes or
15 minutes overall.
So what's really going on now, we can understand, because we're wiser than we were a few hours
ago, we now know that the neutron is made of quarks, and we know the fundamental Feynman
diagrams of the standard model that let the interactions go, and in particular, for the
decay of the neutron, we have the weak interactions.
So the neutron is two down quarks and an up quark.
When the neutron decays into a proton, an electron, and an anti-neutrino, what's really
happening is a weak interaction where one of those down quarks converts into an up quark.
The down quark has a charge minus one-third.
It can emit a w minus boson with a charge minus one, and therefore convert into an up
quark with charge plus two-thirds.
That's the neutron becoming a proton.
And then that w minus that was spit out very quickly decays itself into an electron with
charge minus one and an electron anti-neutrino.
So electric charge is conserved and also fermion number is conserved.
This is a unlikely process by particle physics terms, which means that it takes minutes rather
than zeptoseconds or femtoseconds or something like that, but it's crucially important to
how the world works, to how our everyday lives are run, not because the weak interactions
play a role in biology, but they play a role in stellar and solar physics.
The weak interactions are crucial to the fusion interaction that powers the sun and the stars.
What happens inside the sun is, roughly speaking, you take two protons, you combine them together
to make a deuterium, one proton and one neutron.
That means the strong interactions are involved, because you're sticking together two nucleons,
but the weak interactions are also crucial, yet to turn one of those protons into a neutron,
that's basically just the reverse process of the neutron itself decaying.
So the weak interactions play a crucial role in lighting up the sky both during the day
and at night.
So where are we?
What bosons do we have left to think about?
We have gravitons and we have the Higgs boson.
Now gravitons, as I've mentioned, are particles that many people wouldn't even count as part
of the standard model, because we don't truly have a quantum theory of gravity, but the
rule is easy.
Gravitons interact with absolutely everything.
So several times in the past couple of moments, I've said that this or that interaction wouldn't
happen with other gauge bosons, but gravity is the one exception to all of that.
Every particle can emit gravitons.
The Higgs boson can emit or absorb gravitons.
The gravitons can emit gravitons itself.
Gravity is universal.
That is part of why it is different than all the other forces.
However, it plays absolutely no role in particle physics or the Large Hadron Collider, so we
don't need to worry about the details for our purposes right now.
Finally, we have the Higgs.
And like other particles, like the photon has a very simple rule, the photon only interacts
with charged particles.
The Higgs also has a very simple rule.
The Higgs only interacts with massive particles.
If a particle has mass, like quarks or the charged leptons or the Ws and the Zs, the Higgs
interacts with it.
If a particle is massless, like the photon or the gluon, then there is no direct interaction
between that particle and the Higgs boson.
So we can write down all of the different interactions, all the different things that
the Higgs can do, and that is what we will use to look for it.
So we have a bunch of diagrams we can write down.
Heavy particles interact with the Z very easily.
Light particles, sorry, with the Higgs very easily.
Light particles interact with the Higgs but more reluctantly.
Massless particles, like photons and gluons, don't interact at all.
By writing down all of these diagrams, by putting them together, by asking which of
these will actually happen at an accelerator, like the Large Hadron Collider, we can set
off in search of the Higgs boson.
