In our last lecture, we had a great triumph. We figured out that if there is an invisible
field filling space, the Higgs field, we could explain both why the weak interactions are
short range, which is equivalent to saying why the W and Z bosons have a mass, and also
why the fermions of the standard model also have a mass, even though the weak interactions
violate parity. So the Higgs boson clearly is playing an important role in giving mass
to the particles of the standard model. So now is the time when we should step back one
step and ask, what do you mean by mass? What does word mass actually mean? You might think
that mass is something we understand, but in the context of particle physics, it becomes
a little more subtle. Clearly, it's related to the concept of energy. We have E equals
mc squared. So we really need to dig into what the words mean, how they're used in
different senses, especially because we have particles, but we also have fields. What does
it mean to talk about the mass of a field? Roughly speaking, the way to think about mass
is as the resistance you feel when you try to push something. You try to get something
moving. The inertia that something has is proportional to its mass. Of course, if you're
here on earth and you're pushing a sofa or something like that, you might feel a resistance
because the sofa is on the ground and there is a frictional force between the sofa and
the ground, and that makes it hard. That is not what we're talking about when we mean
mass. We really mean the intrinsic amount of resistance that something has to be accelerated.
If you're out in empty space, there's no friction if I push on the space station. If I'm an
astronaut and I try to push on the space station, it's not touching the floor anywhere, and
yet it wouldn't start moving off at the speed of light either. There's some inertia there,
and that is really what we mean when we talk about mass in the context of particle physics.
To make this a bit more quantitative, think about Newton's second law of motion, probably
the most famous rule in all of physics, or at least what should be the most famous equation,
F equals MA. Force equals mass times acceleration. One way of thinking about what this means
is as the definition of what we mean by the mass. You put a force onto something and it
accelerates, and basically the mass is proportional to the amount of force you need to give some
required acceleration. If the mass is high, then a given amount of force doesn't get you
much acceleration. If the mass is low, the same amount of force will accelerate you quite
a bit. That's what mass is. It's an intrinsic property of some particle or some object,
something that you can push around and start moving. Notice that this is very different
from the concept of weight. So if you've taken even a high school or freshman college
level physics course, you know that mass and weight are not the same thing. Weight is something
that is intrinsic to being inside a gravitational field. If you're standing on the earth, the
weight of everything that's standing on the earth is the mass of that thing times the
force due to gravity. So if you were standing somewhere else, if you were standing on the
moon or on Jupiter, your weight would be different because the gravitational field would be very
different. But your mass would be the same. Mass is not about how much push you have in
a gravitational field. It happens to be proportional to that, but mass is intrinsic to you. Mass
would be there. Your mass would be the same even if you didn't have any gravity around
you, even if you were far away from any gravitational field. In fact, we often mix up the units
of measurement for these two quantities. A pound is a unit of weight, not a unit of mass.
If you're using the metric system, grams and kilograms refer to mass, not weight. It is
actually the unit of newtons, which tell you weight in the metric system. But no one ever
says, oh, I stepped on the scale this morning and I weighed so many newtons. Everyone uses
kilograms or grams because they're exactly proportional to each other. So mass is related
to gravity, but in a very subtle way. I need to explain this because very often people
think the Higgs boson must be related to gravity because Higgs is related to mass and mass
is related to gravity. But in fact, this is a subtlety of the real world where two different
independent concepts get mixed up. That's inertial mass. That's what we've been talking
about, the resistance to acceleration. But there's something else called the gravitational
mass of an object. How much gravity does it cause? You could imagine a world where the
inertial mass and the gravitational mass were two completely different things. Two objects
which had the same mass might in some hypothetical reality actually create different gravitational
fields. But in our world, it is a fact of life that the inertial mass equals the gravitational
mass. This was first discovered by Isaac Newton and it's called the principle of equivalence
in Einstein's language. Einstein used the equality of inertial and gravitational mass
as a starting point for his development of general relativity, his great theory of gravity
is curved spacetime. One way of thinking about the principle of equivalence is if you take
two objects and you drop them, if there's no air resistance, if you drop them in the
same gravitational field, they will fall at the same rate. It doesn't matter how much
they weigh or what they're made of. That's very different than charged particles in an
electric field. If you take a positively charged particle and a negatively charged particle,
they will move in different directions in an electric field. Electric forces act differently
depending on charge, but gravity is universal. That's a consequence of the principle of equivalence.
That's a feature of gravity the force, not a feature of mass the concept. If you think
once again about hypothetical worlds, even in a world without gravity, there would still
be mass. There would still be the resistance to being accelerated when you push something.
The Higgs gives inertial mass to particles. It has nothing to do with gravity.
Things become even more subtle and fun when we add relativity to the game. I'm thinking
now not about general relativity, Einstein's theory of gravity, but special relativity,
which is Einstein's theory that says space and time are related to each other. That's
where the rule comes. It says you can't travel faster than the speed of light. In fact, you've
no doubt heard that mass increases as you go closer and closer to the speed of light.
That's a funny thing. When you think about it, I've already told you that mass is intrinsic
to you. It isn't something that you should imagine changing depending on your velocity.
The answer is mass does not increase as you travel faster and closer to the speed of light.
Faster and faster. You never go faster than the speed of light. What really changes is
your energy. It is sometimes convenient to act as if the mass of an object is changing
as it moves very fast, but physicists will insist that the energy goes up and up and
in fact the energy of an object approaches infinity. It gets infinitely big as you get
closer to the speed of light, but the mass is always the answer to the question, how
much would the object resist you if you were to push it if it were standing still? The
mass of an object is really something that is independent of who is measuring it, how
fast they are moving. This line of thought leads you to ask, well, okay, what about objects
that are not moving? If an object that is moving very fast has a lot of energy, what
about as we go into the opposite limit? What about as the object moves more and more slowly?
It was Einstein again who of course realized that even if an object is not moving, it still
has energy. That's the origin of E equals mc squared. Sometimes Einstein's famous equation
is read as the energy equals the mass times the speed of light squared, but that's actually
not quite accurate. A better translation would be the rest energy, the energy of an object
that is not moving is equal to its mass times the speed of light squared. The mass is something
that is intrinsic to an object just sitting there and that's proportional to its total
energy according to Einstein. Of course there are various different forms of energy for
an object that it can have. It can have rest energy just sitting there, that's the E equals
mc squared, but an object can also have kinetic energy, energy of motion. That is the kind
of energy that goes to infinity according to Einstein as you travel closer and closer
to the speed of light. That's the energy you feel when a baseball hits you. If you were
doing Newtonian mechanics, not Einsteinian mechanics, the formula for the kinetic energy
would just be one half the mass of the object times its velocity squared. And finally an
object can have potential energy. It can have an energy that depends on where it is. For
example, an object on the floor will have a different amount of energy than an object
up on a stool or high up on a building. The higher you lift the object, the more potential
energy it has. And you know that because you can push it off and that object will fall,
the potential energy will get converted into the kinetic energy of motion. The total energy
of course is conserved. And that's an important thing to keep in mind. Energy as a whole is
conserved in particle physics, but it can be converted from one form to another. When
Einstein says that energy at rest, rest energy is mass times the speed of light squared,
the right way to think about that is there's one big important idea called energy and mass
is one version of it. Mass is the energy you have when you're just sitting there. And therefore,
mass is not conserved. Energy is conserved, but mass is just one form of energy and it
can be converted into other forms. So think about, for example, a neutron all by itself.
We've already told you that neutrons are not stable particles. They decay. The neutron
has a mass. It decays into a proton, an electron, and an anti-neutrino. You can take the mass
of the neutron to be precise. It is about 0.9396 billion electron volts. And then you
can take the mass of the proton plus the mass of the electron plus the mass of the anti-neutrino,
add them up. You'll get 0.9388 billion electron volts. There's a difference. The neutron has
more mass by 0.0008 billion electron volts than the proton, electron, and neutrino that
it decays into. What happened was the mass energy of the neutron, a little bit of it,
was converted into the kinetic energy of the proton, the electron, and the anti-neutrino
as they move away at high speed. Of course, this is a very important kind of thing happening.
This is what happens in a nuclear bomb or a nuclear reactor. You're taking the rest
energy, the E equals mc squared energy inside a nucleus, and you're converting it into
kinetic energy. If you do that with enough particles, you get a gigantic explosion.
So elementary particles that we've talked about, the quarks, the leptons, the gauge bosons,
the ones that have mass at all in the standard model of particle physics, get their mass
from the Higgs boson. So very often, this fact will be translated informally into the
statement that mass comes from the Higgs boson. But those are not the same statement. Think
about carefully what I said. The elementary particles get their mass from the Higgs, but
you, or I, or the Earth, do not get our mass by summing up the masses of the elementary
particles. Think about an atom. An atom has a nucleus with protons and neutrons, and there's
also electrons going around outside. In every atom, almost all of the mass is from the protons
and the neutrons. They're about 1,800 times more massive than the electrons. We also know
the protons and neutrons are made of quarks and gluons. So let's take the mass of the
quarks and add them up. An up quark is about 2 million electron volts. A down quark is
about 5 million electron volts. Take a proton, add up two ups and a down. You get about 9
million electron volts. But the whole proton has 938 million electron volts. The mass of
a proton is enormously larger. It's 100 times bigger than the mass of the quarks that are
inside. So what is going on? The answer is that in addition to the quarks inside, of
course, the proton has gluons inside. There is energy holding those quarks together. When
you talk about the mass of a proton, you're talking about the combined energy in the quarks
and also the gluons all bundled up in one big mess. Almost all of that energy comes from
the strong nuclear force. And what that means is the mass of a proton, and therefore the
mass of an atom, and therefore the mass of you, does not mostly come from the Higgs boson
at all. It comes from quantum chromodynamics, QCD, the strong nuclear force. So the Higgs
gives mass to elementary particles. It does not give mass to you and me. Turning off the
Higgs boson is not a good weight loss plan for human beings. So this leads to a slight
aside, a more complicated topic, but it's worth telling you about because it gives you
a little insight on how these atoms and these protons and neutrons actually work. Mass is
the energy of an object sitting at rest. So if you took an object and you heated it up
so that the individual atoms inside were moving faster and had more kinetic energy, it would
then have more mass because mass is just the total energy of the object sitting there.
Interestingly, if you take the hydrogen atom, the hydrogen atom or any other atom is very
different than a proton. A proton has a mass that is much bigger than the quarks inside.
A hydrogen atom has a total mass that is less than the combination of the electron and the
proton, the proton being the whole nucleus of the hydrogen atom. You require energy to
separate the electron from the proton and the hydrogen atom, which means that there is less
energy in there than they would have if those two particles were separate. So what's going
on? The mass of the hydrogen atom is less than the sum of the mass of the proton and
the mass of the electron. What's going on is when the two particles are separate, the
proton and the electron that make up hydrogen, each one has an electric field around it.
Remember, the proton is positively charged, the electron is negatively charged. Those
electric fields carry energy. There's a certain amount, not an infinite amount, but a certain
amount of energy in the electric field around a charged particle. So when you bring the
proton and electron together to make hydrogen to a very, very good approximation, the electric
fields cancel out. You have one positive particle and one negative particle, so suddenly there
is no electric field far away from the hydrogen atom, and therefore there's no energy there.
The energy of the hydrogen atom is less because there's no electric field around it compared
to the separate two particles. The story for protons and neutrons is very, very different.
Remember, they're made of quarks, and quarks are confined inside. What does that mean? Well,
it does mean that if you took out the quarks out of a proton, they would be surrounded
by a chromodynamic field, a gluon field, and you can ask how much energy would be in there.
The answer is infinity. A single quark, all by itself, the quark itself doesn't have very
much mass, but the energy of the gluon field around it is infinitely big. That is why you
cannot take the quarks outside of the protons or neutrons. Inside the protons and neutrons,
the gluon fields cancel out, so even though the three quarks separately would have a total
energy of infinity, put together in a proton and a neutron, they're about 1 GeV in total.
So that's how particles work. You get most of your energy from protons and neutrons
from the strong interactions, not the Higgs field. But what about fields themselves? Remember,
mass is the energy that an object has when it's at rest. Mass times the speed of light
squared is actually that, but as a particle physicist, I set the speed of light equal
to 1. The problem is that a field isn't an object. A field can't sit there localized
in some position. Fields are everywhere. They're spread out. So really, a field, technically
speaking, can't have a mass. You can't associate E equals mc squared to a field because a
field cannot just sit there at rest. When you start the field vibrating and make a particle,
that can have mass. The particle excitation of a field has mass, but the field itself
doesn't really have mass in any ordinary sense. What it does have, of course, is energy.
So a field has a value at every point throughout the universe, at every point in space and
time. And just like particles can have kinetic energy, potential energy, rest energy, fields
can have kinetic energy. That's how fast the field is oscillating or changing through
time. They can have potential energy, which is sort of the intrinsic amount of energy
the field has just because of its value. In other words, the potential energy of a field
is, imagine a field that isn't doing anything, it could still have energy just by sitting
there. And finally, the new thing that a field can have that a particle can't is gradient
energy, which is a way of saying that the field can change from place to place and those
changes require energy. It's like stretching a rubber band or twisting or something like
that. That's the gradient energy that a field can have. So there's a relationship between
these different kinds of field energy and the mass or energy of a particle. Every particle
is the vibration in a field. When you start a field vibrating, there will be kinetic energy
in the field because it's moving. And there's gradient energy because it's moving differently
from place to place. The mass of the particle, however, is associated with the potential
energy of the field. So some fields simply have zero potential energy. It doesn't matter
what value they have, they have the same amount of energy. So guess what? When I poke those
fields and start them vibrating, I get a particle. What is the mass of that particle? It is zero.
So when I have a field with zero potential energy, its particle excitations will be massless.
And we know one example of this, gauge bosons. Gauge bosons are particles associated with
connection fields like the electromagnetic field, the gravitational field, the gluon
field. And those connection fields, what are they doing? They're telling us how things
change from place to place. For a connection field, it's only the changes that matter from
place to place, not the actual value of the field, which is another way of saying that
connection fields have no potential, which is another way of saying that their particle
excitations will be massless. That's the origin of the fact that Yang-Mills theories based
on connections predict massless particles. So that's a nice little mathematical connection.
Let's think about how energy evolves through time. Imagine you make a bunch of energy here
and you just let it go. What happens? Well, energy likes to sort of smooth itself out.
It's like to spread out and dissipate so that at any one point in space, energy is minimized.
If you put a ball on the hill, it will roll to the bottom of the hill, bump around, make
a lot of noise, and eventually settle down. Now, of course, the total amount of energy
is conserved. So when this ball is rolling down the hill, it needs to dissipate its energy.
Energy likes to minimize, but the way that it does that is by spreading out all over
the place. What this means for particles is that heavy particles like to decay. So you
make something like the Higgs boson. That is a very heavy particle. It's a vibration
in a field with a lot of potential energy. But what it can do is to convert into many
lighter particles. That's what energy likes to do. That's why the heavier particles that
we have, like the top quark or the tau lepton or the Higgs boson, quickly decay, and that
makes them very difficult to find. If you have a heavy particle that doesn't decay,
it's because it's carrying some quantity that can't be transferred to other particles.
The electron conserved quantity, like the electron, can't decay because it is the lightest
particle with electric charge. The proton can't decay because it is the lightest particle
that has baryon number or quark number. So the refusal of these quantities to go away,
the conservation of these quantities, keeps these particles stable. But heavier particles
like the top quark or the Higgs boson can decay right away. So let's apply this idea
to the Higgs field, which is, after all, our goal. The thing that makes the Higgs field
special is that it's not zero even in empty space. Now we are finally to the point where
we can ask, why? Why does the Higgs boson, the Higgs field, unlike every other field,
want to be non-zero in empty space? The answer is that being non-zero is what minimizes
the energy contained in the Higgs field. The Higgs, unlike everything else, would have
more energy, more potential energy if it were stuck at zero than if it has moved out to
some large value. Let's think about this a little bit more carefully. Remember I said
fields have potential energy. That is to say, you give me a field, say the field is not
evolving, it's not changing, it's the same exact value at every place and at every moment
in time. I can still ask, how much energy is there in that field? And that answer is
the potential energy. If I change the value, it would have a different amount of energy,
or really, since it's a field, an energy density, a certain amount of energy in every cubic
centimeter of space. Most fields that have a potential at all will have a potential that
its lowest point sits at zero. Most fields in empty space, they want to be sitting there
at zero. That's what minimizes their energy. It's the Higgs field that is different. The
Higgs field is the one field we know about that at zero value has a local maximum of
its potential energy, like it's sitting near the top of a hill. The minimum of its potential
energy is at a non-zero value, 246 billion electron volts, 246 GEV. That's where the
Higgs wants to be, that's its minimum energy state. It's kind of like a pendulum, but the
Higgs field is an upside-down pendulum. So think about an ordinary pendulum, something
hanging from a fulcrum in a ceiling or something like that. It could be a stiff rod or a child
on a swing or a chandelier. Its minimum energy state is sitting there still directly downward.
That is zero energy. If you push the pendulum up, you are giving it energy. If you let it
go, it would start oscillating back and forth. That's what most fields in the standard model
are like. The Higgs is like a pendulum turned upside down. So it's one of those stiff rod
pendulums with a fulcrum on the floor, which means that there's a state where the pendulum
is immediately up and down, but that is not the minimum energy state. If you let it go,
it will want to fall to the left or to the right. The minimum energy state of the upside-down
pendulum is lying on the floor. The angle at which it's sitting or the distance to the
end of the pendulum is some non-zero value. That's equivalent to what the Higgs is doing.
It doesn't want to be at zero. Its minimum energy state is at 246 billion electron volts.
Now just to be clear, there's a couple things to be explained here. For one thing, where
does this number 246 billion electron volts come from? The answer is experiment. We have
no theory that predicts this number. This is the number that fits the data. And this
number, 246 billion electron volts, that sounds like an energy. I already told you before,
the mass of the Higgs boson is 125 GeV. So what is this number 246 GeV? The answer is
it's a different quantity that we're measuring. It turns out that the units of Higgs field
value are units of energy. And that gets very, very confusing. But the 246 GeV is the value,
the number associated with the Higgs field at every point in space. The 125 GeV is the
mass of the Higgs boson particle. It's just a completely different number, just like your
height and your location in space are two completely different quantities, even though
they're both measured in units of distance. So this difference between 0 and 246 GeV conceals
a tremendous energy difference. You might think that, okay, we could do experiments
by taking the Higgs field and pushing it back to 0, just for fun. That's the kind of thing
a mad scientist would like to do at CERN or something like that. Turns out, when I say
that the energy density in the Higgs field is minimized at the bottom of its potential,
that's a huge difference in energy. Imagine you take a little ball, the size of a ping-pong
ball or a big marble, and you say that outside that ball, the Higgs boson, the Higgs boson
field does what it normally does. But inside that ball, I push the Higgs field back to
0. That means there's a tremendous amount of energy in that ball. And guess what? Energy
equals mass times the speed of light squared, so that little ping-pong ball size region
of space now has a mass. We can calculate it. It's equal to the mass of the Earth, roughly
speaking, an order of magnitude. One ping-pong ball size of space with zero Higgs field would
have the same energy as the entire Earth. This is not something that we're going to do in
a laboratory. To have enough energy to do that, we would have to convert the whole Earth
into energy. Manipulating the Higgs field in this way is not realistic. And there's
another thing to notice about this wonderful fact that the Higgs field wants to live at
a non-zero value, which is that zero is special. Zero is a symmetric value. You can take zero,
you can multiply it by minus one, you get zero back. But 246 times minus one is minus
246. That's a different value. So if the field were at zero, it would be symmetric. If it's
not at zero, it is breaking the symmetry. That is why the Higgs field in empty space
breaks the symmetry, which as we've learned is crucial to making the weak interactions
work. It's having that non-zero value that does the job. In the real world, the symmetry
that the Higgs field breaks is not just field goes to minus field, which I just invented
for the example. It's a much more complicated gauge symmetry. Remember, Sheldon-Glashow
posited this three symmetries of the weak interaction and the one extra symmetry that
combined together to give you the three weak gauge bosons and the one photon. It's a very
complicated symmetry that the Higgs boson breaks in a very, very specific way, but that's
what makes the standard model work. Now you might expect that if a field fills space,
there would be a lot of energy associated with that. So think very carefully about the
words that I've been using. I said that if you change the value of the Higgs field from
its non-zero value back to zero, that would cost you energy. But that's a statement about
the difference in energy from the bottom of the potential to the hilltop. It's not a statement
about the total amount of energy at either point. In particle physics, the total amount
of energy in the potential of a field is an arbitrary number. It is once again something
you have to go out and measure. If you put the Higgs field at zero energy at zero field
value, then the fact that the Higgs field has a lower energy at a non-zero value means
that the energy there is negative. It's possible that that could be the world we live in. Fortunately,
it's not. We don't think that empty space has this gigantic negative energy, but it's
something you could imagine being true. In fact, we believe that measurements have shown
us that empty space does have energy. It is what we call the cosmological constant or
the dark energy. We're going to talk more about it in lecture 12. But the measurements,
which are cosmological measurements, galaxies accelerating away from each other, seem to
indicate that the energy of empty space is positive. It is a very small positive number.
Why is that true? Why is the energy of empty space small and positive, even though the
contribution of the Higgs field seems to be large and negative? The answer seems to
be there are some other fields that are canceling the Higgs field. When you take all the fields
in nature and you add up their contributions to the energy of empty space, all of the contributions
are big, but some of them are positive and some of them are negative, and they almost
exactly cancel out. And nobody knows why. This is a huge puzzle for physics. It's called
the cosmological constant problem. It's a feature whenever you have field theory. It's
not about the Higgs field. The Higgs contributes to it, but it's a fundamental puzzle. It's
one of the reasons, in fact, why Phil Anderson, when he suggested the idea of what we call
the Higgs field back in 1963, he didn't push it very hard because he thought to himself
if there's all these fields filling empty space, they will contribute energy and we
don't see it there. He was right to worry. He was wrong not to push his idea just a
little bit harder.
