In the last lecture, we learned one of the deepest, most profound and important facts
about the fundamental nature of physical reality.
The world at a fundamental level is made of fields, and the rules of quantum mechanics
say that when we look at those fields, we see them as particles.
In this lecture, not so much with the fundamental important facts about physical reality, we
need to do some dirty work.
Our ultimate goal is to understand the Higgs boson, to know why we know it's there, to
go out and find it, but to do that, we need to learn a little bit about the other particles
of nature, the standard model of particle physics.
Now, particle physicists often refer to the particle zoo, because actually this is almost
more like biology than physics.
Physicists love physics because of the fundamental principles, the simplicity, the elegance
of the ultimate construction, but the particle zoo is frankly a bit of a mess.
There are only a finite number of fundamental particles that we know of.
There could be many more we haven't found yet, but it's sort of an ungainly large number.
We would actually think that that's telling us something.
Many physicists think that beneath the standard model of particle physics, there is a more
elegant structure waiting to be found.
But at least right now, there are just a finite number of particles.
We think that if democratists were alive today, he would be pleasantly surprised.
He would look around and say, okay, it says these finite number of particles that let us
explain absolutely everything that we see in our everyday lives.
So what particles are there?
Fortunately, particles are not that different from each other, in the sense that there's
not that many different characteristics you need to tell me to specify what particle you're
talking about.
Basically, a particle has mass, it will have spin, as we'll talk about.
Every particle rotates like a little top.
And then most importantly, the particle will have interactions.
A certain kind of particle will talk to, interact with other particles, and not with various
different particles.
So once we give those features, the mass, the spin, and the interactions, we have specified
the particle.
And as you know, of course, what we're really doing is talking about the fields that underlie
the particles.
The reason why every electron has the same mass, spin, and interactions, and every upquark
has the same mass, spin, and interactions, is because they're all excitations, vibrations
of a single underlying fundamental field.
So when we talk about the different fields that there are, the different particles that
there are, there's one distinction that is more important than anything else.
Is the particle a fermion, or is it a boson?
Remember, fermions take up space, fermions are the matter particles that make up atoms
and structures like you and me and the earth and the sun.
Bosons can pile on top of each other.
So a boson can sort of lead to a long range, or at least a very tangible force in nature.
The forces that we know of, gravity, electromagnetism, the strong and weak force, these are all
passed back and forth by bosons.
So we're going to go through what the fermions are and what the bosons are.
The fermions in nature also come in two subsets.
And this one is fairly easy to get a hold of.
We have quarks and we have leptons, two words that were made up by physicists basically.
And the difference is that the quarks are the fermions that feel the strong force.
The strong nuclear force, which as we'll see is carried by particles called gluons.
Gluons interact with quarks.
The leptons are the fermions that are not quarks.
The leptons are the fermions that don't feel the strong force.
You might think that, in principle, there could be a completely different set of quarks
and non-quarks, leptons, but in fact, in nature, they're sort of matching, they're sort of
an equally big set of quarks and leptons, again, we're not sure why that's true.
And then there are the bosons.
The bosons also come into families, but here there's a big imbalance.
Almost all the bosons that we know of are what are called gauge bosons.
We'll talk about where that word gauge comes from, but what you need to know is that a
gauge boson is a force-carrying particle.
So gravity, for example, has the graviton.
The gauge bosons are the particles that carry gravity, electromagnetism, and the weak and
strong nuclear force.
The other kind of boson is the Higgs boson.
It is all by itself.
The Higgs boson is special for many, many ways.
In some sense, many of the different particles are special, but the Higgs is a very particular
kind of thing.
That's what we're going to try to get to the mystery of.
So gravity, for example, among the bosons has gravitons.
Now you have to be a little bit careful here.
In most presentations of the standard model of particle physics, we don't count gravity,
and that's because the standard model is all discussed within the framework of quantum
field theory, the subset of quantum mechanics, but gravity has not yet been quantized successfully.
And we haven't discovered graviton particles, but we are almost certain that they exist.
In science and physics, we're not certain until we actually see them, but if you believe
in the basic features of quantum mechanics and field theory, if you believe in the basic
features of gravity as we know it, there must be such a particle as the graviton.
Now every particle has an intrinsic spin, as we've said, and I've discussed bosons
and fermions.
I've defined them in terms of bosons piling on top of each other and fermions taking up
space, but there's a close relationship between this boson versus fermion feature and the
spin of the particle.
Now particles have no intrinsic size.
It's not like a little physical top that has a diameter and you spin it around and that's
what the spin is, but it was a great discovery in the early years of the 20th century that
even though particles have no size, they can still have spin.
And the reason why that feature of the particles is called spin is because you can convert
the fundamental spin of individual particles into the spin of multiple collections of particles
into their angular momentum.
But really this is a fundamentally purely quantum mechanical property, a phenomenon that is
due to quantum mechanics that says a zero size particle can be spinning.
And there's a unit that we use, a fundamental quantity of spin that we measure it in, and
this is Planck's constant H bar.
Max Planck was a German physicist who helped pioneer quantum mechanics and he figured out
the fundamental unit of quantum mechanicalness which we use to measure spin.
So the rule is simple.
For the bosons, the spin is always an integer.
That is to say it is zero, one, two, three, etc.
The Higgs boson, which remember is special, has a spin of zero.
Almost all of the force-carrying bosons, the gauge bosons, have a spin of one.
The photon has a spin of one.
The gluon has a spin of one.
The only exception is the graviton.
Gravitons have a spin of two, two times Planck's constant H bar.
And gravity is special, just like the Higgs boson is special for a very different reason.
Ultimately, it's because of Einstein's great insight that gravity is a feature of space
time itself.
Fermions, on the other hand, have spins that are integers plus a half in units of Planck's
constant H bar.
In fact, usually it's zero plus a half.
Almost all of the fermions, and certainly all of the elementary fermions we've ever
discovered, have spins of exactly one half.
The electrons, the neutrinos, the quarks, etc., they're all spin one half particles.
You would need two electrons to make up the spin of one photon.
These days, of course, we talk about atoms.
Atoms are the central building blocks of chemistry.
Individual atoms make up the chemical elements.
But we know these days that atoms are not fundamental.
Basically what happened is in the 1800s, in the 19th century, chemists got ahead of themselves
a little bit.
They wanted to understand that individual atoms were the fundamental building blocks
of chemistry, so they used the ancient Greek word, atoms, to refer to these building blocks.
Of course, we keep changing our ideas of what fundamental really means, and these days we
understand that atoms are not fundamental.
They are made of smaller particles themselves.
This came about because of the work of Ernest Rutherford, a New Zealand physicist who worked
in Cambridge, England, and what Rutherford wanted to do was to probe the structure of
atoms.
He did that by taking alpha particles, which are basically the nuclei of individual helium
atoms, and firing them at pieces of gold foil.
There was a popular idea at the time that a gold atom, or any atom, was sort of like
a little blob of plum pudding.
It was sort of an insubstantial blobby, cloudy thing, and therefore what Rutherford expected
to see is that his alpha particles would sometimes be deflected a little bit, sometimes
a little bit more than that.
There would be a range of possibilities.
What instead Rutherford found is that most of the time the alpha particles went right
through the atoms.
They didn't even notice, but very, very rarely they would bounce off, careening at some dramatic
angle.
What we now know that to mean is that atoms have substructure, that at the very center
of the atom there is a very hard, dense nucleus, and that's what the alpha particles were bouncing
off of, and the outside parts of the atoms is where the electrons live, orbiting around
that nucleus.
Of course today we know that even the nuclei themselves at the center of the atoms aren't
fundamental, and with the first hint of that was that they can change.
One nucleus can alter into another one.
We call that radioactivity.
This was the discovery of physicists like Henri Becquerel and of course the curies,
Marie and Pierre Curie.
So today we have a picture of the atom, which is good to keep in mind, which is basically
the picture that Rutherford put together.
There's a nucleus at the center, there's an electron going around it.
The simplest atom is hydrogen.
It has a very tiny nucleus and an even tinier electron orbiting around it.
If you were a physicist in the year 1900, you might think that every kind of atom has
a separate nucleus which is fundamentally different.
There was a hydrogen nucleus, helium nucleus, lithium nucleus, etc.
It wasn't until the very first years of the 20th century that we realized that the reason
why nuclei can change back and forth to each other, from uranium to lighter elements for
example, is because the nucleus itself is made of smaller particles that we call nucleons.
Nucleons is just a catch-all term for protons and neutrons.
So you have protons.
Protons are the positively charged particles.
We have electric charge associated with every particle.
So a proton is a positive charge.
The electron has a negative charge.
Then it took a little bit more time to discover there was another particle that was almost
the same mass as the proton, but it was harder to find because it was electrically neutral
and it of course is called the neutron.
So there we have all of the basic ingredients of building an atom.
We have protons and neutrons.
They're stuck together inside to make the nucleus.
They're held together by some sort of nuclear force.
And then you have the electrons.
The electrons are stuck together to the nucleus by electricity and magnetism.
Because the electron with a negative charge is attracted to the proton with a positive
charge, the fundamental feature of electricity that opposite charges attract.
So this is a pretty compelling picture that Rutherford put together, especially once
protons and neutrons were discovered.
It used to be thought that all the nuclei were different, but now we know they're just
different combinations of protons and neutrons.
Every nucleus is just a different combination of some number of protons, some number of
nucleons.
This picture was put together in the 1930s and you might have forgiven physicists of
the time for thinking that maybe we're done.
If you were physicists of the 1930s, every experiment that you knew about controlling
matter and energy that was in your laboratory could be accounted for using just these particles,
protons, neutrons and electrons with basically three forces holding them together.
One is electricity holding the electrons to the nucleus, the nuclear force holding the
protons and neutrons together, and then gravity that pulls everything close to everything else.
But that turns out not to be enough, of course, as we will discover.
To get there, we had to take a little bit of a step back and think about how we discuss
the mass or the energy in a particle.
Here's where physicists like to keep things a little confusing.
Let's say the mass of a proton, we measure it in units of electron volts.
But not only are electron volts a unit that you've never heard of before, they're not
even a unit of mass.
An electron volt is a unit of energy.
It's the amount of energy it takes to move an electron through one volt of electrical
potential that is a completely useless definition for everyday purposes.
Roughly speaking, if you want to convert from electron volts to everyday energies, one electron
volt is a sort of minuscule amount of energy.
It's 100 billion electron volts would be the kinetic energy of a flying mosquito.
So a mosquito that bumps into you, that's not a lot of energy, but it's 100 billion
electron volts.
So we quickly shift from using electron volts for energy to using GEV, or giga electron
volts.
That's a billion electron volts, and that's a very convenient unit.
A GEV is the amount of energy that is in the mass of a single proton, roughly speaking.
In fact, a proton's mass is about 0.938 GEV, but for our purposes, we'll call it about
one GEV.
The reason why energy and mass get mixed up, of course, is because E equals MC squared,
because of Einstein's famous equation.
What physicists tend to do is take the speed of light, C, which is one light year per year,
or 300,000 kilometers per second, and use units where C equals one.
So if you think about it, if E equals MC squared, and physicists use units where C equals one,
and E equals M, energy and mass are the same thing.
That's why physicists will measure the mass of an electron, a proton, a neutron, or the
Higgs boson using electron volts, or GEV, billions of electron volts.
So there's not really that many numbers you need to keep in mind.
You need to remember that a proton and a neutron are both approximately equal mass.
That's about one GEV, one billion electron volts.
The electron is about 2,000th the mass of a proton, closer to 1,800th the mass of a proton.
So that works out to about 500,000 electron volts, or half a million electron volts.
So there you go, two numbers, one GEV for protons and neutrons, half a million electron
volts for an electron, and then, of course, the Higgs boson will work out to be about
125 GEV.
There are many other particles, there are up quarks and down quarks.
They're stuck inside the protons and neutrons, so it's harder to weigh them.
We think that an up quark is about 2,000,000 electron volts, about four times the mass of
an electron, really not that heavy, a down quark might be 5,000,000 electron volts.
Neutrinos are very, very light, they're less than a thousandth of one electron volt.
So you see there's this huge hierarchy of scales.
The elementary particles have very different masses, and even the particle physicists tend
to look up the more obscure ones in a textbook when they want to know the mass, so don't
feel bad if you can't remember all the numbers.
So that's a little bit of a zoo, electrons, quarks, neutrons, and so forth.
In the 1920s, Paul Dirac, the British physicist, was trying to figure out how electrons behave.
He wrote down an equation, which turns out to be a wonderfully, brilliantly intuitive,
useful equation, we now call it the Dirac equation.
It is the correct equation for how electrons interact all by themselves.
But people were skeptical about Dirac's equation because there were two solutions to the equation.
One solution describes electrons, the other solutions seem to describe a particle that
looks exactly like an electron.
It has the same mass and the same spin, but it would be negatively, sorry, it would be
positively charged rather than negatively charged like electrons are.
And in 1928, when Dirac made his equation, no one had ever discovered such a particle.
We now know that what Dirac's equation was predicting is antimatter.
At the time, nobody believed it.
That's 1928.
Then along comes 1932, an experimental physicist named Carl Anderson was working at Caltech.
It was literally a few yards from where my office is right now at Caltech.
There's a plaque out there that says, here in the year 1932, Carl Anderson discovered
antimatter.
It was a prediction from Dirac's equation that nobody believed.
Anderson found the antiparticle to the electron, which we now call the positron.
Still nobody believed it, even after he found it.
What Anderson did was to build a cloud chamber.
If you think about how a cloud collects particles that eventually rain, you have a humidity,
a large amount of water vapor in the air, and you have a little speck of dust.
And in that speck of dust, the water collects around and eventually falls as a raindrop.
A cloud chamber is a very similar thing.
It's a chamber of gas that is ready to collect in water vapor.
And a particle that will pass through it will nucleate a little trail, so you can actually
see an electron or positron or something going through your cloud chamber.
Anderson built a cloud chamber on the roof of a building at Caltech, and he was looking
at cosmic rays.
He was looking at radiation from the sky, and he found a particle that, in the magnetic
field around the cloud chamber, curved in the wrong direction.
What that meant was, this was like an electron, but it was positively charged rather than
negatively charged.
This was the positron.
And in fact, nobody believed, and many people said, are you sure you aren't just holding
your picture upside down, is that why you think it's curving the wrong way?
But Anderson held up, he was on the right track, he actually found antimatter for the
first time.
Roughly speaking, you'll often hear people say that every particle has an antiparticle,
and actually that's not true.
Photons or gravitons don't have antiparticles.
The particles that do have antimatter are the ones that carry some conserved number,
like an electrical charge or a fermion number.
These are things that can have minus their value, and the antiparticle always has minus
that value.
So the electrons or the quarks, all of the fermions we know about, or all of the charge
particles we know about, all have antiparticles.
The next step, and I'm violating history a little bit here to make things a little bit
clearer.
So now we have matter and antimatter, we have electrons, protons, and neutrons.
Turns out, as we've hinted at before, protons and neutrons, the nucleons, are not themselves
fundamental particles.
They are made of smaller particles called quarks.
Again for historical reasons, the two kinds of quarks that go into making protons and
neutrons are simply called up and down.
Now a proton has a charge of plus one, a neutron has a charge of zero, and an electron has
a charge of minus one.
People really thought that all the particles in nature should have electrical charges that
were either zero, plus one, minus one, or some other integer.
To make the quark model work, you say that a proton has two up quarks and a down.
The two up quarks have an electrical charge of plus two-thirds each, and the down quark
has an electrical charge of minus one-third, so you add them up and you get plus one.
Whereas the neutron has two downs and an up, so that's minus a third, minus a third, plus
two-thirds, and that's zero.
They didn't want to believe it.
They didn't want to believe that there were elementary particles that had charges of a
third, but eventually it wasn't until the 1970s that we eventually figured it out.
The problem was that quarks cannot be seen in the open.
Quarks and the gluons that hold them together, the gluons of the strong nuclear force, are
confined inside strongly interacting particles, and we'll talk about why that's true a little
bit later.
When quarks come in what we call colors, unlike the leptons or the gauge bosons, quarks can
be in red, green, or blue, and then anti-quarks are the anti-colors, cyan, magenta, and yellow,
but usually we just say anti-red, anti-green, anti-blue.
The trick to understanding quarks is that we only ever see colorless combinations.
That means either quarks are in groups of three, one red, one green, one blue, that
will be a proton or a neutron, or they're in groups of one quark and one anti-quark,
a red and an anti-red.
That is a meson.
We have particles like caons and pions that are quark-anti-quark pairs, and then we have
the collections of three quarks which we call baryons.
There are protons, there are neutrons, and there might be many other heavier baryons.
Many of them have already been discovered.
It's conceivable that gluons, the particles that hold the quarks together, can form particles
all by themselves, which we call gluballs, but we've never actually seen a gluball in
the lab yet.
So at this picture, the quarks, the up and the down quarks, the electron, and so forth,
we can start talking about the interactions.
If you take a neutron out of an atomic nucleus and let it be there in empty space, neutrons
are not stable particles.
They will decay.
Takes about 10 minutes on average, but you put a neutron out there in empty space outside
the nucleus.
That neutron will decay into a proton, an electron, and a neutrino.
Now, technically, it's not a neutrino, it's an anti-neutrino, but they didn't know that
at the time.
The fact that neutrons decay was one of the first things we learned about them.
That's how we figured out that there were particles called neutrinos, because when the
neutron decayed, you took the mass energy of the neutron, E equals mc squared, you compared
it to the energy of the proton and electron that went out, and the subsequent proton and
electron had less energy than the original neutron had.
It was Wolfgang Pauli again who proposed that maybe there was a new hidden particle, which
we now call the neutrino.
So neutrons decaying go to protons, electrons, and anti-neutrinos.
So every time there's a process, every time there's a change from one kind of particle
configuration to another, that means there is a force at work.
We already have the electromagnetic force, but the electromagnetic force doesn't change
the identity of particles, nor does gravity, for that matter, nor does the strong nuclear
force.
These forces push around electrons and quarks and so forth, but they don't change them.
So it needed to be a new force of nature that changes neutrons into protons, electrons,
and anti-neutrinos, and that new force is, of course, the weak nuclear force.
The weak nuclear force is what can alter the identity of fundamental particles.
And when we say a neutron gets altered into proton, electron, and anti-neutrino, of course
these days we know it's really an up quark is converting into a down quark, or vice-versa,
under the weak nuclear force.
So what's going on with this weak nuclear force?
It's complicated.
Of all the forces of nature, the weak force is the most complicated.
Why is that?
As we will learn, it is because of the influence of the Higgs boson, but we're not there yet.
We're trying to understand what the consequences of this complication are rather than what
causes it.
So the consequences are there are three kinds of bosons that carry the weak nuclear force.
There's a Z boson that is neutral, and it weighs about 91 billion electron volts, 91
GEV, and there are two W bosons.
The W bosons are electrically charged.
There's a W plus positively charged, and the W minus, these are about 80 GEV.
So it's the W boson that can change one particle into another one.
You can take an up quark, which has a charge plus two-thirds, it can emit a positively
charged W boson and turn into a down quark that has negative one-third charge.
Electric charge is conserved in all these interactions.
The problem with the W and Z is that they decay very quickly.
You can never see a W boson or a Z boson in your particle physics experiment.
All you can do is see what they decay into, but it turns out that's a very common thing
in modern particle physics.
The same thing is true of the Higgs boson.
You'll never see a Higgs boson directly.
You see what it decays into.
So we say we've discovered the W, the Z, the Higgs because we've seen them in action, not
because we've seen them directly.
But now we're just about ready to put it all together.
There's only one more major surprise in store when it comes to the fundamental construction
of matter.
We have a picture with basically four particles and four forces.
The four particles that we're talking about, the matter particles, the fermions, come in
the quarks and the leptons.
We have two quarks, the up quark charge plus two-thirds, the down quark charge minus one-third.
They team up in different ways to make protons and neutrons.
Then we have the leptons, which of the two that we've talked about are the electron, charge
minus one, and the neutrino, charge zero.
So four particles, two different pieces of them, a very nice symmetry.
There's also four forces.
There's the strong nuclear force that keeps the quarks together inside the proton and
the neutron.
There's the electromagnetic force that keeps the electron stuck to the nucleus.
And there's the weak nuclear force that changes quarks back and forth into each other.
And then, of course, there's gravity that pulls everything into everything else.
Then the one new wrinkle, the one-foot note, and again, I'm not going in historical order,
so this goes back to 1936.
It was Carl Anderson, again at Caltech.
Remember, he discovered the positron in his cloud chamber.
That was exactly the same mass of the electron, but the opposite charge.
Then Anderson found in 1936 evidence for another kind of particle that was heavier than the
electron, but had the same charge.
As he studied it more and more, he realized that this new particle, which he called the
muon, was exactly like the electron, but heavier.
There was no reason for that.
It didn't fit in to anything we knew or had predicted about particle physics.
The famous physicist I.I.
Robby said, who ordered that?
But in fact, the discovery of the muon opened a little bit of a new window on how particles
work.
We now realize that these four fermions that we talked about, the up quark, the down quark,
the electron, and the neutrino, we call this a family or a generation of particles.
It turns out there are three families.
This pattern of two quarks and two leptons is repeated two more times.
The electron has a heavier cousin, the muon.
That has a heavier cousin, the tau.
The neutrino, which we associated with the electron, is now called the electron neutrino.
There's also a muon neutrino, and there's also a tau neutrino.
There's an up quark and a down quark, but there's also a charmed quark and a strange
quark.
At the top, there is the top quark and the bottom quark.
This is a collection of three families of fermions.
In each family, there are two quarks, two leptons of the two leptons.
One is charged, and one is neutral, the neutrino.
That is quite a complicated, elaborate picture.
What we're left with is the particle content of the standard model of particle physics.
I went through a whole blizzard of vocabulary there, but the basic outlines should be clear.
There are fermions, the matter particles, bosons, the force particles.
The fermions are quarks, which interact strongly, or leptons, which don't.
Only the lightest family of quarks and leptons are actually involved in making up you and
me, the up quark, the down, the electron, and the neutrino.
Nobody knows why there are these heavier families, what role they might play in the universe.
They're there.
Maybe there's an underlying symmetry or structure that predicts them, but we don't know what
that is yet.
Then, of course, you have the bosons, two kinds of boson.
There are force-carrying bosons, gravitons, gluons, photons, W and Z bosons, and then
there is the Higgs boson.
The Higgs boson sort of lives all by itself in the classification of the particles of
the standard model.
It's not a gauge boson, it's not a fermion, and yet we spent $9 billion building the
Large Hadron Collider because we thought we could find it.
Why in the world did we believe that there was a particle called the Higgs boson long
before we had any evidence for it?
To understand what gave us that confidence, we need to go back into learning some more
profound facts about the fundamental nature of physical reality.
