Okay, we're ready to go find ourselves some Higgs bosons.
We've built the machine, we have the Large Hadron Collider, it was originally scheduled
to have an energy when those protons collided of 14 trillion electron volts after the slight
mishap in September 2008, we've lowered expectations a little bit and they're colliding at 7 trillion
electron volts, that's still more than enough.
We also have the correct theoretical superstructure, the Higgs boson of course plays a crucial
role in the weak interactions which Stephen Weinberg and Abdul Salam and Sheldon Glashow
unified with electromagnetism, so we often now talk about the electroweak interactions.
So we're ready to calculate things, to build things, to put it all together and to discover
a new particle.
We also know what steps we need to keep in mind, we need to make the new particle, we
need to detect once we've made it, now we won't ever see the Higgs boson directly.
As we've said, the Higgs boson if we were to make it, it would decay very, very quickly.
The definition of very, very quickly in this case is one zeptosecond, the lifetime of a
Higgs on average is about 10 to the minus 21 seconds.
There is no piece of electric equipment that we're ever going to build that will interact
with the Higgs so quickly that you'll see it interact directly before it decays.
So by detect it, we really mean see the particles that it decays into.
And then finally, we have to know that we've seen that.
It's easy to see that there's various particles coming out of the collision.
When it's subtle, what's more intricate is figuring out that the particles that we're
seeing actually did come out of the decay of the Higgs boson.
In fact, this is not something that you will ever be sure of, it's a matter of building
up confidence as you get more and more data coming in.
The reality of collisions at a Hadron collider is that things are a mess.
We are colliding two protons together and we say that protons have two up quarks and
one down quark inside, three quarks total.
But the reality is actually much more complicated.
The strong interactions that keep those quarks together are very strong.
And what that means in practice is there are a tremendous number of virtual particles inside
the proton.
So you have your three quarks, you also have many, many gluons that are holding those quarks
together, and you also have quark anti-quark pairs popping in and out of existence.
When you collide these two protons together, it's like you're colliding two floppy bags
of particles and you're not going to get the total energy in your proton to ever be concentrated
in any one collision.
When you're colliding particles at the LHC at seven trillion electron volts total, that's
three and a half electron volts per proton, but at most one third of that is in any one
quark and often it's much less.
So we still have plenty of energy to make a Higgs boson.
When we collide two protons, it's either going to be two quarks colliding or a quark
in an anti-quark or two gluons.
What you want is for the total energy in those individual constituents to be enough to make
one Higgs boson and then whatever other particles might be produced in that collision.
So when the LHC turned on in 2005, we had already been looking for the Higgs boson for
quite some time.
We had the LEP accelerator, also at CERN.
We had accelerators at Slack and Fermilab and elsewhere and they had ruled out quite
a wide range of possibility.
So once we got to 2008, there are basically two possible windows for the Higgs.
Remember the only free parameter, the only thing we didn't know about the Higgs before
we discovered it, is what its mass was.
Once we knew its mass, we would instantly know how it interacted with all the other
particles in the standard model if it were the kind of Higgs that was invented by Higgs
and Browton-Ungleer and then put to work by Weinberg and Salon.
So the mass of the Higgs was the unknown factor and we had two possible places to look.
One was between 115 and 155 GeV and the other was greater than 250 GeV.
Now you want to think about why this kind of window structure is there.
Why don't you just have the Higgs is either greater than a certain mass and we haven't
seen it yet or it's less than a certain mass and we should have seen it.
The answer is because you're looking for a signal above the background.
So again, you make particle collisions, things come out.
What you're looking for is a new contribution to that signal from the Higgs boson, but that
means you're doing a comparison.
You're comparing the signal you would get with the Higgs to the signal you get without
the Higgs.
It's easiest to find the Higgs if its mass lies in a region where there's not that much
else going on.
So the reason why we had ruled out a Higgs boson between 155 and 250 is because there
the backgrounds were low.
The Higgs would be difficult to make there, but if you made it, it would stick out like
a sore thumb.
So there are basically these two windows between 115 and 155 and of course, since it's not
a mystery novel, I'll give the answer away, that's where it was.
The Higgs was sitting there at 125 GeV.
Actually soon after we turned on the LHC, we were able to widen the top range of the
window.
We ruled out the idea that the Higgs would be between 140 and 470 GeV.
Now that was already telling us the Higgs was probably light.
It was probably in that lower region between 115 and 140 and this is because of technical
mathematical reasons in the standard model.
If the Higgs gets very, very heavy, the theory is just not well behaved.
And in this case, 470 GeV or above counts as very, very heavy.
So we already had a pretty good idea.
The Higgs boson is going to be between 115 GeV and 140.
It's hard to look in that region.
This is really the region where the backgrounds are the worst, but if you make it there, everything
would suddenly fit together.
So we want to ask, how do we find the Higgs?
What particles does a couple to?
Because we want to both produce it and then watch it decay.
Well you know the answers.
The Higgs boson discovers couples to every particle that has a mass.
And the bigger the mass, the stronger the coupling.
So the particles that the Higgs couples to the most would be the W and Z bosons and the
very heavy fermions.
The W and Z bosons can come together.
The Higgs is neutral, so you can get a W plus and a W minus combining into a Higgs.
The Z itself is neutral, so you could make a Higgs by having two Z bosons come together
and making a Higgs.
Since the W and the Z are relatively massive, these are relatively strong interactions.
The other thing the Higgs couples to besides the weak interaction bosons are the massive
fermions, the charged leptons, electron, muon, tau, and of course all the quarks.
To make it, the Higgs is neutral, so you need a particle-antiparticle annihilation.
And when you're looking at the strength of this kind of annihilation, the light particles
are much weaker in making the Higgs than the heavy ones are because the Higgs couples
to mass.
If you have an up quark and an anti-up quark, they can combine to make a Higgs, but it's
very, very rare.
If you have a top quark on the other hand and an anti-top quark, making the Higgs is
very, very easy.
So knowing that the Higgs couples to heavy, massive particles, we can think about our
two tasks, how to make it and how to find it, what it will decay into.
So let's first think about making it.
What we have as our ingredients are protons.
We said that protons are made of three quarks, but that's a little bit of an exaggeration
because again, inside that proton, there's a whole bunch of virtual particles.
There are particle-antiparticle pairs, quark-antiquark pairs.
There are also gluons bouncing back and forth between the different quarks.
But if you think about it, the gluons and the quarks of which the proton are made, the
up quarks and the down quarks, these are all very light particles.
We just said to make a Higgs, you want heavy particles.
So in fact, the particles that are inside the proton are not very good for making Higgs
bosons.
This is one of the challenges that we face.
As it turns out, if you go through the math, the best way to make a Higgs boson by proton
collisions is to not make it directly.
To first turn those light quarks and gluons into heavy particles, like W's and Z's or
top quarks, and then use those to make the Higgs.
You think about it, the gluon has zero mass.
It doesn't couple to the Higgs boson at all.
The up quark is about two million electron volts and the down quark is about five million
electron volts.
Whereas when you talk about the W and Z, you're talking about 80 and 90 billion electron
volts.
The top quark is up there at 174 billion electron volts.
So the coupling of the W, the Z, and the top to the Higgs boson is more than 10,000 times
bigger than the coupling of the up quark or the down quark.
You definitely want to make these heavy particles first.
So actually your question is, what is the easiest way in a proton-proton collision to
make these heavy particles, to make top quarks, W's and Z's?
Well you have to calculate it, that's work, that's why we pay our graduate students.
But roughly speaking, there are two ways.
You can do it by the strong interactions or you can do it by the weak interactions, the
weak nuclear force.
If you want to make the top quark, the easiest thing to do it is through the strong interactions,
all quarks feel the strong interactions.
So there is a set of Feynman diagrams you can draw corresponding to different ways to
make top quarks.
They all amount to the same thing.
You want to basically take gluons and convert them into top quarks and then let those top
quarks make a Higgs boson.
So there are processes called gluon fusion and top fusion.
When you take two gluons, bring them together, create a loop of top quarks, remember a virtual
top quark can run around in a loop and you add up all the contributions and then that
can spit out a Higgs or you can make a top, anti-top pair that annihilates into a Higgs
as well as making other strongly interacting particles.
That's one way to make a Higgs boson by first making a top quark.
The other way is by first making a W or Z boson pair and to do that you use the weak
interactions.
So again you bring together the quarks that you already have in your proton, the up quark,
the down quark, etc.
Those couple to the W's and the Z's via the weak interaction and then basically there's
two ways to make a Higgs.
One way is you can combine a positive W and a negative W or two Z bosons to make a Higgs.
That's once again called fusion.
The other way is emission.
You can emit from the quarks a W or Z boson and then they can emit in turn a Higgs boson.
So these kinds of processes are, we believe, the dominant way to create Higgs bosons at
the Large Hadron Collider.
And I encourage you to go home, take a pencil and paper, draw some Feynman diagrams, try
to figure out can you think of a better way to make Higgs bosons.
None of this is given to you from the start.
There's no back of the book that we can look in.
Physicists had to sort of think about every single possibility and this we believe are
the most promising ways to make Higgs bosons.
Now of course when we calculate these Feynman diagrams, these transition probabilities,
they do come out as probabilities because that's the nature of quantum mechanics.
We don't say that for sure a certain interaction will lead to a Higgs boson.
We say a certain fraction of the time you'll get a Higgs, a certain other fraction of the
time you'll get something else.
Likewise, were you to make a Higgs boson, a certain fraction of the time it will decay
into some particles, other times it will decay into something else.
That's just how quantum mechanics works.
So once we've made that Higgs, we're going to calculate the probability for it to decay
into something else.
And once again, there's a competition going on.
The Higgs wants to interact with heavy particles, therefore it wants to decay into heavy particles.
However, if the particle is too heavy, the Higgs doesn't have enough energy to decay
into it.
In fact, a Higgs of 125 GeV can quote unquote decay into particles that are heavier than
it because the Higgs itself can be a virtual particle and its mass is not actually its
real mass.
However, as you know, because you were here a couple lectures ago, if the mass of a virtual
particle is far away from the mass of the real particle, that gives you a very small
contribution.
So the sweet spot, the place the Higgs really wants to decay, is into particle-antiparticle
pairs that are similar in mass to the Higgs itself.
So we can think about the various possibilities.
For example, the Higgs does not couple to photons.
Photons are neutral and massless.
The Higgs does not couple to massless particles.
So you might imagine we can ignore the photons, but that's not true.
What the Higgs can decay into is heavy particles like a top quark, but the top quark couples
to photons.
Top quarks, bottom quarks, tau leptons, all of these charged particles are heavy and
coupled to the Higgs, so you can make Higgs's into two photons.
You can go through a virtual heavy charged particle.
As a matter of fact, when we really did find the Higgs, the strongest signal we had was
from the Higgs decaying into two photons via some virtual heavy charged particle.
That's not because it happens most of the time, it's just a much cleaner thing to do.
There's not that many other ways of making two very, very energetic photons.
But it's not the only thing that can happen.
There's a whole list of things that can happen.
So for example, the Higgs can decay into two Z bosons.
The Z is up there at about 90 GeV.
The Higgs is at 125 GeV.
So the Higgs doesn't have quite enough energy to make two real Z bosons, but it can make
two virtual Z bosons, and then they can decay.
What you're actually going to find are not the Z bosons, but what they decay into.
Each Z is neutral, so it decays into a lepton and an anti-lepton.
So for example, an electron and a positron, or an electron neutrino and an anti-neutrino
and so forth.
If they're neutrinos, you just won't see them.
If they're charged leptons, you will see them.
So what you're looking for in your detector are not the Z bosons directly, but pairs
of leptons and anti-leptons.
So four leptons, or two, because two of those are invisible because they're neutrinos.
Likewise, the Higgs can decay into two W bosons, virtual W's, because it's not quite
heavy enough to make two real W's, and then the W's decay.
But because the W's are charged particles, there's fewer ways for them to decay than
for the Z. Rather than making any particle and its anti-particle, the W has to make
a charged lepton and then a neutral lepton.
So if you have a W plus, it can decay into a positron and an electron neutrino.
A W minus can decay into an electron and its anti-neutrino, or a muon, a tau, etc.
So if you get W's created by your Higgs boson, you're looking for two leptons and then missing
energy because neutrinos carry away the rest of the energy.
Another possibility, going down the whole list, is that the Higgs boson can decay directly
into quarks.
This is something that Higgs really likes to do more than anything else, because quarks
are heavy.
So the Higgs can decay into top quarks, which are virtual, or even bottom quarks that can
make them for real.
Higgs bosons in any particle that decays, they like to decay into real particles rather
than virtual ones, so bottom quarks are the single favorite thing for the Higgs to decay
into.
Sadly, we don't observe.
Bottom quarks, we observe what they themselves decay into.
So what we're looking for in our detectors are jets of strongly interacting particles,
jets of hadrons, in particular two jets, because the Higgs creates a quark-anti-quark pair,
and each one of those two quarks makes a jet.
Finally, we can imagine the Higgs decaying into tau leptons.
The tau is the heaviest lepton, so the Higgs can decay directly into it, and then guess
what?
That tau is going to itself decay very quickly.
It could make an electron, it could make a muon, or the tau could even decay into quarks
and hadrons, making a jet.
And then of course there's a whole bunch of invisible neutrinos that also go along for
the ride.
The neutrinos are a bit of a problem because they carry away energy, and therefore we can't
actually measure the total energy produced in the event.
If you're looking at a Higgs decay where every part of the decay product is visible,
then we can add up all the energies and we get the mass of the Higgs boson.
If a lot of the energy is carried away by neutrinos, we have to be a little bit sloppier.
We have to say, well, it's plausible that that was a Higgs boson, but we don't know
for sure.
So take all these considerations.
Plug them in, ask yourself, what is the sweet spot?
What is the best place to look for Higgs decays?
If you think about Higgs decaying into tau leptons or charmed quarks, that can happen,
but those particles are relatively light, the Higgs doesn't interact with them as strongly.
If you think about the Higgs decaying into W's or Z's or top quarks, that can happen
but only if they're virtual because they're so heavy.
The sweet spot for 125 GeV Higgs are bottom quarks.
Most of the time, when the Higgs decays, over half the time, it will be into a bottom
anti-bottom pair.
Interestingly, however, 120 GeV Higgs is sort of an interesting place for the Higgs to live.
It's not only going to decay, or at least at the 95% level, into one thing or another.
There's a whole pie chart of possibilities.
So there's decays into bottoms, there's also decays into W pairs, gluons, tauons, etc.
All of these possibilities are there, and that is going to be crucial for figuring out
that if we detect a new particle, it really is the Higgs.
Since we don't see it directly, we would like to see that this new particle we detect
makes all of the possibilities in the right proportions.
We want to compare all of those different data points to our theoretical predictions.
So let's say you observe an event.
You've built the LHC, you have a detector like ATLAS or CMS, you've taken a picture
of this spray of particles being emitted once your two protons have collided.
Let's say in particular you get some low energy particles that are not that important, and
you get four particles that have a lot of energy.
An electron, a positron, a muon, and an anti-muon.
This is exactly the kind of thing that you might expect if you had first made a Higgs
boson, and that Higgs boson had decayed into two Z bosons, and those Z bosons had decayed
into lepton-antilepton pairs.
The question is, you've seen this event, it fits in with your expectation from the Higgs,
but is it the Higgs, or is it something else?
The problem is that everything the Higgs can do can also be done without the Higgs.
Everything the Higgs decays into can be produced by some non-Higgs-like mechanism.
What the Higgs boson is, is simply an extra way to make that particular collection of
particles, especially it tends to create those particles with the total energy that is approximately
equal to the energy of the Higgs boson, that is to say the Higgs mass, 125 GeV.
So you're looking for a little bit excess, a small amount of excess, in the number of
certain kinds of particles produced with a certain characteristic energy.
If you were to plot all of the particles that you're observing, and you were to plot it as
a function of the total energy in those particles, what you're predicting because there's a Higgs
boson is a little bump.
You're seeing that in this plot of how many events you get as a function of the total
energy in those events, you make a little bit more of them with a certain energy because
the Higgs boson is there.
So let's imagine you do that.
You collect data, you plot it, you see how many events you have at different energies.
You see a little bump in the data.
Now this is the real world.
This is not the textbook.
So your data are not perfectly smooth.
They are intrinsically bumpy because you're not actually observing an infinite number
of events.
You're observing some finite number.
There will be statistical fluctuations.
What you want to be sure if you see a bump in your data and you say maybe that bump is
evidence that there's a Higgs boson there, you want to be able to compare the size of
that new little signal to the possibility that it could simply be a random fluctuation.
That's the mathematical statistical analysis we need to do to be sure that what we've
seen is actually the creation of a new particle, the Higgs boson.
Now let's imagine you've seen a bump in your data.
You have a few more events of a certain kind than you would have expected on the basis
of the standard model alone.
The question you want to ask is, is this bump some really new physics or is it just a random
fluctuation?
What is the statistical significance of this bump?
So we can think about this kind of thing by thinking about any other random process
like flipping a coin.
If you have a fair coin, one that is 50-50 heads or tails every time, if you flip it
a small number of times, you will get large fluctuations.
If you flip a coin four times, you would not be surprised to get one head and three tails
or zero heads and four tails.
Whereas if you flipped it a hundred times, you'd be extremely surprised to get zero
heads if it were a fair coin, you'd even be surprised to get 25 heads and 75 tails.
50 heads, 50 tails would be the average, and the more times you flip it, the closer you
expect to be to that average.
If you only flip a coin four times, getting 25% heads is not surprising at all.
If you flip it a hundred times, getting 25% heads would mean something fishy were going
on.
So in physics and in mathematics, we quantify this uncertainty by using the Greek letter
sigma.
You will always hear particle physicists talking about sigma.
What sigma is, is the expected amount of fluctuation.
Sigma is saying, you know, given that we've flipped a coin a hundred times, on average
we should get 50 heads and 50 tails, but we wouldn't be surprised if we got 50 plus
or minus sigma.
Sigma is the amount of slop in your expectation, the uncertainty.
So in particular, you can calculate what sigma is given any well-defined process.
If you're flipping a coin and you flip it a hundred times, the average is 50 and sigma
is five.
That is to say 50 plus or minus five is the amount that you normally expect if you flip
a coin a hundred times.
So you will get rare, weird, unlikely fluctuations and you can calculate to great precision how
unlikely those fluctuations are.
And the nice thing about the way of thinking in terms of sigma, the uncertainty, is that
the probability of getting a rare fluctuation is directly correlated to how many sigmas
you are away.
Remember, if you flip a coin a hundred times, sigma is five.
If you're off from your expectation by one sigma, so if you're 50 plus or minus five,
you'll be outside that range 32% of the time, almost a third of the time.
In other words, it's not that surprising if you've got 42 heads and 58 tails.
But then you can ask, how often would you be outside a three sigma range?
If sigma is five coin flips, three sigma is 15.
So how often are you outside 50 plus or minus 15?
And a three sigma range corresponds to something that happens less than 0.3% of the time.
So we say that three sigma fluctuations are very, very rare.
And then you can go to five sigma, which would be 50 plus or minus 25.
Being outside that range, being outside the five sigma range, happens less than one time
in a million.
So particle physicists have translated the amount of sigmas into a rough guide about
how confident you should be that you really found something.
If you get a one sigma fluctuation, you haven't seen anything.
Those happen all the time.
If you get a three sigma fluctuation, a particle physicist would say you have evidence that
something is going on.
This happens less than 0.3% of the time.
But it's not quite yet risen to the level of a discovery.
If you have five sigma of fluctuation, if you're off from your expectation, by five
times the expected uncertainty, that's less than one in a million, and then you can claim
you really have a discovery.
So think about what actually happened historically.
It was in December 2011 that at CERN, there were two seminars by Fabiola Gianotti and Guido
Tinelli, these spokespeople for ATLAS and CMS at the time.
They presented what we call evidence for the Higgs boson, December 13, 2011.
What that means is they saw bumps in their data, and the statistical significance of
those bumps was three sigma.
Three sigma, 0.3% chance of it happening, but you know what?
You look for many, many different bumps.
If you look for many, many bumps, if you look for 300 different places, a bump could be
one time out of those 300s, you're going to see a three sigma bump just randomly.
So seeing a three sigma deviation is not yet enough to claim discovery.
But in December 2011, that's what we saw.
It was good enough to get particle physicists excited.
It was good enough to get me a contract to write a book about the Higgs boson, which
appeared later as the particle at the end of the universe.
But of course, it wasn't until July 2012 that we actually claimed we discovered the Higgs.
What that means is both experiments, ATLAS and CMS, showed us plots of their data, and
in both experiments we saw five sigma deviations from what you would expect if it were the
standard model without the Higgs.
Not only did you see this large deviation in both ATLAS and CMS, but it was the same
deviation in the same place in both experiments.
So either one of the experiments alone would have been enough to say we have found the
new particle.
Together, it was certain that something had gone on that we'd really found a new piece
of nature.
Lynn Evans, who brought the LHC to life, declared himself gobsmacked that the two experiments
agreed so beautifully.
But what we really knew in July 2012 was that we had found a new particle.
There was a bump in our data, statistically significant, more than five sigma.
The question is, do we know what's the Higgs boson?
And in fact, do we know that there is only one Higgs boson?
Is it possible there is a family of Higgs bosons?
So that's why discovering it was not enough.
We had to keep studying this new particle.
We had to calculate and then measure what we call the branching ratios.
So the first discovery plots were actually the Higgs decaying into two photons, but we
also studied the decay into quarks, the decay into leptons, the decay into everything we
could possibly find.
It's the fact that all of these measurements fit into one single theory that gave us confidence
we were on the right track.
Then to go beyond that, we measured the spin of the new particle, we measured the parity
of the new particle, we measured the relative amount of coupling of this new particle to
everything else, and guess what we found?
Whatever this new particle was, it tends to couple preferentially two heavy particles,
not two light particles.
In July 4th, 2012, CERN announced that they had discovered a new particle.
We all knew and suspected that it was the Higgs boson, but it was in March of 2013 that the
scientists from ATLAS and CMS came back and said, you know what?
This is definitely the Higgs.
This is not just a new particle, this is exactly the one we've been looking for.
And then of course, it didn't take very long.
It was in 2013 that the Nobel Prize went to François Englert and Peter Higgs.
The first two of the three people to find the Higgs mechanism in the context of a modern
relativistic particle theory, along with Robert Brown, who had passed away in 2011.
This is a very short period of time between the discovery of a new particle and the Nobel
Prize being given for it.
It was a very, very deserving Nobel Prize.
The idea of the Higgs boson is simply absolutely central to modern particle physics.
The hope is that somehow the Nobel Committee will find a way to honor not just these theoretical
physicists who invented the idea back in 1964, but also the experimental physicists who did
the hard work of building the LHC, constructing the detectors, analyzing the data, and actually
finding the particle.
Sadly there is a tradition in the Nobel Physics Prize that only three people or fewer can
win the prize in any one year.
Both ATLAS and CMS are collaborations with more than 3,000 physicists.
The physics prize is never given to collaborations or never given to more than three people
at a time.
That's not a matter of law, that's just a matter of tradition.
Perhaps this discovery is important enough that that tradition will finally be changed.
