Remember when we talked about the state of physics in the early 1930s?
We said that back then there was a pretty compelling model of atomic matter.
We had this picture of atoms as made of protons and neutrons held together by a nuclear force,
orbiting around them held together by electromagnetism, and of course everything is pulled together by gravity.
That was a situation which fit all of the data at the time.
You could have been forgiven for thinking that we more or less had physics figured out.
What happened, of course, is that we were surprised, and in that case the surprise came from the sky.
Carl Anderson and Caltech first found the positron, which we really should have expected, the antiparticle of the electron,
and then he found the muon which nobody expected at all.
Today we're in a similar situation.
We have a very good model that explains the physics here on Earth.
We have the standard model of particle physics.
We have just discovered the final piece that Higgs bows on.
But the sky has already told us that our theory is incomplete.
We live in a universe which is about 95% stuff that is not explained by the standard model of particle physics.
What we call dark matter and dark energy.
We believe that, roughly speaking, only about 5% of the energy of the universe
is in the form of the stuff that we found in the standard model, the atoms and so forth.
That's enough to account for you and me and the Earth, all the stars and planets that we see.
But there's another 25% of the universe, which is in the form of what we call dark matter,
some other kind of particle that we haven't directly detected,
and 70% of the universe is in the form of something called dark energy.
Dark energy is not even a particle.
It's some form of energy density that is spread uniformly throughout the universe
and does not dilute away as space expands.
It's something that is very, very different.
Now, I've actually done a whole course for the great courses on the nature of dark matter and dark energy.
You should definitely go out and buy that right away if you haven't already.
But for the course, the purposes of this final lecture of this course,
I want to point to the possibility that both dark matter and dark energy
might be related to the Higgs boson,
that we might be able to use our discovery of the Higgs
to learn more about the other 95% of the universe.
First, let me just remind you or convince you to stark
that there is such a thing as dark matter.
A lot of people have doubted that there is dark matter,
but there's two steps to the argument.
One is there's a lot more matter than we know how to account for.
So the first hints of dark matter go back to the 1930s with Fritz Wickey.
He's an astronomer at Caltech,
and it really became a very solid case in the 1970s with Vera Rubin and Ken Ford
who looked at individual galaxies.
And they showed that there was a lot more gravitational pull
at the edges of galaxies than you could account for with the stars, gas, and dust inside.
Now you might say, that's just because there's matter we haven't seen yet.
There are dark stars, there are black holes, there are planets,
where there's invisible gas and dust.
But these days, in the early years of the 21st century,
we have so much data that tells us so much about the dark matter,
we know it cannot be ordinary matter.
Not only do we have galaxies like Rubin and Ford saw,
not only do we have clusters of galaxies,
which is what Fritz Wickey was looking at,
we also have gravitational lensing, for example.
If there's dark matter, if there's some particle that has mass
and collects in galaxies and clusters,
every bit of matter in the universe affects the gravitational field,
and gravity in turn deflects light as it passes through.
That's gravitational lensing,
which we can actually use to map out where the dark matter is in the universe.
There's also the evolution of large-scale structure in the universe,
which is clearly being influenced by something other than ordinary matter.
And finally, there is the cosmic microwave background,
the leftover radiation from the Big Bang.
The subtle patterns of the temperature of the microwave background
depend on what the universe is made of.
It turns out that only using ordinary matter,
you don't get a right prediction for what the microwave background looks like.
You add dark matter and dark energy in there, and it fits perfectly.
So over and over again, we see the same picture.
There's a lot more dark matter in the universe than there is ordinary matter.
Perhaps the most vivid illustration of this is something called the bullet cluster.
This is actually two clusters of galaxies that pass through each other.
In a cluster of galaxies, even though we call it a cluster of galaxies,
most of the stuff, most of the matter, isn't even in the galaxies.
Most of the ordinary matter is in the form of hot x-ray emitting gas in between the galaxies.
And we think that most of the matter overall is in the dark matter in between the galaxies.
So what happened in the bullet cluster, these two clusters passed through each other,
and the hot intergalactic gas bumped into the gas from the other cluster,
and they were left behind.
Basically, the dynamics of these two clusters passing through each other separated out.
Most of the ordinary matter from most of the dark matter,
because the dark matter just passes right through.
And you can actually see this in the data.
You can map out the ordinary matter by looking at the x-rays emitted by the hot intergalactic gas,
and you can map out where the dark matter is by looking at gravitational lensing.
You see with absolute vivid clarity that most of the mass in the bullet cluster
is not where most of the ordinary matter is.
It is very strong evidence for dark matter.
So how do we know that the dark matter isn't simply ordinary matter, that is dark?
It turns out we have separate ways of talking about,
of measuring the amount of ordinary matter in the universe.
It's not just counting the stars and the gas and the dust.
Depending on how many ordinary particles there are in the universe,
it affects processes in the very early universe.
It affects the rate at which particles come together by a nuclear fusion to create new elements.
For example, you have hydrogen and helium in the early universe fusing together
to make lithium and other elements deuterium.
And the rate at which this happens depends on how much ordinary matter there is.
Likewise, the patterns in the cosmic microwave background are also closely affected
by the ratio of the number of barions, of protons and neutrons
to the number of photons in the universe.
And in both cases, you get the same answer.
Only 5% of the matter density, the energy density of the universe,
can be explained by the standard model.
We need a new particle, a dark matter particle.
It must be stable.
It's lasted a lifetime in the universe.
It must be neutral, otherwise it would be visible matter, not dark.
And it must be hardly interacting because dark matter, unlike ordinary matter,
doesn't clump together to make galaxies and stars.
It remains in puffy clouds that we call halos around galaxies.
So what is the dark matter?
We don't know the answer, but we have our favorite ideas.
And roughly speaking, there's only two candidates for dark matter that really stand up above the rest.
One is called a weakly interacting massive particle, or the acronym is a WIMP.
That is to say weakly interacting in the sense of really interacting
through the weak interactions of particle physics, not simply not interacting very much.
And the second candidate is something called an axion particle.
An axion was invented in the 1970s to solve a completely different problem,
namely why the CP symmetry is preserved by the strong interactions,
even though it's slightly violated by the weak interactions.
It turns out that both WIMPs, weakly interacting massive particles and axions,
are related to the Higgs boson.
Now the axion is a whole separate category.
I'm not really going to talk about it in any detail,
but basically you can think about it as a lighter cousin of the Higgs itself.
The axion is very similar to the Higgs boson, but with a much, much lower mass.
And the axion doesn't really play a role in giving mass to other particles,
but it's a specific kind of scalar particle, just like the Higgs,
that couples in very predictable ways to the particles we know about,
so we're certainly looking for axions.
But axions are also certainly the second most popular candidate.
The first most popular candidate for what the dark matter is, is the WIMP,
the weakly interacting massive particle.
And that's because of a special feature that WIMPs have.
Think about the early universe.
The universe now is expanding,
galaxies are moving away from each other.
So if you play the movie backwards, you push everything together.
In the early universe, the density of matter was much higher,
and likewise the temperature was much higher.
If you keep going backward in time,
the temperature and the density of energy go up and up and up.
So what that means is there's a lot of interactions.
Particles are bumping into each other with very, very high energies.
And what that means is you are constantly creating and destroying particles.
Particles and antiparticles are popping in and out of existence
because the temperature is so high.
That means the energy per particle is so high and you can make a lot of new particles.
But now that we've wound the movie backwards, let's play it forward again.
You start with a very hot dense state.
Particles and antiparticles of all sorts are being created or destroyed, including dark matter.
But then as the universe expands and cools,
most of these particles and antiparticles annihilate with each other and disappear into photons.
Except that if the universe expands fast enough,
the density of matter and antimatter gets to be so low that they stop interacting.
In particular, keep in mind the density of particles of dark matter and antiparticles of dark matter.
As the universe expands, there will be a leftover abundance of particles
after the density has gone down so much they can't annihilate anymore.
This is the relic abundance that gives us, in principle, the dark matter abundance today.
So you can ask yourself a question.
What is the rate of interactions between the dark matter particles and antiparticles
that you would need to get to give us the correct abundance of dark matter today?
The answer is the dark matter particles need to interact with a strength
that is exactly the strength of the weak interactions.
This is known as the WIMP miracle.
If the dark matter is a particle that interacts through the weak interactions,
it's very easy to get the right abundance of dark matter particles at the end of the day.
So what does that mean when we say weak interaction scales?
Well, the weak interactions are the W boson and the Z boson,
and by family resemblance, we also count the Higgs boson in there.
Any particle and antiparticle that can annihilate through W bosons, Z bosons, or Higgs,
we call that a weak interaction.
So if you really want to annihilate a particle and antiparticle,
it's not the W that is involved because the W is a charged particle,
you're going to annihilate by either creating a Higgs boson or a Z boson.
So you can calculate the rate at which this happens.
You can calculate what it would need to be to give you the right relic abundance,
and you're in the ballpark.
There are details that depends on the model,
but the ballpark answer is you get the right abundance to be the dark matter.
And then a wonderful thing happens.
You've figured out that your dark matter particle must interact with either Z bosons or Higgs bosons
via annihilation, but we know from our lectures about quantum field theory
and Feynman diagrams and particle physics processes
that if you have a diagram that, let's say, takes a dark matter particle and antiparticle
and they come together and annihilate into a Higgs boson,
then that Higgs boson can decay into particles in the standard model.
We can take that diagram and we can rotate it.
So we have a diagram where dark matter comes in, ordinary particles go out
by first creating a Higgs that implies the existence of an interaction
where a dark matter particle and an ordinary particle come in,
scatter off each other by transferring a Higgs back and forth,
and then keep going their separate ways.
In other words, if it is true that the dark matter feels the weak interactions
or interacts with the Higgs directly,
that means the dark matter interacts with ordinary matter directly as well.
And that means we can detect it.
We can find it.
The dark matter does not need to stay dark forever.
The way to do it is to go deep underground,
and that's because just like looking for the Higgs boson,
the trick of looking for dark matter is to get rid of the backgrounds.
If you build the detector here on the surface of the earth,
cosmic rays and radiation from all over the place will create a huge background.
It will be impossible to tell that you have a dark matter signal at all,
so instead you go deep, deep underground.
You build a detector that has very heavy nuclei in it
because a nucleus has protons and neutrons,
and basically what you're saying is that the WIMP,
the weakly interacting massive particle,
will scatter off individual protons and neutrons,
so the more of them you can pack into a small space, the better off you are.
Then what happens in your detector is a WIMP dark matter particle comes by,
it scatters off your heavy nucleus that shakes the nucleus,
which in turn shakes the electrons around it in the atom,
and that emits light.
We know that light is created when you shake electrons,
so this is the way we will ultimately try to detect dark matter.
In fact, this is exactly what we're doing.
There are several different dark matter experiments going on right now.
We haven't found it yet,
but we've made very good progress in figuring out how it would be possible to find it.
For example, there is the LUX detector, LUX.
This is 350 kilograms of liquid xenon.
Xenon is a nice element to use because it's heavy,
it's liquid, so you can pour it into your container,
and it is neutral and it doesn't interact very happily with ordinary matter.
It is a noble gas, so it just sits there and is inert,
waiting for dark matter to come along.
The LUX detector was assembled in the Homestake Mine in the Black Hills of South Dakota.
Homestake used to be the deepest gold mine in North America.
Over its history, over a million kilograms of gold were taken out of Homestake,
but it's also a wonderful place to do physics experiments
because it's so deep underground and accessible.
The solar neutrino problem, the first telescope that measured neutrinos from the sun,
was built in the solar neutrino problem discovered in the Homestake Mine in Ray Davis,
who did it, won the Nobel Prize for his work.
In 2002, the mine stopped mining gold, but it's still used for physics experiments.
So like I've said, we've actually made a lot of progress.
In fact, we've made a tremendous finding in our search for dark matter,
namely that the dark matter does not interact via exchanges of Z bosons.
I said that to get the right numbers, the dark matter should interact either through Z bosons or Higgs bosons.
We don't know the whole detailed dark matter model that we're thinking about,
but basically there's a sort of simplified way of thinking about it where there's only two parameters.
One is the mass of the dark matter, and the other is the strength of its interactions.
And if you believe that the mass, that the dark matter is a weakly interacting massive particle,
you already have a very good guess as to what the mass should be.
Remember, the mass of the W's and Z's are like 80 or 90 GeV.
The mass of the Higgs is 125.
The value of the Higgs in empty space is 246 GeV.
Anything associated with the weak interactions will be associated with an energy scale
or a mass of roughly 100 or 200 GeV.
So that's where you expect the dark matter to be.
When you plot in a two-dimensional plot the mass of the dark matter that it might have,
the mass of that WIMP particle, and the interaction strength, then you go look for it.
How strongly is it interacting with ordinary matter?
So we have done this.
We have done this in many different experiments, and what we found is that we have completely ruled out
the possibility that there are dark matter WIMP particles in the range we're thinking about
that are scattering off ordinary particles by exchanging Z bosons.
However, we have not ruled out the possibility that dark matter could scatter off ordinary matter
by exchanging Higgs bosons.
The way that you play the game is you write down a model,
and then you write down all the possible ways the parameters that model could fit together,
and the current state of the art is if the dark matter scatters off ordinary matter by exchanging Higgs bosons,
we have ruled out some of that parameter space, but not most of it.
There's still a long way to go before we can say that's not what happens.
So physicists are actually very, very optimistic that over the next five or ten years
we will not just put limits on dark matter, we will actually discover it in an underground detector.
So that's a very important finding.
If the dark matter is a WIMP, it interacts with ordinary matter by exchanging Higgs bosons.
That is a feature of the Higgs.
As we've said way back in the beginning of the course, the Higgs is a sociable particle.
It is easier for it to interact with new particles as well as the ones in the standard model
than it would be, say, a top quart to interact with those particles.
So whether or not we actually find dark matter by this technique,
the fact that we found the Higgs boson gives us new hope for finding new particles
beyond what we know in the standard model because the Higgs likes to interact.
Then we're left with the other puzzling cosmic phenomenon, dark energy.
Now we don't know as much about dark energy as we even know about dark matter, which is already very little.
We have a very simple, effective model for what the dark energy is
because what we know about it from measurements is that it's approximately the same density of energy
at every location in space and over every moment of time.
That's why we know that dark energy is not a particle.
Particles dilute as the universe expands.
If the number of particles is some fixed amount, as space gets bigger and bigger,
the density of particles per cubic centimeter goes down.
But the measurements that cosmologists have done showing that the universe is accelerating,
not just expanding, can only be explained if the density of dark energy,
if the amount of dark energy in every cubic centimeter is approximately constant over time.
And if that's true, there's a very simple idea for what the dark energy is.
The dark energy could be the intrinsic energy of empty space.
It could be the idea that in every cubic centimeter of space, you can empty it out.
You can say, all right, I take a cubic centimeter, I remove all of the ordinary matter,
I remove all the dark matter, everything there is, so it's nothing but the vacuum, empty space.
Then I can ask, how much energy is there in that cubic centimeter?
According to Einstein, the answer is not necessarily zero.
It's some feature of the world, it's some constant of nature, the vacuum energy,
or the cosmological constant.
That could be the dark energy.
So think about this in terms of the Higgs field.
When we said that, the reason why the Higgs takes a non-zero value in empty space
is because of its potential energy.
The potential energy function for the Higgs boson is simply the answer to the question,
how much energy is there in empty space when the Higgs boson field takes on different values?
The minimum energy is when the Higgs is at a value 246 GeV.
But that's the minimum energy we want to ask, what is the energy?
What is the minimum, but what is its actual value?
And the answer is, it's completely unknown.
That is a separate free parameter of the model.
We can have any energy we want at the minimum value.
That is the dark energy.
That is the vacuum energy that is apparently making the universe accelerate.
But the story doesn't quite end there.
We have a potential energy function for the Higgs boson.
And if you want to think about it mathematically,
if you think about the Higgs boson as being the letter H,
the potential energy function is something like minus H squared plus H to the fourth.
This is a fancy way of saying that at zero there's a hilltop,
and then it hits a minimum, and the potential goes up again as the field grows very large.
So there's basically two terms.
There's the minus H squared term, there's the plus H to the fourth term,
and both of them have coupling constants.
Those two coupling constants determine two parameters that we have measured.
One is the value of the Higgs, 246.
The other is the mass of the Higgs.
Before, five years ago, we didn't know what the mass of the Higgs was.
Now we know what it is.
It's 125 GeVs.
So we know both of the terms.
We know the complete Higgs boson potential.
At least, we know what you might call the classical Higgs boson potential.
The one that you write down.
But just like everything else in particle physics,
the Higgs potential gets corrections from quantum mechanics.
You can once again draw Feynman diagrams.
Feynman diagrams with virtual particles inside
contribute to the final form of the Higgs boson potential.
The good news is, once we have measured the mass of the Higgs
and its value in empty space, which we have done,
you can calculate all of those quantum corrections.
You can actually plot the complete and final form of the Higgs boson potential.
And the answer is absolutely fascinating.
There is a minimum value for the Higgs energy,
potential energy, at its current value, 246.
But there is another minimum value very far away
at large values of the Higgs field.
In other words, the Higgs boson potential looks like a maximum at zero.
It hits a minimum at 246.
It goes up again at larger values.
But then it turns over and comes down again
and has another minimum before it starts going up again
at some large, large field value.
Now you might ask, why would we care?
Our universe seems to live in the value of the Higgs field that we have now.
If there's another value further away, why should it bother us?
The answer, of course, is even though right now
the Higgs field takes on the value 246 GeV, it might change.
There is something called quantum tunneling.
You can start with the Higgs field having its current value, 246,
but in a tiny little region of space, a bubble can form.
Through a quantum fluctuation, you can make a little tiny region
where the Higgs field takes on a much larger value, but with a lower energy.
Remember, the value of the Higgs is different from the energy of the Higgs field,
which is different from the mass of the Higgs boson.
These are all three different kinds of parameters.
So you can make a little region of space where the value of the Higgs field
is much, much larger, but the energy is actually lower.
And that has dramatic consequences.
Remember that if you have some energy in some region, it wants to minimize.
It wants to dissipate and spread out.
What this means is that if we have the current value of the Higgs field
with some energy density in empty space associated with it,
and you make a little bubble where the value of the Higgs field might be much larger,
but the energy density inside is smaller, then that bubble will want to grow,
because that is lowering the energy of space itself.
So there's a competition here.
The universe is expanding, but bubbles are being created.
Once a bubble is created, it starts expanding at almost the speed of light.
And the question is, is the nucleation rate of these bubbles,
is the rate at which these bubbles come into existence fast enough
that the bubbles can collide and what we call percolate?
This is a phase transition, much like liquid water boiling and becoming water vapor
by creating bubbles.
If you create bubbles of new Higgs value fast enough,
the bubbles will hit each other, take over the universe,
and we will have a phase transition that is percolated with a new value of the Higgs.
What would that mean for us?
We would all die.
It would be a tremendous ecological catastrophe,
the likes of which the universe has never seen.
For one thing, all that energy in empty space would convert to Higgs bosons,
which would then decay, but that's not really the bad news.
The bad news is, remember, the particles that you are made of,
the electrons, the quarks, etc., get their mass because of the value of the Higgs field.
If the value of the Higgs field went from 246 GeV to something like 10 to the 16 GeV,
suddenly all of the particles of which you were made would get ginormous masses.
Everything that you and I know about chemistry, biology, atomic physics would be completely wrong.
Life would not exist.
Everything that we see right now that is made of ordinary matter would explode and collapse into black holes,
and it would be a catastrophe.
Fortunately, it hasn't happened yet.
It might not ever happen.
We don't know whether or not this is actually going to happen.
What matters is a delicate calculation, namely how fast do such bubbles form.
So now that we know the mass of the Higgs,
we can actually go back and calculate the rate at which such bubbles of new Higgs value
might appear in our universe.
Very roughly speaking, our universe right now is about 10 billion years old,
about 10 billion light years across in all three dimensions of space.
So we think that so far there's been no nucleation of bubbles in our universe that we know about,
or we would certainly know about if it had happened.
So whatever the nucleation rate is,
it's probably less than 1 per 10 billion cubic light years per 10 billion years.
That's a rate of bubble nucleation,
and in the real world it's probably smaller than that.
The question is, is it much, much, much smaller than that?
In which case we are safe,
or is it almost that big?
In which case we might be fine now,
but 10 billion years from now the world could be a very, very different place.
Well, the answer is we've done the calculation,
and we are right on the boundary.
As far as we can tell, the error bars, the statistical uncertainty
in our measured values of things like the Higgs mass and the Topcork mass
make it impossible for us to tell whether or not we will actually undergo
this phase transition in the future.
That is kind of a strange thing.
If the Topcork were lighter,
if the Topcork, because it's the heaviest particle,
the Topcork is what affects the Higgs potential the most,
if the Topcork were only 100 GeV, rather than 174,
we would say with confidence that the Higgs boson potential is stable,
we will not get any bubble nucleations.
If the Topcork mass were 200 GeV,
the Higgs boson would have already undergone this phase transition a long time ago.
For some reason it's right there on the edge.
Is this a coincidence, or is this a clue to something different?
Honestly, right now we don't know.
So that should be an important lesson to us.
There's a lot that we don't know right now about how the universe works at a very deep level.
So there's two statements that I want to make that are both true,
but they sound like their intention with each other,
so think about them very carefully.
One statement is, we have a completely correct description of the laws of physics
that underlie the stuff out of which you and I are made,
the atoms that are interacting with their electrons and their quarks,
interacting through electromagnetism, strong force and so forth.
That is a true statement.
Also, we do not understand a lot of physics beyond what underlies our everyday stuff.
We don't know about quantum gravity.
We don't know enough about what happens at very high energies.
We still need to get more information to figure these things out.
So that's what we're trying to do.
Clues are useful.
The hierarchy problem is a clue.
The existence of dark matter is a clue.
The existence of dark energy and perhaps the instability of the Higgs boson potential,
these are also clues.
Even better would be experiments.
It would be really, really great to get a particle out of the LHC or some future collider
or some clue from astrophysical data that said that what we have now
in terms of the standard model is not just puzzling but downright wrong.
That would be very, very useful.
It's possible that nature is not going to be so kind to us.
It is possible that we will keep doing experiments
and we will just keep on finding out that our data fits the standard model.
That will be slightly annoying, but then what do we do with all these puzzles?
What do we do with the puzzle of the dark energy, the puzzle of the hierarchy problem, etc.?
It might be that they're puzzling not because there's a new particle out there to be found
but because we are fundamentally wrong about our ideas about how quantum field theory works.
That is an interesting and provocative possibility.
It might mean that we truly need a revolutionary new understanding.
In the meantime, the need for a potentially revolutionary new understanding
should not prevent us from patting ourselves on the back just a little bit.
Democritus, 2,500 years ago, set out the idea that all of the wonderful variety of stuff
we see around us every day could be boiled down to different combinations
of a small set of underlying fundamental constituents.
He called them atoms, we call them elementary particles.
We have a vision of elementary particles which is not enough to explain the whole universe,
doesn't explain the Big Bang or Dark Matter,
but it explains the atoms, the molecules, the forces and the impulses
that make up you and me and the sun, the moon, the stars,
everything we've ever seen with our eyes, touched with our fingers,
tasted with our tongues, etc.
With the discovery of the Higgs boson in 2012, that particular picture is complete.
There is a part of nature that we understand perfectly well.
It's got to count as one of the single most impressive things that human beings have ever done.
And I think we should be very excited to see what it is we will do next.
