You
will
Your lecture is Dr. Sean Carroll.
Dr. Carroll is a research professor of physics at the California Institute of Technology
and a former instructor at the University of Chicago and the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.
He is the author of From Eternity to Hear, The Quest for the Ultimate Theory of Time,
and a blogger at Cosmic Variants.
His latest book is The Particle at the End of the Universe about the Higgs Boson and
the Large Hadron Collider.
Dr. Carroll also has been featured on the Colbert Report, PBS's NOVA, and Through the
Wormhole with Morgan Freeman.
Where were you on July 4th, 2012?
I was in Geneva, Switzerland, at CERN, the European Center for Particle Physics Research.
But the vibe in the air was closer to that of a rock concert than that of a physics laboratory.
There were kids 19-years-old, 20-years-old who had literally camped out overnight to
get good seats, much like you would camp out for a Lady Gaga concert except that everyone
had brought along their laptops.
There were also distinguished 80-year-old scientists who were jostling for good seats
in the presentation hall.
But they were not there to see a concert at all.
They were actually there just to see a couple of PowerPoint presentations.
Of course, you know why they were so excited to see some physics seminars.
It's because July 4th, 2012 was when we announced the discovery of the Higgs Boson.
This was a massive worldwide media sensation, front page news on the New York Times and
newspapers throughout the world.
The web servers that were bringing the live stream of the seminar announcements crash over
and over again.
You may even have heard of a phrase that physicists sort of dread, namely the God Particle.
The God Particle was a label given to the Higgs Boson by Leon Letterman, a very distinguished
Nobel Prize-winning physicist, back when he was trying to make the case that the United
States should be looking for this mysterious Boson.
The problem was that Letterman wanted to give sort of a marketing label to the Higgs
Boson.
He knew that if you're watching CNN and you heard Higgs Boson, you would keep on going,
but if you heard God Particle, you might stop to listen.
The problem was he didn't realize that people would take him literally, people would think
that the Higgs Boson actually has something to do with the existence of God.
That is completely false whether you're a believer in God or whether you're not.
Nobody actually believes that God plays favorites among the elementary particles.
But the Higgs Boson is a big deal, and that is really what I want to try to explain.
Part of the point of this course is going to be not only to explain to you what the
Higgs is, what role it plays, but why people were so excited by it.
And because this is a lecture course, not a mystery novel, I'm going to give you the
answers ahead of time.
This is the kind of subject where it repays careful thought.
So I'm in this lecture going to tell you, try to explain why it was such a big deal,
and then in the lectures to come, we'll go through all the details and fill in the story
a little bit.
So the point is the Higgs Boson is a little bit hard to understand because what we call
particle physics is different than what we actually think about as professional physicists.
I actually blame the guy named Democritus.
Democritus is an ancient Greek philosopher.
He is really the father of what we now call particle physics.
We don't know what Democritus looked like, but we do have portraits painted that are
labeled Democritus because since we don't know what he looked like, people like to paint
self-portraits and call them Democritus.
So you will see pictures of people like Rembrandt with the labeled Democritus.
In fact, we have no idea what he looked like.
We do have a nickname that he got.
He was known as the laughing philosopher.
And Democritus had the idea that you see a bunch of things around you.
You see water, you see solids, you see air, and the ancient Greeks would have thought
these were all fundamentally different things.
The atomists, like Democritus, had the idea that in fact they were just a small number
of fundamental building blocks that go into creating all of these different substances.
They called these fundamental building blocks atoms.
Now sadly, for historical reasons, in the 19th century the chemists got a hold of the
word atoms.
And so we now use atoms in our modern language to speak of the chemical elements.
But these atoms that we have, the chemical elements, aren't really fundamental.
We know that atoms are made of smaller things.
What Democritus and his colleagues were really talking about are what we would now call the
elementary particles, the fundamental building blocks of nature.
And since the 19th century, physics has been trying very hard to look for to find the elementary
particles.
Particle physics is a thriving field.
We know that atoms are made of elementary particles called electrons.
They also have protons and neutrons, which we thought were elementary.
Turns out they're not.
Antons and neutrons are made of even smaller particles called quarks.
And we also have gluons, we have neutrinos, we have muons.
There's a whole zoo of elementary particles we will be talking about in lecture three.
The reason why the Higgs boson is hard to understand is because particles are actually
not what the world is made of.
We talk about that.
We use that all the time.
And so when we talk about the Higgs boson, it's a particle.
It's a boson, which as we will see is one of the two major kinds of particles.
However, that's just sort of a sloppy approximation to the true underlying reality.
Our modern idea, the idea that is really centrally important to modern physics, is that the world
is not made of particles, but it's made of fields.
A field, unlike a particle, is spread out everywhere throughout the universe.
It's a number at every point in space and time.
A particle has a location, but a field is spread out everywhere and is vibrating, is
changing its value.
Think of the temperature of the air in the room.
At every point in a room, there's a temperature, that's a number, that's a field.
Temperature is not a fundamental field.
It's a derived quantity that comes from the air, comes from the molecules.
The modern point of view on the fundamental nature of reality is that quantum fields vibrating
at every location, in space and throughout time, are the fundamental building blocks
of nature.
You may have heard the question, is light, or are electrons particles or waves?
I will tell you the answer, they are waves.
They are waves, they are vibrating quantum mechanical fields.
What we call particles are just what we see when we look at the fields.
That is the miracle of quantum mechanics, that's one of the subtle things we'll have
to describe during this course.
Why is it such a big difference?
Why do we care that the world is made of fields versus particles?
Like I said, when you look at the field, you see it vibrating, you see a particle there,
so it makes perfect sense to use the language of particle physics to say there's an electron
particle even though we really know there's a vibration in the electron field.
The one difference is the Higgs boson.
The Higgs boson is itself a particle, it is a vibration in a field called the Higgs
field, but unlike all the other particles, unlike the electron which is a vibration in
the electron field, the photon which is a vibration in the electromagnetic field, for
the Higgs boson the particle is beside the point.
For the Higgs boson it's the Higgs field that really matters.
On that day, July 4th, 2012, people were very excited to announce the discovery of the Higgs
boson, but what got them excited was the knowledge that there is a Higgs field that fills space.
You are soaking in it, as the commercials used to say.
That is really what makes modern particle physics go, the idea that everywhere around
you, as you walk through the universe, as you wave your hand through space, you are
moving through the Higgs field.
Now remember, I'm saying that every particle that we know about is really a field of one
kind or another, but there's a difference between the other fields and the Higgs.
There is something that makes the Higgs special.
What makes it special is, even in empty space, the Higgs field is not zero.
If a field is something that has a number at every point in space, when you turn things
off, when there are no electrons around, that's a way of saying the electron field is at zero.
In empty space, all of the fields we know about are sitting at zero, undisturbed, except
for the Higgs field.
That is what is making the Higgs a little bit different than all the other forces of
nature, all the other fields we know about.
The Higgs is there lurking and affecting things, even in empty space.
That Higgs field plays two crucially important roles in modern particle physics.
One role is that it governs the action of the weak nuclear force.
As we will see, there are four fundamental forces in nature.
There's gravity, which we all know about.
There's electricity and magnetism, or electromagnetism, which is actually unified into one force.
Then there are two nuclear forces that only work on very small scales.
They are imaginatively called the strong nuclear force and the weak nuclear force.
All of these forces are different in their own individual ways.
The Higgs boson is responsible for how the weak nuclear force works.
The reason why that is important, as we will see, is that gravity and electromagnetism
are noticeable in your everyday life.
The reason why they're noticeable is because they stretch over long ranges.
The nuclear forces, on the other hand, are stuck there inside the nuclei of atoms.
They are very, very short range.
That was a mystery for a very long time.
Why were the nuclear forces short range, even though gravity and electromagnetism stretch
out over such large distances?
It turns out, because particle physics is complicated, that there are very different
reasons why the strong nuclear force and the weak nuclear force are short range.
In particular, for the weak nuclear force, the answer is the Higgs boson, or the Higgs
field, filling all of space.
The short answer to a longer question that we'll get to later, why is the weak nuclear
force short range?
Because the lines of force that are trying to stretch from one particle to another are
absorbed by the Higgs field.
That Higgs field lurking out there in empty space is really governing how the weak nuclear
force works.
As we'll see, that makes a crucial difference to how our lives work, to how all the elementary
particles interact with each other.
The second main feature of the Higgs boson is that it gives mass to elementary particles.
This is a bit tricky, we're going to have to explain this in great detail, because who
says that you need a field or something else to give mass?
Why can't elementary particles just have mass?
If you were Isaac Newton talking about the mass of the earth, you didn't need to know
about the Higgs field, you didn't need to know about particle physics or bosons at all.
When Paul Dirac, the famous physicist, first invented an equation governing the electron,
he just put a mass in there, he said the electron has a mass, we've measured it, I'm
going to put a term in my equation that tells you what that means.
He didn't realize you needed something called the Higgs boson to explain how the electron
could have a mass, so in lecture six we will be explaining why you should be surprised that
particles have masses at all, and then how the Higgs boson does the work to get it right.
It all comes down to the fact that the weak nuclear force is complicated, people tried
for a long time to find the right theory to make sense of it.
In the end, the only reason why the weak nuclear force works the way it does, and the only
reason why we have a theory that explains it is because of the Higgs boson.
So, if there were no Higgs boson, if there were no field filling space from which the
Higgs boson arose, we would live in a very different universe.
We would live in a universe where the electron, for example, did not have mass.
If you had a world where the electron didn't have mass, you would not have atoms, because
electrons would not be able to settle into atoms.
That means no molecules, that means no chemistry, that means no biology or no life.
Without the Higgs boson, there will be a very different place.
Today, we have a wonderful, elaborate, complicated theory of particle physics, which also has
a very boring name.
It is called the Standard Model of Particle Physics.
It's an amazingly successful theory, really worth a tremendous amount of adulation.
It's an amazing intellectual accomplishment.
In that theory, all of the forces, gravity, electromagnetism, weak and strong, they're
all different.
They all have fundamentally different properties.
It was the Higgs boson that was the last piece of the Standard Model puzzle.
It makes the weak interactions work, it gives mass to some of the other elementary particles,
and it was the last particle that we found.
But because of the theoretical superstructure of the Standard Model, we knew that the Higgs
boson had to be there before we had found it.
Basically, since the 1960s, particle physicists had thought about this idea, maybe there is
a field filling space, something that we now call the Higgs field.
It seemed to make everything else fit together.
It seemed to make our theories of particle physics make sense.
All we had to do was find it, and that's what we did in July of 2012.
That's why there was such an excitement in the room in that lecture hall at CERN.
It was just a couple of PowerPoint presentations, but they were saying that we were completing
the Standard Model of Particle Physics.
We were completing our understanding of how the matter that you and I are made up of actually
works.
We're made of atoms, we're made of electrons and quarks and things like that.
The Higgs boson was crucial to understanding how that worked.
As I said, this understanding went back to ideas from the 1960s, and one of the most
impressive things about it was that these thinkers back in the 1960s who invented the
idea of the Higgs field and the Higgs boson, they weren't really driven by specific detailed
experimental results.
They were really driven by trying to understand how nature could possibly work.
How could it possibly be the case that the weak nuclear force is such short range?
This was a very difficult issue at the time, and it was fundamentally a mathematical problem.
We had good ideas about where the weak nuclear force and the strong nuclear force could come
from, but they didn't seem to give us the kind of theory that we really wanted.
That's why we were eventually driven to this dramatic idea that all of empty space is suffused
with this invisible energy field called the Higgs.
The issue was that we had this really lovely attractive picture for how forces of nature
arise at all.
We had these four forces, why?
Why are there four forces?
Why do they have the features that they do?
The answer that became popular in the 1950s and 1960s was because of symmetries.
Again, we'll have a whole lecture devoted to the idea of what a symmetry is.
It's the basic idea that there's stuff in the universe, and you can transform the stuff.
You can imagine rotating it, changing one field into another, without changing the fundamental
nature of the object that you're considering.
That's what a symmetry is.
It's a change that doesn't make a difference.
We had this brilliant idea from the 1950s that symmetries imply forces.
If you have the right kind of symmetries, these very powerful symmetries, which we're
going to call gauge symmetries, they give rise to forces of nature, and it's a very
beautiful, elegant, compelling mathematical structure.
The problem is the forces that you get out of these symmetries are always long range.
They're always things that stretched over huge distances, which we should easily be
able to detect.
We found gravity, we found electromagnetism.
That wasn't that hard, but we haven't seen long range forces for the nuclear forces.
Those are only short range, so it seemed to be a conundrum.
You had this wonderful idea that you wanted to be true.
Symmetries underlie forces, but they only give rise to long range forces, so maybe that
idea was not going to work for the nuclear forces.
The idea that then came along was that these symmetries are there, but symmetries are
broken.
There's something in nature that takes these symmetries and breaks them just a little bit.
If you did that, then you could have a symmetry giving rise to a force, but that force could
be confined to short range.
To do that, how do you break a symmetry like that?
You need a field that pervades empty space and has a non-zero value.
That is the Higgs idea in a nutshell.
You wanted to have these symmetries that give rise to forces, but you had to break the symmetry,
and to do that, you introduce the Higgs field.
When this idea came along in the 1960s, it was a very general principle.
It wasn't something that was a very specific model that was meant to do one precise thing.
It was an idea.
If you have a field filling space, you can break a symmetry giving rise to a short range
rather than a long range force.
It took a few more years for people to figure out, you know what?
This is how the actual weak interactions of particle physics really work.
Once that idea came along, suddenly everything fit together.
The experiment suddenly made sense.
However, we didn't actually see the field.
We had that idea of the Higgs boson, but we hadn't actually, back in the 1960s or even
1970s, seen evidence for it in our data.
The next step is to actually go look for it.
It's very nice to have a theory that fits together and makes sense, but we really want
to get the direct evidence that we're on the right track.
In particle physics, that means building new, more energetic, more powerful particle accelerators.
Really the way that particle physics gets its direct evidence is by E equals MC squared,
Einstein's famous equation relating the energy of an object at rest to its mass times the
speed of light squared.
You can think that the equation E equals MC squared means that energy is mass times the
speed of light squared, but really it's the energy a particle has when it's not moving.
What this does is it enables us to bring into existence new particles with heavier masses
than before if we can squeeze a lot of energy into a very tiny amount of space.
So that's what a particle accelerator does.
It accelerates other particles to extremely high velocities, so those particles get a
tremendous amount of energy together, and then it smashes them together so there's a
lot of energy there you can create more massive particles.
It was really in the 1970s that the search for the Higgs boson began in earnest.
The 1970s were an era when quantum field theory really became triumphant.
Before in the 1960s, even before that all the way back to the 30s, we had ideas of quantum
field theory, but it wasn't until the late 60s, early 70s that we really knew this was
the right way to think about nature at a fundamental level.
We figured out many of the pieces of the standard model of particle physics.
We knew that there were quarks, there were gluons, there were W and Z bosons out there.
We didn't discover the W and Zs until the 1980s, but we knew they had to be there.
Even the top quark, which was hypothesized back in the 1970s, everyone was convinced
it was there and we would eventually find it.
And ultimately we did find it in 1995 at a particle physics accelerator called the Tevatron.
The Tevatron was a facility right outside Chicago at Fermilab, the flagship United States
particle physics laboratory.
And in addition to looking for the top quark, they were also looking for the Higgs boson.
Roughly speaking, every major particle physics accelerator since the 1970s has been looking
for the Higgs.
There was the Tevatron at Fermilab, there's a dedicated place called the Large Electron
Positron Machine at CERN, but look as they may, none of them were actually able to find
it.
That led us to build the Large Hadron Collider, the LHC.
The LHC is not only the most impressive particle physics experiment ever built, it is the largest
machine ever built of any kind by human beings.
Like I said, it's just outside Geneva, in fact it's underground, it crosses the border
between France and Switzerland, it's a European collaboration where other countries, such
as the United States, are sort of allowed to participate, but the US is not part of
the governing body that really runs how CERN works.
The US tried to build its own particle accelerator called the Superconducting Supercollider.
The Congress canceled the funding for that back in 1993.
We left it up to the Europeans to find the Higgs boson.
So they built the LHC, this gigantic machine, it's 27 kilometers in circumference, 100 meters
underground, cost about $9 billion to build.
It's a lot of money, there's no question, but it's spread out over many years, many
countries.
And then finally, in 2008, we turned on the LHC.
There were some fits and starts at the beginning, we'll tell the wonderful story of the LHC
being built in Lectures 8 and 9, but finally it started running, it started running once
and for all in 2009 and it got better every year.
And finally, in 2012, we found the Higgs.
In fact, we found it sooner than we had thought.
I was actually hoping that it would be announced late in 2012 because I had a contract to write
a book about the Higgs boson.
The book finally came out in November 2012 as the particle at the end of the universe
and I was hoping that the book would be released the same day that we announced the discovery
of the Higgs boson, but the LHC actually worked better than we thought and we discovered
it in July 2012.
So the bad news was, my book release was not timed at the same time.
The good news was, I was there at CERN, I was actually able to be there listening to
the announcements that the Higgs boson had finally been found.
This was an historic event, not just for particle physics, but for human intellectual achievement.
People were really immensely moved by what they saw.
It was hard to find the Higgs boson.
We knew from the theoretical construct how it should interact with other particles.
We knew how it should interact with quarks, leptons, electrons, and so forth.
But what we didn't know is how heavy it was.
We didn't know what the mass of the Higgs was supposed to be.
That was what we call a free parameter in the theory.
It could have been 100 times the mass of the proton, 120, 140, 180.
We just didn't know.
It could have been much lighter than that except we would have found it long ago.
So the trick was to build up the statistical significance of the search.
As we'll discuss in later lectures, all of these particle physics experiments fundamentally
run by the rules of quantum mechanics.
Quantum mechanics says that when you do an experiment and you do a particle physics collision
and you look to see what comes out, you can never predict with 100% precision what's going
to happen.
You can predict the probabilities of one thing happening versus another one.
You can predict for sure.
So what you have to do is do that experiment over again and over again and over again,
seeing enough of an anomaly in your data that you can say, aha, there's definitely a new
particle there.
That's what took time in 2012.
But in fact, the experimental particle physicists did better than we expected.
They got the answer in July 2012, worldwide acclaimed, soon followed.
And in fact, Nobel Prizes followed for Peter Higgs, who the Boson is named after, and
François Unglère, another one of its discoverers.
You can ask yourself, why do we do this?
Why do we spend $9 billion building large Hadron Collider?
Why do talented young physicists devote their lives to looking for a particle that may or
may not be there?
Many times, people want to know what are going to be the technological ramifications?
Are we going to build a better iPhone?
Are we going to cure malaria or something like that?
And the answer is, when you do this kind of basic research, looking for a fundamental
new particle of nature, there will be technological applications.
There will be spin-offs.
We have done in building the Large Hadron Collider amazing accomplishments in computer
science, superconductivity.
CERN, the home of the LHC, invented a little thing that we call the World Wide Web, because
it turns out that particle physicists need to share data back and forth.
By spending money on doing basic research, we inevitably get more back per dollar than
we put into the science in the first place.
But that is not why we do it.
It's nice to get spin-offs.
It's nice to get the World Wide Web, or better superconducting technology.
But really, the reason why we devote our lives and our money to something like the Higgs
Boson and the LHC is because we want to know the answer.
It's simply driven by curiosity.
We want to discover the way the world works.
We are driven by the same impulse that democracies and the ancient Greeks were driven by.
We want to know what this nature is that we live in, what this world is, what are the
rules, what are the ingredients.
It's part of what makes us human beings.
We are curious.
We want to know.
We are not content simply to exist and to live from day to day.
And it turns out, for particle physics, there is no cheaper way to do it.
You can't say, well, we spent $9 billion on the LHC, the Large Hadron Collider.
What about if we spent only half that, four and a half billion?
Would it have taken a few more years to find the Higgs Boson?
The answer is no.
We would not have found the Higgs Boson.
We would not have gotten half as many Higgs Boson by spending half the number of dollars.
Whether you spend the money and you find it or you don't and you don't.
So so far, fortunately, the human race has decided it's worth the money to look for these
fundamental building blocks of nature.
And the Higgs Boson, especially, is a special particle.
As we will see in later lectures, it plays a different role than the other particles.
We are made of quarks and particles called leptons.
We're not really made of Higgs Boson.
It's not an ingredient that you can find inside our atoms.
But the existence of that Higgs field changes the properties of the particles that we are
made of.
And what this means is, when it comes to the physics underlying the everyday world, the
physics of atoms and molecules, the physics that underlies the biology that we are made
of that describes us, we now have a complete theory.
We have the standard model of particle physics, which accounts for everything that you and
I are made of.
It's not all of physics, there's many more things out there.
But when it comes to people, planets, stars, anything you've ever seen with your eyes
or touched with your fingers, we have a 100% complete theory of the fundamental building
blocks that make that up.
It's the underlying theory.
It's not the theory of planets and stars themselves.
When it comes to complicated interactions of many, many particles, there are many things
that we don't understand.
It's as if we have figured out what the rules of chess are.
That does not make us a good chess player.
But still, it's very, very important to figure out what those rules are.
When we think about atoms and the particles that make us up, we know what the basic rules
are.
There's no room for new particles that we haven't yet discovered to play an important
role in you or me.
That is why the discovery of the Higgs was such a big deal.
And now that we have found it, we can move beyond everyday physics.
As we'll see, there's dark matter out there in the universe.
There's dark energy.
There's the big bang.
There's black holes.
We are hopeful, as particle physicists, that the Higgs boson will not simply be the end
of one story, the standard model of particle physics.
It will also be the beginning of the next era in fundamental physics.
It turns out, for technical but believable reasons, the Higgs boson is a more sociable
particle than any of the other ones we know about, by which I mean it is easier for the
Higgs boson to interact with other particles.
We do think that there are other particles out there, not ones that we touch or are made
of, but we think that there could be supersymmetric particles, there could be extra dimensions
of space, there certainly is something called dark matter out there in the universe.
We would like to see it.
We would like to find it.
The Higgs boson might be the way to do that.
And of course, the biggest, most exciting possibility is that we will be surprised.
We have a good theory, the standard model, underlying what you and I are made of, but
there's a lot that we're not made of.
We have ideas, maybe supersymmetry, maybe dark matter, other things, but in the history
of physics, the most fun parts have always been when our ideas have not been quite right.
When the experiments have given us something we didn't expect.
Now that we have the Higgs boson, that's a tool.
It's something we can use.
It's a new way of looking at the universe.
We're hoping to keep looking, using our new tool, and if we're lucky, nature will surprise
us once again.
