Congratulations on making it through the particle zoo.
I know there's a lot of particles from the neutrinos to the quarks and leptons and so
forth, but you know what?
You can always just look at Wikipedia if you forget which particle is doing which.
In this lecture, we're back to the deep, profound, and fundamentally important ideas
of modern physics.
In fact, I would say that it is this lecture that is probably the most challenging and
most profound of all the ones that we're going to have in the course.
This is the lecture about symmetry.
Now, symmetry plays a fundamentally important role in modern physics, but it sounds like
it's just kind of aesthetically pleasing.
You have symmetry, you have a nice smoothness in the proportion of something.
What we're going to learn is that in modern physics, symmetry does much more than that.
Remember, we talked about forces of nature and gauge bosons, but we're going to learn
is that the fundamental structure of the forces of nature is ultimately due to symmetry.
So what is asymmetry?
What do we mean when we use that word?
Roughly speaking, the definition of asymmetry is a change that doesn't make a difference.
What do we mean by that?
We mean, well, you have some stuff.
Ultimately, we're going to have quantum fields, but let's think a little bit more concretely.
Just think about a shape that you can draw on a piece of paper.
So when we say there's a symmetry, we mean that there's some way you can alter that
shape without changing its fundamental structure.
So imagine you just draw a blob.
You just draw a scribble on a piece of paper.
That will, in general, unless you're a very accidental genius, will have no symmetry to
it whatsoever.
If you take that blob and you do something to it, if you rotate it or smush it or move
it around, it will generally turn into something else.
Your change will have made a difference.
A blob looks different from every different point of view.
But if you have a more special geometric figure, you will generally find there can be quite
a lot of symmetry.
So a good example is to think about a rectangle.
Remember a rectangle is a geometric figure with four sides and the opposite sides are
the same length.
And the angles in between are right angles.
We all know what a rectangle looks like.
And it just seems intuitively obvious that rectangles are symmetric figures.
But we want to be a little bit more precise.
We want to know at the mathematical level, without actually writing down any equations,
but conceptually, what do we mean when we say that that rectangle has symmetry?
How much symmetry does it have?
The answer is you go through all of the things you can do to the rectangle, ways you can
change it, so that you really are changing it.
But at the end of your change, it looks the same.
You do something to it and you get back the same rectangle that you started with.
So what can we do?
Well, one thing is we could flip the rectangle about some axis.
If you drew an axis horizontally, left and right, through the rectangle, and then you
flipped it about that horizontal axis, taking the bottom and moving it to the top and vice
versa, at the end of the day you would get back the same rectangle that you started with.
I do encourage you to go home and do this.
Cut out a rectangle, flip it over, you'll get the same rectangle.
You could also flip it vertically.
If you drew an axis up and down, then you flipped it left to right.
When I say vertical, I mean about a vertical axis, so you flip it left to right, you will
also get the same rectangle back.
Notice that you can't flip it around any axis.
If you draw some axis that is not exactly up and down or exactly left and right, and
you flipped it, then the rectangle would have moved.
It would show a different aspect to you, so that is not a symmetry.
Flipping horizontally is a symmetry.
Flipping vertically is a symmetry, and there's one more.
You can take that rectangle and you can rotate it 180 degrees.
If you rotate the rectangle 180 degrees by pi radians, for you scientists out there,
you get back exactly the same rectangle you started with.
What's crucial here is that you can't rotate it, or you could rotate it by 360 degrees.
You can rotate it by 180 degrees twice, but that does not count as a new symmetry.
What we count as the symmetries are all the things you can do that are independent from
each other.
If you do try this at home, you'll find that flipping horizontally, flipping vertically,
rotating 180 degrees, you cannot build up any one of these out of the other ones.
They're all independent.
Some mathematical structures that go into defining what you mean by that are called
group theory.
If you ever wonder what physicists and mathematicians are studying when they study group theory,
it's basically the symmetry transformations of different kinds of objects or abstract
things that mathematicians can invent.
So we can go beyond that.
A rectangle has a little bit of symmetry.
What about a square?
Again, intuitively, a square looks more symmetric because the sides are exactly equal to each
other.
Means mathematically is there are more transformations we can make that don't change the square.
In particular, by playing around with it, you'll notice that you can draw an axis diagonally,
either left to right or top right to bottom left, and flip it around those diagonal axes.
Furthermore, you can not only rotate the square by 180 degrees, you could rotate it by 90
degrees, or 270 degrees.
These are all separate symmetries.
There's more symmetry there to the square than there was to the rectangle.
If you move on to a circle, you get even more symmetry.
A circle has rotations of absolutely any angle, 1 degree, 2 degrees, 0.317 degrees,
and so forth.
That's a little bit different than the square or the rectangle.
Those had what we call discrete symmetries.
A circle has a continuous symmetry, any rotation you want to do.
There's also one thing you can do to the circle, which is flip it around any axis you
want.
Draw any axis that goes through the center of the circle, flip it around, you will get
a circle back.
This is not something that only applies to pictures that you can draw on a two-dimensional
sheet of paper.
Consider a sphere embedded in three-dimensional space.
Then you have all these smooth continuous symmetries, which means rotating the sphere.
You can rotate it not just around a vertical axis.
You can rotate it around a horizontal axis, either what you think of as the x-axis or
the y-axis.
Three separate axes of symmetry.
There's three different kinds of symmetry for that sphere.
You might say, well, but I can't flip it because if I try to flip the sphere around, it's basically
just rotating around some axis, but secretly you can do something analogous to the flip,
which is you can invert the sphere.
If you imagine taking the sphere, take a point on one side, and I move that over to the other
side, sort of turn the sphere inside out, you would get a sphere back.
A sphere is a highly symmetric geometrical object.
So that's what a symmetry is, something you can do to something without changing how it
appears or how it behaves to you.
All these examples from geometric designs and spheres, these are symmetries in space.
They're physically rotating, flipping, and moving things around.
There's a whole bunch of symmetries of space that are lurking in the laws of physics.
There are spatial translations, which is a fancy way of saying, if I have something here,
I can move it to some other place, and it's still the same thing.
There are time translations.
If I have an object that is not changing in time, that's a way of saying that it's the
same now as the same at some other moment, that's a symmetry.
And finally, there are what we call boosts, which is a way of going back to Galileo and
Einstein and saying, you know what, it doesn't matter how fast we're moving.
If I do a physics experiment here in the room, I can do the same physics experiment in a
rocket ship, zooming through space at a constant speed, I would get the same answers.
That is the symmetry that we call boosts.
What we're getting at here is that symmetries don't only apply to geometrical objects, they
apply to the laws of physics themselves.
What we mean by that is, we ask, what is the outcome of an experiment?
If an experimental outcome doesn't depend on whether you rotate it, whether you move
it, whether you do it at some other time, there's a symmetry underlying that lack of
difference.
For example, if you measure the charge of the electron, you're going to get the same
answer everywhere on Earth, every other moment in the history of the universe.
There's a symmetry that is keeping the charge of the electron constant.
That's the pretty part of symmetries.
We can visualize them in our heads, we can move things around, we can move around our
laboratory and so forth.
I want to go to a slightly more abstract level and distinguish between global symmetries
and local symmetries.
The words are a little bit confusing because global seems to be more powerful, but it's
actually the opposite way around.
A global symmetry is a symmetry that we can do to the whole universe, but we have to do
it everywhere all at once.
If you imagine rotating the universe all at once, that is a global symmetry.
A local symmetry is something we can do in different ways independently everywhere throughout
the universe.
Imagine for example we have a rotational symmetry.
What that means is we can do an experiment, we can rotate our whole laboratory, we do
the experiment again, we will get the same answer.
For example it might be measuring the charge of the electron, that's a typical physics
experiment.
We can measure it in our lab, we rotate the whole lab by any angle by 93 degrees.
If we measure it again we should get the same answer, but in fact there's an enormously
larger symmetry involved because there is a local symmetry, a gauge symmetry.
If we have two laboratories and they're both measuring things, one laboratory is measuring
the charge of the electron, the other is measuring the charge of the proton.
We can do those and not only can we rotate the world or rotate some big platform that
both of those laboratories are on, we can rotate one laboratory with respect to the
other one.
We can separately do a rotation over here and a separate rotation over there and the
two experiments will still get the same answer.
That's an enormously larger amount of symmetry, that is a local symmetry or a gauge symmetry
so named after the idea that a gauge is how we measure things.
Now that's a huge amount of symmetry, when you have a lot of symmetry that is restricting
what can happen.
A circle is more restrictive than a square which is more restrictive than a rectangle.
The fact that you have a symmetry you can do separately everywhere in the universe,
this local or gauge symmetry puts an incredibly strong restriction on the laws of physics.
Now we get to the tricky part of the whole lecture.
What is the consequence of a local symmetry?
What does it mean?
Well, you're making some non-trivial statement, you're saying I can do something here in a
lab over there next door, I can do something different and I can do a symmetry transformation
separately.
So one can ask how do you know that you've done a transformation at all?
How do you know that one lab is rotated or moved or translated in time compared to the
other one?
You must have some way of measuring the difference between one laboratory and another.
That is to say you must have some way of comparing your orientation or your location or something
like that.
How do you do that?
How do I measure the orientation of a laboratory set up in one room versus another one?
Now I'm making a big deal out of this, of course in real life there's no problem at
all.
You put up some measuring sticks or some surveying equipment and you do it, but the only reason
you can do it is because there is a field that is connecting the orientation of one
lab to the other one, or even better way to say it is, there is a field filling space
that lets us compare the orientations or the locations of different parts of the universe.
That field is cleverly enough called a connection.
A connection field is something that lets you compare the outcomes of different symmetry
transformations at different parts of the universe.
So every time we say that you have a symmetry that you can do separately here and there,
there must be an underlying connection field that lets you do that.
If you're literally talking about low tech things like laboratories here on earth sitting
on the ground, the ground itself is acting as a connection field.
It's not anything that you would apply that lingo to, but really that's what it's doing.
It's letting you compare the orientations of different parts of different laboratories
there on the ground.
If you were in outer space where there was no ground, you nevertheless have space time
itself.
This is a consequence of Einstein's way of looking at space and time.
There's a connection field.
They don't usually call it that, but you can call it that.
There's a connection field filling space time that lets you compare the positions and orientations
of different things going on in space time.
Now if that's true, why don't we talk about it all the time?
Why are connection fields not something we learn about in elementary school?
The answer is because usually they're boring.
Usually they're what we call flat.
A connection field is something that tells you the relative orientation of things in
different parts of the world.
Imagine that you're actually doing surveying.
Usually you do it on a flat surface, a plane or something like that.
In that case, surveying is not such a challenging job.
Where it becomes challenging is if you're trying to survey mountainous terrain.
If there is something undulating and waving back and forth, even if it's not changing
with time, it makes your surveying job a little bit harder.
The way that you notice connection fields filling the universe is not when they're simply there,
but when they're changing, when they're altering from place to place.
What happens when you have a connection field that is changing from place to place in the
universe?
The answer is you feel a force.
Just like when you're standing on a mountainous terrain.
If you're on a ski slope, there is a force pushing you downward on that ski slope.
The same thing is true throughout space time.
There's a connection field pervading space time itself.
If that connection field is curved, if it is changing from place to place, you feel a
force.
We've heard of this force before.
It's called gravity.
The force of gravity is a force because there's a connection field filling space time and
that connection field changes from place to place.
We feel the gravitational force.
We feel the influence of that field changing.
It's like standing on a ski slope.
We feel the nudge downward.
That's true for any kind of connection field there might be.
If it's flat, if it's boring, if it's zero, we don't notice.
If it's changing from place to place, there is a force.
Maybe you can intuitively grasp that when it comes to gravity.
After all, the ski slope is a pretty good analogy for gravity.
It's really gravity that is pulling you down.
But there are many more connection fields out there other than the one that gives rise
to gravity.
The difference is that for the other kinds of connection fields filling space, some particles
feel them and others don't.
Gravity is felt by absolutely everything.
To get there, you have to think about what symmetries could there be between different
kinds of quanta, different kinds of particles, different kinds of fields.
For example, we have protons and neutrons.
You might think protons and neutrons are very different.
They have different electrical charges, but if you think about it, they act more or less
the same if you ignore the fact that their charges are different.
They have about the same mass, protons and neutrons.
They behave very similarly with respect to the strong nuclear force.
The electromagnetic force is really not that strong when you compare it to the strong nuclear
force.
There's an approximation that says we can treat the proton and the neutron as the same.
If we only care about the strong nuclear force, the proton and the neutron can be switched
with each other and you would get the same answer.
That is a symmetry.
These days, we would say you could switch up quarks and down quarks and because they're
both much lighter than the protons and neutrons themselves, you get the same answer.
There is a symmetry that is relating the up quark and the down quark or the proton and
the neutron.
The problem is that even though it's a useful approximation, it's still an approximation.
Protons and neutrons are not precisely identical particles, nor are up quarks and down quarks.
Remember I said that a gauge symmetry, a local symmetry, that is something you can do everywhere
in the universe independently, that's very, very restrictive.
One of the restrictions is gauge symmetries are always exact.
They're either true or they're not true.
They're either real or they're not there at all.
A global symmetry is what we have between protons and neutrons.
It's a useful, calculational fact.
If you become a professional particle physicist, you will learn to do calculations that approximate
neutrons and protons as the same, but it's not really a gauge symmetry.
There is, however, a set of particles that do have a very noticeable gauge symmetry between
them and those are the individual quarks.
So an up quark is not symmetric with respect to the down quark.
They have different masses, so they can't be identical.
They can't be sort of switched for each other.
But remember, each quark comes in red, green, or blue, three different colors.
If you look at a particular quark and say, which color is it?
That's a question nobody ever asks, and the reason why is it doesn't matter.
There is a symmetry that relates red, green, or blue.
You can switch them.
It doesn't change anything.
And in fact, that symmetry is exact.
That is a gauge symmetry.
What I'm saying is I can take every quark everywhere in the universe.
It's either red, green, blue, or some combination, and I can rotate them in color space, in a
space where the three axes are redness, greenness, and blueness.
And I can do this separately, independently, everywhere throughout the universe.
That's a perfectly good symmetry.
What that means is there must be a connection field that talks to the colors, a connection
in color space.
And that connection can change from place to place, and that gives rise to a force.
It's a force you already know about.
It's the strong nuclear force.
The strong nuclear force is sometimes called quantum chromodynamics.
It's the dynamics of color itself, color being the symmetry that this gauge connection
field is talking to.
The reason why these abstract ideas are worth getting right is because as far as we know
right now, all of the four forces of nature, the strong nuclear force, the weak nuclear
force, the electromagnetic force, and gravity, these are all gauge forces.
These forces all arise from an underlying symmetry that is throughout the world local
and independent, and therefore comes with a connection field filling all of space.
What I'm saying in other words is that empty space, through which you're moving, is filled
with invisible ski slopes.
Ski slopes that you're being pushed down or pulled up.
The difference is that the slope of the ski slope depends on what kind of particle you're
talking about.
An electromagnetically charged particle feels the electromagnetic ski slope, the electromagnetic
connection field, which is of course the electric and magnetic fields that we know about.
Quarks feel the quantum chromodynamic ski slopes, that is to say the strong nuclear
force.
The fermions that we know about feel the weak nuclear force and everything feels gravity.
But you can think of all of empty space as being alive with these little tilted slopes
that cause the forces that push around particles through the universe.
With this field, remember every symmetry, every gauge symmetry has a field, the connection.
Well guess what?
When you look closely at fields, what do you see?
You see particles.
That's what quantum field theory tells us.
So here's the logic.
Whenever you have a gauge symmetry, you have a connection field.
Whenever you have a connection field, there's a particle.
These particles are the gauge bosons.
The particles that we say carry the forces of nature.
This is a beautiful, profound, deep idea that the forces of nature are based on symmetries.
Of course, it was true for gravity and electromagnetism, but the suggestion that it was true more
generally goes back to 1954, Yang and Mills, two physicists, proposed that all forces of
nature are based on these gauge symmetries.
So we call these ideas Yang-Mills theories.
Yang-Mills theory is a kind of quantum field theory.
So if you want to think about the logic of it, you have the very general idea of quantum
mechanics, any quantum mechanical system.
Quantum field theories are particular kinds of quantum mechanical systems where the things
that are moving around are fields pervading space.
Yang-Mills theories are particular kinds of quantum fields where the fields themselves
are connections associated with symmetries, and the standard model of particle physics
is a particular Yang-Mills theory, where its four forces of nature are all based on
these gauge symmetries.
So the idea of these symmetries being underlying all the forces of nature was sort of nice,
but not necessary when we were thinking about gravity and electromagnetism.
We already thought we understood those forces before Yang and Mills came along.
What was mysterious were the nuclear forces, what we now call the strong and weak nuclear
forces.
So the question is, can we understand the nuclear forces as Yang-Mills theories as based on
global, or sorry, gauge symmetries and their associated connection?
So here's the game that we were instructed to play.
Imagine you have some collection of particles, some collection of fields, if you'd like,
and imagine there is a symmetry between them.
Use the mathematics of symmetry, of gauge symmetry, to predict what kind of gauge bosons
there should be.
Can you make the nuclear forces this way?
Turns out it's hard, and it's hard for a couple of reasons.
One reason is gauge symmetries are exact.
If you thought that protons and neutrons should be related by a gauge symmetry, you're out
of luck.
They're not exactly symmetric.
They have different masses.
But there's a second deeper and harder reason.
There's a prediction that Yang-Mills theories make, and this prediction, it's a good thing.
It's a good thing when physics theories make predictions, you can then test them.
Remember that gravity has a graviton, electromagnetism has a photon.
These are massless particles.
Turns out this is not a mistake or an accident.
There's a prediction of gauge field theories.
When you have a gauge symmetry, the bosons associated with it will always be massless.
The reason why that's a problem is that massless particles are easy to make.
Heavy particles that weigh a lot are hard to make.
You need a gigantic accelerator like the LHC to make them.
But a massless particle like a photon, that's easy to make.
If the strong and weak interactions were based on massless particles, we should have detected
those particles a long time ago.
In fact, when Yang himself of Yang and Mills gave a seminar at Princeton about their ideas,
Wolfgang Pauly bullied him into silence.
Yang had to quit giving the talk halfway through, and he sat down sulking because Pauly kept
saying, what is the mass of this particle you are predicting?
Of course, the answer was zero, and if it were zero, if it were massless, it would have
been detected a long time ago.
Eventually, we'll realize the solution to this problem is a little thing called the
Higgs boson.
That's why we care about it.
Nevertheless, there's part of being a genius in physics which says, I know what the problems
are, I'm going to ignore them.
One genius in physics was named Julian Schwinger.
He shared the Nobel Prize with Richard Feynman for understanding electromagnetism.
In 1957, Schwinger was trying to understand the weak nuclear force, and he was imagining
maybe it is somehow a Yang-Mills theory, maybe there is somehow a gauge symmetry with
a connection associated with it.
He was going to say, I'm just going to give the gauge bosons a mass by hand.
I know that it's breaking the rules, it's not allowed, I'm going to do it anyway.
He invented a symmetry group, which is actually the same as the symmetry group of a sphere.
There are three axes, and you rotate the sphere around.
He imagined that the weak interactions were kind of like that.
The way it works is, if you have three different ways to rotate something, if that's your gauge
symmetry, you predict three different gauge bosons, three different massless gauge bosons
that Schwinger sort of just gave a mass by hand.
Well, what was he predicting?
He was predicting, as it turns out, you go through the math, Schwinger's theory predicted
two massive electrically charged gauge bosons.
He called them the W plus and the W minus.
This was the origin of what we now call the W bosons.
He had one other particle that was neutral.
He did not give it a mass, he called it the photon.
In other words, what Schwinger was proposing was that there were these three symmetries
of nature, two of them became massive gauge bosons and were the weak interactions.
One of them remained massless and was electromagnetism.
He was unifying these different forces of nature, something the physicists have tried
to do ever since.
Sadly, it was a complete failure, Schwinger's idea, not only because he was cheating by
giving the W bosons a mass by hand, but because the weak interactions and the electromagnetic
interactions are very different.
The difference is something called parity violation.
Parity is a kind of symmetry.
It's the kind of flipping, the inverting that we talked about with the sphere.
It's basically take whatever you have, whatever setup is your arrangement in front of you,
and look at it in a mirror.
A mirror exchanges left with right, it's doing a parity transformation inside and out.
For example, if a particle is spinning clockwise, under parity it switches to spinning counterclockwise.
Turns out that the strong, the electromagnetic, and the gravitational force are invariant
under parity.
It doesn't matter whether you're in our world or in the mirror image world, but the weak
interactions violate parity.
The weak interactions know if you're in the real world or you're in the mirror image.
This was something discovered by C.S. Wu, a physicist at Columbia, and she did an experiment
with cobalt atoms that tried to tell the difference between our world and a mirror image world.
How can you do that?
Cobalt atoms spin, the nucleus of the atom has a certain spin, so C.S. Wu put the atoms
in a magnetic field, and what that means is the spins all line up in a certain direction,
and then she washed it decay.
Cobalt 60, this particular atom, undergoes decay by the weak interactions.
It emits an electron when it decays.
What Wu discovered was that the electrons are always emitted in the opposite direction
of the spin.
So that's interesting all by itself, but as far as parity is concerned, it's especially
interesting, because when you look at that cobalt atom in a mirror, the rotation would
be reversed.
You're rotating clockwise in the real world, in a mirror you're rotating counterclockwise,
and what she was finding was that if you spin things clockwise, that predicts where the electrons
are going to be emitted, but in a mirror they'd be rotating in the opposite directions, but
the electrons are still moving in the same direction, even in the mirror.
So somehow the weak interactions know the difference between clockwise and counterclockwise.
The weak interactions violate parity.
But electromagnetism doesn't violate parity.
That's a problem.
How can you unify two forces together if one of them violates parity and the other one
doesn't?
So Schwinger was smart enough to give up.
He said clearly this cannot be done, but he needed to invent a problem for his graduate
students to work on, so he gave it to a bright young student he had named Sheldon Glashow.
And Glashow was stuck with unifying two forces that had very different properties, E and
M, electromagnetism, and the weak force.
What Glashow did was basically cheat once again.
He took the symmetry that Schwinger had predicted, that gave two charged bosons, the W's, and
one neutral one, the photon, and he just added one more symmetry to it.
So basically he had three symmetries that would give you the weak interaction, and he
gave all three of the bosons a mass.
So he had a new electromagnetically neutral boson that he called the Z boson, and the
new symmetry he added just gave you the photon.
So Glashow's theory, an elaborate, complicated set of symmetries, but it predicted four
gauge bosons, two W's, a Z, and a photon.
The W and the Z's violate parity.
The photon does not.
This is kind of idea is sort of bold and arguably crazy.
There was no experimental evidence in favor of any of this stuff.
The symmetries that Glashow was suggesting were not known to exist.
There's no known way to give masses to the W and Z bosons.
It was kind of clunky.
In particular, the interactions that the W bosons were supposed to mediate were known
to exist, but not the ones that the Z was supposed to mediate, because this Z boson
of Glashow's was just completely out of the blue.
There was no evidence for it.
And yet, Glashow persevered.
He said, well, maybe this is a good idea.
He was the kind of physicist who would write a lot of ideas.
You don't get too married to any one particular clunky, unwieldy idea.
You just write a lot of them and you hope that you strike gold.
Eventually, Glashow will be rewarded with the Nobel Prize in physics because someone
else took his idea and made it work.
We'll see that story because the missing ingredient that he didn't know about was a
little thing called the Higgs boson.
