Okay, now it is time to get serious.
We had our fun in lecture one, gave you the lightning overview of everything that's going
to happen in the course.
Already here in lecture two, we need to get down into the nitty-gritty.
The point is that physicists are always talking about particles.
Particle physics is a major subfield of the discipline.
And in part, that's absolutely fine and appropriate.
Many many times over the course of these lectures, I will be talking about particles.
But the secret is that the particles are just a useful fiction.
What reality is really made of, as I've mentioned, are fields.
It's filling space, vibrating, doing various things, interacting with each other.
And that's why the Higgs field is so important.
It's interesting that in popular science, when physicists talk to the general public,
they actually very rarely talk about fields, or quantum field theory in particular.
If you go to a physics department and look at the courses that are being taught, there's
at least a one year long sequence in quantum field theory, and there are dozens or hundreds
of textbooks, and yet we never tell people about it.
You can buy a popular book on relativity, particle physics, quantum mechanics, you can
buy popular books on string theory or the multiverse, but you never hear about quantum field theory.
And partly that's because before the Higgs boson became a big deal, it didn't really
matter.
You could talk about particles, that was fine.
Particles were really noticeable, those are what show up in your experiments, and if you
think about atoms and molecules in terms of particles, you would be doing fine.
That is why we will in fact be talking about particles throughout the rest of the course.
But if you really want to understand what's going on, we have to delve a little more deeply.
And that means talking about quantum field theory.
This is not what you usually hear about, but it's also not really scary.
It sounds like a bunch of words that don't quite fit together, but in fact hopefully
what you will discover is that by thinking about things in terms of quantum fields, not
only is it not scary, but it's actually helpful.
You will understand why the particles that we talk about behave in some of the ways they
do once you realize that those particles are really excitations or vibrations in quantum
fields.
So in some sense, the search for fields goes back to Isaac Newton, like many things do
in physics.
Newton, of course, among other things, invented gravity.
Now he didn't really invent gravity, we already knew about gravity, nobody before Newton was
surprised to see apples falling from trees.
What Newton really did was to explain that gravity is universal.
In other words, Newton didn't care so much about apples falling from trees, he cared
about the motion of the planets.
What he realized was he could come up with a single equation that explained both the
apple falling from the tree and the motion of the planets around the sun.
This is Newton's universal law of gravitation, otherwise known as the inverse square law.
Because the point of Newton's idea was that if you have a gravitating object like the
sun and you have objects around it like planets, that object the sun will pull on the planets,
that's the force due to gravity, and the strength of that force dilutes away, it gets weaker
and weaker and weaker as you move further away from the object.
In particular, according to Newton, the strength of the gravitational force goes as one over
the distance squared.
So if you have the relative distance of, let's say, Mercury and the Earth, whatever
the gravitational force is of the sun pulling on Mercury, the difference between that and
the force of the sun pulling on the Earth is the difference in their distances squared.
So you take the distance, you square it, take one over that, that, according to Newton,
is proportional to the force due to gravity.
That constant of proportionality is called Newton's constant of gravitation, I don't
know if he ever called it that, but that's what we call it today.
It's still one of the most important parameters in all of physics.
But Newton's law, as successful as it is, is also quite mysterious.
Let me emphasize, it is very successful.
Newton's law of gravity is all you need to get to the moon and back.
If you want to travel around the solar system, you want to figure out how the planets move,
except for the tiny little exception of Mercury, which is closest to the sun, where we need
general relativity, Einstein's theory of gravity.
But for the rest of the solar system, Newton's theory of gravity is very good.
But it's mysterious, and Newton himself recognized this.
The reason why it's mysterious is, how do the planets know how strong the gravitational
force is supposed to be?
It says if gravity is reaching out over empty space with nothing in between, from the sun
to the planets and saying, here's the force that is acting on you.
Newton was very bothered by this.
This is called action at a distance, and Newton himself didn't like it.
If you read his masterwork, Principia Mathematica, Newton himself will say, I don't know why
there is this action at a distance involved with gravity, I leave it to future generations
to finally figure it out.
But in fact, it didn't take very long.
Not long after Newton, in the around the year 1800, a French mathematician and physicist
named Pierre-Simon Laplace came up with a slightly different theory of gravity.
Now Laplace's theory of gravity is not one that you may have ever heard of, because basically
it's exactly the same as Newton's theory in all of its experimental predictions.
Once you have Newton's inverse square law, Laplace is not giving you a different law.
He's giving you a different way to get the same law.
What Laplace says is, instead of just thinking of a gravitational force, think of a field
pervading space.
Think of a number at every point in space, which Laplace called the gravitational potential
field.
In Laplace's version of gravity, he replaces Newton's equations with equations for this
gravitational potential field.
He says two things.
Number one, a big massive object warps the field.
By pushing on the field, it changes its value.
And then number two, the slope of the field.
The amount by which the field is changing gives you the force due to gravity.
So you can think of a hillside or something like that with a slope where the distance
by which the field is changing, the distance by which the sharpness of the hill tells you
the force that is acting on you.
Now the answer you get for what the force is, is exactly the same.
In Laplace's view and in Newton's view, but the difference is that Laplace does not have
action at a distance.
Instead, the field is everywhere.
So the sun affects the field nearby, and that affects the field near to that, and that affects
the field near to that all the way throughout the whole universe.
In Laplace's version of gravity, there's no action at a distance.
There's a field that is everywhere, even though you don't see it, and that is what
gives rise to the force of gravity.
So what is a field?
What do you mean by saying this?
As we've said, it's simply a number at every point in space.
If you ask what kind of number, I have to say, well, it's the field.
That's what it is.
Mathematically, it's a number, but fields are not made of anything else, the fundamental
fields that we're talking about.
The gravitational field is just the gravitational field.
There can be other fields that are sort of coming out of, emerging from deeper phenomena.
For example, we said that the temperature at every point in the room is a field.
It's a number, even though there are atoms underneath it.
If you think about a pond or an ocean, there are waves on the water.
The height of the wave is a field.
You can imagine plotting the height at different points in space.
That's kind of a field.
That's a very useful visual image.
A particle, on the other hand, has a position.
A particle is here and is not anywhere else.
A field is everywhere.
And the reason why fields are important is because they embody what physicists call locality.
In physics, we like to think that what happens happens at a place, a point in space and a
location in time.
Even though fields are spread out throughout space, what happens to a field at any one
point is only governed by what's happening to the field at other nearby points.
It's not governed by what's happening far away.
If an influence is going to travel through the universe, according to field theory, it
has to start somewhere, affect the field there, and that affects the field nearby, and that
affects the field nearby, and that's how things propagate through space.
Just as if you drop a pebble into a pond, waves will ripple out.
That's what field theory says happens.
So we used to think, if you were Isaac Newton, that the world has particles and also fields.
If you were Newton or Laplace or Maxwell who invented our modern version of electromagnetism,
these days we've done away with the particles.
We think that it's really all just fields at a fundamental level.
The particles, as we've said, are a convenient fiction.
And nevertheless, we talk about particles all the time, so what is going on?
Well there's a famous physics conundrum that is given to you if you take physics courses.
Is light a particle or a wave?
The answer is it's a wave.
You may never have been told what that answer is.
The answer is it's a wave, but it is complicated, and the complications come in because of
quantum mechanics.
And this issue goes all the way back to the 1600s.
They were thinking about light, and physicists at the time were having a debate over whether
light is a particle or a wave.
There was a Dutch physicist named Christian Huygens.
He argued that light was a wave, because waves have what we call interference and refraction
phenomena.
These are big words, but what it means is, send light through a prism.
It gets spread out into different colors.
This is something that you can understand if light is a wave.
Different wavelengths behave differently when they move through different media.
Likewise, if you pass light through a slit, light can interfere with itself.
You can see fringes of interference as the light goes through slits, and that's exactly
what you would expect from a wave of water, for example.
A wave is up in some places, down in other places, and different waves can add together,
either constructively to be higher, or destructively.
If a high wave hits a low wave, you can be left with nothing.
Light acts like that in some circumstances, which seems to say that light is a disturbance
in some kind of medium, it's some kind of wave.
Isaac Newton, on the other hand, argued that it must be particles.
Newton pointed out, think about the shadows that are cast when light hits an object.
Shadows tend to have sharp edges.
A water wave, if you send it around a corner, it bends.
It goes around the corner, whereas particles, if you shoot them at a target, if they don't
go past the target, they don't bend around on the other side.
So Newton said that light seems to be acting more like particles, which he called corpuscles.
Now, as I've said, the answer is that light is a wave, but if that's going to be true,
you want to say a wave in what?
A wave in water has water underneath it.
What is it that is actually doing the waving when it comes to light?
The answer, which is absolutely remarkable and needs to be appreciated more, are the
electric and magnetic fields.
If you go back to the 1800s, when this answer was finally cooked up, we knew about two very
important fundamental fields other than the gravitational field.
We knew about what we called the electric field and what we call the magnetic field.
The electric field, people like Benjamin Franklin studied it, static electricity, lightning,
what we now think of as electrical currents.
Today we know the electric field is crucially important.
For one thing, it keeps atoms together.
You have the nucleus at the atom in the middle, you have electrons orbiting outside.
It is the electric field of the nucleus that keeps the electron bound to it.
So the electric field is still important today.
And then, of course, you have the magnetic field.
Think about what a magnet does.
If you hold up a magnet, the fundamental feature of a magnet is it will stick to your
refrigerator.
Now, many things stick to your refrigerator.
You can put a piece of tape or a piece of gum on the refrigerator.
The difference is, if you hold up a magnet close to the refrigerator, you will feel it
pulling before it actually touches.
Tape will not do that.
If you want tape to stick to the refrigerator, you got to stick it.
You got to touch them together.
But somehow, the magnet is doing some kind of action at a distance.
The magnet is pulling on the refrigerator before it actually gets there.
So the question is, how does the magnet know that there is a refrigerator nearby?
The answer is, as you can see, if you sort of scatter iron filings near the magnet, there
is an invisible field surrounding the magnet, what we call the magnetic field.
The magnet by itself is not all that is happening.
There is a field around it, even though you can't see it.
When you bring that magnet close to your refrigerator, the refrigerator is acting on
the magnetic field.
It's acting back on the magnet, and that is what is pulling them together.
It was a genius physicist named Michael Faraday who figured out how magnetic fields really
behave, these lines of force that he traced out and drew beautiful pictures of.
Faraday is a wonderful character in the history of physics.
He was not really a mathematician, but he was a brilliant, intuitive genius.
In fact, people made fun of him at the time because he really didn't have the mathematical
chops that some of the other people had, but nevertheless he was right over and over again.
He was a wonderful experimenter and a wonderful lecturer, and it was eventually people like
James Clark Maxwell who took Faraday's ideas about magnetic fields and put them together.
Another physicist, the Danish physicist Hans Christian Orsted, was the one who actually
realized that electric fields and magnetic fields are not separate from each other.
These are two aspects of a single underlying phenomenon.
What Orsted did was he ran an electric current near a compass.
People understood that compasses were driven by magnetic fields, and what Orsted showed
is that he could turn a magnetic field on and off.
It wasn't just a matter of having the right magnetized rock or having the Earth's magnetic
field, he could create it by first creating an electric field.
These days we can do even better.
In the 1800s, James Clark Maxwell, who was a Scottish physicist, showed that he could
completely unify our understanding of the electric field and the magnetic field so much
so that these days physicists called it a single idea electromagnetism.
What you see when you look at a beam of light or when you detect an x-ray or a radio wave,
these are all electromagnetic waves.
If you are right now in your room and you're seeing something, almost certainly it is the
case that what you're seeing is illuminated by light that comes from taking an electron,
an electrically charged particle, and shaking it one way or another.
If it's in an incandescent bulb, then it's shaking because of the current going through.
If it's from the sun, it's shaking because of all the nuclear fusion inside the sun,
and it's shaking electrons or other charged particles, which is the basic way that we
make electromagnetic waves.
The point is that an electron sitting there, all by itself, has an electric field all around
it.
It does not have a magnetic field, but think about what happens when you start the electron
moving.
Two different things happen.
One is that magnetic fields are created when charged particles move, so your electron doesn't
have the magnetic field to start with, but once you start shaking it, a magnetic field
is created.
It ripples away from that electron.
The other thing, of course, is that the electron does have an electric field, and the electric
field is always pointing toward the electron.
Once you start that electron shaking, the location that the electric field itself is pointing
in changes slightly, and what that means is that there are ripples in the electric field
that propagate outward from that electron.
It's these coupled propagating oscillations, the electric field oscillating up and down,
and the magnetic field oscillating up and down, that we call an electromagnetic wave,
or we call light.
All of the different forms of electromagnetic radiation are electric fields and magnetic
fields oscillating in tandem to make a wave.
Now I have to be very clear about this.
We use a lot of analogies to talk about fields.
We think about the height of a wave that is literally moving through the water.
You might think that in that case, the field is the water, but that's not exactly right.
The field is the height of the wave.
In the electromagnetic field, it is the electric and magnetic fields that are doing the vibrating.
They can be zero, but they still exist.
There's a difference between existing and having a non-zero value.
As Maxwell, as I said, who put all of these together, who showed that there's a unified
theory of electricity, magnetism, and light.
It was an amazing time in the 1800s in the history of physics.
Heinrich Hertz, who was a German physicist, discovered a little thing called radio waves,
and people asked him, what will these things ever be good for, and he said they will never
be good for anything.
These things called radio waves are completely useless.
Of course, now we know different.
The idea of fields became known since the early 1800s and became very, very popular once
we understood electricity and magnetism.
How do they get related to particles?
The answer there is, of course, the wonderful thing called quantum mechanics.
We need to understand quantum mechanics a little bit.
I can tell you the essence of quantum mechanics in one sentence.
Quantum mechanics says that what we observe when we look at something is fundamentally
different from what really exists and we are not looking at it.
That is a little bit hard to believe, which is why quantum mechanics is something that
people still argue about to this day.
There's a whole field called interpretations of quantum mechanics, because if you talk
about any other theory of physics, relativity, Newtonian mechanics, Maxwell's electromagnetism,
you don't need to talk about observations.
There's just what happens, and you can observe what happens.
But in quantum mechanics, observation seems to play a fundamental role.
This is not a course on quantum mechanics, so we're not going to go into great detail
about the different interpretations.
For our purposes, we just need that little motto.
The quantum mechanics says what you see can be very different from what actually is.
In quantum field theory, what actually is are the fields.
For instance, the electric field, the magnetic field, the gravitational fields, but when
you look very carefully at those fields, particles are what you see.
That is the relationship between particle physics and field theory.
When you take field theory, which Newton or Laplace or Maxwell or Faraday could have talked
about, when you add quantum mechanics to it, particles come out.
Particles are the visible packets of energy that we see when we observe a quantum field.
For example, think about an atom.
You've probably seen little cartoon diagrams of atoms with a nucleus at the center and
an electron orbiting around, like a little solar system.
But those pictures are completely misleading, as you may have been told.
The electrons do not actually orbit like the earth orbits the sun.
The electrons are spread out around the atom in what's called a wave function.
The wave function is sort of a wave.
It's all through space, but it's concentrated in any individual atom near the nucleus.
What the wave function tells you is, if you were to observe the electron, where are you
likely to see it?
What is the probability of seeing it at different places?
This makes people think that the wave function is a tool for calculating where particles
are, but in quantum mechanics, that's not right.
The wave function is the electron.
It's not that we don't know where the electron is until we look at it.
It's that there is no such thing as where the electron is before we look at it.
What actually exists is that wave function all spread out.
You may have heard that atoms are mostly empty space.
That's not right.
Atoms are actually filled with wave functions.
That's what quantum mechanics really says.
We're so used to privileging what we observe about the universe that we tend to think that
there must be some place where the electron is, but that's not how quantum mechanics works.
The real world, I'm claiming, is made up of fields.
Particles are what we see when we look at the fields.
In particular, they're what we see if the fields are vibrating.
If you have some field, whether it's the electric field or the magnetic field or the gravitational
field or whatever, that is just sitting there not changing, you look at it and you see nothing.
There's no visible effect, but if you poke at it, you start the field vibrating and then
you observe it, it's where those vibrations are that you would say you would see particles.
And really, every kind of particle you've ever imagined is the vibration in some kind
of field.
Usually, the names for the fields are not that imaginative.
The electron is a vibration in the electron field.
The up quark is a vibration in the up quark field and so forth.
But that is the secret translation.
The world's really made of fields.
Start them vibrating, look at them, and that's when you see particles.
For example, we said that light is a wave.
You can have long wavelength electromagnetic waves like radio waves or microwaves.
You can have very short wavelength electromagnetic waves like gamma rays and x-rays, or you can
have in-between wavelengths like visible light, but we also have heard that light is a particle,
the photon.
If you have a very energetic photon particle, that corresponds to a short wavelength electromagnetic
wave, whereas low energy photons correspond to long wavelength electromagnetic waves.
But where does the correspondence between these waves and these particles come from?
Imagine you're outside on a dark night and a friend of yours is carrying a lantern, and
you can see the lantern, and imagine that your friend walks away from you.
The lantern will grow dimmer.
In fact, the intensity, the brightness of that lantern will obey an inverse square law.
Its brightness will go down as the square of the distance to your friend.
But what matters here is that as the friend gets further and further away, the lantern
gets dimmer, and eventually you will not see the friend at all, will completely disappear
from your view.
Now if you were a frog, you would see something very different.
Not because being amphibious is all that important, but the point is that frogs, as it turns
out, have more sensitive eyes than we do.
So our eyes are only so good, but if you had a more sensitive electromagnetic wave detection
device, like a frog's eyes, what you would see as your friend walked away is the lantern
would get dimmer and dimmer, but eventually it would stop getting dimmer, and instead
it would start turning off and then flicking back on again.
And as your friend got further and further away, it would spend more and more time off,
and the flickers would become more and more rare.
But every flicker you saw would be of equal brightness.
So what is going on with this?
The answer is, if you have a sufficiently sensitive experimental apparatus, like the
eye of a frog, you're seeing the electromagnetic wave as individual particles called photons.
The wave is what comes to us.
The wave is what's really there, but when we observe it carefully enough, we resolve
it into individual packets of energy called particles, called photons.
Now remember, that's not because the wave really is individual packets of energy called
photons, that's what we see when we observe it.
That is the feature of quantum mechanics when applied to field theory that brings particles
into reality.
Now to some extent, this seems to make sense to us when we talk about force particles, which
are called bosons.
As we'll see, there are two fundamental kinds of particles, bosons and fermions.
The bosons are particles that carry forces, like the gravitational force, gravitons, the
electromagnetic force, photons.
There's another kind of particles called fermions, which are the matter particles.
The fermions are the electrons and the quarks and the neutrinos that make up you and me
in tables and chairs and planets and stars.
What is the difference between a boson particle and a fermion particle?
It goes down, as you won't be surprised to hear, to the fields that make them up.
The difference is that for a boson field, the amplitude of the field, the strength,
the bigness of the number that describes it, can be anything.
I can make an electromagnetic wave or a gravitational field, maybe even a gravitational wave, of
arbitrary size.
In the language of particles, we say that the bosons can pile on top of each other.
You can fit as many photons into one little tiny box as you can possibly imagine doing.
You add up all these photons and it appears to us, once again, like a wave.
Even though it really was a wave all along, if there was only one little vibration, it
would look like a particle.
When the vibrations become very big, it looks like so many particles that it seems to us
like a wave again, just like the pixels on your TV screen seem to make a smooth picture
when there's enough of them.
Fermions, the particles of matter, are very different.
A fermion particle is a vibration in a fermion field, but the vibrations cannot be arbitrarily
big.
For a fermion, the field is either vibrating or it's not.
What that means is that fermion particles take up space.
At any one point in space, there's a fermion there or there's not.
This is known as the Pauli Exclusion Principle after physicist Wolfgang Pauli.
And that's crucially important for how the world works.
You can make a table out of fermions, it will take up space and hold up your coffee cup.
You can make people, you can make planets.
Fermions take up space, bosons can be piled on top of each other.
So that's the fundamental difference in these two kinds of particles will be crucially important
to making up the world.
Now I understand that the nomenclature here gets confusing.
We have a wave function, which is what you get when you take a particle back before we
knew about field theory, you quantized a particle, but then we also have the quantum field, which
is a wave itself.
So there's like two levels of waviness here.
Sometimes this will be referred to as second quantization.
You go from quantizing fields to get particles, quantizing particles to get individual energy
levels of those particles in atoms and so forth.
To be honest, I don't advocate that you use or think about the term second quantization.
I'm telling it to you because you might hear about it elsewhere.
What you should remember is the world is made of fields.
You quantize those fields and you see particles.
The nice thing about that is the field is all that there really is.
So for example, you have electrons.
Why are all electrons the same?
Why do they have the same mass, the same charge?
Because they are all vibrations in the same underlying field, the electron field.
That single quantum field keeps track of all the electrons in the universe, all the wave
functions for all of the electrons, and it also explains how particles can be created
or destroyed.
You start the field vibrating or you stop it vibrating.
It's much easier to understand the comings and goings of particles once you realize that
they are just excitations in quantum fields.
So in fact, fields are helpful.
It's not just a complication we have to deal with.
It's a better way of thinking about the universe, and it's an absolutely crucial way of thinking
about the universe once we get to the Higgs boson.
The Higgs boson is a boson, therefore it's a particle, which means it's a vibration in
the Higgs field.
But as I mentioned in the first lecture, the Higgs boson particle is more or less irrelevant
to our everyday lives.
There's no interaction inside you or me or the Earth or the Sun in which the Higgs boson
is playing a crucial role, but the Higgs field filling space is absolutely central.
There's a huge difference between the Higgs field and all of the other fields that we
know about in the standard model of particle physics, which is that the Higgs field has
a value, which is not zero, even in empty space.
I said that the electric field, the gravitational field, and so forth, you can turn them off.
Their values go to zero, and you say there's nothing there, but the Higgs boson, when you
say there's nothing there, that means the Higgs boson field has a whopping big value.
That is a fundamentally different feature between the Higgs and everything else.
So it's not the boson, the vibration in the Higgs field that is really important, it's
the field that is there, living in empty space.
As we will see in the rest of the course, other particles, electrons, quarks, W and
Z bosons, they travel through the Higgs field, they interact with the Higgs while traveling,
and that basically determines the properties of these particles, of the electrons, of the
W bosons, and so forth.
So there's a very real sense, which the Higgs field rules the universe, it is what sets
up all of the rules for how other particles interact.
That's why finding it, understanding it, is such a crucial goal of particle physicists.
