So now we've discovered the Higgs boson, and before moving on, let's reflect on how
really impressive this achievement is.
Not only the discovery, but the fact that there were 48 years, almost half a century,
in between when the idea of the Higgs was first proposed in 1964 and when it was finally
discovered in 2012.
The amazing thing there is that the people who were coming up with the idea back in 1964,
well for one thing, it's amazing that most of them were still alive in 2012, it was
young people who came up with the idea, but they did it on the basis of basically ideas.
There was no data, there was no piece of information that had been discovered back in 1964 that
said, oh, there's a new field out there, a new boson called the Higgs.
It was a challenge presented by our understanding.
We didn't know why the weak and strong nuclear forces were short range, and so these people
proposed this amazingly audacious idea, a field in empty space makes it all happen, and it
was sufficiently precisely constrained by the requirements of physics that 48 years
later we finally had the experimental know-how to show that they were exactly right.
But we don't think that that's the end of the story, it was a true triumph for human
ingenuity that we found the Higgs, but I was there on July 4th, 2012, and you might want
to know how long did it take in between when the discovery of the Higgs boson was announced
and when the physicists were back to work planning the next thing and looking for even more?
The answer is a matter of minutes, not even hours, much less days or weeks.
The physicists were back in their office, they were talking about how to do the next
round of experiments, how to look for even more.
As exciting as the Higgs boson discovery was, it was also anticipated.
We sort of expected it was going to happen.
What we really want is physics of the unanticipated, particle physics beyond the standard model.
And we're hoping that the Higgs boson is a bridge to that new unexpected physics.
So there's two things that we actually get from the Higgs that will guide us in the journey.
Number one, there are properties of the Higgs boson which suggest they hint at the idea
that the physics we currently have is incomplete, that there must be something more out there.
And secondly, we can actually use the Higgs boson itself as a window onto finding new
physics.
In this short set of lectures, the last two we have left, we won't be able to give a
comprehensive discussion of all the different ways we can go beyond the standard model,
but we'll sort of lay out a map of some of the most interesting parts of the territory,
what particle physicists judge to be the most promising ways to go beyond the physics we
already know.
So what we have to guide us right now are basically some hints and some unanswered questions.
By hints, I mean things that we do know in the data that don't quite fit into our current
understanding in an easy way.
They can be fit, but it's not something that really makes perfect sense.
So the first hint is the existence of dark matter and dark energy, the dark stuff that
makes up over 95% of the energy of the universe.
The thing about dark matter and dark energy is they are not explained by the standard
model.
There's something a little bit different.
So we're going to devote the whole next lecture to that sort of cosmic frontier.
The second hint is the existence of gravity.
I've been talking about gravity and gravitons as if the graviton is just another gauge
pose on.
But as we've mentioned, gravity has not been put on a careful quantum mechanical footing.
The search for a complete reconciliation of gravity general relativity, Einstein's theory,
with the rules of quantum field theory is an ongoing project.
That's something that might lead to very, very new physics.
But even here in the world of particle physics, there are things that we don't quite understand
or at least things that rub us the wrong way.
There are fine tuning problems.
That is to say, we measure a number and we can just say, well, that's what the number
is, like the mass of the Higgs boson or the energy density of empty space.
But the numbers are very, very far from what we might expect.
It could be just a coincidence.
Maybe we got lucky.
But maybe these fine tunings, maybe these unexpected parameter values are telling us
there is deeper physics that we haven't yet found that explains these values.
And in fact, we can ask the same questions even about the parameters that don't seem
finely tuned.
We have a long list of particles in the standard model.
Every one of the fermions has a different mass.
There's all these different couplings.
There are three generations of particles.
Everybody knows why, why three generations, why this pattern of masses and couplings.
Maybe that's just how it is, but maybe there is something deeper underlying everything.
We also have the neutrinos.
We haven't even discussed the fact that neutrinos themselves have mass, but it doesn't arise,
they don't arise, the neutrino masses from the same simple Higgs mechanism.
There might be a relationship between the Higgs boson and the neutrino masses, but right
now we don't know what it is.
And finally, out there in the universe, we know there are more particles than antiparticles.
Why is this the case?
That's another mystery.
The physics that we understand treats particles and antiparticles very similarly, but the
universe in which we live has a big asymmetry between them.
We'd like to understand the origin of that matter, antimatter asymmetry.
So what are the possible ideas?
As you might expect, the standard model was first put together for the last time, basically
in the 1970s.
We found the last particle, the Higgs boson, in 2012, but it was predicted long before
that, and basically the last prediction that became part of the standard model was predicted
in the 1970s.
So we've had a lot of time since then to try to move beyond the standard model.
We have plenty of ideas.
One idea is called grand unification.
Remember, there's a sense in which Weinberg and Solom and Glashow showed us how the electromagnetic
force is unified with the weak nuclear force, but there's still the strong force out there
that's not unified with anything.
Grand unification is the hypothetical idea that there's one big force that gives rise
to the strong and the weak and the electromagnetic interactions.
There are cosmological ideas, like inflation in the early universe.
Inflation is worth a whole nother lecture course, but it requires new particles.
You cannot get inflation out of the particles we know in the standard model.
We have three generations of particles in the standard model.
Maybe there is a fourth one.
You would have to hide it somehow.
We haven't yet found it, but there are definitely ideas for partial or even complete new generations
that we simply haven't found.
Of course, we know that protons and neutrons, famously, are made of quarks and gluons.
Is it possible that quarks and gluons are made of even smaller particles, or are electrons
or Higgs bosons made of even some substructure, smaller particles, which would be called prions?
It's a good idea.
It's an old idea.
We don't have any evidence yet, but it's still on the table.
So we're exploring all of these different possibilities.
We need some guidance.
These are ideas basically inspired by the fact that the standard model can't be the whole
story.
There's so many different possibilities that we can't just go out and say, well, maybe
this, maybe that, maybe something else, and eventually hope to hit on the right answer.
We need a little guidance.
So guidance comes in the form of clues or puzzles in the existing data, in what we know.
The most prominent example in particle physics is something called the hierarchy problem.
The hierarchy problem is basically the question, why are the parameters that are attached to
the Higgs boson so small in energy?
By the parameters, there's only two parameters for the Higgs.
There's the mass, 125 GeV, and there's the value that the Higgs field takes in empty
space, 246 GeV.
So these numbers are similar to each other.
That makes sense to us.
Basically, if there's something Higgs related, it's going to be in the range of 100, 200
GeV kind of ballpark.
That might seem like a big number.
It's 100 or 200 times the mass of the proton, but it turns out to be very small compared
to other scales of particle physics.
If grand unification is true, if the strong force is unified with the weak force, that
will happen at a scale of somewhere near 10 to the 16 GeV.
And if gravity is included, then you're up at the Planck scale, 10 to the 18 GeV.
These numbers are huge compared to 10 to the 2 GeV that characterizes the Higgs boson.
Why is the Higgs boson, why is the weak scale of particle physics so different from these
large scales of gravity or grand unification?
And it's worse than that.
It's not just a sort of numerology problem that says, why are these numbers different?
You can try to estimate how big the numbers should be.
Remember, we showed you when you take Feynman diagrams to calculate a process like two electrons
scattering off of each other, you add up many different Feynman diagrams, and if the graphs
have loops inside, then you integrate, you sum up over all the different ways that momentum
and energy can flow through those loops.
That's not only true for scattering or for decay or for annihilation, it's true even
for a particle just moving through space.
If you have a Higgs boson, for example, simply sitting there, not doing anything, because
it's really a quantum field, the Higgs boson field is always gently interacting with all
of the fields around it, and we can describe that by drawing Feynman diagrams, by thinking
of that Higgs boson splitting into a virtual particle-antiparticle pair, and then those
pairs coming back together to leave you with the Higgs boson once again.
So if you're calculating the property of the Higgs boson at rest, which is to say simply
what is the mass of the Higgs boson, you don't just put in a number, you actually add
together a number of Feynman diagrams, and when you do that, it turns out the predicted
mass of the Higgs boson is infinity.
Now that's a problem.
If you predict that something should be infinity, you don't think that you're on the right track,
but what we really think is going on is that you get an infinitely big contribution to
the Higgs boson from these virtual particles, but that's only because you're including
energies that the virtual particles could have that go all the way up to infinity.
Let's say that it's some very large energy scale like the Planck scale, the scale at
which quantum gravity kicks in and spacetime itself probably breaks down.
Let's say you shouldn't include energies higher than that.
Then you make a very finite, precise prediction for what the mass of the Higgs boson should
be, and the answer is it should be up at the Planck scale, 10 to the 18 GeV.
It's actually 125 GeV.
Those numbers are very different.
That is the hierarchy problem.
What you want to do to solve the hierarchy problem is not just to set some numbers to
the right answers, you want to explain why the virtual particles, why the quantum corrections
to the mass of the Higgs remain so small.
So we don't know the solution to the hierarchy problem.
It's one of the primary motivational ideas the particle physicists keep in mind these
days.
We do have some scenarios that might help.
Number one, we can imagine that in those virtual particles that contribute to the mass of the
Higgs, some of them contribute a positive amount, some of them contribute a negative
amount.
Maybe for reasons we don't understand, there is a cancellation between the positive and
negative contributions to the Higgs mass.
Another possibility is that instead of including contributions all the way up to the Planck
scale, there's some reason to stop including new quantum corrections at a much, much lower
energy scale.
If you could somehow put a cutoff and upper limit on those contributions, you could save
the mass of the Higgs and solve the hierarchy problem.
Both of these solutions have actually been implemented in very specific models.
The model that you probably have heard of, if you've heard of any particle physics at
all, is something called supersymmetry.
Remember how important symmetry was to us, gauge symmetries we think are the explanation
for all of the forces we know in the universe.
Supersymmetry is a new kind of symmetry that has not yet been discovered in nature, it's
a symmetry between bosons and fermions.
That is an intrinsically interesting idea, there's all sorts of theoretical playgrounds
to run around in if you believe in supersymmetry, but it's directly relevant to the hierarchy
problem.
The hierarchy problem says the Higgs boson should have a very big mass because it gets
quantum corrections from virtual particles.
It turns out that those additional contributions to the Higgs mass are positive from boson
virtual particles and negative from fermion virtual particles.
So it's possible that they could cancel, but they would only cancel each other if the set
of bosons in the universe that we're contributing to the mass of the Higgs were matched, were
in one-to-one correspondence with the set of fermions that contribute to the mass of
the Higgs.
In the standard model, that's not true, but in supersymmetry it is.
The idea of supersymmetry is that every boson has a matching fermion partner and vice versa.
The two partners are exactly the same in terms of their mass, their charge, the way they
interact with other particles.
The only difference is that one is a boson, one is a fermion, therefore of course they
have different spins.
The bosons have integer spins, the fermions have integer plus a half spins.
The problem with supersymmetry is that you can look at the particles we've discovered.
Supersymmetry says that if you have an electron with a mass of half a million electron volts
and a charge of minus one, there should be a super partner of the electron that also has
a mass of half a million electron volts and also has an electric charge of minus one.
There is no such particle, that would be easy to find we would have found it a long time
ago.
That doesn't really bother physicists very much because they know that when you invent
symmetries you can break them.
That's what the Higgs boson does, it breaks the symmetry of the electroweak theory, maybe
there's something that breaks supersymmetry and hides the super partners from us.
In that case you would still have a partner of the electron with the same charge and interactions,
but because of supersymmetry breaking its mass could be very, very different.
So really the prediction of supersymmetry is for every particle that we know about in
the standard model right now there is a partner with very different masses but the same interactions,
the same charges, opposite spin but a much larger mass.
We call these sparticles the supersymmetric partners of the particles that we know in
the standard model.
So physicists because they're very inconsistent about their cleverness when it comes to naming
new phenomena have a slightly weird scheme for naming superparticles.
If you have a fermion in the standard model its superpartner will be a boson and you name
that boson by taking the letter s and tacking it as a prefix to the fermion name.
So if you have an electron as a particle its sparticle partner is called the sulectron.
If there's a top quark then you have a stop, squark and so forth.
If you have a boson in the standard model its fermion partner gets an eno at the end.
So a photon comes along with a fotino, graviton comes with a gravitino and you guessed it
the Higgs boson comes along with the Higgs eno.
In other words if you believe in supersymmetry we have now discovered only approximately half
of the particles that are out there to soon be discovered.
Supersymmetry is clearly very popular among particle physicists in part because it helps
explain the hierarchy problem, in part because it's a very pretty mathematically elegant
theory, but in part because it's full employment.
There are many many particles to be discovered by experimenters if supersymmetry is right
and there's a lot of analysis to be done by theorists trying to understand how all these
particles fit together.
So let's think in a little bit more detail about how supersymmetry or SUSE as it is called
for short actually would work in the real world.
We said that one of the motivations for supersymmetry is that it helps address the hierarchy problem.
The virtual particles that contribute to the mass of the Higgs boson would have canceling
contributions from the bosons and their super partners, the fermions and their super partners.
But that's only true if the masses are exactly equal.
The cancellation would be precise if for every boson you had a matching fermion with exactly
the same mass and we know that doesn't work.
You cannot arrange the particles of the standard model in supersymmetric combinations.
So if supersymmetry is broken then the super partners are heavier which means that the cancellation
of the different contributions to the Higgs mass is only approximate, it's only incomplete.
Simply speaking you make a super partner by taking a regular particle and you add some
number to it to give the mass of the super partner.
The bigger that mass is, the worse the cancellation is when you calculate the mass of the Higgs.
So what I'm trying to say here is that if you really want to solve the hierarchy problem
using supersymmetry, the super partners themselves cannot be much heavier than the Higgs boson.
If they were much heavier than the Higgs they wouldn't do their job in cancelling out
the virtual contributions to the mass of the Higgs.
So that means that supersymmetry not only predicts all these new particles but the particles
should be easy to find relatively speaking.
Now that we've found the Higgs it is very easy to imagine that by looking at slightly
higher energies there will be many, many more particles that we will instantly start binding.
Really is a bit of an exaggeration but relatively quickly in the history of particle physics.
A second detail is that these super partners don't necessarily match up to the original
particles in an easy way because they can mix together.
For example if you think about the Higgs boson it's a spin zero neutral boson.
Think about the photon it's a spin one neutral boson.
Both the Higgs and the photon have super partners that are spin one half fermions.
The Higgs zero and the Photino are both spin one half neutral particles.
They can mix together.
So rather than thinking about the Higgs zero and the Photino separately we group them together
in what are called neutrolinos whereas something like a W boson has a partner that is a charge
zero.
This is just the way we talk about the super partners and not only that but in supersymmetry
because of the very detailed mathematical way that it fits together it turns out that
one Higgs boson is not enough.
There's a very strong clear prediction of supersymmetry that there are at least five
different spin zero scalar particles that play the role of the Higgs boson in the standard
model.
So it is part, it is an absolute prediction of supersymmetry that we've discovered a Higgs
boson but not the only Higgs boson.
We've only discovered 20% of the Higgs bosons there are to find out there.
Finally, you might have heard that there is a relationship between supersymmetry and
string theory.
String theory is the idea that we replace elementary particles by little loops of string
and that helps gravity fit together with the standard model in a quantum mechanical framework.
The relationship is the following.
String theory requires supersymmetry but supersymmetry does not require string theory.
If string theory is right, if it's the right theory of quantum gravity, the right theory
of everything, supersymmetry is certainly part of it but we can imagine finding supersymmetric
particles even if super string theory is not correct.
So supersymmetry is interesting in its own right in addition to its connection to string
theory.
So overall we have a lot of reasons to take supersymmetry seriously even though we haven't
found it yet.
It helps us solve the hierarchy problem.
It is predicted by string theory.
As we will see in the next lecture, it gives us a very nice candidate for the particle
that is the dark matter of the universe.
Finally, supersymmetry in this modern era plays a crucial role in the idea of grand unification.
Grand unification is the idea that the strong force, remember, gets unified with the weak
and electromagnetic forces but that unification requires that the coupling constants, the interaction
strengths, have the same value.
Of course they don't have the same value here at low energies where we do our experiments
but the values of the coupling constants change as you do experiments at higher and higher
energies.
What you want is for all the couplings to unify at some very high energy, that's where
the grand unification energy scale comes from.
It turns out that we can predict how the coupling constants change with energy and they don't
unify if all you have is the standard model.
They can unify if you also have supersymmetry.
So again, it's circumstantial evidence, it's not set in stone, but supersymmetry remains
the favorite theory beyond the standard model among modern particle physicists.
It's not the only theory, there are alternatives.
The alternatives for better or worse are sort of falling by the wayside one by one.
We are making progress in particle physics by ruling out some people's favorite ideas.
For example, there's an idea called technicolor.
Color is of course what goes into the strong interactions, QCD, a quark has a color, red,
green or blue.
The idea of technicolor is basically to do quantum chromodynamics but do it over again.
Add a new kind of color, completely unrelated to the color that quarks have, call it technicolor,
it will be a new strong force, stronger than the strong force, it will be confining its
technic quarks together in very small packages and then you would predict a whole bunch of
particles as bound states of these technic quarks.
One of these could be a spin-zero boson that would be kind of like the Higgs particle.
In other words, in technicolor the Higgs boson or the thing that plays the role of
the Higgs boson is not a fundamental particle all by itself.
It's a bound state of these new kinds of particles, these technic quarks that feel technicolor.
It's a sort of nice theory because it's taking a theory that we already know works and extending
it to a new regime by copying its success with different numbers.
It does fix the hierarchy problem.
Those contributions to the mass of the Higgs don't affect a bound state of technic quarks
in the same way that they would affect a fundamental particle.
The problem is that technicolor models have been developed quite a bit and they somehow
don't seem to fit the data.
They make predictions for precision measurements from particle physics accelerators and so
far none of those measurements has given us any evidence that there is substructure
to the Higgs or to any of the other particles that we know.
These days there are very few adherents to the technicolor philosophy but you know we
don't know yet.
But to keep it in mind is a possibility and keep trying to move forward because someone
else might have a better idea.
For example, in the late 1990s, kind of out of the blue, some very clever people did have
a dramatically different idea.
They suggested that we could try to address the hierarchy problem using extra dimensions
of space.
The idea that space has more than the conventional three dimensions, up, down, left, right, forward,
backward.
This is an old idea.
It goes back almost as far as general relativity itself.
Once Einstein said that space time can be curved, people quickly wondered whether or
not there are more than three spatial dimensions but they're just curled up into a little
ball so small that we actually can't see them and space looks three dimensional to us.
The usual standard way to do this would be to curl up these dimensions to what we call
the Planck scale, the scale where quantum gravity becomes important.
That's about 10 to the minus 33 centimeters.
It's a phenomenally small size.
Even if it's not that small, even if there are extra dimensions, we have experimental
evidence that they must be at least less than about a hundredth the size of the proton,
less than 10 to the minus 17 centimeters.
But what if this new idea went, there are actually large extra dimensions and the reason
we don't see them is simply because we can't get there.
In other words, imagine large extra dimensions of space but there's a three dimensional surface
embedded in these dimensions, a surface that we call a brain.
From the word membrane for a two dimensional surface, we didn't have a word for a three
dimensional surface so we call it a three brain or simply a brain.
If all of the particles and forces of the standard model, all of the fermions and gauge
bosons and the Higgs boson were confined to this three dimensional brain then space
would look three dimensional to us even if there were larger extra dimensions we didn't
see.
But there is one force, one particle that does not get stuck to brains no matter what
you do and that's gravity.
Gravity always escapes to the extra dimensions and what that means is the extra dimensions
can't be too big.
If they were infinitely big, remember the reason why gravity is an inverse square law
is basically because space is three dimensional and a sphere around a gravitating force is
two dimensional.
If there were truly extra dimensions of space then instead of an inverse square law gravity
would obey an inverse cube law or an inverse to the fourth law or something like that.
That's not how gravity works.
So the extra dimensions have to be sufficiently small that we haven't noticed them by doing
experimental tests of gravity.
Right now, or I should say back in 1998 when these ideas came on the market, our best experimental
tests of gravity looked at distance scales of about one millimeter across.
So the idea was an extra dimension of space could be as big as one millimeter across and
we never would have noticed.
It turns out once again you go through the map, imagine there are two extra dimensions
of space with a size one millimeter across.
What that does is effectively it acts to dilute the strength of gravity.
So the reason why in our macroscopic world gravity is such a weak force, in this extra
dimensional scenario gravity is not a weak force, really the fundamental strength of
gravity is set at about one trillion electron volts near the weak scale, near the electro
weak scale where the Higgs boson has its expectation value and its mass.
It's only because gravity is diluted in the extra dimensions that it seems weak to us.
So this is an approach to solving the hierarchy problem by saying actually there's not a
hierarchy, there's no such thing as the Planck scale up there at 10 to the 18 GeV.
All of the new physics in the world in this large extra dimension scenario is down there
at about a hundred or a thousand GeV just where we're doing experiments today.
So that is a very exciting prospect because it means that when you turn on the LHC not
only are you making Higgs bosons and W bosons etc. you could make gravitons because in this
large extra dimension scenario gravity becomes strong at an energy scale of one TeV right
in the wheelhouse of the LHC.
Sadly we have now turned on the LHC which we hadn't done back in 1998 and guess what?
We have not seen any gravitons.
Furthermore we've done a better job in decreasing the size of our macroscopic table top experiments
testing gravity and currently we know that gravity does not break down at one millimeter
it's at least a tenth of a millimeter or smaller before we might be able to see any
deviation from ordinary inverse square law Newtonian gravity.
So the idea that extra dimensions were large and could help solve the hierarchy problem
was a very good idea but it seems not to have worked.
Again there could be some twist on the idea that will be revived but right now supersymmetry
is still the leading candidate for a theory beyond the standard model.
We have other ideas, we have extra dimensions, technicolor and so forth but they have been
very very strongly constrained by experiment.
Super symmetry has been fairly well constrained but there's still a lot of room for it to
exist.
So at the end it can be a little bit discouraging.
We've built the LHC, we've found the Higgs, of course finding the Higgs was great but
we would like to be surprised.
We don't want to find the particles that we predicted and only those particles, we want
to find something we weren't expecting.
When the LHC turned on it was very plausible that a few months later we would have discovered
supersymmetry.
You can imagine models of supersymmetry that would easily be discoverable in the run of
the LHC that we've already done and we haven't seen it.
We haven't seen anything beyond the standard model.
We could have found the Higgs boson but the Higgs might not have exactly fit into our
standard model expectations but in fact that's exactly what it does.
So it's possible to get a little bit discouraged, we haven't found anything yet but remember
we only just found the Higgs.
After the Higgs was found the LHC only ran for literally a few months and the LHC is
still not running at its design energy.
There's plenty of room for possibility both that the LHC will run for several more years
at higher energy and come back with many, many more particles and surprises or that
even if the LHC doesn't do that a next generation of colliders will do it.
There's plenty of room for surprises and that's what drives physics.
We're only going to learn about the fundamental laws of nature if we keep probing and keep
discovering new things.
