At this point, we know what the Higgs boson is, we know what it does, we know the purpose
it serves, and we know how it interacts with other particles.
So we can finally begin to think about actually making it, actually going and looking for
it.
In the old days, it used to be we could find new particles, new elementary constituents
of matter, either just by looking for them in our laboratory, that's how we found the
electron, the proton, the neutron, the photon, or by waiting for them to fall from the sky.
That's how Carl Anderson found the positron, the muon, and the anti-muon.
These days, we have to make them.
We have to actually build a gigantic particle accelerator to create particles that are not
lying around in the matter that we have in front of us or falling around from the sky.
So building and designing particle accelerators is a huge deal, and in this lecture, I want
to not only talk about the particle accelerators that we have and what they do, I really want
to give you the logic behind it.
There's all sorts of choices that are made, and you'll hear people saying, well, we discovered
the Higgs boson because of a certain signal in two photon interactions.
So why?
Why is it photons?
Why do we have a certain detector that detects muons but no detector that detects bottom
quarks or something like that?
After this lecture, you should practically be able to design your own particle accelerator.
The basic idea behind accelerating particles and making new ones is E equals mc squared.
The energy of an object at rest is its mass times the speed of light squared.
What that means is, if you turn it around, if you want to create a particle, like the
Higgs boson or the top quark or whatever, a massive particle, what you need to do is
to put a tremendous amount of energy into a very tiny region, get those quantum fields
vibrating, and make that into that new particle.
The way that we create a tremendous amount of energy in a very small region is to smash
particles together at high velocity.
That's why most particles that we detect that we discovered today are done so at particle
colliders.
It used to be that we would just collide fast-moving particles into stationary targets.
Once the technology developed to the point where we could actually set two beams of particles
against each other, we gained a tremendous reach in discovering new things.
Now there's an analogy that is often used, and it's a very bad analogy.
It says that finding new particles is like learning about watchmaking by taking two
watches and smashing them together, looking at all the pieces that fly out.
Particle physics is actually not like that for a very important reason.
When you smash two watches together and you watch what comes out, what you're going to
see are the pieces that were inside the watches.
You're just revealing what is inside.
Particle colliders do not do that.
They bring into existence new particles that weren't there.
If we smash two protons together at the LHC and we make a Higgs boson, there were no
Higgs boson hiding in those particles, in those protons.
The Higgs boson is over 100 times heavier than the proton.
We are creating new particles by getting the quantum fields they're associating with vibrating
to beat the band.
So it's as if you smash two Timex watches together and a Rolex watch pops out.
You're really making something new and special.
Of course, what we're really doing, and I'm trying to emphasize over and over again, is
we're smashing together fields, not particles.
So when we say we have two protons coming together and we watch what they make when
they collide, really the protons themselves are collections of quarks and gluons, and
every quark and every gluon is a vibration in the quark fields or the gluon fields.
So all those interactions that we talked about in the previous lecture, these are really
vibrations in one kind of field talking to the vibrations in the other kind of field.
When we have a high energy particle with a lot of things going on, we have vibrations
of a large amplitude, a very short wavelength.
You squeeze them together in a little tiny region, and those vibrations sort of hum along
and start the other fields vibrating.
An analogy I like to use is, imagine you're playing a piano in a room where there's another
piano sitting there and someone is not playing the other piano.
It's left all by itself.
But when you play a note on your piano, the musical note that you make, the sound wave
that fills the room, will interact with the strings on the other piano and start it resonating.
That's really how you create new particles in the process of a particle physics collision.
You have the oscillating fields, the quarks and the gluons in your protons.
They are resonating with the other fields in the standard model.
With the Higgs boson, for example, with the W's, with the photons, and so forth.
That's how we bring new particles into existence at a high energy collider.
So of course, the Large Hadron Collider is the collider we really care about, but I'm
going to talk a little bit about the history of colliders and how we got there.
Why do we build particle accelerators and colliders in the particular way that we do?
Well we think about the goals that we have.
There are three things that we need to do to make these new particles, whether it's
the Higgs or the top or whatever.
One is, of course, we need to accelerate the particles that we have to as high an energy
as we can.
Because E equals mc squared, and because we found the low mass particles already, the
particles that we're looking for tend to be those that have a large amount of mass.
So we want as much energy as we can possibly squeeze into a tiny volume that will let us
reach these new kinds of particles.
Secondly, once we've done that, once we've accelerated our particles into tremendous
energies and brought them into collisions, things are going to happen.
Those particles are going to interact with each other and new particles will come out.
We want to look at what comes out.
This is what sounds like the easy part, but is actually the hard part.
You don't just take a photograph of these particles, when you see a picture in a book
about particle physics, you might have nice little curvy trajectories with labels on
them.
Oh look, there is an anti-muon or something like that.
But the labels do not appear in your actual experiment.
All the trajectories are just trajectories, even if you can just find the trajectories
at all.
If you have something like a neutrino that is neutral and doesn't interact very much,
it leaves no track in your detector.
So there is a whole art and science of looking at what comes out of the particle collisions
and reconstructing what must have gone into making that happen.
Finally, and where people like me come in, the theoretical physicists, is that we need
to compare what we have observed to the predictions.
Remember in the last lecture we talked a lot about Feynman diagrams, about the interactions,
about calculating the numbers.
That's the process that goes into comparing the data that we get from an accelerator to
our theoretical expectations.
And to be frank, the data you get from a particle accelerator is kind of a mess, unless you
really know exactly what you're looking for.
It can be very, very hard to pick out the very faint signal of a new particle.
So experimentalists and theorists need to work hand in hand to make these particle accelerators
do their job.
Okay, so let's imagine we are building, we are designing a new particle physics experiment.
You're going to collide particles together, make something new.
The first question you should be asking yourself is, what kinds of particles should I be colliding
together?
So fortunately, we have the standard model of particle physics.
We know what particles there are that we have access to right now.
We might be trying to make new particles, not only the Higgs boson, but maybe super
symmetric particles or dark matter, but we don't have any of those lying around in our
bargain basement bins.
We need to work with the particles we have to create those new ones.
So we have the leptons, the charged leptons, electron, muon, tau, and of course the neutrinos.
We have the quarks and we have the gauge bosons.
We're going to collide some combination of these together to make new particles, so let's
think about what that combination will be.
Well, let's think first about the leptons.
We have the charged leptons, as I've said, and we have the neutrinos.
For the quarks, of course, we don't have access to individual quarks.
Quarks are confined inside strongly interacting particles.
The generic name for a strongly interacting particle, like a proton, which is three quarks,
or a pion, which is a quark and an anti-quark, is hadrons.
Hadrons are any collection of quarks and gluons that are overall something that has no color,
something we can actually make in the laboratory.
So we can imagine building a particle accelerator that accelerates hadrons.
So those are our options.
What would make a good candidate versus a not good candidate?
Well, we want a particle to accelerate that is stable or nearly stable.
In other words, you're not going to make a W boson accelerator.
W bosons just decay away far too fast.
They will not get around the ring.
You will not be able to accelerate them to a very high velocity.
Likewise, you don't want to use tau leptons or top quarks or anything like that, or even
heavy hadrons.
Furthermore, you want something that is electrically charged.
This might be a little bit less obvious, but you wouldn't want to build a neutron accelerator
for the simple reason that it's really hard to accelerate neutrons.
The way we actually accelerate these particles is by grabbing onto them with electromagnetic
fields.
So electromagnetic fields will only accelerate electrically charged particles.
We're not going to use neutrons, neutrinos, photons, or gravitons.
So what does that leave us with?
What might we use in our particle accelerator?
Well, we have electrons and positrons.
We have protons and antiprotons.
You don't want to use neutrons, as we've just said.
You do have atomic nuclei.
There are stable particles that are, for instance, the nucleus of an iron atom or a lead atom
or something like that.
These are collections of protons and neutrons, but they are stable and we can put them inside
our particle accelerator.
The final example, let's think if you can think of it at home, if you don't know what
it is, pause the button right now and try to think of what the other possibility could
be.
The answer is muons are a possible thing that we could use in our particle accelerator.
Besides electrons, positrons, protons, and nuclei, muons are right there at the edge
of maybe being useful in a particle accelerator, and we'll talk about that a little bit later.
They're unstable.
They do decay, but their lifetime is just long enough to make them an intriguing possibility.
It's never been done yet, but a muon collider is on the drawing board as something we might
someday build.
Okay, given the particles we want to accelerate, how are we going to do it?
Well we have our electric fields and our magnetic fields.
This is what we use to push around particles.
Remember, in the macroscopic world there are only two forces of nature that are even noticeable,
gravity and electromagnetism.
And gravity is far too weak to accelerate particles to near the speed of light.
It accelerates something as fast as you can see something drop, but you really want to
use electromagnetism to get particles moving at a high velocity.
And the electric fields and the magnetic fields, even though they're unified as a theory of
particle physics, play a different role in making an accelerator.
An electric field pushes a particle in the direction that the field is pointing.
If you have an electric field pointing upward and you put a positively charged particle
in that field, it will accelerate upward.
If you put a neutral particle, it won't accelerate.
If you put a negatively charged particle, it will accelerate downward.
So if you have a specific kind of particle you want to move, like a proton or an electron,
you can design your electric field to push it in the direction you care about.
Magnetic fields are different.
If you take a particle of any electric charge and put it stationary in a magnetic field,
it will not move.
This is an interesting feature of magnetic fields, which is that what they couple to
are the motions of electrically charged particles.
A stationary particle is unaffected by a magnetic field, but if you have it moving compared
to the magnetic field, then it will get pushed one way or another.
So basically you use electric fields to accelerate your particles, to get them going really quickly.
Use magnetic fields to steer the particles.
If you want to move the particles or if you want to collimate the beam of particles, in
other words, you want to take that beam of all your particles and focus it down to something
thin and powerful and highly intense, that's when you're going to use your magnetic fields.
In terms of what we actually put in a real particle physics accelerator, the way that
we get those electrons or those protons, those charged particles, to be boosted to higher
and higher energies is something called a radio frequency cavity.
For reasons that have to do with the actual way we build the machine, reasons that as
a theorist I have no idea what is going on, but I trust the engineers and the technicians
and the experimentalists here, it is easier to have an electric field, which does the
accelerating, but an electric field that oscillates backward and forward rather than a constant
electric field that would just give you the same push every time.
But that causes a problem because if you have a particle going through, but the electric
field is oscillating back and forth, sometimes it will accelerate your particle, but sometimes
it will decelerate it.
That is not what you're looking for.
The way that we reconcile this is the actual particles arranged in the accelerator are
not smoothly distributed in the beam.
They are concentrated in what we call, the technical term is, bunches.
So you have little bunches with several particles each moving through and they are exquisite
times when the bunch passes through the RF cavity, the radio frequency cavity, it is
always feeling the electric field pushing it in the direction to get it to go to higher
and higher acceleration, higher and higher velocity and energy.
In the parts when the electric field would be decelerating it, there are no particles
there because that's in between the bunches.
By this technique we can get the particles that come through grouped into bunches to
be accelerated to faster and faster energies very close to the speed of light.
So there's two main geometries that we have for our particle accelerators.
We can accelerate them along with these radio frequency cavities, but then what do you do
once you've nudged the particle to a high energy?
There's two options.
One is you have a one shot deal.
You have what's called a linear accelerator.
You get the particles moving as fast as you can and then you collide them.
There's a famous particle physics laboratory called Slack outside Palo Alto, California.
It used to be that Slack stood for Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, but the Department
of Energy who built the machine decided they didn't want Stanford University's name on
it.
So now Slack actually stands for Slack Linear Accelerator Center.
It's a recursive acronym that doesn't really mean anything, but it's a linear accelerator.
It is one of the longest, straightest buildings in the world.
And also in the United States we have the Fermilab Accelerator Complex right outside
Chicago that is a circular accelerator.
A linear accelerator accelerates particles once and then smashes them.
In a circular accelerator you can recycle.
You can use those particles over and over again.
So there's a trade off either way.
In a linear accelerator you don't get to recycle the particles, you only use them once.
You can accelerate them as fast as you can and then you lose them.
In a circular accelerator you can use them again and again, but there's a problem.
When you are turning the particles around, when you're nudging them in a circle to keep
them going over and over again so you can reuse them, every time you nudge the particles
around a circle they lose energy.
When you accelerate a particle to turn to the left it will tend to give off photons to
radiate and lose some of the energy, some of that precious energy that you've given
it.
So it turns out that both circular accelerators and linear accelerators have their uses.
Roughly speaking we use circular accelerators when we have heavy particles like protons
or anti-protons, linear accelerators when we have light particles like electrons and
positrons.
Speaking of which, if we're sticking to protons, anti-protons, electrons, positrons,
do we want to collide particles with their anti-particles or with themselves?
And again, there are trade-offs.
If you take a particle and collide it with an anti-particle you generally get a more
efficient annihilation into whatever new particles you're trying to make, that's a good thing.
The problem is it's hard to make anti-particles in the first place.
Remember you want to have a lot of collisions, you not only want to have a high energy collision,
you want to have many, many, many of them so you can see many, many examples of the
kinds of interactions you're looking for.
This is called the luminosity of the particle accelerator, how many collisions you get per
second.
So in a linear collider, which generally uses electrons and positrons, you know positrons
are fairly light, they're anti-particles but because their mass is low they're relatively
easy to make.
So a linear collider will generally use electrons and positrons.
A circular collider that's going to use protons, it depends on the machine.
The Tevitron, the giant machine at Fermilab, was an actual proton-anti-proton collider.
They were able to make enough anti-proton to make it worth their while but at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN outside Geneva, the luminosity needs to be much, much higher.
They just can't make that many anti-proton.
So with the LHC we actually collide protons with other protons and we see what comes out.
Finally, I teased you about the possibility of muon colliders, muons do decay, they have
a lifetime.
The lifetime to you and me sounds relatively short, a muon lasts for about two millionths
of a second.
But they are heavier than electrons and that's a good thing, they can be raised to a much
higher energy and there's also an intrinsic benefit to getting electrons or muons or other
leptons versus hadrons, namely that the hadrons, the protons, the anti-protons, these are
full of all sorts of substructure.
They have quarks, they have gluons, a proton is like a big floppy bag of particles.
When two protons hit each other, only a fraction of the energy is actually useful.
When two leptons hit each other, those are point-like particles we get out as much energy
as we put in.
So since muons are like electrons, but heavier, it would be great if we could use them to
make accelerators.
The fact that they decay is a problem but that's a technical thing, we can accelerate
them and smash them very, very quickly, two millionths of a second might be plenty of
time.
The real problem is that when they decay they give off energetic particles including neutrinos.
People have calculated that even though neutrinos are relatively weakly interacting, at a muon
collider you would make so many of them that it would be dangerous to stand next to the
collider.
The neutrinos that were emitted could actually be a health hazard and that is a problem.
So muon colliders are on the drawing board but they're not a very promising technology
yet until we've figured out that problem.
What we do have, of course, are the Hadron colliders, protons and antiprotons, and there's
a difference between what we use Hadron colliders for and what we use electron-positron colliders
for.
Hadron colliders, like we said, protons and antiprotons are big floppy bags of particles,
but we can raise those protons and antiprotons to very, very high energies.
What that means is it's a blunt instrument.
You can reach very far, but you don't get very precise information about where you reach.
As a result, Hadron colliders are useful for discovering new particles.
The Tevitron at Fermilab was a Hadron collider.
There was something called the super proton synchrotron, at CERN, which we used to discover
the W and Z bosons, and of course the large Hadron collider discovered the Higgs boson
for us.
In contrast, an electron-positron collider cannot reach as high energy as a Hadron collider,
but the energy it reaches, you can really study with very, very high precision.
Once you've discovered something at a proton collider, you can go and study it at an electron-positron
collider.
This has been done to great effect.
The Stanford linear accelerator was an electron-positron collider before it closed down, and at CERN,
the tunnel where the large Hadron collider is built now, used to house something called
the large electron-positron collider, LEP, and LEP was a wonderful tool for exploring
and studying a great number of the properties of all the particles in the standard model.
Still, many of our best pieces of information about the standard model come from the run
that LEP had underneath that tunnel at CERN.
So you can see that there's quite a richness to what goes into building a particle collider,
and there's a long tradition of doing it.
The whole game basically started back in the 1930s when we built cyclotrons for the first
time, and they were literally, you know, a few inches across, maybe 10 inches or up to
a few yards across at most, and they reached a few million electron volts.
There were very famous cyclotrons at Berkeley, at Chicago, at Columbia, and other places.
These days, we build much bigger machines, and very, very roughly speaking, I'm being
a little bit unfair to the many wonderful particle accelerator facilities that have been
around for many years, but the three biggies are ones we've already named.
CERN, the European system right outside Geneva, they had something called the intersecting
storage rings, which is the first time you were actually colliding two beams moving in
different directions.
They had the super proton synchrotron that found the W and the Z, they had LEP, now they
have the LHC.
There was Slack outside Stanford, which is responsible for discovering the charm quark
and the tau lepton, and of course, we have Fermilab outside Chicago.
The Tevatron was where we found the top quark, and we also, at Fermilab, found the tau neutrino.
So each one of these facilities has really contributed in an important way to building
what we call this wonderful edifice of the standard model of particle physics.
So as a pallet cleanser, I have to answer the question that everyone always asks me
when I give talks like this, which is, what would happen if I stuck my head into the beam
of a particle accelerator?
I don't know why people have this question, or sometimes it's not their head, but they
want to stick their hand in.
Would it hurt?
Would it go right through you?
Fortunately, someone has done the experiment.
I mean, not fortunately for them, but in 1978, a Russian technician named Anatoly Burgosky
was working at a Russian particle accelerator facility.
Let's just say the safety standards in Russian particle physics in the 1970s were not quite
as high as they are at CERN or Fermilab today, and Burgosky managed to somehow put his head
into the beam of particles and someone turned it on by accident.
These were not quite as energetic as we get at the LHC, but still they were 76 GEV protons.
They were moving at a very high fraction of the speed of light.
So what happened?
Burgosky did not, as you might expect, die instantly.
He actually was scarred.
He received partial paralysis and hearing loss, but not only did he survive, but he
got better.
He finished his PhD and he continued to work as a particle physicist for many, many years.
Probably if you were at CERN, the luminosity is higher, the energy is higher, it would
be much more dangerous, but the answer is yes, you can survive putting your head inside
the beam of a particle accelerator.
Okay, with that little bit of curiosity out of the way, let's get back to the dirty work
of finding the particles that we make.
So you built a particle accelerator.
You're going to smash together either protons, antiprotons, maybe electrons and positrons.
What comes out?
How do you know what you've created?
You need to build a detector.
And that means you need to build a multifaceted instrument that looks for all the different
kinds of particles that can be created.
Now fortunately or otherwise, the particles that we're trying to create and discover,
like the haze boson or dark matter, are not the particles we will ever directly see in
our detector.
We're going to see the decay products, you're going to make a particle which will then produce
the good old particles of the standard model.
So when you build your detector, you're really trying to detect standard model particles.
So all we need to do is once again go through the list of standard model particles and ask
how do we detect all of them?
Well some of them you're never going to detect.
Even like a neutrino or a graviton, if you were lucky enough to make one of those, they're
just not interacting strongly enough to be detectable.
They will fly right out of your detector, you might as well ignore them.
Some particles decay so quickly that you don't need to worry about detecting them directly.
The haze boson, the tau, the top quark, the w and the z, you'll never see these directly,
you're just going to see what they turn into.
Strongly interacting particles, you can make quarks or gluons in a particle physics collision,
but as you know these are confined.
So what happens if you make an individual quark or gluon, it scatters into a whole bunch
of strongly interacting particles.
We call this process hadronization, since strongly interacting particles are hadrons,
and we call the collection of all these hadrons that spill out in a certain direction a jet
of particles.
It's actually very difficult to separate out the different hadrons inside a jet, certainly
we don't know which one came from which quark and which gluon, but we collect all of the
energy, all of the momentum in every individual jet, and we put that into our information
that we get out of the decay.
So besides hadrons, that leaves us with the electrons, and of course the antiparticles,
the positrons, photons, and muons, that's the collection of particles we might want
to absorb, detect in our detectors.
Electrons and photons of course are very low mass particles, the photons are zero mass,
so they're light and easy to absorb, whereas a heavy particle like a muon can punch through
a lot of material.
So just to keep this straight, electrons and photons can be absorbed, hadrons are heavy,
but interact strongly so they can also be absorbed, it's only muons that can punch through
lots of material and yet be detected, but not absorbed.
With these considerations in mind, we can actually build a detector.
A modern particle physics detector comes in pieces like layers of an onion, because there's
different particles that can come out of our interaction, there's different ways we want
to measure those particles.
Now every detector is going to be a little bit different, but roughly speaking there
are four layers that any good modern particle physics experiment is going to have.
At the very center, we don't even try to capture the particles, we just want to take
a very high precision view of what's happening with precision, measurement and timing to
the best extent we can.
That's called the inner detector, we're looking for tiny little offsets of where the particles
come from that might be a sign that there's another particle we don't see that moved
a little bit before decaying into them.
The next layer around the inner detector is called the electromagnetic calorimeter.
By calorimeter we mean something that will actually capture the particles and measure
their energy as well as their momentum.
The electromagnetic calorimeter, you might want to guess, is going to measure photons
and electrons, photons carrying the electromagnetic force and electrons feeling the electromagnetic
force.
Then around the electromagnetic calorimeter we have something called the hadronic calorimeter,
the strongly interacting particles, the neutrons, the protons, the mesons like pions and caons
that organize themselves into jets of these strongly interacting protons, these are harder
to capture so they will pass through the electromagnetic calorimeter, but we put denser material around
it to capture them in the hadronic calorimeter so we can also measure the spray of energies
inside the jet.
And finally around the hadronic calorimeter we have the muon detector.
This is not a calorimeter, this outer layer, because we can't measure, we cannot capture
the muon.
So what we can do is measure their path and therefore figure out what momentum they had.
We can't actually capture them and figure out what their energy is, but if you get their
path and you get the momentum and you know it's a muon you can figure out what it was
doing.
From all of this information we can reconstruct, at least probabilistically, what kind of event
would have constructed would have created all of these particle tracks.
The big challenge at a real particle accelerator like the Large Hadron Collider is that you
have too much data.
It doesn't sound like a problem, but it is.
At the LHC there are approximately one billion collisions every second and every collision
has about one megabyte of data.
You could not possibly store all of that data onto a disk drive and it's not just you, human
technology does not allow you to do that.
So in fact what you do is you throw away almost all the data.
We only keep one out of every million events at the Large Hadron Collider.
Every second we keep a million, we keep sorry, one thousand events, one megabyte of data
each.
Clearly, there's a very important puzzle to be solved, which events do we keep and which
do we throw away?
This is a process called the trigger and building the trigger, designing the trigger is one
of the most crucial parts of modern experimental particle physics.
What you want to do is look at the event very, very quickly, decide is this possibly interesting,
can I keep it?
If it's not, I throw it away.
That means you better know ahead of time which events are possibly interesting and that means
once again that experimentalists and theorists need to talk to each other and be very, very
careful about what they think is boring versus what they think is interesting.
