Hello everybody! My name is Rachel and welcome to my channel Kalanadi. Today I am reviewing
Battle 17 by Samuel R. Delaney. This is a classic science fiction novel originally published in
1966 and it won the Nebula Award for that year, though actually it tied for the award but they
both won. And bottom line, if you don't go any farther in this review, this is a classic sci-fi
novel that I was really impressed by. The plot of this book is based on the Saper Warp Hypothesis
an idea that the structure of a language can influence or even dictate the way that its
speakers think or behave. I was surprised to discover that this particular theory was a lot
older than I thought it was. I first heard about it in a linguistics course almost 10 years ago
and for some reason I thought that it had been disproven. That does not appear to be the case.
People don't think that it so drastically affects the way that people think but it hasn't been
disproven either. It's had its heyday but it's not been abandoned. And this book written in the 1960s
when the hypothesis was kind of I think on its way out really explores the extreme possibilities
of that linguistic idea of language kind of controlling people. In this future humanity
has spread throughout the galaxy and they are currently engaged in a war with the invaders.
There have been a series of attacks and infiltrations on the good guys outposts
and during these they intercept radio chatter which is in a code that they can't break. They
turn to a woman named Raidra Wong. She is a poet with a background in cryptography and amazing
linguistic skills and they ask her to break this code for them. They call it Babel 17.
Raidra discovers that this isn't actually a code. It's a full-blown language making it
much more complex and she also discovers that it seems to have a interesting effect
on people's behavior or the way that they think when they learn how to speak it.
And she goes off on a quest to discover where the language came from, what it can do, and ultimately
try to stop the war and the attacks. I'll be honest I set my expectations really low for this book
not because I thought it was going to be bad but because I've heard various things about
Delaney's writing style, some of the weirder concepts he puts into books, and I just wasn't
sure that it was going to be my kind of thing. I was expecting it to be like a super psychedelic
weird 60s trip and it wasn't. It has a 60s vibe but it's not as far out as I expected it to be.
And I think that a lot of my enjoyment of this book comes from the fact that it avoids some of
the cliches of 60s and 70s classic sci-fi that are really beginning to annoy me these days.
This is a book written in the 1960s by a gay african-american man which explores
non-straight sexuality and has a female asian protagonist.
Redra is described as being very beautiful but she's also talented and intelligent.
She has mental and physical strengths. She is not a cardboard cut out of a female character
shoved into scenes to be pretty and to have sex with the male characters. She is a person.
As a character she stands on her own and she is more highly valued by the other characters in this
book for what's inside of her head rather than what's on her face. This is very refreshing.
Thank you Delaney for proving that someone could do this back in the 60s. I'm gonna have a really
hard time giving any other classic sff books a pass for lack of diversity when obviously Delaney
has proved that it could have been done back then. He did it! Why didn't anybody else do it too?
The other thing that I really enjoyed about this book is that it's based on a linguistic
theory whereas a lot of the sf that I read from this time period and modern is often really based
around a hard scientific concept often to the detriment of character development but this
is a book about language and about how language affects people and you really can't have a linguistic
theory or a language without the people that speak it. Now there are some jarring elements of this
book mainly because it is old and it is one of Delaney's earlier novels. As far as the science goes
I think that Babel 17 is quite typical of a lot of books written before we went digital. A lot of
the terminology and the technology is out of date. We've conquered the galaxy but we're still using
punch card machines to run our computers and tape recorders. I didn't find it that bad though.
Sometimes I can be really pulled out of a science fiction book when it becomes obvious to me that
these science is flawed or incredibly wrong but I didn't get that sense during this book. It just
it feels a bit old. The other thing is the writing style. The introduction to my sf masterworks
edition does discuss the exuberant language. This book has the feel of a young writer discovering
the treasure trove that is the English language and just spewing vibrant words and experimental
language across the page. But once again it wasn't too much for me. It certainly felt like the work
of a young writer but even though I have a low tolerance for experimental language and poetry
and so on it still worked for me and I actually found that it contributed to a certain atmosphere
in this book. The upshot of my review is that I really enjoyed babble 17 despite my very low
expectations. I really enjoyed reading this book and if you are interested in reading classic
science fiction you could do a lot worse than to pick up this book. I definitely think it is one of
the best classic sci-fi novels I have read so far. I haven't read that many let's be honest here but
I have been underwhelmed by quite a few and this and rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C Clark are
really the only two classic sci-fi novels that I think I would reread at some point.
And that's it for my review. I hope you found this helpful. If you're interested in reading
babble 17 or another book by Samuel R. Delaney I definitely am going to be picking up Dolgren
or Nova by him pretty soon. Thank you for watching and until my next video, bye!
