I'm Jessica Flack and I'm the co-director of the Center for Complexity and Collective
Computation in the WID.
And before I introduce tonight's topic and speakers, special guests, I would like to
first thank some of the folks in WID who made tonight happen.
Maria Piat, Marianne Englisch, Jenny Eagleton, Sarah Shapiro, and Beth Misko, WID's outstanding
administrative and outreach team.
I'd also like to thank Wisconsin Public Television, who's in the back filming the lectures
tonight, everybody at University Communications, who's done a great job with advertising, folks
at the ITHMIS for accommodating changes the last minute, and of course the IT team and
Alan Ruby in particular here in WID for their support tonight.
And finally, the Center for Complexity and Collective Computation is indebted to John
Wiley and to the Templeton Foundation for very much appreciated financial support of
tonight's lecture series.
Without this support, we could not have these kinds of events.
So tonight's lecture on the roles of energy and information in 21st century biology is
part of a new public lecture series sponsored by C4, that's the Center for Complexity and
Collective Computation, and the series is called the John von Neumann Public Lectures
in Complexity and Computation.
And the lectures are going to be each month at about 7 p.m. the 2nd or 3rd Wednesday over
the course of the fall and spring semesters in 2012 and 2013.
We have a great lineup this fall.
The next speaker, the next lecture is on October 17th, and it's by Graham Spencer, who you
might know as one of the original founders of Excite, and he's currently a partner at
Google Ventures, and he's going to be talking about programming the Internet.
He's a super smart, broad-minded computer scientist who gives fun and insightful lectures,
so I hope to see you guys all there.
Intelligent information are two of the most fundamental concepts in science, affecting
phenomena over a vast range of scales, from quantum mechanics to the origin of life to
the evolution of cooperation in human and animal societies, to also, as you'll hear
about tonight, the size and pace of cities.
In tonight's lecture, Dr. Jeffrey West and Dr. David Krakauer, who I will introduce
momentarily, will explore how information and energy have shaped nature, and they'll
discuss the implications of the principles for the future of science, for future of biology,
and for society.
Some of the questions that we will tackle over the course of the evening tonight include
what really are energy and information.
The laws of physics, and specifically the first law of thermodynamics, tells us that
energy cannot be created or destroyed.
As such, it's said to be a conserved quantity, meaning that the total energy in the universe
is a constant.
It is this property of energy coupled to the fact that it can be hard to transform into
something useful that makes it seem like a finite expendable resource.
Now is the same true for information?
Or can information be created and destroyed?
And if so, what does this mean?
So as you'll hear tonight, existing theories of information stress that information increases
our understanding of the world around us.
In formal terms, we say that information reduces the uncertainty about the environment.
But there's nothing in this definition that captures, I think, the fact that most of us,
for most of us in this audience, information is really about meaning.
It's the knowledge itself not about reducing uncertainty about the knowledge that we're
interested in.
So existing formal theories of information have nothing to say about this which you might
call semantics.
Do we need a new theory of information?
That includes meaning or semantics.
That's one of the questions we'll ask tonight.
Can we use existing formal theories of information?
Or are the new ones that we might build to overcome energetic constraints?
Or does information only help us find solutions to harness energy more efficiently?
These are deep and unanswered questions in physics and biology.
So finally, we are going to ask what would a new science of energy and information mean
for physics, for computer science, for biology, and for society?
So our first speaker is Dr. Jeffrey West.
Jeffrey is a theoretical physicist whose primary interests have been in fundamental questions
in physics, especially those concerning the elementary particles, their interactions
and cosmological implications.
Jeffrey received his BA from Cambridge in 1961, his doctorate from Stanford in 1966,
where he returned in 1970 as a member of the faculty.
He was the leader and founder of the high-energy physics group at Los Alamos National Labs.
Then he moved to the Santa Fe Institute in 2003, where he became a distinguished member
of the faculty and eventually became president of SFI for 2005 to 2009.
His long-term fascination has been in the origin of universal scaling laws that pervade
biology from the molecular genomic scale up through a minor country and sells to whole
organisms and ecosystems.
He's currently working to extend the theory of scaling that was developed in biology,
or as it was developed in biology, to social systems with the goal of understanding the
structure and dynamic of social organizations, such as cities and corporations.
Tonight, he will talk on energy scaling and the future of life on Earth for about 45
minutes.
Our second lecture is David Krakauer.
David is the director of the Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, co-director of the Center for
Complexity and Collective Computation, professor of genetics at UW-Madison and external professor
at the Santa Fe Institute.
A graduate of University London and Oxford University has authored more than a hundred
scientific papers, served on several journal editorial boards, and works to bridge the
gap between academia and business, and also between the physical and biological sciences
on the one hand and the social sciences and humanities on the other.
His research focuses on the evolutionary history of information processing mechanisms
in adaptive systems.
But his mind, and I know him well, is perhaps best described as sitting in an intellectual
space that has been deeply influenced by, I guess, I think a somewhat idiosyncratic
group of some of history's most interesting contributors, including John Louis Borges,
John von Neumann, Turing, Bill Hamilton, and Sir Thomas Brown.
Tonight he will talk for 30 minutes on the power of information to transform the 21st
century.
Following the lectures of David and Jeffrey, Steve Paulson from Wisconsin Public Radio
will lead a panel discussion on the role of energy and information in 21st century biology.
Steve is the executive producer and interviewer with, to the best of our knowledge, a well
known science radio program.
Paulson is written for Salon, Slate, The Huffington Post, The Chronicle of Higher Education,
The Independent, and many other publications.
His radio reports have also been broadcast on NPR's Morning Edition and All Things Considered.
His recent book, Adams and Eden, Conversations on Religion and Science, was published back
for the University Press.
So please join me for a bit of a marathon session and welcome Steve, David, and Jeffrey.
Thank you.
Thank you, David, thank you, Jessica, and thank you for inviting me to give this talk
and be part of this interesting discussion about energy and information.
So this is the title that was given to me, mostly because I was delinquent in giving
one myself.
And it does sort of cover what I'm going to talk about, but this is kind of the landscape
that I'm going to be talking about tonight in terms primarily of energy and the ideas
surrounding metabolism in biology, and it's a very idiosyncratic view, and as is clear
from the introduction, I come to it as a theoretical physicist wandering into areas of biology
and the social sciences.
And I'm going to begin it.
I'm going to take as a point of departure something that's relevant to this, namely,
this is supported by the Center for Computation and Complexity, or whatever anyway.
Complexity was in it, and I wanted to use as a point of departure a statement by Stephen
Hawking, who is not someone that works on complexity and not someone that works on biology, but
is a highly reductionistic physicist, and here's something he said about 10 years ago.
Some say that while the 20th century was the century of physics, we are now entering the
century of biology.
What do you think of this?
And many people believe the 21st century is the century of biology, and it certainly will
be, but more importantly, and this I do believe is what Hawking says, I think the next century
will be the century of complexity, because many of the problems we're going to face
and are facing are to do with complex adaptive systems, and I'll be talking a little bit
about them.
And I want to use this, as I say, as a point of departure because implicit in this is an
idea of what complexity is, and that's something I'm not going to discuss, but accept to use
it to talk about what is not complex first, because it brings in the whole role of energy.
And this is a system we're familiar with, the solar system, and this is a system that
is often thought of as not complex.
It is simple, and by simple it means that the whole dynamics of that system, the motion
of the planets around the sun and therefore of the satellites that power our communication
systems, are all encoded in two very simple looking equations.
This is a highly non-technical talk, you don't have to understand the equations, everybody
is familiar with the idea F equals MA, but they're in the two laws proposed by Newton
that kind of covers everything to do with the motion of the solar system, the planets
around the sun, but much, much else, and much of modern physics is based on these equations
or versions of these equations, but critical in this is the flow of energy, the idea that
energy is the kind of fundamental thing that's underlying this motion, and one of the crucial
aspects of that is already been mentioned by Jessica, the conservation of energy.
But if you add to it another set of equations, which you don't have to understand, but important
to understand conceptually the equations of Maxwell for unifying electricity and magnetism
and giving rise to understanding radiation, electromagnetic radiation, that pretty much
encompasses much of the kind of world that we live in, and indeed, just to take these
two equations with these equations is how your cell phone works and allows everybody
to communicate and everything else that's pretty much around us, and these, the word
simple applies to because they invoke the idea that you can encode everything in this symbolic
fashion and from that everything else follows, even down to the quantum level, and one of
the things I want to emphasize is that again, these are to do with the flow of energy and
because they are simple and they are written in a mathematically precise form, you can
calculate things somehow in principle to any degree of accuracy, and one of the great
triumphs of 20th century science is this calculation, which is calculating the strength
of the magnet associated with the electron, and here's the theory to 12 decimal places,
and here's the experiment agreeing with it to 12 decimal places.
This is kind of extraordinary, and this is quite unusual actually in the world that we
live in, because the world that we live in, oh, I forgot about that, I put this slide
in, just to show you some of the main characters that you're familiar with that have, that
I think have played an important role in developing ideas of energy.
One is this, is Newton, that's the kind of rock star image of Newton.
This is Einstein looking like Einstein, and this is Max Planck, the origin of photons
and the quantum, and this is someone, oops, this is someone that most people are not familiar
with, it's another, there was a famous Bill Hamilton here, biologist, very famous ecologist,
biologist, the David or Jessica actually mentioned.
This is a really deep Bill Hamilton, this is Bill Hamilton, he was an Irishman who I
sadly drank himself to death, but he encoded something extremely important about energy,
and the physicists in the audience will forgive me, but basically he said that all physical
systems in some sense minimize the amount of energy that needs to be expended.
So this kind of a least, minimum least energy principle, Hamilton's principle, it's actually
called technically the principle of least action, but roughly speaking this is the framework
in which all of the physics that encompasses everything from the macroscopic down to string
theory operates from, is using those principles, and it's to do based on energy.
So here's a picture of energy, this is energy, we're familiar with it, and this is highly
complex use of energy because these are highly non-linear effects and you're familiar with
them, you're also familiar with this, this is the energy that we create on the planet
through objects like this, cities, and I'm going to talk a little bit about that shortly,
and these are driven of course by us, which involve energy, so there are these multiple
levels of energy, and they go all the way down to the thing that drives these us, that
drives us to create the light and the energy by which we live, our brains and our cells,
and these of course also operate by energy themselves, but they invoke something new
that is typically not been considered in physics, and they invoke information, the idea that
information necessarily is needed to be put into the system in order to understand the
way these systems have evolved and the way they organize and the way they behave, and
these systems are typically outside physics, and they form much of the work of biology
and the social sciences, and they are complex, but more importantly they evolve and are therefore
adaptive, so these are very different in their nature from the kind of simplistic system that
we see in the motions of the planets, or even may I say in thinking about string theory
as the origins of the universe, because we can write definitive, precise equations in
principle for those, whereas for these we have this extraordinary challenging problem
of both integrating information in it and understanding the role of energy, and what
I'm going to explore tonight is how far one can take the traditional physics thinking
without invoking explicitly information to understand some of the organization and dynamics
of these systems, and then David will talk about information and maybe in the discussion
we'll talk a little bit about the integration. So here's another kind of system that you're
familiar with, a forest, and all of these systems obey second law of thermodynamics and
the conservation of energy, and therefore the production of entropy, which is the kind
of random stuff, the dissipative kind of energy that comes from doing work and creating order,
it is the resulting disorder that comes from ordering the system, and one of the challenges
and I would say, I would even go as far as to say, I think the major challenge conceptually
in 21st century science is understanding this integration between energy and resources on
the one hand, metabolism in biology with information, genomics maybe, and integrate and get a complete
understanding of these. These are typically considered separately, roughly speaking, in
the kind of academic way in which we think about these things. So what I'm going to talk
about in these systems is, as a physicist, I want a quantitative, predictive, mathematical
in principle understanding of the dynamics and organization of these systems, and it
is clear for the kinds of systems I just referred to, we cannot do what we did for understanding
the magnetic moment of the electron. We're not going to get equations that produce precise
calculations, but maybe what we can get is what we call coarse grain descriptions. So
for example, the kinds of questions that we ought to be able to answer quantitatively
are questions like this. Why is it that I can look across this room and say, everybody
will be dead in 100 years? In fact, if I look more closely, I would say that, including
myself, may I say, but where does 100 years come from for a typical lifespan of a human
being? Why isn't it 10 years or 1,000 years? And how is that connected to underlying molecular
structures of the genome and the respiratory complex? Where in the hell does that come
from? And why is it that the same stuff, if it were a mouse, only lives two or three
years? So those are the kinds of coarse-grained questions that one ought to be able to answer
in a predictive framework, and I'm not going to talk much about these, but in what role
does energy and metabolism play in these? So here's another set of similar kinds of
coarse-grained questions. Why do we need eight hours of sleep? Why do we need to sleep? Why
are not two hours or 18 hours like a mouse or four hours like an elephant? Where in the
hell do these numbers come from? And why is it that mice get many more tumors during their
lifespan per unit volume than human beings? And therefore, why in the hell are we doing
all these experiments on mice and trying to draw conclusions about human beings? We need
to understand those kinds of questions. And the one I really love is why is it very good
to grow babies in your body but not grow cancer, which is also part of you? So these are kind
of coarse-grained questions. And one that has occupied me in the last few years is are citizen
companies just large organisms that are biological? Are citizen organisms just, is New York a great
big whale? And Google a great big elephant? And if that's true, how come that organisms
die? Companies die but cities don't. And in fact, I would say, roughly speaking, almost
no cities die, although you can think of counter examples. We have done awful experiments to
test that. We've dropped two atom bombs on two cities and 30 years later they're functioning.
Companies, all companies die. And so one of the questions is in a coarse-grained way, can
we predict when Google and Microsoft are going to go bust? Because they surely will eventually.
Okay, so those are the kinds of questions. And I want to lead into all of this. This is
biology, but I want to lead into it via cities because we are facing an extraordinary challenge
and this is addressing the question of how biological are cities and can we understand
them that way? We are facing this extraordinary challenge that we live in this exponentially
expanding universe of socioeconomic quantities. And just to give you an example, we've gone
from a few percent being urban to over 80 percent being urban in just 200 years. The
world's across the halfway mark. We're going to go to somewhere close to 80 percent by
2050. China's building several hundred new cities in the next 20 to 30 years. And indeed,
this statistic ought to freak everybody out that every week from now to 2050 on the average
one and a half million people are being urbanized. Therefore, every two months, there's a New
York metropolitan area coming onto this planet. So by the beginning of December, there's another
New York metropolitan area. By the beginning of February, there's another one. By the beginning
of April, there's another one and so on inextricably for the next 30, 40 years. Now, can I use
explosives in this talk?
Sure.
Okay. How in the f*** are we going to deal with that? This is an extraordinary challenge.
So I want to get into that and it is related to energy. Okay. So the other aspect to recognize
is that all of the tsunami of problems we're facing from global warming to the environment
to health problems to crime to resource problems, water, energy and so on, all are driven by
urbanization by people in cities. So that's the problem. But cities are also the solution
because they suck all of you lot into Madison. Cities suck in people and they are the sources
of ideas, innovation and wealth creation. So this is what cities are represented by,
the good of cities. This is what in fact attracts people to cities, all these good things, culture,
music, goods and so on, driven and participating in an ever expanding, exponential, expanding
economy. But if this is a thermodynamic system, which it is, it produces entropy. So it produces
socioeconomic entropy. Incidentally, side comment, if you look in any of the standard
economics books, you never see the word entropy. But what is more amazing is, we've looked
in five of the standard texts, only in one did the word energy appear. That's a side
comment, provocative comment. So here's socioeconomic entropy. Okay. You're familiar with all this.
And the question is, is that what New York and San Francisco and it looked like in 2050
or that, or like this, or this? This is what we want, or even like that, beautiful, or
like that in a hundred years or that. And most importantly, to maintain that, which
is the social buzz of a city, the interaction of people. So here's the question, given this
extraordinary role of cities, we need a science of cities. Okay. And I'm going to use energy
as the as a major piece of that. So the question is, can we have a science of that? And is
that another version of this? Well, if it is, that would be good, actually. If this were
another version of that, because you ask any question that has a quantitative metric associated
with it, like, how many trees are there of a given size? How many leaves are there in
a given branch of a given size? How much energy is flowing through each one? How many, how
big is the canopy? What is the mortality rate? What is the growth rate? How, how far apart
the trees have given size, etc. All those can be answered in a quantitative conceptual
framework with a bunch of mathematical formulae, which in a coarse grained way, agrees with
data from forests all across the globe. And the question is, can we do the same for this?
Sorry, we'll submit to go backwards. So we're here, some of the commonalities, metaphorically,
at least, between social organizations and biological organisms, which we're all familiar
with. And I'm going to show you some just very briefly some data that substantiates
the idea that we understand a little bit about, generically, the way forests work. So what
this is, is just a plot of the number of trees of a given size. The theory, which I'm going
to talk about momentarily, the theory predicts that it goes as the inverse square of the
diameter of the tree trunks. The number of trees of a given size goes as the inverse
square of the diameter of the tree trunks, which means if you look at trees that are
twice the size of any others, there's a quarter of the number, two squared, a quarter of the
number, if it were three times, it'd be eighth and so on. So you get the idea. And there's
data. And what is important about it, not only does the data fit the theory, but you
can see it's over a period of 30, 40 years, this forest, which is a tropical forest, has
changed dramatically. Lots of trees have died, new ones have grown, rapid turnover. But this
law has remained robust. And there's data into the 90s and 2000s that continue with
that. I'm going to miss this. So here's the kind of framework that I want to invoke. Here's
a cartoon of, say, an ecosystem. I could have done a city. And this is the lens that I want
to look at it through. And all of these equations actually are really to do with energy flow.
So another concept I want to talk about very briefly is the concept of scalability that
a system needs to be scalable if it is a system that is going to be resilient and evolvable
and adaptive to change. It needs to be scalable just in the sense that we are scalable. This
is us. We have scaled over a range of 100 million in size in mass. We go down to something
that sits on the palm of my hand all the way up to something that's bigger than this, much
bigger than this room. And we're all pretty much the same thing. We may look different,
but in terms of, in a coarse-grained average way in terms of our life history and our physiology,
we're all pretty much the same thing. And I'm going to show you that in a moment. But
even going further, in going from the molecular levels, I could have put the genome here.
This is what the cartoon of the molecules that produce your energy all the way through
mitochondria to cells, to multicellular organisms like this, to produce things like this, houses
and produce things like this, so that, in fact, what goes on here scales all the way
through this to keep this going. All of these have to be scalable because they are highly
complex and high and continuously evolving and continuously adapting. And so there has
to be a kind of scalability. And out of that comes the idea that you can't have this being
arbitrary. There have to be emergent laws that govern this. And I think the next slide,
ah, yes. So in a similar way to the way we scaled in a much shorter time frame in terms
of our growth, and one of the things that I will talk about briefly in a moment is about
growth and the fact that the same theory, the same theoretical framework, which I will
come to in a moment, which ah, it purports to explain the organization dynamics growth
of forests that I talked about earlier applied to us, mammals, gives rise to equations like
this or pictures like this for what is called a growth curve.
This is the weight as a function of age.
This is us.
It happens to be a rat version of us.
And the line there, the solid line,
is a prediction from the theory.
And the points are the data.
And you can see it's very good.
And this can be done for any organism.
And if I had time, I would show you
lots of other wonderful fits.
But the point is that we can understand growth.
And I will come to that in a moment.
But the important thing I want to stress now,
moving to social systems, is that this
were taken over to socioeconomic systems,
namely that the organism grows quickly and then stops,
like we did.
I mean, one of the amazing things about biology
is that we eat, we grow, and then we go on eating,
but we don't grow.
And the theory explains that.
And I don't have time to go into it.
Maybe we can discuss it later.
And it's all to do with the input of energy
and the distribution of energy and the scaling
of the networks that are inside us.
But the point is this would be very bad
if it were a socioeconomic system,
because this is our image of socioeconomic systems.
And I showed you a picture before of the economy,
always open and expanding.
And I want to come back to this in a moment.
So here's a picture of the extraordinary scaling
in biology.
So let me spend a minute on it.
What you see is plotted here is the most fundamental quantity,
certainly from a physicist's view, of in biology.
That is your metabolic rate.
How much energy do you need per day to stay alive?
The 2,000 food calories a day that you eat to stay alive.
And here it is plotted on the vertical axis
against the weight, the mass of the organism,
on the horizontal axis.
And it's plotted in a Byzantine way.
So I can put mice and elephants on the same graph.
And the Byzantine way is that instead of being linear,
it goes up by factors of 10, 1, 10, 100, 1,000 watts,
1, 10, 100, 1,000 kilograms.
So we can get everywhere on the same graph.
And what you see is something extraordinary,
that there's an extraordinary regularity
when we're dealing with maybe one of the most complex
and diverse phenomena in the universe.
Something unbelievably simple, ridiculously simple
has emerged.
And this is at some level astonishing
because we believe that each one of these organisms,
each subsystem of that organism, each organ, each cell
type, each genome has evolved with its own unique history
and its own unique environmental niche.
So you might have expected from that natural selection
viewpoint that if I plotted anything
versus the size of an organism, it'd
be all over the map representing, manifesting
the historical contingency involved in all of this.
No, that's not what you see.
You see something ridiculously, ridiculously regular.
And that regularity has some extraordinary features.
For one, the slope of it is approximately 3 quarters.
And that 3 quarters is less than one.
One would be a slope, a line like this.
And one is what you might naively
expect if you thought everything were pretty much the same.
The most naive level, you double the size of an organism,
double the number of cells.
Therefore, double the amount of energy needed
to keep it alive.
That's not what you see.
You see something less than one, which
means in that language, double the size of an organism.
Approximately instead of needing twice the amount of energy,
you only need roughly 75%.
So there's this extraordinary economy of scale
as you get bigger, and this is called sublinear behavior.
So it turns out that if you look at any physiological variable
that you can measure and or any life history event
that you can think of, it all has this kind of character.
And I'm going to show you a couple of examples.
There's heart rate, very mundane kind of quantity,
versus body size.
I'm not going to explain it in detail,
but what you see is, again, a very simple scaling law.
This is you thinking.
This is your white matter to gray matter in your brain.
Again, a very simple law evolving.
This is your genomes.
And what you see from this is that you
have this regular behavior, and the other remarkable thing
is all the slopes of those, like that three quarters,
are simple multiples of one quarter.
Four plays this amazing role in these scaling laws
of extraordinary complex phenomena.
What is underlying them?
And this is work I did with colleagues at the Santa Fe
Institute, and I'll tell you who they are in a moment.
The idea is, how in the hell can this
be that all of these phenomena have simple scaling laws?
And why is it that the scaling laws of mammals
are the same as birds, fish, crustacea, insects, and so on?
How can that be?
Well, what could be universal among them?
What could be universal is somehow
the supply of energy and resources through networks
has to be a commonality among them.
And the idea here was that it is the mathematics,
the universal mathematics, and geometric topological properties
of those networks that transcend design,
that are constraining natural selection.
That's the idea.
And I'm not going to, I don't have time to go into that,
other than to say that if you look at these networks,
that's your brain, that's your white-to-gray matter
of the brain, that's your lungs, that's a tree,
that's a little thing, lives inside an elephant,
but they're ubiquitous.
And they have these repositories.
They have these properties.
And if you use those properties, put them
into some fancy mathematics, and use Bill Hamilton's
principle of energy least action kind of ideas,
out-pop all of these marvelous scaling laws,
including the number four, the one quarter, which
happens to be, for the information, the dimension
that we live in, three plus one.
And just to add to that, the plus one
is to do with the fact that these networks have
a fractal-like behavior.
That's a kind of tangential remark.
So here's others.
This is down at the intracellular level.
This is the intermiticondrial level, and so on.
So here's that growth again.
So the idea is we have this theory.
The claim is we have this wonderful theory
that, based on networks, the mathematics of networks,
and that from that, we can understand these scaling laws.
But also, if you like, we understand the network.
We can understand the structure of the network
within each of the organisms.
And you can use that to go back to this growth
and use this kind of idea that, if you eat, you metabolize,
that energy goes through the network, controls the network,
which maintains the cells that are there,
replaces ones that are dead, and grows new ones.
And then from that, you can mathematics it,
and that gives rise to this equation, which
actually invokes all of the properties of the network
and gives rise to these kinds of what we call sigmoidal,
meaning they stop growing curves.
So here's kind of the summary of this part.
We have these amazing nonlinear quarter power scaling laws.
They represent an economy of scale.
The one quarter is intimately related
to flows of energy in networks.
One thing I did not emphasize is the pace of life
systematically slows with size, so that, for example, heart
rates decrease systematically according
to these quarter power scaling laws.
The rate of diffusion of oxygen, say, across membranes,
decreases with size.
Organisms live longer systematically,
and so on and so forth.
Everything to do with time slows down the bigger you are.
Growth is sigmoidal, reaches a stable size of maturity.
And to emphasize again, the idea is
this is all based on the mathematics and properties
of networks.
So, and this is a sustainable system.
It's sustainable phenomenologically,
because it's been around a couple of billion years or more.
Part of that sustainability, I believe,
is actually invoked in the fact that things stop growing.
They stabilize, and most organisms, not all,
and we can discuss this.
Most organisms spend most of their mature life
in a stable size configuration.
Not all, and there are exceptions,
and we can discuss that.
But this leads to a sustainable, resilient system.
And the question is, oh, I'm sorry, yes.
So this is the Motley crew that I work with,
some are biologists, some physicists, some chemists.
But I then took the work over into social organizations,
and there's another Motley crew, that the top guys did
all the work.
All the guys at the bottom are famous
and did none of the work.
And the guys in the middle started off with me
and then moved on to other things.
OK, so here's the question, the first question,
about whether cities and companies are biological.
The first thing is, do they scale?
So what we said before was that whales live in the ocean,
and elephants have trunks, and giraffes long necks,
and we stand on two feet, and mice scurry around.
But in fact, at the kind of 85% level,
then scaled versions of one another
in this nonlinear, quarter-power fashion,
this mathematical fashion.
They're scaled versions of one another.
Is that true of cities?
And is it a kind of universal scaling,
as it is in biology?
So are cities scaled versions of one another?
Is New York a scaled up San Francisco,
which is a scaled up Madison, which is a scaled up Santa Fe?
Even though they look completely different?
Well, you can only answer that.
I mean, first sight, it's hard to believe.
Every city feels so unique.
But of course, you can only answer that by looking at data.
But one of the reasons you might think
there are scaling phenomena, there
are these kind of generic universal similarities,
is because cities are indeed networks.
I mean, there's the obvious networks
of roads and electrical lines and all the rest of it,
like this, transportation systems.
But more importantly, there's this network, which never
occurs, essentially, in biology.
It is the network of us talking to one another.
It's us, social networks, that is unique.
It's only been around on this planet for maybe 10,000 years.
Maybe in the universe, for all we know, for 10,000 years.
But certainly, in our solar system, this is it.
It's new.
And it's this.
This is just people talking to one another,
how they interact with one another.
So whoops, I seem to have lost the slide.
It doesn't matter.
So I use this slide.
What is the city but the people?
Indeed, the city is not the buildings and the roads
and all these other stuff.
It's us.
We are the city.
And that stuff is a manifestation
of the interactions between us.
And that's something that is outside of biology
but is integral to biology because it's driven by biology
and it's driven in large part by energy.
And I'm going to talk about that.
So the other part of the network is not just
that we interact with each other but we cluster.
So I'm going to not say much more about that
but go straight to the data and ask the question about scaling.
So this is a graph plotted in the same way
as those biological graphs were.
But this is a mundane one, the number of petrol stations.
I was working with European colleagues,
number of gas stations in a city as a function of its size
in various countries.
And you can see there's pretty good evidence of scaling.
It's again, there's a very simple line on this plot
plotted this way, very much like biology.
And like biology, this would be linear
so that you don't, when you double the size of a city,
you don't need twice as many gas stations.
In fact, what you find from this,
you only need about 85% more gas stations.
The slope of this line is not three quarters
as it is in biology, it's about 0.85, it turns out.
Most importantly though is that they're pretty much the same.
The slopes of these are the same.
The same economy of scale occurs
in all these European countries
but it occurs in Colombia.
It occurs in Chile, it occurs in China.
Anywhere you look, across the globe,
you get the same scaling and if you look
at any infrastructural quantity that you can measure,
you get the same scaling as this.
There's a consistent, always roughly 15% saving
every time you double, okay?
Okay, 10.
Good, perfect.
So this is kind of a mundane quantity
but here's, and that's like biology.
Looks just like biology except it's 0.85
but this is something that doesn't exist in biology.
Wages, you lot, super creative people
and you ask how do those scale
with the size of the city and here they are.
This is wages at the top and this is super creative,
so-called super creative by a man named Richard Florida
and what you see is there's more fluctuations in the data
but there's pretty good evidence of scaling
but most importantly, the scaling is different
than in biology.
The slope of these are bigger than one
rather than less than one and this is critical.
Namely, the slope of these you see is roughly about 1.15
so that what that says is that if you double the size
instead of needing less per capita,
you have more per capita
and I will come back to this in a moment.
So here's wages, super creative,
here's patents, this is some prude measure
of the innovation of a city.
The slope of this is also about 1.15,
this is the crime in Japan, so a little bit bigger, 1.15,
this is police, tax receipts, construction,
all about 1.15 and there they are all plotted
on one another, just a few of them
to show a universality of income, GDP, crime and patents,
very different things but they all scale in the same way,
there's quite a lot of fluctuations
and the slope of that is roughly 1.15
and what is, we believe that underlying this
the universality of social networks
of the way we interact with each other
is a kind of universal phenomenon
whether you're in China, Japan, Columbia,
the United States, anywhere,
the fundamentals of the social interaction is universal
and that is what is being manifested
in these scaling laws, these scaling laws
are for multiple socioeconomic quantities
anywhere in the world, we've looked at data
in Europe, the United States, China, Japan,
Latin America and so forth.
What is interesting to substantiate that
is this graph which is very recent data
which is the number of cell phone people,
none of the people you call on your phone
on the average as a function of city size.
So this is a kind of way of tapping in
to the network, the social network
and if this theoretical framework
of the mathematics of that social network
is the right one, the slope of this should be
about the same as these other networks
and indeed we could have plotted this on top of this
and it would have fit right on top of it.
So this is the number of people you talk to
on the average as a function of your city size, okay.
So I'm gonna miss this
and that's what I said a moment ago
and here's kind of the summary of this,
the good, the bad and the ugly.
If you double the size of a city
or if you look at a city that's twice as big
as another city, then systematically across the globe
and you double the size, you can go from 50,000
to 100,000 or 5,000,000 to 10,000,000
doesn't matter where you begin, just double the size,
systematically income, wealth, patents, colleges,
creative people, police, crime, AIDS, flu,
all of these things, the good, bad and the ugly
all go up together to the same degree
and at the same time, you save about 15%
on the infrastructure.
Big cities are good and the bigger ones are better still
both at the collective level,
they save on infrastructure per capita,
I had a graph which I flipped through,
they save on carbon footprint per capita
and at the individual level,
everybody is attracted to cities
by the first lot of those income, wealth,
number of patents, colleges and the general buzz of city
and ignore the other bad things,
the fact that they're coming along with it,
handing glove as more crime, disease and so forth, okay.
So, the network dynamics is the one
that dominates this again
and the network dynamics has the following
interesting phenomenon that if it's sublinear scaling,
then we have this pace of life slowing with size
that I mentioned, but if it's super linear,
bigger than one that we see in socioeconomic systems
in cities and are driven by the social networks,
then the theory tells you the pace of life
systematically increases with size
and so the pace of life in New York
is systematically faster than it is in Madison,
which is systematically faster than it is in Espanola,
which is a tiny town here, Santa Fe, in a systematic way
and here's some whimsical data to show you that,
we've looked at many things,
on the left is some data on heart rate versus body size,
the one on the right is walking speed,
show you walking speed,
there's people have actually measured walking speed,
perfect and you can see it's systematically rising
and it's in reasonably good agreement with the data,
but that, you know, why, because walking actually,
walking in a city is a social phenomenon, okay.
So, I'm gonna miss this out, I think.
So, this is kind of a summary
and I'm gonna finish off in the last few minutes
with the last part of this.
So, unlike biology, super linear scaling,
socioeconomic, which is to do with wealth creation
and innovation and ideas, dominates,
and so you get this kind of 15% rule,
which I'm not gonna talk about its origins here,
that also leads to a systematic increase
in the pace of life and the last thing
I'm gonna talk about, which is very satisfactory,
is that if this is true, which it is,
and it comes from these networks,
then I'm gonna talk about growth
and the idea of open-ended growth following from this
because we're gonna use the same kind of growth equation
that, again, based on energy equivalent
of the flow of energy through these systems
leading to maintenance and growth,
and that's what we had before for us,
the sublinear scaling leading to bounded growth
and if it's super linear scaling,
there's a cartoon on the left,
this leads to actually faster than exponential growth.
And that's very satisfying, that's great,
because that's what we see
and that's what we apparently love
or have loved for the last couple of hundred years
and that's great.
However, it has, if you believe the theory,
this has a fatal flaw
and the fatal flaw is denoted by this line
and it's called in the technical language
a finite time singularity
and to put it in very simple language,
what it says is that in some finite time,
this damn growth curve will go to infinite size
and that's obviously impossible.
So this is kind of a Malthusian argument,
namely at some stage,
you're gonna run out of whatever it is
that's keeping the system alive,
the resources, the energy, whatever it is
and the theory tells you what happens,
it says as you go through this so-called singularity,
you stagnate and collapse.
That's terrible and we need to avoid that
and we have avoided it
and this is how we avoid it.
We avoid it for the very reason
that Malthus and Paul Ehrlich were rejected,
that is they did not take into account
the fact that we innovate ourselves out of these problems.
So I wanna finish on this note.
So here's the situation.
This is you start at some point and you start growing
and you would hit this singularity and collapse.
So somewhere along here,
you better change something
because this growth was done in the paradigm
of whatever the major innovation is.
It could be the discovery of iron,
could be the discovery of coal, could be oil,
it could be the invention of computers,
the invention of IT,
that's something major that has a kind of paradigm shift
and changes everything.
So this suggests that the way out of this dilemma
of collapse is that you innovate somewhere here
and you start over again.
You reset the clock and then you can go on merrily
and of course you're gonna hit
another finite time singularity and collapse
unless you innovate again.
So you have to keep innovating.
So there's a kind of theorem if you like
that if you want to continue to have open-ended growth,
you have to have cycles of innovation.
Well, people have been saying things like that
for a long time.
Here's the difference going back to what we said.
As you grow and you get bigger, the pace of life increases.
So first of all, the pace of life is increasing.
Second thing is it turns out the theory says,
yes, you can do this,
but the time to go from here to here necessarily
has to be and systematically shorter
than the time from here to here.
So that you can innovate,
you can have these cycles of innovation,
but they must come quicker and quicker.
So the image is that we're on this treadmill
that is going faster and faster,
which is difficult to begin with.
But at some stage you've got to jump from that treadmill
onto another treadmill that's going even faster.
And then very soon you've got to jump onto another one
and you've got to kind of keep doing this.
So you have this kind of double acceleration
and the question is,
do you suffer a kind of global heart attack from that?
So is this sustainable?
Obviously not, ultimately.
And here's, this is not mine at all.
This is someone I don't know who he is, but he did it
and he showed, you know, it was great.
Oh, this is something I saw in an English newspaper
a week ago, which I thought illustrated the point
a little bit.
So here's something, some of you may have heard
of the idea of singularity from this,
what I consider a little bit loony work of Ray Kurzweil.
I think this is loony,
but he did some wonderful things of collecting data.
I don't agree with a lot of this,
but what he's plotted here is that
here's the paradigm shift.
That is, how long it took to create each one
of these paradigms versus how long ago it happened.
Okay, so, and what you see is it takes shorter and shorter
times to make these shifts
and it's happening faster and faster.
And he drew this, he got them,
there's all kinds of people who've done things like this.
I'm gonna finish up.
And whoops.
And interestingly enough, that straight line,
if you take this theoretical framework
that I just told you about,
this continuous innovation and jumping
from one treadmill to another,
it predicts almost exactly that orange line.
So that's data kind of supporting it.
So I'm gonna finish with that
and I'm gonna finish with one last image,
which is this, just to give you a sense of things
in terms of energy, our metabolic rate,
I didn't point that out on the graph.
You remember that graph of metabolic rate?
Our metabolic rate in watts is about 90 watts,
a little bit less women versus men,
but roughly it's about 90 watts.
We're a light bulb.
One of the bloody light bulbs is equivalent to one of us.
So turning a light bulb off,
it's like your mother turning you.
If you turn it off, you help the starving people
in Sudan or somewhere.
So it's ridiculous having all these lights on, frankly.
They're us.
We are extraordinarily efficient.
That 1,800, 2,000 food calories a day
is unbelievably efficient.
May seem like a lot of food, but it's just a light bulb.
However, and incidentally,
that metabolic rate is the metabolic rate
we should have for a mammal of our size.
That's what we should have, okay?
And if you add in activity, hunting and gathering,
which is the way we evolve or versions thereof,
that number changes from 100 to about 250,
the amount of energy we do to hunt and gather and so on.
And that also scales the active metabolic rate for mammals.
So that's what we, quote, should have.
Then we started talking to one another.
We discovered economies of scale to form communities,
and then we started to innovate.
And once we innovated,
we created all of this around us,
all this wonderful quality of life and standard of living
that we'd like to have for everybody.
And we can ask, what is our real metabolic rate?
What is our social metabolic rate
of having cars and lights and buildings
and all the rest of the stuff?
That number goes from about 90 watts to 11,000 watts.
And you can turn it around,
as has been done on this graph as I did here,
and ask, how big is it?
What big an animal are we?
This is about a dozen elephants,
each one of us in this room.
And there are seven billion people of us on this planet
who all want to be like us,
and there's three billion more coming in the next 30, 40 years,
and they all want to be like us using 11,000 watts.
So this is an enormous problem,
and I cannot answer the question,
what is the future and what does it bring?
But I can say that I'm a pessimist.
So I'll finish on that.
Oh.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
