So, of course, it's a great pleasure to introduce my colleague today, Eric Smith.
Partly because he's not just a colleague, he's a friend of mine, and he's a collaborator at the Institute.
Tonight's lecture, as you know, is on the topic of life, the inevitability of life,
and its origins in relation to geochemistry.
Now, one of the unfortunate tendencies of the human mind is to think categorically,
to think in terms of dichotomies, living, non-living, conscious, not conscious, good and evil.
But, of course, the world is not categorical, it's more continuous.
And, of course, this tendency to categorise extends to institutions, departments, physics departments,
biology departments, literature departments, architecture departments.
And for those of you who've been coming to these public lectures, you will know that the Santa Fe Institute often stands in opposition
to a rather simple-minded categorisation of the world, both institutional, intellectual and metaphysical.
Now, the topic of life, of course, derives some of its charge from the sort of categorical,
dichotomous opposition it stands in relation to the inanimate world, to non-life.
And I want you to read you a quick quote from Mary Shelley's Frankenstein.
This is a preface that she wrote to the book in 1818.
Many and long were the conversations between Lord Byron and Shelley, to which I was a devout but nearly silent listener.
So, presumably, she couldn't get a word in.
During one of these, various philosophical doctrines were discussed and, among others, the nature of the principle of life.
And whether there was any possibility or probability of its ever being discovered and communicated, perhaps a corpse would be reanimated,
Galvanism had given a token of such things.
Galvanim, of course, being the application of current to muscles and their subsequent contraction.
And, of course, there are other stories like that of the Gollum.
The Gollum is mentioned in the Talmud, where Adam, in fact, was first a Gollum made from dust,
and the famous Gollum, of course, of Prague, the 16th-century Rabbi Low,
who constructed a creature to work on the Sabbath out of the mud of the banks of the River Volta in Prague.
And, of course, more recently, computer viruses, which some people think are alive.
Now, all of these narratives, Frankenstein, viruses, and the Gollum, life springs from physical and chemical processes.
It doesn't spring from existing life.
It's not like birth, where living things spawn living things.
These are non-living things, spawning living things.
At some point in the history of the earth, presumably there was no biology,
and some disposition of chemistry and physics gave rise to biology and the subsequent evolution of life.
And these are the things that Eric's going to talk about.
Now, Eric has done his fair share of raising disciplinary boundaries.
He was an undergrad at Caltech, where he did his degree in mathematics and physics.
He was then a post-graduate student in Austin, Texas, where he worked in string theory and quantum gravity.
And then he was a post-doc at Texas and then at Los Anamos before coming to the Santa Fe Institute.
His interests include the emergence of life that he'll talk about today, but they're not restricted to the emergence of life.
He's also interested in the correspondences between economic processes, physical processes, and living processes, biological ones,
and also the connections between energy, information, and computation.
So in tonight's lecture, Eric will ask whether, contrary I think to our intuitions, life might not be inevitable in the universe rather than rare.
Eric.
Thank you all for coming. David, thank you.
Wonderful introduction. It sets just exactly the right tone.
Because in a subject where there has been too much oversimplification and too much soundbite reporting,
I want to try to give you some sense of the richness and the beauty of the picture that comes up if we ask about the position of life on Earth.
So let me stop this thing.
And...
Good.
So tonight I get to tell you some facts or some new ideas about the emergence of life on Earth
that I think will change what many of us have been told about whether we should think that life on Earth is surprising or inevitable
and how we should ask questions like this.
At the same time as answering this question, it should change our understanding of the position of the biosphere within the geological world
and several important aspects of our position as people or as animals within the biosphere.
So there are many different messages that all sort of inform each other.
I want to set us tonight the task of answering four questions.
First one, why is there life on Earth at all as opposed to nothing or as opposed to an empty rocky planet?
How and where did it originate? Sort of obvious questions of mechanism.
Why has life persisted?
This is important because I think if we have a sensible understanding of how life emerged,
that must also make it sensible that life has stayed because the things that cause it to persist are the same things that caused it to emerge in the first place.
So the questions must be asked and answered sensibly together.
And then, last of all, does the biosphere contain relics of emergence so that by looking at what life is today,
we have a window that's informative about how it came into existence?
Now, before I can address any of these sort of forward-looking questions,
I have to address a question that has been a problem in this topic,
which is whether science can say anything about these problems at all.
And of course, since I'm here on behalf of the Institute talking to you about science,
you would think that this is a foregone answer,
but if we poll some influential 20th century scientists and particular biologists,
the returns we get are a little bit surprising.
So let me start with Stephen Jay Gould.
I actually chose my talk title tonight as a response to Gould's very wonderful little book called Wonderful Life.
Many of you will probably have read it, and it had a big influence on me with my first exposures to biology,
and it's a really important work of this century.
Gould chose the title for his book on the basis of Frank Capra's 1946 movie, It's a Wonderful Life,
because he felt that the movie told exactly the story he wanted to tell.
It's a story that an individual's actions can have permanent and important consequences.
And Gould's message about biology was that for the first time in science,
things that seem to be accidental can have consequences that could last forever.
So, of course, being Gould and fighting the last war against oversimplification,
he states things in the strongest possible terms.
Any replay of the tape would lead evolution down a pathway radically different from the road actually taken.
Now, if you take this at face value or in the context of the book,
it makes it sound like accidents are all that matters,
which kind of leaves us wondering what then is the role for science,
not the same as in the other sciences maybe.
Gould, of course, worked with things that are big enough to see without a microscope and it can leave fossils.
Let's go to somebody who works with things that are smaller.
This is Jacques Monot, who, the year I was born in 1965,
won a Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine for his work on the regulation of cell machinery from the gene.
Monot wrote a lasting influential book called Chance and Necessity.
His concern was one that we've heard many times,
a wish that people not imprint human notions of purpose on biological descriptions of how machinery works.
And he was interested in arguing against two things in particular.
The two ways people tend to imprint purpose.
One, vitalism would have been a claim that when matter becomes part of a living thing,
it's no longer the same as other matter and we can't understand it.
The other, animism, which says, well, it's all matter, but it all has purpose from the beginning.
I think Monot's point in arguing this was to try to bring biology closer together to the other sciences
and the way they're understood.
But, of course, Monot was primarily a guy who explains how machinery works
and how machinery works doesn't necessarily provide a good explanation of why it's there at all or how it got there.
And so, faced with this difficulty, he makes a statement that if anything is even stronger than Gould's.
He says, the biosphere does not contain a predictable class of objects or of events,
but constitutes a particular occurrence, compatible indeed with first principles,
but not dedusible from those principles and essentially unpredictable.
So he starts out trying to bring biology together with the other sciences
and with this sort of encapsulating statement, if anything, it makes biology seem even more remote from the other sciences
and leaves us wondering what can we say.
But the granddaddy of them all, as far as strong statements, is Francis Crick.
Crick, together with Jim Watson, discovered the double helix structure of DNA
and first realized that this was the molecule that could be responsible for heredity in the way it works.
And Crick takes this sort of accidentalist viewpoint of Gould and Monot
all the way back to the beginning by associating the emergence of life
with the emergence of something like DNA and heredity.
So early, you see him here, he's looking sort of appropriately like a sorcerer,
presumably lecturing on the structure of the molecule that's the key to life itself.
And I think a lot of people have tried to think of DNA in those terms
and I'm going to try to push back a little against that tonight.
But he refers to the emergence of life as a happy accident
and a little bit later goes on to say, the origin of life appears at the moment to be almost a miracle.
So many are the conditions which would have to have been satisfied to get it going.
Now, if there's one thing we know science does not claim to be able to talk about, it's miracles,
so while this is not necessarily a logical impossibility,
it seems like a very strange point of view for a scientist to be putting forward as a scientific conclusion
because it amounts essentially to throwing up one's hands and saying,
oh, we can't say anything about that part.
So if there is ambiguity in the public's understanding of what science has to say about the emergence of life,
I think it would not be blamed on the public.
Maybe we should start by looking at the things scientists have said.
But if there's ambiguity, it should be leading us to ask three important questions.
As one of my favorite political commentators says, what were they thinking?
Specifically, what aspect of biology are these people looking at
that would cause them to draw such seemingly odd conclusions?
For us, what's important is, is this really science?
Is this the nature of life that they're talking about,
or is it actually a nature of their point of view which might be narrow and might have left things out?
Because if it is just a prejudice that comes from not having looked at everything
and we can broaden our perspective a little bit,
maybe we can find that from a bigger perspective there's a story that's not all about accident
and that's truer to the nature of life, not necessarily to the history of science.
So that's what the rest of tonight is supposed to be about.
So what were they thinking?
Most of us who have seen anything about the history of life
have seen a picture something like this.
We see many pictures of trees of life.
Let me very briefly tell you what this is in case it's not familiar.
Every name here at the end, elegant things like methanosarsina and entoamibi,
these are big groups of organisms.
The tree is basically much too small for me to be able to show individual organisms.
And as we go down any of these lines,
what you're seeing is the history that led up to the organism as it is today.
So when you see then two lines that become one line in the past,
the idea is that two things that are today different once had an ancestor that was a single thing.
So one could easily talk for days about just this tree.
There's so much interesting to know about it.
I'll mention only a few things.
One, this is a representation of data that says that everything we know about in the earth is related to everything else.
And as far as we can tell, everything that's around today came at some point from one single form
that was a bottleneck from which the survivors descended.
Now, to give you a sense of scale, everything that you can see without a microscope
is these three little branches here, the plants, animals, and the fungi.
So the rest of what is alive in the world is individual cells.
Now, I couldn't make this dot small enough to only cover all of human history,
so it's about ten times too big for that.
And it's kind of a useful thing to give us a sense of what part people are in the natural world.
And not only scientifically, but also as human beings.
But the thing that I really want to point out to you about trees that's important is
that the only time similarities, and that's what these trees are, I should mention,
the trees are trees of family resemblances.
You see a trait that's into things and not anywhere else.
You infer that those two things, that the trait came from a time when those two things were once a single population of organisms.
Now, the only way having the same trait implies that you're related to the others that have the trait
is if that is infinitely accidental.
So this is the reason you can't use skin darkness to figure out who's related to whom.
Because as soon as you move toward the equator, you have to get darker to survive.
You move away from the equator, you have to get lighter to survive.
So these things can change so fast, and they can change in so many ways
that they're not good guides to what is related to what.
So the only time family resemblances imply a tree is when the change along these branches
is in characters that are so rare that it's amazing they ever occurred,
and if they're lost, they're gone forever.
So the reason Gould sees accident is that Gould's life was understanding the structure and the relations of this tree,
which is a thing that emphasizes the accidental parts of life.
But we still have to understand why anything about life is so accidental
that it would make a tree, that the family relations would be that.
And to understand that, we have to go down to the molecular level.
So this is now the world of Cric and Mono.
What Cric discovered with the double helix structure of DNA
was that you have a positive and a negative of the same information,
which can be split and copied without being used up,
and that's how changes can be passed on from a mother to a daughter
when in the case of cells the mother divides.
Now at the same time, either the positive or the negative can be used
as a source of instructions to control the cell,
and that's how the hereditary information that's passed down is expressed in us.
But the thing that's important here is this is like a company
whose commander only gives commands and never listens to feedback.
The only way you know whether they were good ideas or not
is whether the company lives or dies.
This is what implies accident because it says that it's only the accidental changes
in the course of living or in the course of dividing
that cause organisms to gradually change,
and then those changes are inherited,
and the only thing that determines what we see today
is which changes lived and which ones didn't.
This is Darwin's idea,
and of course what Cric and Watson recognized
is that this is the molecular basis
that gives substance to Darwin's empirical observations.
But I'll point out to you here,
this is the description of life at the level of control and inheritance.
Of course, if we have a moment of common sense,
we remember that there's more to life than control.
What I want to do is now broaden the picture,
ask what else is in life,
and then start to dig down in a different area that maybe is more fruitful.
What I want to show you here,
life is not just one thing.
It's not just one level of structure or just one kind of organization.
It's many things and they're all different and they all work together.
Just to give you a lay of the land,
I'll review what some of them are,
and then I'll tell you which ones I want to focus on.
First thing, life lives in the non-living world of rocks in the atmosphere.
In the non-living world, your carbon comes in the form of carbon dioxide molecules mostly.
That's what these little stunted butterflies are supposed to be,
pictures of carbon dioxide.
The first thing life has to do is make carbon-carbon bonds,
which it does by making a certain set of small molecules.
There are many of these about 250 and they're not very big,
between 5 and 20 carbon atoms.
This is a whole structure of chemistry that's called core metabolism,
and that'll be the hero of our story tonight.
But for a moment, let me go on.
You make little atoms one carbon at a time.
When you make big atoms, you do something different.
You stitch the little atoms together like beads on a necklace.
This is where you get the big molecules, the DNA and the proteins,
that can have tens or hundreds of thousands of atoms, in some cases even millions.
Of course, that's not all.
The big molecules have to be physically stuck together to make the structures of cells.
That's a different organizational problem.
Now, for some living things, that's as far as it goes,
your one cell and that's your life.
For others, you get many cells that group together to make a plant or an animal.
That's another problem of organization.
For most of us, we live in an ecosystem where we have relations to all the other organisms.
That's another problem of coordination and organization.
The ecosystems together on the earth feedback and change its basic geological chemistry.
All this is going on, these things are very different in their dynamics.
We shouldn't be thinking that one idea of control explains all of them.
The remarkable thing is, if we look at these things from the perspective of chance and necessity,
we find that in fact they lay at very different places.
The benchmark for what I'll call necessity is the chemistry of the rocks and the atmosphere and the oceans.
On any planet like the earth, it's going to be the same.
There's not much that's accidental to it.
It's very steady, we can predict what the minerals are and we understand it with our science.
At the opposite end of this is any individual species.
The fact that there should happen to have been a large flightless pigeon on Mauritius is an infinite accident.
The fact that it didn't survive unfortunately is the most likely thing.
This is Gould's world of contingency.
All the things that almost never were and never will be again.
Here, of course, they're variable.
They fluctuate like crazy.
This is Doug Irwin's lecture a few months ago on extinctions.
We have a hard time predicting them.
This is Gould, Mono, and Crick, their statements.
Here's what's neat.
Biology is not all piled up against the contingent end.
If I ask about the small molecules here,
these are almost as steady as the chemistry of the rocks.
The same set of about 250 of them is in every living thing in the world
and appears to have been the same for all of history, almost four billion years.
So it's like a feature of the geosphere.
DNA, well, chemically DNA has been around probably since fairly close to the beginning
and RNA even closer than that.
But when this contains instructions for how to make these chemicals,
the instructions can change all over the place.
The chemicals do not change and the pathways do not change.
So all of a sudden control is looking like maybe it's not the most important thing.
Maybe getting the answer is the important thing
and you have some freedom in how you do it with control.
Cells are fairly regular,
but there's a significant amount of variability in them over history.
And ecosystems, if I could have drawn them, should cover this entire span
because the accidents of how we live together in an ecosystem
are among the most fragile things that are parts of life.
And yet the chemistry of ecosystems, which is the chemistry of these molecules,
goes all the way back here to the oldest things we know.
So in fact, if we want to understand the predictable parts of life,
we should be looking at metabolism as the bridge between the rock chemistry
and the early stages of life and the part that we can predict.
But in order to do that, we need a science of metabolism
which is going to be different from the science of control.
So let me start back looking at the things that are alive again
and show you how you would think about their organisation in metabolic terms.
Turns out two questions will answer a huge fraction of what you need to know.
One is where you get your energy,
and the second is do you depend on other living things for your own survival?
And there are two choices to each.
So biochemistry 101 in 30 seconds.
All of life is driven by energetic electrons
and the only question about where you get your energy is where you get your electrons.
There turn out to be two choices.
There are molecules that release energy by giving electrons away
and the metabolisms that run on that energy are what I call reductive here.
And both of these are of that kind.
And I'll tell you what they are in a minute.
This little guy lives at almost the temperature of boiling water in volcanoes under the deep sea.
This is botulism, which when I was a kid was not a cosmetic,
it was a deadly poison that you tried not to get in your canned goods.
The other option besides reductive metabolisms are oxidative metabolisms
where the energy comes from pulling electrons to the environment.
Oxidative metabolisms are things like the blue-green algae that give the ocean its greenish colour
and everything most people think about life is down in this corner.
The animals, the plants, the fungi, everything big enough to see without a microscope.
Now here's the interesting thing.
The oxygen in the world that is the foundation for this way of life was produced by living things.
It was not always here.
So this whole way of life didn't exist at the beginning of the world
and didn't exist at significant complexity until quite late,
probably half of the age of the earth.
Now the other distinction we can make is whether or not you need anything else in the world.
There are organisms, both of these kinds,
which basically can do every chemical thing they need in a world with no other living thing.
What a life it must be, especially if you're just one cell,
you know, no communication, no competition,
but they can do what none of the rest of us can do.
These guys are called autotrophs from the Greek roots meaning self-feeding.
The alternative to being an autotroph is to be a heterotroph.
You have to live in an ecology because your own chemistry is incomplete
and you have to have the ecology providing things for you.
And we, of course, are the ultimate heterotrophs.
We need everything.
But in fact, what I did here was a little bit of a sleight of hand.
I did the thing people always do.
I looked at individual species and individual organisms.
That wasn't the right thing to do.
It turns out to be a distraction.
Because if I look at the ecosystem level,
the whole ecology together, things become even simpler.
By definition, every ecology, because it's self-contained,
has to do all of its own chemistry.
So every ecology is autotrophic.
The remarkable thing that you get from studying biochemistry
is the knowledge that other than this division,
there's essentially no variability at the ecosystem level
in the chemistry of life, which means that...
I mean, this is the Tolstoy quote.
All autotrophic ecosystems are essentially alike,
but every heterotrophic organism is heterotrophic in its own way.
If you are a reductive ecology, like one of these sulfur swamps
that you get in volcanic hot springs,
then you're living off of electrons that come from the geochemical reactions.
If you're an oxidative ecology, there's a little bit more variability.
You're living ultimately off of energy that comes from sunlight
and the ability to produce oxygen.
But here's the more remarkable thing.
Chemically, these things look like opposites.
Either the environment gives you electrons where it pulls them in.
It turns out that in the structure of life,
this is not just an opposition, it's a hierarchy.
Because the universal chemistry that is in these guys
is a subset of what's in these guys.
Oxidative life is reductive life wrapped up in a spacesuit
that's able to capture sunlight.
So what that means is that even though on the earth today
there are environments with almost no oxygen
down in the deep seas around volcanoes
and environments with locks of oxygen,
like up here where we live,
you can also look at this as a picture back in time.
Because back at the very beginning,
when there was not yet life to have made oxygen,
the only kind of life there was was the reductive life.
And in these very simple organisms,
basically building biomass is enough to be alive.
This may have happened as long as almost four billion years ago
within a couple hundred million years
of when the ocean stopped boiling off.
So it basically was a snap of a finger.
It happened as quickly as it could.
Probably somewhat later,
and this is the biggest uncertainty in the talk,
when this happened is unknown to a billion years or more.
But at some point organisms started to realize
that there was huge energy in sunlight if they could capture it.
And they started to couple that to building their core metabolism,
and they started producing oxygen.
Took a long time though for the oxygen to build up
and only when there was a lot did you start getting the things
we think about as life, complex cell forms,
multi-cell organisms, all that stuff.
Now here's the striking thing.
Oxygen, when it first was introduced, was a waste product.
It was a worst poison for life
than anything any of us has ever imagined.
And yet this chemistry did not end.
It was preserved and it has been preserved all the way up to the present.
So.
I've just thrown a huge amount of stuff at you in five slides.
I think maybe that's appropriate because life is complicated.
And we said that if we want to avoid the mistakes of the past,
we don't want to oversimplify by ignoring things at the beginning.
We want to look at it all,
and then we want to see what looks like it doesn't depend on chance,
and we want to let universality and stability be our guide.
So we've been able to boil the story down
to focusing on the core molecules of biochemistry
and what we use to build our own biomass.
So at this point, we're still in the middle of a treasure hunt.
We think we know what we're after, but there hasn't been an aha.
That's for the next slide.
But here's the cool thing.
If you were to watch a movie,
and one of the characters were to open up a treasure map
that has five arrows pointing to someplace saying,
here it is, this is it,
you would say, okay, that's not a very subtle movie.
What kind of a character needs that?
What I'm about to show you is that the map of biochemistry
is a treasure map with five arrows pointing to here it is,
and it's been known since the 1960s.
But people only started to recognize what they were seeing
within about the last 25 years.
So this is what is universal about the way we build all of our biomolecules.
Biochemistry itself is not super complicated.
If you ask what we are made of, we're made of five classes of things,
and we know all of them because we have to eat them.
Because you remember I said we're metabolically incomplete.
So we need the fatty acids because otherwise we can't make cells.
That's your olive oil.
We need the amino acids, which we know from meringue and marshmallow
and things like that.
That's the structure and the enzymes and all that good stuff.
We need sugars.
Turns out they're probably more important for structure
than they are for energy storage, but we like them for the other thing.
Very, very important set of about 20 to 30 little molecules
which do all of our sort of super fine chemistry.
Like the chlorophyll that allows plants to capture sunlight
or the heme that allows us to do respiration.
And then of course there are the nucleic acids, the molecules of heredity.
Now there are 250 or 300 basic molecules that these are built up from.
But here is the kicker.
Every molecule in every living thing in all the world for all time
has been synthesized from one of these 11 molecules in this cycle.
Now when we were in high school a lot of us were taught about the Krebs cycle.
And of course there was the million dollar, billion dollar point here
which was ignored and something of almost no importance that we were told.
We were told that the Krebs cycle is important because we use it to break down sugars to get energy.
The Krebs cycle is important because everything in the entire history of life
has used it as the starting point to build every biomolecule.
No exceptions.
We came along 2.5 billion, well single cells came along 2.5 billion years later
and used it to get energy.
But we're borrowers in that sense.
So it may be obvious now that I think this is where life started
but now that we have this chemical framework I can also tell you why
I think life had to start this way.
Which is a question that we can ask in chemistry in a way that we could not before.
So in biology the struggle has always been when you think in terms of control
how do you explain why something is there?
Because when we think why is something there we always think what is it good for?
Well what is it good for is a purpose based question
and it's not clear that it came up because it was good for anything.
It came up for a different reason.
In chemistry we're not so susceptible to that error
because in chemistry we're used to saying what was it getting away from?
So a new way to ask about why life emerged is to say what was wrong with a non-living earth?
What was so wrong that could have driven it to have to change
and why was that change in the direction that led toward life?
And that's the thing that I think we can answer
or that we can at least pose good questions to that are testable in the laboratory.
So that's what I'll tell you about in what's left.
Turns out what we appeal to for understanding is the thing that's the most familiar of all.
If you put enough stress on something it will break.
And it turns out that the essential math and also the essential intuition I care about
for the origin of life is the intuition of breakdown.
Now the thing that might be non or sort of counterintuitive
if you've been wondering about the origin of life
you don't normally think of the origin of life as the breaking of a lifeless earth.
So the two things that I have to show you is there's more than one way for things to break down
and then second sometimes the process of breakdown is a process of creating new structure
and creating accident where there was only formlessness before.
But you'll be surprised as familiar as crack propagation is to us
these other two facts about breakdown are equally familiar.
One of them we know all the time
because lightning of course is a breakdown of the atmosphere.
It's not a mechanical breakdown but instead it's an electrical breakdown.
The thing that we need if we want to understand why life emerged
is to understand where the stress came from
and why it results in one kind of breakdown instead of another.
So if you want to understand lightning you say
that storm systems pull charges apart between the clouds and the ground
and that creates an electrical stress for the charges to try to recombine.
The ordinary dry atmosphere which is the preferred configuration
can't do that transport but the creation of the plasma channel of the lightning bolt
can do that transport and that's what sustains the plasma channel.
Now we can't predict exactly the track it will take, that's contingent, that's accidental
but we can very well predict the chemistry of this plasma channel.
So the analogy here and it's better than an analogy, it's a scientific equivalence
is that our biochemistry is like the altered state that is the plasma channel
within the lightning bolt and it was driven into existence in something like the same way.
Now lightning is not an ideal example here because it's gone in a short time
and we don't think of it as lasting for very long
even though on the scale of the processes that make it it's plenty long lived.
But there are other examples.
Hurricanes are another kind of a breakdown of the atmosphere.
This is not a breakdown of the electrical structure of the atmosphere,
it's a breakdown of the thermal structure.
What I'm showing you here is a set of hurricane tracks
which you can see transporting heat out of the tropical oceans
and into the temperate and polar upper atmospheres.
This is what drives the hurricane system as of course people now understand
and appreciate in a way that they did in a little while back.
This is a channel that has the ability to pull in heat
in order to reinforce its own structure
and the wall storms of the hurricane are transporting that heat from the ocean to the upper atmosphere.
But in order to do that they have to break the smooth layered structure
that the atmospheric temperature usually has.
So if we want to understand the emergence of life, was it a chemical breakdown,
what we have to ask is where did that happen
and what was the stress that would have caused it to happen.
And now we're talking about stress in a chemical sense.
So my good friend and colleague Harold Morowitz,
who is much older than I, also has an infinite gift for words.
And he has recognized, that's why he's written something like eight or nine books
that are revered around the world and I recommend any of them to you.
But he's recognized that theories of the origin of life can be divided into two categories.
There are the heaven theories and the hell theories.
You can already guess which one I'll like.
But it turns out that this has a basis.
They're distinguished according to where the energy comes from
in the life forms that use it today.
The heaven theories are all of the theories
whose energy ultimately comes from sunlight or starlight.
The idea is that there's so much energy in this
that it can do the chemistry of forming carbon-carbon bonds.
So it can produce the small molecules.
This can happen on the surfaces of asteroids, which then fall on the earth.
It can happen in the ices of comets.
In some small amount, the sunlight drives the weather system
and a little bit of the energy from weather winds up in the lightning bolt
and that can do a little bit of chemistry.
This was what the Miller-Urey experiment showed
that was so exciting to people
and that got the origin of life started as a scientific question.
And all of these stories that have to do with this sort of sunlight-yielded chemistry
are the things that we associate with the primordial soup.
Now, this appealed to people when there was no other idea in town,
but there are a lot of problems with it.
Sunlight is a tremendous energy source,
but it's not easy to use because it tends to destroy things.
And so, in fact, it's much easier to understand the way sunlight is used today
if that happens somewhat later on when there was already life in place
with the complexity to capture it.
Another problem with the primordial soup is that you need to finish life
before the soup is done, so you're on the clock.
The idea is that, in the classical scenarios,
heaven deposits organic materials on the surface of the ocean
and accidental chemistry gives you a control mechanism
and then you have the keys to life itself, the DNA or whatever,
but then you have to build the whole life underneath of this
before you have used all of the soup.
So, that's unappealing.
The thing that, to me, is the biggest problem with these ideas
is that, in this chemistry,
there's no special place for the biochemistry we see,
and there's no special reason to exclude all of the things
that are not in our biochemistry.
So, it's not clear to me that this is very tightly coupled to who we are.
And since the whole point of exploring biochemistry
was that that was the thing to be explained,
I think we should expect a coupling.
And that's where the hell theory comes in.
This is the theory, particularly associated with hydrothermal vents.
These can be volcanoes, but they can be quieter things
that involve magma and water under the deep ocean.
There can be many different kinds.
You can have these guys which are alkaline
and which are full of carbon dioxide, but not too much metal.
These are called white smokers,
and they occur in not the hottest places.
These are about at the boiling temperature of water a little bit cooler.
These guys can be 600 degrees Fahrenheit
or 300 degrees Celsius, roughly,
and they thunder along at the bottom of the ocean.
They're black because they're full of metal and sulfur.
They're full of carbon dioxide. They're full of hydrogen.
In particular, they're full of all of the chemicals
that life needs to exist,
but they are not full of primordial soup.
And oddly enough, that turns out to be an advantage.
And I'll show you why in the next slide.
Oh, I should mention to you
that there are whole ecosystems that live down here.
The little grey guy that I told you can live all by itself
with no other living thing.
They live down here in this range,
and they do exactly the chemistry I'm going to tell you
I think was being done four billion years ago
before there was life.
If you want to understand what was wrong with a lifeless earth,
then you say what was the problem.
Here's the problem.
The geochemistry creates carbon dioxide,
and it creates hydrogen.
Now, hydrogen has electrons
that it can give to carbon or oxygen,
and if it were to give them,
so you put as many hydrogens as will fit around a carbon
to make methane,
you put as many hydrogens as will fit around an oxygen
to make water,
that is the most energy that's available from this system.
You look at this picture and you say,
well, how hard could it be?
Well, it turns out it's very hard.
It's harder than any non-living thing
can do at an appreciable rate,
but living things do it with superb efficiency.
So what life on earth is today doing,
among other things,
these geochemical processes
are generating all this energetic stuff,
but it would build up and build up and build up
in the absence of life.
Life consumes it, provides this downhill run
to lower energy molecules.
So the idea behind the lightning strike
is that this stress, when there was no life,
built up and built up
and created a lightning strike through chemistry
to make this possible.
But what does that have to do with biochemistry?
All I showed you was carbon dioxide and methane.
Here's a surprising thing that's a little different
than we're used to thinking of.
I told you that there are organisms that live
in these hydrogen environments,
the reducing environments that give electrons.
They're doing this chemistry
and they have essentially nothing more than biosynthesis.
Their energy capture is very limited.
It's much less than a tenth of what any of us
use up in the air-breathing world.
The surprising thing is that in order to get from here to here,
the best way is to go through the molecules of life.
So what this picture is, you can think of this
as being the chemical equivalent of a ball rolling down a hill
and it has the same mathematical meaning.
What I'm showing you here is the starting point
when no chemistry has been done,
the ending point when all of the energy has been extracted,
and across here is how far you've gone
in transferring those hydrogens.
It turns out that there are no ways through little molecules
to go from here to here that are as energy efficient and simple
as going through these molecules,
which are the ones in the cycle I showed you.
You don't need to worry about the names,
but if you want to know why is there sugar,
there's sugar because sugar is downhill from the stuff that makes sugar.
If you want to understand why there's oil, including petroleum,
it's because oil is on the way to methane
if you have enough hydrogen to make it.
And so what I'm telling you, the chemistry was doing here,
is exactly what these little guys are doing
at the base of that hydrothermal vent that I showed you.
Incidentally, if I had remembered to point it out on the tree,
you remember that some of the organisms seem to connect in
very, very close to the root.
Unlike us, we're kind of connected way out here in the leaves.
This is one of them.
This connects all the way down at the bottom.
Lives a few degrees below the boiling temperature of water.
Seems to have ancestors that could be at least 3 billion years old
before it has a common ancestry with anything else.
Does this simple chemistry is completely self-contained
and does nothing else?
So this is the kind of model we're looking at
for the chemistry of the origin of life.
Now, you shouldn't believe me yet,
even if you might believe me in a minute,
because I just told you that all of this chemistry is hard.
So where did any of this stuff come from if it's so hard to do?
And that's what's special about the cycle at the core of biochemistry
with all the arrows pointing to it.
Because that cycle is the chemical equivalent of the hurricane.
So here's the cycle again.
I didn't know how to show it to you
without making it sort of sleep inducing.
But this is actually the chemical diagram
showing where carbon dioxide's come in,
where hydrogen's come in, where waters are given off,
and so on, and we go round and round the cycle.
And we go around it in this picture the same way
as the hurricane goes around it.
By the way, if you have kids in school
and they come home telling you that the Krebs cycle
is the citric acid cycle,
tell them, wait till they grow up.
Because this thing is called by some people
the reverse citric acid cycle.
This is the real citric acid cycle.
This was here 4 billion years ago.
We run the reverse citric acid cycle.
That came along only when there was oxygen much later.
But the important thing about this cycle is this.
The chemistry of these molecules
is chemistry that's like flypaper.
It's suited to take in a carbon dioxide or a hydrogen
even if they couldn't react with each other.
And so as you go around the cycle,
the molecules get bigger and bigger
and bigger as they take in carbon.
And then when they get here, they split.
And you get two molecules where before you had one.
So now you can take in twice as much carbon.
And it splits again.
And now you can take in four times as much carbon.
So this is like compound interest.
Or like the chain reaction that was, of course,
made famous by Los Alamos some decades ago.
Or the hair commercial where she told two people
and so on and so on.
The thing that's important about these kinds of cycles is
that even if you have only a very rare event
to form one of these molecules,
if you have self-amplification,
that can cause all of your carbon
and all of your energy flow
to get sucked into one cycle.
Just like you never find two hurricanes
in exactly the same place,
because any one of them is pulling all of the local energy in
from the ocean where it is.
So that's pretty much the story.
I'm not going to tell you that all of it is fact,
that all of it's established,
but all of it is experimentally testable.
And there are several things that I think it allows us to think
that are different than have been thought before,
probably more common sense and maybe more useful.
Metabolism first, not control first.
Control is complicated if it had to come on a background of nothing
that would seem like almost a miracle,
but it doesn't exist on a background of almost nothing today.
It exists on a background of metabolism,
and metabolism is old.
Life arose and persists in order to enable metabolism.
This is the lightning strike argument.
Think about how different this is
than the way we usually think.
We usually think that metabolism exists in order to enable life.
That's the sort of purpose-oriented thinking.
In the chemical domain,
you get a completely different idea of what life even is.
Life is what can be built out of those 11 molecules
when you have this amplifying cycle
spewing them out from geochemistry.
We get, to me, the very pleasing idea
that the emergence of life was a form of collapse.
The important thing about this is
that things do not come up off of the floor
and rearrange themselves on the table.
So if the transition from a non-living to a living earth
was actually a collapse,
that enables us to understand why life has been so stable.
Species go extinct, ecosystems rearrange.
Life has never winked out.
It's been continuous all the way back,
and the chemistry has been invariant.
This is a sensible way to look at that.
Of course, most of all,
the biosphere is no longer separate from the geosphere,
not in our thinking, not in our science.
Geochemistry is, in some sense,
the core of what we are and have always been.
The rest of us as living things is built around it.
There's contingency that comes in later.
There's all kinds of room for accident,
but this accident comes in
once there's a significant amount of structure already in place.
Thank you, and it'll be good to talk.
APPLAUSE
The first question is,
why do we not find it spontaneously emerging
in the remote parts of the world?
If the absence of life in those remote parts of the world
is explained by competition with existing forms of life,
which is the more common explanation,
then why is it so hard in a laboratory
and of highly idealised conditions to synthesise life?
Cool. Yeah, good. All good.
So the answer to the first question
is a thing that even Darwin had already recognised,
that in some sense,
when you have very modern forms that are very sophisticated,
it's difficult for the things that gave rise to those modern forms
to be recreated.
So for instance,
I'm trying to think of something in the technological realm,
if there's some tremendous amount of effort
that's required to make the first digital computer,
and it's as big as this room and uses as much electricity as a city,
and then you have that thing sitting over there on the desk.
People would not be willing to go through the same effort
to do the same difficult thing again,
once the efficient things are already there.
So I should be careful.
What you said the first time seems to be exactly right,
that we have never found any place where the process
of the emergence of life is being repeated,
but the second thing,
we've never found any place in the earth
that doesn't have something living there.
So you drill down as deep as you can in an oil well,
and you'll find bacteria and archaea living down there.
You go up into arctic ices, they're there.
Up in the atmosphere, they're up there feeding off dust particles.
So in some sense, anywhere there's energy in the world,
something is already grazing on it.
And I think most people do not expect
any catastrophic surprises in that area.
They think that we don't see the emergence of life again,
because current life is so much more efficient.
But then the question about the lab
really is pertinent to what we do.
And so the interesting thing is that
not only is life complex, but the geological world is complex.
And so here's the best thing we can do in the lab.
There are probably three guys in the United States
who can do it, and I'm privileged to be sort of
on the doorstep of one of them asking for what he knows.
You can take a fantastically expensive machine
that took you most of your career to build.
You can put a little bit of chemistry into a gold capsule.
You can seal it.
You can compress it to 300 atmospheres
and heat it to 200 degrees.
And then you can take it out and very carefully open it
and find out what happened.
And if you don't have the chemistry exactly right,
you can start over.
So compare that to what was happening in the early earth.
In the early earth, the mantle was more fluid,
and so there probably were no lasting continents.
It was constantly fractured.
The moon was as big as a dinner plate in the sky,
and the tides were once every six hours
and probably two kilometers high.
The entire ocean probably got cycled
through these hydrothermal systems
on the order of once every 1,000 years,
whereas today it's more like once every 100,000 years.
And I told you that there were two of these systems today
that are sort of separate and sort of different
with their unrelated chemistry.
One is alkaline, one is acid, one has low metals,
one has high metals.
In the early earth, the entire upper crust
was probably fractured with the ocean
infecting through it.
And the chemistry at that time
could have been any mix of any of these things.
So if we want to understand and recreate correctly
in the lab this organic chemistry,
we have to understand what type of chemical environment
we're looking in.
And that turns out to be a really hard search problem.
Works better if you have the entire crust of the earth
than if you have a little gold capsule
that holds less than this much of my finger of a liquid.
But I am hoping that I will live to see these experiments done.
I should tell you that for the citric acid,
the Krebs cycle that I showed you,
George Cody and Carnegie Institution in Washington
has already gotten big arcs of this cycle to go
even with his little capsule.
And so the question is whether at the places
where things are not working,
we're missing something about the mineral chemistry.
And I think that that's probably the case
and that it will probably be cracked.
OK.
So here's the next one.
It's probably the question that is maybe of greatest interest
to the most people.
And that is where does the inevitability end, right?
So in your spectrum, you know,
it would be a sort of rather disappointing take-home message
of inevitable life was basically the inevitability
of a bunch of small molecules.
And so the question is,
is there some possibility of identifying other regularities
and other processes that would make
more sophisticated, more complex structures inevitable too?
So, for example, you know, we watched Star Trek
and we encountered bipedal self-conscious extraterrestrials.
Are we going to be forever disappointed
and only ever encounter, you know, the Krebs cycle?
Or is there something about the theory,
or some theory that might be related to it,
that would say that more complex structures
would be inevitable too?
Wonderful. Yep.
So, of course, this is in some ways a disingenuous question
because this is what David and I work on together.
And this is also what Jeffrey West at the Institute works on.
We think there are all kinds of things that are very lawful
and that can only happen in more or less the way they do
at all kinds of structures throughout life.
I'll tell you about a couple in our work,
but I'll tell you about a couple others that are obvious
that are just kind of common knowledge.
All fish look more or less like fish,
and that's because they live in water.
It's out that if you look at diatoms,
these little tiny glass-encased things that are one or a few cells,
they don't look like fish at all,
but that's because they live at low Reynolds number.
And if you're a fluid mechanic and you look at diatoms,
they actually look all like each other,
sort of like snowflakes look like each other.
So, in some sense, there are rules that make fish fish
and that make diatoms diatoms.
Now, I didn't tell you much about what goes on at the chemistry
above this very basic cycle,
but I think that we will be able to show
that maybe 14 or 15 of the 20 amino acids that we use
had to be either as they are or somewhere pretty close,
because it turns out that they are the easiest chemistry
to do from these carbon backbones.
We think that a lot of the regularity that's in our genetic code
turns out to have had a chemical origin in the era
before there were cells, before there was any coding,
and that that probably is predictable.
Of course, Geoffrey's work on allymetric scaling says,
if you want to become multicellular and you have to feed yourself,
there are limits on how you can do that,
and that's why you do not have flying elephants
or little hummingbirds that live 100 years.
And so there are lots of regularities,
and the lovely thing is, like the structures of life,
they are not all alike.
They're very different, and they each come at different scales,
and yet once you stitch them all together,
a lot of times there's kind of a skeleton of regularity
and there's sense to the variations and the accidents
that can live around them.
Those things and necessity are not things that are separated by a gulf.
They're things that are constantly sort of interleaved.
So is that?
Good, yes.
So why don't we take some questions now from the audience?
There's one here, yes.
Have any of the cornology that's been found in our explorations
of the moon and Mars?
No.
We haven't looked for them in Mars,
but here's a point that maybe I could have made better in the talk.
When I say that we are coupled to the geosphere,
we really are coupled to the energy of the geosphere,
because having carbon and having nitrogen or oxygen or phosphorus or sulphur
is not enough to give you life.
You have to have an energy source that forces it to exist,
and the moon is a very low energy place,
and today even Mars is a very low energy place.
The moons of Jupiter are not low energy places.
They may be chemically different places from the earth,
but it's kind of like Alice in Wonderland.
It takes all the running you can do just to stay in place.
You'll have to run a lot harder than that to get anywhere.
It's taken all we can do to understand the chemistry that's in the life we know.
If the chemistry of the planet or the moon is different on Europa or on Titan,
it may turn out to be an equally hard problem where we don't have clues
to understand what we should look for there.
But if you can find me a planet whose rocks are like the earth,
and it comes from a second-generation star,
it's about at the same distance,
I will certainly go there looking for vinegar,
and looking for malic acid and citric acid,
and all these other good things that are even familiar.
They're so common.
Yeah, there's a question back there.
You may have answered this in his second question,
but in your tree of life,
everything went down in this root of the tree.
It's my understanding, and I'm not in this field,
that even in that trunk of the tree,
biologists presume that there's DNA, there's control,
even in our trunk.
So it must have happened very early,
as what you're saying, not as early as this,
but is DNA still in other places?
If we do find the predacypal on another planet,
are we going to find DNA on that planet?
I don't know about DNA.
I would bet more than 50 cents on RNA.
Depending on how many trillion dollars it costs us to go there,
then there's a question how much you would bet on RNA.
You have it exactly right,
and you raise two really important points,
because the oldest thing you can trace with a family tree
is a thing that has a structure of control.
So anything that happens before the structure of control,
even if it had a long time to happen,
the family tree will not enable you to know about,
because there was nothing to preserve those family resemblances.
Now, interesting thing,
DNA is really good for what it does,
and RNA is not so good for the things DNA does,
and there's a lot of chemical sense in DNA.
And it's interesting, it turns out that the sugar in DNA
is not very hard for an organic chemist to make
from some of the chemicals that I showed you there,
but that's not the way it's made in any living thing.
In every living thing, it's made from the sugar in RNA
via a much more complicated, difficult reaction.
I think what that tells us is that RNA was certainly there,
whether it was there a little before,
or a little after there were cells,
is a hard problem to be worked out,
and I would believe either one of those with a good argument.
DNA may have come, interesting possibility,
on the tree DNA could have come after the first branching.
There are some people who believe it did,
because the molecules that make, that copy DNA,
look to have been independently derived twice.
So it could be that, at the root,
there was actually an RNA organism,
and DNA was discovered for its value twice.
There's a question here.
Yeah.
My main recollection of the prep cycle
is that there are quite a few enzymes that they can go.
What about that?
That's the other wonderful part of the story
that, if I had been a chemist, I would have told you
instead of the story I told you today.
The enzymes in modern cells are so efficient.
They can increase the rate of reaction by millions,
or as much as hundreds of millions of times.
Now, there also tends to hundreds of thousands of atoms long,
so they probably didn't exist.
Because they're so good, and it's been so much work
to understand how they work,
almost all of our focus on catalysis
has focused on these very big, very sophisticated,
and relatively late molecules.
A thing that is now being discovered,
but needs to be much more explored,
is that small molecules can also be catalysts.
They're not nearly as good,
but they're also not nearly as hard to make.
And not only small molecules can be catalysts,
but mineral surfaces can be catalysts.
The people who know this better than anybody
are the petroleum engineers,
because they're the ones who use it to convert the grades
of gasoline and diesel and all that stuff.
And this is another place where there are tremendous fossils.
Much of the mineral chemistry that's good for hydrocracking
involves iron, sulfur, cobalt, and molybdenum,
some part of that is preserved in the enzymes
as the actual active site that either moves an electron
or moves a functional group.
And so, if we want to understand where the structure
to the chemistry came from and we need catalysis,
the place we need to look is in the small molecules themselves.
Starting with the minerals,
what can be done on the surfaces of exposed rock,
when those make small molecules,
what catalytic capabilities do those perform?
A few experiments have been done
with showing that every one of the amino acids
is catalytic for certain reactions that will make sugar.
And they're specific.
They not only enhance the rates,
but they do it in different ways for different molecules.
So this is a whole field of organic chemistry
that doesn't yet exist,
just because people haven't put a priority onto doing it.
But I hope that that's a thing
that within a small number of years
will become an active area of work.
There's a question behind you.
That, yes, you know.
A great volume of something up on the internet
of a supplementary researcher,
he said, was playing that
beings aren't dying in California
due to the genetic of modified organisms.
And that this person also claims
that this molecular interference
can have potential to destroy life
within six years.
Three-fourth that. Have you heard anything about this?
I heard something about cell phones
causing the colony disruption of bees.
Happily that's not an area
that it's my responsibility
to provide reliable answers on.
You got to appreciate that the stuff I'm doing
is simple enough that a physicist can understand it.
And the kind of questions that you're asking
are at such a higher level of complexity,
I don't really have the right tools
to address those kinds of questions,
because they're in the domain of accident.
And that's one of the things we work on
is how really do you think about a science
where history is an important part.
Have you heard of the...
Yes.
Yes, they have been here in the past.
They were only bigger and stronger than they are today.
Any given one might only last for a thousand years
or 10,000 years,
and then it dries up and a different one goes someplace else.
But I didn't mention this about the heaven and the hell theories.
The heaven theory turns out to come from nuclear fusion,
because that's what powers stars.
The hell theories come from nuclear fission,
because that's what keeps the inside of the planet hot.
And it's the process of getting rid of that excess heat
that causes the planet to convert heat energy into chemical energy.
And that's what's driving these things.
That's why there's a steady rich source of chemistry at those
that there may not be on the surface.
I'm going to take two more questions.
Yes.
You bet. You bet.
You know why?
Because there wasn't a self back then.
And that, to me, is one of the most important things
that should revise our understanding of biology.
The Darwinian Revolution took for granted
that we know what individuals are on the planet.
We know what individuals are on the planet.
We know what people are on the planet.
We know what people are on the planet.
We know what people are on the planet.
We know what people are on the planet.
We know for granted that we know what individuals are.
And that we know what it means for an individual to have offspring.
But in thermodynamics there are no individuals.
And so there's a big question.
Is the Darwinian dynamics of life completely unrelated
to the things we understand?
Or in fact should we recognize that Darwinian dynamics
come into existence when individuals come into existence
and that there is a dynamic before that
that continues all the way back
and becomes part of the physics?
So in fact what I want to say is
you start with the geochemistry.
You have an ordered geochemistry
which is the seeds of biochemistry
but there are not individuals yet.
From biochemistry you get cells
because they're the best way
to make biochemistry happen
and you get the chemistry of ecosystems
but still there are no stable individuals.
Later, later, later
when it becomes possible to specialize
it starts to become worthwhile
to have an individuality that persists.
And then the dynamics that we've all heard of from Darwin
starts to become important
and that's also where accident starts to become important
and where family trees begin to show up.
So there's a lovely continuity that goes back
but to me it's wonderful.
We don't have to take the self for granted anymore.
It can be a concept that it is the responsibility of science to derive.
So let's have
there's one right in front here.
It's a final question.
Well I know there are a lot of experiments
that have been done with computer simulations
of evolution.
So this must be very exciting
to me.
We'd like to create a toy model
and run it through a computer network
to see whether a simplified version
of 11 simple chemicals
that are descending energy
train what's involved in this
something.
The devil here is in the details.
Right.
So this is a place where there's been too much of a gap
and this time I'll throw mud at the physicists.
The physicists have stayed with problems
that in some sense are simpler
than chemistry
because the physicists want to say
assume a carbon atom is a sphere.
Assume a nitrogen atom is also a sphere of the same kind.
A nitrogen atom is not the same as a carbon atom.
What we need to do
at the institute and more broadly
is to drag physics forward
and say okay
what do all of these ideas
of dynamics look like
when you have the structure of chemistry
where carbon really is different from nitrogen
and the differences matter.
But that is exactly the kind of experiment
that we and colleagues are trying to do
one little baby step at a time.
Right. Thanks Eric.
Okay.
Thank you.
