Rwy'n cael ei ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud.
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud.
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'
ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r
ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud
o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r d
ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud
o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o ffordd doedd.
Yn ymrheid ..
Mul grannu nhw?
O' chi'n入yn?
oam drwy'n daytime. strictly.
yn hoffio gyrdd strengthen
Buduniaid Y analyser o hon y hwn yn ysgolwch
Hyd photographer yrrdydd yn strengthen
Y c Suellamos yn hoffio'r ffordd
Ar chefu Llan tackenzingr1 o gyllid ni yw hyff Angeles
Erall teithio bod yn cael cyfrannu
Od yn hawryd drwsianedd
And tonight he's going to square the circle
and make calculus fascinating for everybody.
It's kind of amazing that everyone's come out...
..something you tried to abandon decades ago,
I suppose you'd come back for it, it's fantastic.
Many of you know Steve from his New York Times column,
his blog about mathematics,
where he showed how mathematics was essentially, in our modern world, ambiant.
It's part of the culture that we live in.
Y cwmwys力SOUNDâ ar ysteig,
dwi'n rhaglawn i llodd yn aeth i werth gwasiol jwyl Rep Kardashian,
mae arian yn ei gallu eu meddwl.
Rwy'n vaerio commander diwetID.
Mae haltiaid?
Ac kaydonwch dweud hefyd serrnau
bath am Ym Gweithydd Cweirol,
ha Instan Montydw,
slywbu Llyr Nicol W tendencyll,
siad tychau i ymgyrchol a wneud i le profitryn migrate,
That's what I learnt in that article...
...which was again as a reassuring for me that it wasn't that exciting.
In connection to SFI and complexity science more generally...
...Stefa'n cwednaeth yw laint cyrdourfos copied toad.
He coauthored in 1998...
...i nebryd o ond차f posts i�l ifancs.
I'm sure many of you have heard.
At the result of Steve and Duncan Watts' article.
was one of our early postdocs, actually, after he'd finished working with Steve.
And this is one of the foundational papers in network science.
It built on sociological research and it added modern techniques of non-linear dynamics
and statistical physics and really revolutionized how we do a whole range of different sciences
now from sociology to network science in the internet.
Steve is also the author of several books that I'm sure some of you purchased up front.
So he writes both for technical audiences and for popular audiences and does so extremely well.
His book on non-linear dynamics and chaos from 1994 is a completely standard textbook
that many of us used in learning the field.
But he also wrote popular books like Sink, The Joy of X and Infinite Powers.
Will it be for sale still after the lecture?
Tomorrow.
OK, tomorrow night if you haven't bought a copy and go ahead and sign it.
So these lectures are the Stan Ulam Memorial Lectures.
And Stan Ulam was a mathematician who also wrote a popular book called Adventures of a Mathematician.
Stan was born in Poland.
He worked in Princeton, Harvard, Madison before coming to Los Alamos.
Steve shares Harvard and Princeton with Stan.
And in that book, Stan Ulam writes, theoretical physics, meaning mathematical physics,
is possible because there are many identical or nearly identical copies of objects and situations.
Science would not be possible.
Physics would not be conceivable if there was not this similarity or identity of vast numbers of points
or subsets or groups of points in the universe.
And Steve's work on networks and dynamical systems more generally
have revealed how in complex systems, which are full of particularities,
you find these kinds of universalities that even in the world of biological life,
there are universalities not unlike those that we observe in physics.
So join me in welcoming Steve to give the first of two Ulam Lectures.
Well, thank you very much, David, and thanks to all of you for coming out tonight.
Thank you too for our online audience on Zoom or on YouTube.
It's really, wow, what a big treat it is to be here speaking to you tonight.
My wife and I always love coming back to Santa Fe, and I can't tell you how honoured I am
to be giving the Ulam Lectures.
As you can see here, I've posted a little picture of Stan Ulam,
and he meant a lot to me.
I never had the pleasure of meeting him.
But when I was a teenager in high school, already in love with math and physics,
my beloved mentor, Mr De Curcio, gave me a book, A Graduation Present,
that he inscribed very affectionately.
And it was this book, Adventures of a Mathematician, SM Ulam,
who I had not heard of at that time.
But I learned a lot about him from the book.
It's a very candid and funny, quirky book.
You may be able to see, I don't know, the writing may be a little too small on that image on the side.
But it describes Ulam as, certainly true, a member of the famous Polish Mathematical School.
He'll be remembered probably forever as the person who invented the hydrogen bomb.
Edward Teller was working on it, but couldn't quite get it to work theoretically,
and Ulam figured out how to make it work for good or evil.
I don't know. This is how he'll be remembered, I suspect.
Which is a little bit of a pity, because in the world of math,
we think of him as one of the most creative mathematicians of the 20th century.
He thought of the method that we call the Monte Carlo method in constant use today
for solving all kinds of difficult probabilistic calculations.
He was extremely ingenious, and even in the subject that David mentioned,
my own subject, nonlinear dynamics, within Rico Fermi and other colleagues at Los Alamos,
he thought of ways to use what were then the very first computers to do scientific research,
not just to do calculations, but to perform computer experiments
and to learn things that you couldn't see either through pencil and paper or through observation.
You could see the invisible in the computer.
It was like a new kind of telescope or microscope for the mind. This was his idea.
Reading the book, one thing struck me that was a little puzzling,
which is he doesn't talk much about his wife.
She's in there, but she doesn't get mentioned so much,
and his wife Francoise, it turns out, actually is the writer of the book.
It's her modesty that we have to blame for her large absence in the book.
Francoise was a terrific writer. She had a degree in comparative literature,
and they had quite the love affair, I think, quite a great relationship,
giving birth to a daughter, Claire.
I had the pleasure to meet, well, there's Steve Weiner, who's here tonight.
That's Claire Weiner, and then their daughter, Rebecca Ulam Weiner.
I also had the pleasure to meet recently.
Anyway, so, yes, Francoise and Stan, quite the striking couple, weren't they?
I just want to leave you with one thought before I turn to my lecture proper here,
which is this remark of Stan's.
By the way, so the point was that he's dictating, he's telling stories to Francoise,
and she's writing them down and embellishing them and cleaning them up mostly.
Anyway, Stan says, it's still an unending source of surprise for me
to see how a few scribbles on a blackboard could change the course of human affairs,
to say the least, you know, if you think about what he did with the hydrogen bomb,
but also with his work really revolutionizing the way that we use computers in math and science.
So, with that, let me take up Ulam's theme of how a few scribbles can change the course of history,
because this is really what my story is about tonight.
The story of calculus is exactly that story.
Without calculus, we wouldn't have really anything that we are used to in the modern world.
We certainly wouldn't have radio, television, microwave ovens.
We wouldn't have been able to send astronauts to the moon or unravel the structure of DNA.
Looking at those pictures, can I ask you a little quiz?
Maybe for the younger people, I wonder.
If we've got some kids in the audience, does anyone know who's over there on the left?
You may have seen her in a movie recently or read about her.
Anyone want to shout it out?
That is Catherine Johnson, one of the hidden figures speaking of use of computers to solve important problems.
Actually, Catherine Johnson was a human calculator at the time when that referred to people.
The calculator was a person or even they were sometimes called computers.
Anyway, so then you see also Catherine in her 90s receiving the Presidential Medal of Freedom from Barack Obama.
Getting choked up thinking about her hidden figure status.
What about the other woman? Do you know who that is? Unraveling the structure of DNA?
Right, of course. That's Rosalind Franklin.
She is there next to her famous picture, an x-ray diffraction picture, revealing the helical structure of DNA.
Before Watson and Crick realized that, she in a way was channeling calculus.
To interpret an x-ray diffraction picture like that one you see next to her,
she had to use an outgrowth of calculus called Fourier analysis.
Just as Catherine Johnson was using differential equations to design trajectories to get our astronauts to the moon and back again safely.
So it's calculus throughout. It's in ultrasound for expectant mothers.
It's GPS for maybe getting you home tonight or lost travelers in general.
And as I already mentioned for nuclear energy and nuclear weapons, calculus throughout has helped make the world modern in so many ways.
So there's a mystery though in that, which is the calculus grew out of geometry.
And you might ask the question, and I want to explore this with you tonight.
How could it be that an arcane branch of math originally about shapes, specifically curved shapes, how could that have ultimately reshaped civilization?
And so I want to try to personify that question in the form of this gentleman, Herman Woke.
Some of you will know that Herman Woke was really a great American novelist of my parents' generation.
The World War II generation looked to Herman Woke.
He had served as a sailor in World War II.
He wanted to write the sort of big definitive novel about World War II
and ended up ballooning into two novels, The Winds of War and War and Remembrance, very famous books made into movies.
Cain Mutiny, you probably know that story, the book and movie, Humphrey Bogart in the movie anyway.
So Woke, when he was thinking about writing his big novel about World War II, someone told him,
you know, if you're going to write about the bomb, let's say, and the scientists who helped make the bomb,
you really ought to go talk to this gentleman, Richard Feynman.
Now, you'll recognize that there's a lot of Los Alamos and Santa Fe in these stories I'm telling here tonight.
Richard Feynman, of course, young, brilliant physicist, worked at Los Alamos on the bomb.
And so he was happy to receive Woke for their conversation about what was really happening, the inside story of the Manhattan Project.
Feynman, you'll see there in the pictures teaching at Caltech.
He was a joker known for breaking into the safe at Los Alamos, going to strip clubs, playing his bongos character.
And anyway, so the two guys are talking.
Now, Woke and Feynman were both from New York City.
They found that they had that in common.
They were both Jewish guys, but there were also differences.
I mean, they had both served in the war, but Woke was very devout.
And Feynman was very much of an atheist.
And they found that they had a lot to talk about all around, and they had a good chat.
Anyway, they found themselves becoming friends.
And by the end of the chat, Feynman says to him in his, I guess, far rockaway accent that I won't attempt to imitate.
But something like, so you're really going to write this book.
Okay, I have one question for you.
Do you know calculus?
And Woke admits, well, no, I never studied calculus.
And then Feynman stares at him and says, well, you better learn it.
It's the language God talks.
And that became the title of a book that Woke wrote later, the language God talks.
You can maybe see the subtitle on science and religion about his conversations with prominent scientists,
John Weinberg, Feynman, a number of other, mostly atheists, about science and religion.
Are those irreconcilable? Are they compatible?
So I commend that book to your attention if you're interested in the relationship between science and religion.
But in particular, on the point of calculus, is it necessary to learn calculus as Feynman admonished him?
He needed to learn calculus.
Woke took him seriously, and he tells the story of what happened.
He says, I picked up and skimmed some freshman texts in college bookstores,
hoping to come across one that might help a mathematical ignoramus like me,
who had spent his college years in the humanities, i.e. literature and philosophy,
in an adolescent quest for the meaning of existence, like many college students.
A little knowing that calculus, which I had heard of as a difficult bore leading nowhere,
was the language God talks.
So he's motivated to learn calculus, but then it turns out that it's hard for someone in his position to learn calculus.
It's really hard, and he tells stories about it that he couldn't get anything from these freshman textbooks.
It was gibberish to him, so that didn't seem to work.
He hired a tutor, who happened to be an Israeli guy,
because he thought he was a person who knew a lot about math,
but he thought maybe I could also pick up and improve my spoken Hebrew on the side,
which he was interested in, so anyway he's with this Israeli tutor.
That didn't really work out so well.
Then, in fact, on both counts, and then he attended a high school class
and was very serious about going and doing all the homework for several weeks,
but he gradually fell behind and decided at some point to quit.
As he was leaving, he says that the students, all these teenagers, started clapping,
which he interpreted as sympathy applause, like for a pitiful showbiz act.
So my point is that it is not easy for many people to absorb the language God talks,
to learn calculus.
This made me personally sad thinking about this,
because I love calculus and want the world to appreciate it.
So I wrote this book recently, Infinite Powers,
subtitle How Calculus Reveals the Secret of the Universe.
Secrets, yeah.
Well, okay, you've got to sell books.
With people like Herman Woke in mind,
the reason I'm telling you the whole story is I want this talk to be accessible to anybody of goodwill,
like Herman Woke, an educated, curious person who didn't know much math,
but seriously wanted to get what is so special about calculus.
So I think of him as my ideal reader.
Actually, I sent him a copy of the book through his agent,
but he was about 103 years old at that point.
And I was told that his wife had recently passed away,
a good long life for both of them.
But I don't know if he ever really received the book or read it,
so I don't have a good conclusion for you about that.
But I do sort of have Herman Woke in mind,
and this book is for you, Mr Woke, if you can hear me.
So let me try to address the question,
what did Feynman mean with that cryptic comment that calculus is the language God talks?
What could that possibly mean?
All right, so let's talk a little bit about one case study.
I want to tell you the story of electricity and magnetism
and what calculus taught us about those phenomena.
So electricity, all right, there's a little picture of my daughter,
Leah, when she was much younger playing around in her grandmother's apartment,
and it was a wintry day. It was dry in the apartment.
Her hair got all staticky.
Lots of electrons rubbed off onto her hair without her knowing it.
They repelled each other. They made her hair look like that.
You're probably familiar with the phenomenon.
So yeah, that's static electricity.
There's also the electricity that's powering my microphone right now.
There's also magnetism.
You may have played around with bar magnets as a kid,
maybe even done a little experiment like this,
where you sprinkle iron filings on a piece of paper around a bar magnet,
and then amazingly, these iron filings reveal some kind of pattern.
They don't just form a random, you know, haphazard scatter on the page.
If you jiggle the page lightly, they start to align in this amazing, organized way,
suggesting that there's something around the magnet that is otherwise invisible
but that is now made manifest by these iron filings.
Michael Faraday did experiments like this back in the 1820s and 30s
and came up with the idea that there is something, although invisible,
something very real around a magnet,
which he called lines of force visualized by these filings,
but we today call it the magnetic field.
Similarly, there are invisible aspects of electricity
that we would call the electric field.
In the 1800s, scientists like Michael Faraday and Ampyr,
whose name lives on in the unit of electrical current, and Gauss and Ersted and many others,
were starting to try to figure out how do electricity and magnetism work.
Faraday created the first electric motor and electromagnets and lots of other things.
They started to realize there was this intimate relationship
like you could put a current through a wire and then the wire would start to act magnetic.
There would be a magnetic field around that wire with the current going through it and so on.
Anyway, Faraday didn't have much math background,
but this gentleman did, James Clerk Maxwell.
There's a picture of him as a young man.
He was a Scottish physicist and a mathematical physicist.
Usually you see him in pictures when he's much later in life with a big beard,
but I like this picture of him as a young man.
Anyway, he realized that what Faraday and others had been discovering
could be written in the language of calculus,
that there were certain laws about electricity and magnetism,
specifically how changing an electric field could produce magnetic effects
and changing electric fields, or did I say that first?
Basically changing one can produce the other.
Changing magnetism can generate electricity and vice versa.
He wrote what we would call differential equations,
meaning equations that describe how things change from moment to moment or place to place,
little differences in time or space, hence differential.
He wrote differential equations that encoded what Faraday and Ersted and Gauss and Ampere had discovered.
So now these physical discoveries from science, from tinkering,
were put in the language of math, and then comes the spooky part.
I mean it may not surprise you that math can describe physical phenomena.
We know that math is a language, but math is much more than a language,
and this is the part that I find uncanny, and that I think has something to do with what Feynman was talking about,
that with math you can actually manipulate equations.
You know that you can add and subtract if you're doing stuff with numbers,
but in algebra you do things like substitute a variable into another equation,
or you can divide, or in calculus you can do similar things, but they're more sophisticated,
and these manipulations, I want you to think of the word manipulate like in the spas here in town,
where you have a masseuse who's actually manipulating you,
and maybe you start mumbling and telling some intimate secrets.
You can get equations to do that.
If you can massage them the right way and get them to relax and open up,
they will tell you amazing things.
Okay, I'm being a little bit silly and metaphorical,
but what's really going on is that these operations of math are really long logical arguments
that are too long to keep in your head,
but you're applying logic to the equations and transforming them by manipulating them,
and they start to look different, and so Maxwell did this to these four equations that were known,
and he started to see something, he didn't know what he was looking for really,
but at some point he saw something he recognized,
which was an equation that describes the spreading of a ripple on a pond.
It describes a wave moving, and what is this wave that he's discovering?
He's curious how fast does it move.
If it's a wave, it's traveling, it has a speed.
He calculates the speed of this wave, and this part I'm just making up,
but I like to imagine him somewhere in Scotland and he's got his candle burning,
and he's calculating, and out comes the speed of these electromagnetic waves,
and they're moving at the speed of light, which is a pretty interesting coincidence.
In that moment, unique in human history, Maxwell is the first person to understand what light is.
People have thought about light for millennia, but Maxwell understands that light is a propagating wave of electricity and magnetism,
dancing together in his Pada da, and each regenerating the other.
He has this prediction from calculus and these known physical laws that light can move as an electromagnetic wave,
and it doesn't have to just be light.
There can be other kinds of non-visible forms of electromagnetic waves.
This comes out of his calculations around 1860, so think of the time of the Civil War in the US.
Soon after, Heinrich Hertz observes these predictions that come out of, like Ulam said, scribbling on a blackboard.
Nature is doing something that's respecting the scribbling,
and then Tesla figures out a way to use it to transmit energy wirelessly.
This should sound familiar, and then Marconi is sending messages across the Atlantic Ocean with it,
and then you have the 20th century.
You have radio and television and telephone and things we take for granted now, but it did come from calculus.
Now, I don't want to say calculus alone did this because I hope I told the story in a way that you're getting it,
that it was essential to have the physicists making their discoveries about electricity and magnetism,
but math was a key supporting player in this drama, specifically calculus.
I think that you can buy t-shirts now that look like this.
Some of you may even own this t-shirt, and God said, and there's Maxwell's equations in vector calculus,
and there was light.
It's actually kind of true.
So I sort of think this is what Feynman meant, that the language of electricity and magnetism that God talks is calculus.
This is a specific dialect of calculus, we call vector calculus,
but it doesn't just apply to electricity and magnetism.
The same is true if we were talking about how air moves, or water, or how heat diffuses,
or how gravity works, or even in the quantum mechanical realm.
All of those phenomena are described by this same sub-dialect of math, differential equations,
a specific kind of use of calculus.
So my argument for the rest of the talk is going to be that calculus matters because of these three things.
First, that nature's laws happen to be written in this particular language, calculus,
but that calculus is more than a language, it's a system of reasoning.
Like when Maxwell's doing his mathematical manipulations, he's somehow tapping into the inner logic of the universe.
It's not just playing games with symbols.
Nature is somehow doing the same thing that, I mean I find this really bizarre, so do many other people,
that we, with our puny primate logic, happen to have stumbled across something that mirrors the way nature really works,
that you can predict stuff that is out there, and then by learning to speak this strange language,
and by discovering that it taps into nature's hidden logic, we can use calculus to remake the world.
So that's the gist of the argument here, this is why calculus matters, at least from one point of view.
Now, in telling the story of calculus, I want to, at this moment, personify calculus.
I want you to think of it as something that has desires.
Now, if that's too ridiculous, think of it as the practitioners of calculus have desires.
But I'm going to say it this way, what does calculus want, and how does it get what it wants?
So the answer to what it wants, before I tell you what calculus really is,
what calculus wants to do is make hard problems simpler.
And this came as a surprise to my editor, who did not know any math when I was writing this book,
but he eventually said to me, I now get it after reading three drafts of the book, I get,
no, I mean he kept telling me do this, do that, I kept changing it, but by the third one he said,
I'm really starting to get what this is.
The books are so fat, the calculus textbooks are so big, because the problems are so hard,
but somehow you have found a way, not you, me, but I mean the people that do calculus
have found a way to make very hard problems tractable.
Now, how do they do it?
Okay, so how does calculus get what it wants?
Here's the strategy, it's going to slice hard problems into smaller pieces.
Okay, that might sound familiar.
You know that every good problem solver says if a problem is too hard,
break it down and solve simpler, easier problems first.
Fine, that's a time-honored strategy.
But calculus is a maniacal strategy that keeps doing this forever, indefinitely odd infinitum.
So calculus takes this idea of chopping to the infinite limit.
It keeps cutting and cutting and cutting and never stops until what's left is an infinite number of infinitesimal pieces.
This is the big idea at the heart of calculus, I'm going to call it the infinity principle,
which is that if you cut a problem of a certain class of math or physics problems,
and actually many problems nowadays, even in biology or the social sciences,
if you can subdivide it into infinitely many infinitesimal pieces, you have a strategy,
which is you're going to solve the problem first for the tiny pieces, and that tends to be easy.
Much easier than the problem originally was.
So that's why there's hope that this is going to work.
The heart problem is putting the pieces back together. There's no free lunch.
So that is the challenge in calculus.
Now that you've solved the little problems, how does that tell you about the original big problem?
Well, all right, so we have names for those two parts, the easy and the hard part.
The slicing part is what we call differential calculus, and that's actually easy.
We usually teach that at the beginning of the semester.
The hard part is the putting them back together, integrating everything into a whole,
and that's integral calculus, the rebuilding part.
All right, so that's our strategy.
And so from that point of view, calculus is about this exploitation of the infinity principle.
Now, you'll notice in the way I described what the principle is,
that you're going to keep cutting and cutting indefinitely,
you have to recognize that that's a wild fantasy that you could ever do that in real life.
And it has to do with a fantasy that stuff of all kinds is what I'm going to call continuous.
All right, so the infinity principle works nicely for things that are continuous,
to anything that can be sliced finer and finer forever, endlessly.
Those are what I'm going to call continuous, things that hold together,
I mean, from two Latin words that mean holding together.
No smallest parts.
And I want to make sure you understand, since this is a talk about stories,
that in math we tell ourselves stories just like everybody tells themselves stories.
There is an enormous creative fantasy happening right now.
The idea that matter is continuous, we know to be false, right?
We believe in atoms.
The word atom means uncuttable.
There are smallest bits.
You might not believe that atoms are the smallest bits,
but we don't really talk about splitting an electron.
We think at some level, matter can't be split farther.
At least that's what the modern physicists tell us.
And not just substance, but even time and space themselves.
If you listen to people talk about quantum gravity,
a theory that doesn't quite exist yet,
but we're working hard on it.
Once quantum mechanics and gravity are unified properly,
there's a belief that there will be a smallest unit of time and space,
which was already anticipated 100 years ago by Max Planck.
There's something called that if you combine fundamental constants
that control the strength of quantum effects,
something called H Planck's constant,
something that controls the structure of spacetime, the speed of light, C,
and something that controls the strength of gravity, Newton's constant, G.
There's only one way to combine those three quantities
to make something with the units of length.
Planck realized that, and if you do that, you get the Planck length,
which is 10 to the minus 35 meters approximately,
which is way smaller than an atomic nucleus.
It's way smaller than anything we could measure.
Way smaller.
But there is a feeling that no matter what quantum gravity ends up being,
as a theory, it will have the Planck length in it on dimensional grounds,
and something funky has to happen to space at that scale.
Either it gets pixelated, it's thrashing wildly from quantum jitters.
We don't know what's going to happen down there,
but it's going to not look smooth and continuous.
It's going to be weird.
And the same thing for the time it will take for light to travel that distance,
that will be 10 to the minus 43 seconds.
Time is going to get granular or weird.
The point being, nobody in modern physics would tell you
that nature is ultimately smooth and continuous today.
They may be wrong. I mean, maybe it is.
But our best understanding is that calculus is based on a lie.
The idea that you could keep cutting forever is not true in real life.
Nevertheless, creativity often involves wishful thinking.
We can imagine that we could cut forever, and doing it gives us calculus.
Really, like I say, the most powerful math we've ever thought of as a species.
So appreciating that there is this creative fantasy,
I would say calculus is not the study of derivatives and integrals
like your teacher might have told you.
It's the study of using the infinity principle systematically
to shed light on any continuous thing.
Any continuous shape, object, motion, phenomenon, process,
anything at all that can be thought of as continuous.
All right, so let me give you some examples of what calculus looks like.
Think of it as having to do, if you had to define it after you leave the lecture
and someone says you went to calculus lecture, what is calculus?
You could say it's the study of continuous change.
That works pretty well, or smooth change.
Or if you don't want adjectives, change.
Calculus is about change.
If you want to get a little more descriptive, it's about things that change direction,
which I would call curves.
Or it's about things that change location, which I would call motion.
Or it's about things that change in some other way, which I would call change.
So curves, motion, and change.
Those are the three obsessions of calculus.
Historically, calculus began with curves.
That's why I say it grew out of geometry.
In the olden days, like Euclid, math of geometry was about straight lines and sharp angles.
The triangles and squares you learned about in elementary geometry.
But you also learned this.
Okay, now that's a curve.
That's a circle.
Curvy is a thing can be.
You probably memorized a formula at some point in your life that the area of a circle is...
Did anyone know what to say?
Yeah, right? Pi r squared.
Everybody memorizes that for the SATs.
That's a formula involving that amazing number pi,
which already gives you a hint that that formula, because pi has those infinitely many digits that never repeat,
there's already a hint of calculus in there with the infinity principle.
Pi is not a creature of geometry.
Pi is actually a creature of calculus.
They snuck calculus into that formula when they told you pi r squared.
Where does that formula come from?
I want to show you an argument that is very close to the argument that Archimedes used
when he discovered and first proved the formula around 250 BC.
I'm reminding you the circumference of a circle, that's the distance around.
The diameter is the distance across through the middle at the widest point.
The radius, the r in pi r squared, that would be the distance from the center out to the circle.
The area refers to that green stuff inside, not the distance around, not the circumference.
We want the area inside a circle.
Here's an argument that will give us the pi r squared using the infinity principle.
Watch this. If you've never seen it, I think you're about to have a big epiphany.
If you have seen it, pretend that you're excited.
What we're going to do is this dramatic argument where we take the circle and chop it into four pieces.
The strategy is, if I could figure out the area of those four pieces, I would know the area of the whole circle.
I'm now going to try to rearrange the pieces into some shape that I recognize,
whose area I will know and that will be the area of the circle.
My first attempt is to make that shape on the bottom that looks like some kind of, I don't know what,
a worm or some scalloped shape. It doesn't look promising, but there it is.
If you want to think of it with pizza slices, I put one point down and then one point up, and I've snuggled them together.
The thing I want you to look at is that this distance here is what I'm calling r, the radius of the circle,
because it's the distance from what used to be the center. All these points are at the center.
I go from the center out to the curve. That's r, and then this distance along the bottom is half the circumference.
Half the curvy stuff. The circumference is pi times the diameter. We could also say 2 pi times the radius.
Half of that is just pi times the radius, and that's the distance around these curved scallops on the bottom.
The other pi r is up here on the top, making the whole circumference.
This is not so helpful at the moment, but now we're going to do like the optometrist does when trying to figure out your prescription.
Is this better or worse? Which is better? So what am I doing? I'm going to make eight slices,
and I want you to keep your eye on what happened here, which is that this is still the radius,
and this is still the curvy bottom of total length pi r. Do you see what's happening?
That the shape is starting to look more promising, more recognizable. What if I do it again?
Better? Even better. That's now 16 slices, and look, this is practically a parallelogram.
It's practically flat. It's not really, it's got little curves, but you can see it's getting flatter and flatter.
Compare what it was like that. This is very bulbous. This is getting flatter, and that's flatter still.
Also, let us compare the radius. Look how nearly upright that radius is standing, compared to how tilted that one is, compared to how tilted that one is.
Do you see what's going on? The more you take, the flatter and the more upright it gets.
So what do you think happens if I take infinitely many slices, infinitesimally thin? You get that.
Now that, you know how to find the area of, because that's a rectangle, and now we're back in classical geometry, so it's just the length times the height, pi r times r, that's pi r squared.
That's actually the reason. So if you have memorized it and never knew why, you now know why.
But you had to use calculus. You had to use this idea of taking infinitely many infinitesimal slices to get it, and it's because curves are hard.
We had to get rid of the curves and replace them with straight lines, so that we could use ordinary geometry.
And that's the genius of the early creators of calculus, Archimedes and Eudoxus and people like that in ancient Greece.
They were using the infinity principle to do problems like this.
Okay, so now Archimedes, although to us just sounds like another old Greek name, really lives on all around us today.
For instance, look at this. If you wanted to represent this head of a mannequin in computer graphics with a smooth bald head and smooth cheeks, you can do what Archimedes did.
You take something that's simple shapes analogous to the pizza slices, you could use triangles, and the more you take of them, the finer the mesh, the closer you get to something that looks like a smooth face.
And this is commonplace nowadays in computer graphics, like say in this movie Jerry's Game, which was really the first movie with a human character that had lots of expressions and emotions.
You can find it at its old five minute movie on YouTube, but it won the best short animated film back in 1998, and Jerry playing chess there in the park is built of millions of polygons.
You don't see them, just like you don't notice all the polygons in that smooth mannequin.
But going on even better to Shrek with his little trumpety ears or his belly explaining onions have layers to donkey, these creatures don't exist except as meshes of polygons.
So it's enormously powerful, this idea of replacing curved shapes with straight shapes by making them infinitesimally small and very plentiful.
And so if you just think it's about computer graphics, I want to show you a more serious application of this idea, which is, here's a patient, you may be able to see that his jaw is sticking out.
It's a congenital malformation here, and he went in for cranio facial surgery. The treatment is doctors, the surgeons, are going to take out some of the bones in his jaw and let his whole face heal, and they hope that he will look and feel the way that he wants to look and feel after the surgery.
But you don't really get a second chance. You want to predict what's going to happen after the face and the whole head heals.
So they first put this guy in a scanner, CT scanner, they get all the details of his bones and everything.
And then they have a mathematical model of what will happen with the soft tissues if they replace some bone and they're also taking out cartilage and maybe some, hopefully not too many blood vessels, but whatever.
It's complicated surgery, and this mathematical model built on differential equations and calculus tells them where to, it's basically like a flight simulator for surgeons.
So they can do the surgery on a virtual patient ahead of time. And so the model predicted that if they do what they should do, his new face will look like this, and here's his actual new face.
And they could quantify how close they were to the model. It was only ever off by like a millimeter at the most.
But what I want to show you is that the model consists of this Archimedean principle of lots of little triangles and polygons, except now in three dimensions.
So they have to put in tetrahedra in here underneath the skin, thinking about the whole model of the head, all these various soft tissues with their different elastic properties and stiffnesses and everything.
It's all elasticity theory and continuum mechanics built on calculus that makes this surgery possible and so effective.
Okay, so saying that calculus is about curves, motion and change, I've talked to you a little about, in case of this guy, the changing appearance and structure of his head.
We've talked about the change in Maxwell's equations and predictions of electromagnetic waves and wireless and all that.
But in general, curves are very big in data science. You know, that's something we teach our students.
How to represent changing relationships of all kinds in algebra class.
We teach them the X, Y plane and Cartesian coordinates.
The point being that curves are not just curves. Curves are the key to thinking about data.
And we can represent motion and change with curves, visually.
So I want to finish with this thought, which has to do with, speaking of motion, let us talk about Usain Bolt.
So Usain Bolt, you may remember, was a wonderful sprinter from Jamaica.
It didn't look like a typical sprinter. He's about six-five.
Usually a sprinter is a pretty compact muscular person.
Usain is a very gangly, tall guy, muscular, but very long legs.
And he normally was known for running the 200 meters. He was essentially invincible at that distance.
But he wanted to also try his hand. I feel like that's the wrong body part.
He wanted to try running the 100 meter dash at the Olympics back in Beijing in 2008.
And his coach said, it's not a great idea. You're a 200 meter man. Let's just stick with that.
He said, I want to practice. Let's try the 100.
So he ran the 100 meters in competition five times, which is not a lot to be going against the world's best 100 meter runners.
But anyway, he shows up in Beijing and I want to show you what happened on that night.
It's about 10.30 at night. No wind. Very good night to run.
So here's the, as it was called at the time.
And so back to 2008 and the Olympic Games in Beijing, the final of the men's 100 meters.
Usain was ready to do his thing.
And now a great start by Richard Thompson in lane four from Trinidad.
And here comes Usain Bolt. Bolt is pulling away. Bolt's looking back.
You don't look back in 100 meters. 9.68 is a world record for Usain Bolt.
9.68, a new world record, the fastest man in the world.
That celebration on the line told the world he could run faster and soon he would.
But it was the Olympic gold medal he really wanted.
If that went by too fast, do you want to watch that again?
That went by pretty fast, okay? 10 seconds. No, well, 9.68 seconds. Watch this again.
So keep your eye on Usain Bolt. He doesn't get the best start.
He was never the best. In fact, he was number seven out of eight coming out of the starting blocks.
And so back to 2008 and the Olympic Games in Beijing, the final of the men's 100 meters.
Usain was ready to do his thing.
And off. Great start by Richard Thompson in lane four from Trinidad.
And here comes Usain Bolt. Bolt is pulling away. Bolt's looking back.
You don't look back in 100 meters. 9.68 is a world record for Usain Bolt.
9.68, a new world record, the fastest man in the world.
That celebration on the line told the world he could run faster and soon he would.
But it was the Olympic.
Here, look at this.
Okay, those guys are running like hell.
And Usain Bolt has put his arms down.
You probably can't see it, but his shoelace is untied.
He's a very mischievous guy. He was known as a practical joker.
And he's coasting across the finish line and breaking the world record.
He stopped the running with the proper form about 10 or 20 meters before the end.
And he's just goofing around, slapping his chest.
He's so excited. I mean, I don't think it was, some people thought it was a little obnoxious.
But I think he was just celebrating. He's a very good natured guy.
Didn't mean any disrespect.
But anyway, the question became in the sports world, what if he had run hard all the way?
I mean, he already broke the world record with 9.68.
How fast could he have run so we could analyze this with math?
They have little recording devices every 10 meters down the track that measures his split time.
What time did he cross this 10 meters and the next 10 meters?
And from those data, we get this graph.
So here's his distance down the track as a function of time.
And you can see at the beginning, well, all right, let me be honest about this.
I actually only have these dots. That's what we know.
We also have the tape, but it's hard to tell from the tape.
There's a lot of distortion in the footage.
It's not so easy to really know exactly what's happening.
But you can fit a smooth curve through the dots by various statistical techniques,
which, by the way, use calculus, something called linear regression.
So you can estimate, excuse me, in a good way, a reasonable smooth curve through there
with the further constraint that its slope at the beginning should be zero,
because we know he had zero speed coming out of the blocks.
He's motionless at first.
So if you fit a curve with those constraints, you can then look at the slope at every point on that curve,
and that will tell you his speed instant by instant, and it looks like this.
You see the message there?
It's what you saw visually. It's very obvious.
He's picking up speed.
His peak speed was around 27 miles an hour.
This is when he's pulling away.
Then he's still accelerating, and then he starts slapping his chest and fooling around,
and he's slowing down.
So what would happen if he kept going?
All right.
So we could do that extrapolation, but actually we don't have to,
because a few months later was the world championship in Berlin.
And this time, the scientists were ready.
So they put little reflecting dots on the back of everything,
so they put little reflecting dots on the back of every runner,
and were shining sort of like the radar guns that the police would use to see if you're speeding.
I think they might actually have been laser guns,
but in any case, they could record 100 times per second where the runner was for each of the runners.
And so that's a very precise measurement, and here's what the data...
Oh, he broke the world record again.
I think it was now 9.58.
And so here's the data.
Now, what do you think all those wiggles are?
This is the wiggles of the actual data.
Do you know what those are?
Those are actually steps.
Breathing is an interesting guess.
Yeah, those are steps.
When you run, you're leaping and landing, and doing that again.
And in Usain Bolt's case, he does it 41 times.
Everybody else does 45 steps.
I told you he has long legs.
So he runs 41 steps in the 100 meters, and there's 41 wiggles in here.
And what I find interesting about this, and I want to leave you with this thought,
is that we don't really care about that.
That's not interesting, the wiggle.
I mean, yes, it's slightly interesting that his speed varies during a single foot cycle.
But what we're really interested in is the trend, the average that's going through here, these dots.
And so I want that to be kind of a little parable for you,
that sometimes if you get too detailed in your science,
you might start measuring stuff you're not actually interested in.
And I think that calculus is like that.
That when we take this approximation that we can cut things infinitely finally,
it's not really true.
At the finest scale, there's quantum jitters and other things that we don't care about.
Calculus is capturing the trend of reality over a tremendous number of orders of magnitude
of space and time and substance and everything.
And it's based on a lie, but it's capturing something true.
And so I think it's very well said by Picasso, art is a lie that makes us realize truth.
So I really do think that's the lesson, that is the story of calculus.
Thank you.
Thanks.
I see some microphones going around.
Are we doing questions here?
Oh, I would love to take questions if people would like.
So there are some microphones available.
If you just stand up or wave your hand, they'll come find you.
Yes, okay.
There are two of us, so try to get either of our attention.
Did you figure out how fast the world record would have been in those 2008 Olympics?
Well, it's a very good question. I did set that up.
Right, so we should probably really do the calculation I suggested.
Imagine if I extrapolated without the slowing down, what would he have run on that night?
I honestly haven't done it. It's a good question.
Could he have done even better than the 9.58?
I don't know. I haven't done the calculation. I should. It's a good question.
I have the data.
So we could just ignore the last few data points and then draw a straight line.
It's a good question. I'm sorry, I don't know.
Yes, there's a question over on the far left.
Can calculus be used in the research of cancer?
Calculus is being used constantly in cancer research.
Sure, yeah, I mean, we have mathematical models of various types,
so you can talk about the, for instance, the growth of a tumor has been modeled
with so-called partial differential equations.
There are questions about optimal dosing of chemotherapy,
or suppose you have several chemotherapy drugs that might work,
but if you just use one for too long, the patient develops resistance to it.
So is there an optimal way to trade off between a few different drugs?
I have a colleague, Dr. Jake Scott at Cleveland Clinic, who's doing exactly that,
using a branch of math called Optimal Control Theory,
which builds on calculus ideas from a subfield called Calculus of Variations.
So yeah, I mean, there's a lot of calculus.
There's even a field now called Mathematical Oncology,
which you could definitely look up and find practitioners.
Yes, yes, there's a question.
Hi, this is not your point exactly,
but I'm wondering how if time and space are not infinitely divisible,
Zeno's paradoxes get resolved,
and so I'm thinking particularly about the paradox of the flying arrow,
in which if it's in a moment of time at a certain point,
and then in the next moment of time at another point,
there's no motion between those,
and so it seems impossible for the arrow to move,
and Aristotle's resolution is just that you can keep dividing them,
and there's no real end.
Well, thank you for that question about Zeno's paradoxes.
I think you summarized the paradox of the arrow very well,
and I write about them at some length in infinite powers,
and I feel, I'll tell you what my take on them is,
but keep in mind that people have been arguing about Zeno's paradoxes
for about 2,500 years now,
so I don't claim that I've outdone Zeno or Aristotle
or Bertrand Russell or anyone in between,
but my take, one thing is, we don't have Zeno's writings.
We only know what Zeno was saying because of what Plato said about him
or Aristotle said about him,
and these were people who weren't predisposed toward treating Zeno kindly.
They bring him up to demolish him,
so I don't know that I trust their version of his paradoxes,
but as far as we can tell, he had at least four paradoxes,
which were structured like this.
Two paradoxes are supposed space and time are infinitely subdivisible,
and two of them are supposed the opposite,
supposed space and time are fundamentally particulate and discreet,
and then he has paradoxes for every occasion.
So the paradox of the arrow is under the premise that space and time are particulate,
that there's a particular moment in time,
and the arrow is at a particular location,
and then click on one of those digital clocks
that the second hand doesn't sweep continuously,
it goes tick, tick, tick, right?
That's the picture of time in Zeno's paradox of the arrow,
and under that paradox, at the next tick, the arrow's in a new place.
It has just materialized in a new location
without traversing the space in between
because, by assumption, there is no space in between.
Space is particulate.
So motion in a universe that is particulate
is doing exactly what Zeno said it would do, and there's no paradox.
He has described the way things would be in such a universe,
and the fact that we don't like it
is because we perceive space and time as being continuous,
but I don't think Zeno's paradox of the arrow is wrong.
I think it's logically correct.
So anyone who says that paradox is wrong
and tries to argue it with calculus
is not understanding Zeno's reasoning.
He's perfectly right about that.
Where he's not right is in the paradox of Achilles and the tortoise
or the dichotomy paradox.
Those are paradoxes, like the dichotomy paradox is,
I can't walk from here to there because before I get there,
I have to walk half the distance,
and I can't walk half the distance
because before I do that, I have to walk half of that.
You're always splitting in half.
Meanwhile, everyone does that every day.
They get out of bed and go eat breakfast, so we can do it.
So there's the paradox.
How can it be possible to do an infinite number of these things
before breakfast?
Zeno had trouble thinking about infinite sums
that converged to a finite thing
because that math was not really well developed at that point.
So I think Zeno is wrong about the...
If space and time are continuous, I think his paradoxes are faulty,
but I think his paradox of the arrow is correctly reasoned.
Stephen, over here.
Yes, please.
Thank you.
Calculus involves an infinite number of sums of infinite decimals,
and the universe has, beginning with Max Planck,
perhaps an invisibly small quantities of length and distance and so forth.
But as far as I understand, a fundamentally open question is
whether the universe itself is infinite or finite.
So can we use calculus to make predictions that are observable
through cosmology of whether our universe is finite or infinite?
Very interesting.
So to think about the infinitely big, not the infinitesimally small,
and in the case of cosmology.
First of all, I'm not an expert in that,
so I wouldn't presume to give you a clear answer on it.
I don't know what to say.
I mean, I think it's...
Well, what do our scientists tell us today that...
I mean, you see different things.
They tell us that the universe is 13.8 billion years old or something,
and a naive calculation would tell you so it should be 13.8 times...
You know, that many light years across in radius,
but then I'm told by my cosmology friends,
no, that's not right.
90 billion light years are some kind of crazy big number.
You don't just... because of something about inflation.
So I can't say I ever really understood that argument.
And then others will say, well, that's only just the visible universe
that we get from the cosmic microwave background and other data.
So if we really believe that that's just the visible universe,
but there's more stuff, like in a scenario where there's lots of bubble universes
that are causally decoupled from us,
conceivably it could be infinite.
I think there are respectable models that have infinite universes
in both time and space.
So I don't think calculus can answer that.
I think there are also respectable ones that are finite
that have big bang and big crunch pulsating universes.
So I don't think calculus can answer that one for us.
I don't see any logical contradiction in either of those.
It's up to the physicists and the cosmologists to take care of that one for us.
I saw some people nodding.
So I hope that was reasonably close to what science would say today.
I'm an amateur on that field.
Okay, we'll start here, and then Denise will cover that one.
Okay, good. Great questions.
How about the 1980 article about Wigner
about the unreasonable association of mathematics and natural science?
I'm not sure that's the correct title, but I think it's close.
Yeah, very close.
What was the question? Just you want my comments on Wigner's article?
The comments on that article.
Yeah, so Eugene Wigner, great scientist of one of the great Hungarian Jewish geniuses
that, along with people like von Neumann and Leo Zellart,
had this fantastic article from around 1960
that's called on the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the physical sciences.
I think that's the title.
The ringing phrase is on the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics.
So that's the question. Is it unreasonable or not?
Some people say, what's unreasonable?
The people who are big on the language point of view will say,
math is the language that we use to describe nature.
Why should we be surprised that it describes nature?
So they don't get it. They don't get what Wigner is talking about.
I think it's because those people don't know enough science, actually, or enough math.
The deeper you go, I mean, let me try to capture what Wigner is talking about.
Here's an example.
We have this theory that goes beyond quantum theory,
where in traditional quantum theory the electric and magnetic field are treated classically,
but other parts are treated quantum mechanically.
But if you quantize the electromagnetic field,
then you have this fancier theory called quantum electrodynamics, QED,
that Feynman worked on and others worked on.
In QED, we have certain calculations about quantities in physics,
something called the gyromagnetic ratio of the electron.
G-2 is the little formula for it.
It's not a very physically important quantity,
but it's interesting as a poster child for how good math can be in describing reality.
We can calculate this G-2 to, I think,
the current record is something like 12 digits after the decimal point.
One part in a trillion accuracy or something like that.
Does that spook you?
It should.
That math that is, according to some people, just a free creation of human imagination,
is matching click, click, click, click, click, click, click for 12 digits worth of what nature is doing.
So it's like nature knows math,
but really not just geometry, not just straight lines and stuff.
This is a very fancy part of math that seems like it's built in.
I don't know if that's the best example.
Maybe it's too arcane, that example.
Anyway, it's a feeling of awe that, certainly Einstein expressed in that famous saying
about the eternal mystery of the universe is that it's comprehensible.
He often quoted us the most incomprehensible thing about the universe is that it is comprehensible.
So Einstein certainly felt it, and people like Dirac,
another example would be Dirac working in this area of quantum,
I mean it's a precursor to quantum electrodynamics.
He writes down a thing called the Dirac equation that merges special relativity with quantum theory,
the existence of something called antimatter,
that there should be in addition to an electron some exact bizarro world version of the electron
that has the same mass and the same charge except it's positive instead of negative.
And it had never been seen, and he just imagined it and the equations conjured it up and said it should be there.
And Dirac, very dry in his British way says something like,
would be curious or it would be surprising if nature did not make use of,
but it's sort of like, this math is so pretty you'd expect nature to do it.
And then a few years later, it's measured, there is a positron, you can find it, it's a real thing.
And today it's used in PET scanning if you've heard of people going in for sensitive kinds of magnetic imaging,
PET scanning, that's positron emission tomography.
So it's wild, the math conjured that thing out of nothingness, it was there waiting to be discovered.
I don't know what to say, so for me, yes, it's a profoundly practically religious feeling.
Like if I were inclined to believe in God, I would think this would be evidence, but I'm not.
But I don't know how to explain why math works so well at describing the universe.
It's confusing, I mean there could be circularity in the argument,
it could be that I'm only bringing up the cases where math works well.
So of course it works well in those cases.
I don't know, these are really deep questions.
Okay, here's a question.
Hi.
Oh yes please, go ahead.
I'm sorry, I saw a gentleman here in the middle, but go ahead.
My head is really exploding.
Your head's exploding, is that good?
Yes, that's it.
Okay, okay.
But just recently I've been listening to compositions by Carl Jenkins.
Could you hold your mic up a little closer?
Carl Jenkins, and they always talk about him being a mathematician.
I'm not a mathematician, I'm not a musician.
But 50 years ago, I also read Hermann Hesse and Magistral Ludi,
a glass bead game, and the connection between math and music.
So do you have any comments from the perspective of...
Is the question about the relation between math and music,
or between math and playing games?
No, it's math and music, and the patterns.
Do you have any insight there that you'd like to share with us?
I don't have much to say.
Certainly there's some kind of profound connection.
Certainly a lot of...
It's often pointed out that a few things,
that mathematicians are often particularly entranced with music.
There are plenty of musicians who are not that fond of math.
So that's not like a simple identification.
Leibniz has some quote that I can't remember exactly what it is,
but something like about that music is the soul.
Does someone remember the quote?
Music is math of the soul.
It's something about the...
Oh, do you have it?
Music is the soul of the last class.
Oh, please put the mic on her.
I love it.
Are you from St. John's?
Yeah.
This you see?
This is the kind of education you get at St. John's.
Please give us a quote.
So if I remember correct, Leibniz says music is the mind,
like, mathematicizing or calculating unconsciously.
And then Schopenhauer says music is the mind,
philosophizing unconsciously.
Nice.
So that's an interesting possible thought that...
Beautiful, thank you very much.
That is music the mind.
What is it?
Mathematizing unconsciously.
Certainly there's something about time and rhythm and pattern,
but it's a confusing question because math is...
I mean, music is so much more capable of moving us emotionally.
Math can move us in a certain way,
but it's not the same as listening to...
Right, even those of us who love math.
I have clapped at beautiful math.
I've never started weeping, but I could really get transported.
Well, not for that reason.
I don't know.
There's something very transporting.
Music feels transcendent in a different way than math is,
but other just random connections,
since you asked me what are my thoughts.
I'm also thinking of prodigies,
that the fields that have prodigies, math,
right, child prodigies, math, music,
the three-year-old Mozart, and chess.
And there may be some others,
but it's hard to be a great historian at two.
So some fields, especially fields that are about patterns,
subtle perceptions of patterns,
appreciation of symmetry pattern, things like that,
that are often outside of language or experience,
I mean spoken verbal language.
I don't know.
It's interesting to me that math and music and chess are those three.
There may be others, but I don't know.
I don't have that much to say about it.
Thank you.
Yeah, good question though.
Oh, yes, please.
Go ahead.
I have a chicken or the egg kind of a question for you.
Would any of the sciences or most of mathematics
be possible without the analysis of infinite series?
Aha.
So you're saying that the tool that we call infinite series
or the mathematical concept of infinite series,
would what be possible without it?
Everything else.
Higher math or something?
Well, the sciences.
The sciences.
How much of the sciences depends on the use of infinite series?
Calculus, it seems to me.
Calculus, yeah.
It very much uses infinite series.
I think it's kind of a basis of...
They're important for sure.
They're very important.
They're one strategy of using the infinity principle.
I wouldn't say that they're the only strategy,
but Newton used infinite series very much in his first development of calculus.
Then he later created fluctuations,
which were based on analogies with motion and time,
and then ultimately he did a geometric version of calculus
that is in the Principia where he's trying to persuade people
with what looks like Euclidean rigor,
except it has a lot of infinitesimal arguments in it.
So he certainly used infinite series a lot.
It's worth pointing out.
I've only mentioned European scientists so far
with Maxwell and Ersted and Company,
but let's not forget that in India there were people like Madhava
around 1300 or 1400,
so fully more than 200 years before Newton and Leibniz,
working with the infinite series that you like so much.
So Madhava came up with infinite series for sine and cosine
and arc tangent for astronomical reasons.
These are the great Hindu mathematicians of Kerala, India,
big tradition in math and astronomy.
You've got to appreciate that calculus is world culture.
The Arabic mathematicians did a lot.
I would single out a guy named Ibn al-Haitham,
often called Alhazen in the West.
Very important work also using infinite series and sums generally.
He could do integrals or find volumes that Archimedes didn't know how to do.
Anyway, I know that we often tell it very Eurocentric,
but I think the truth is the European mathematicians
put the finishing touches on calculus,
but a lot of it was developed elsewhere in the world.
First, the sake of honesty, let me say this definition
I've given about the infinity principle,
that that's the heart of calculus,
that's a singular point of view, that is not widely shared.
I believe it's right, but most historians will tell you calculus
is a phenomenon of Germany and England in the 1600s
from Leibniz and Newton,
in particular the discovery of the thing called the fundamental theorem of calculus,
which connects the two parts, the differential and integral part of calculus,
and lets us do things like infinite sums
through a certain trick that is called the anti-derivative,
that makes the calculations much easier
and you don't have to be a genius of the caliber of Archimedes or Ibn al-Haitham.
Now you can teach that calculus to ordinary school children
of no particular great intellect and they can do it,
which they could never do in Archimedean argument.
We've made calculus so streamlined and so easy,
maybe not you didn't think so when you took it,
but believe me it's much easier now than it was.
That's what most historians would tell you is the beginning of calculus,
but I just think that's wrong.
I think that's the culmination of 2,000 years of great work.
Shall we take one last question?
So going back to your example with the area of a circle,
one thing you took for granted was pi.
Oh yes.
So I was just curious how Archimedes, whoever it was,
that was deriving this initially, what method they used.
Sure, great question, yeah.
So right, I took for granted the pi in the calculation, the number pi, 3.14, etc.
So Archimedes absolutely gave a very systematic way of thinking about the number pi,
where he tried to, so in the same little manuscript or treatise
where he's calculated an area of a circle,
he also calculates the circumference, though he doesn't think of it as a,
I mean it's interesting, to him pi is not a number.
That's a whole complicated story.
But he looks at a ratio, he's very interested in proportions, right?
You know the Greeks think a lot about proportions.
And for him, he looks at the ratio of the circumference of a circle to the diameter,
and he does it by putting in shapes that he understands that have straight sides,
like a square, actually what he starts with is a hexagon,
that almost looks like a circle, sitting inside the circle,
and another hexagon sitting outside the circle, tangent to the circle,
the inscribed and circumscribed hexagon.
And then he systematically doubles the number of sides,
so he goes from a 6-gon to a 12-gon to a 24-gon.
And you can picture as you add more and more corners to these polygons,
they start to look more and more like a real circle.
And he could calculate an iterative formula if he knows the area,
knows the circumference for a 6-gon,
it gives him the formula for the 12-gon,
and he works his way up till he eventually gets to the 96-gon,
and he shows that pi, this is a great formula,
he shows what we would today call pi is trapped between two numbers.
It's between the number 3 and 10 seventieths and 3 and 10 over 71,
which is cool because the 70 and the 71 are right next to each other.
So it's between 3 and 10 seventieths,
which you might recognize as 3 and 1 seventh,
or 22 sevenths, which a lot of people mistakenly think is equal to pi.
That's not correct, it's a bound on pi,
but that's Archimedes bound, 22 sevenths.
And then the other bound, which is a smaller, that's an upper bound,
and the smaller number, 3 plus 10 over 71, is a lower bound,
and pi is somehow trapped in between those two numbers.
So he does it by these inscribed and circumscribed 96-gons,
and it requires a lot of detailed approximations of square roots
using rational numbers that are still, people are debating,
how did he do it exactly, because he doesn't show his work.
Teachers out there, I know some of you are teachers,
see there's Beth, right, you would have taken off for Archimedes,
didn't show all his work.
Yeah, so we don't exactly know,
but he was a wizard with those approximations of fractions
of square roots and things,
but he got everything is right that he said.
If you don't appreciate Archimedes, he's really fantastic.
I would put him in the top three or four of all time in math,
he's really something with Newton and Riemann and Gauss,
those are really, but oiler too, those are like my top five.
For what it's worth.
Can we have another round of applause for Steve?
Thank you.
