at Cambridge University and he's been a professor of physics at Harvard University for the past
20 plus years I guess. Two facts about him that you might not know or maybe you do know is one
of MacArthur, genius of course, 1009. And the other thing is that he's also recipient of the
Ike Bilbell Prize in 2007 and what he wanted for was understanding wrinkly of sheets and manifolds
when they land on surfaces so every time I look in the mirror I'll keep the view.
That's pretty cool. I hope everybody else does the same from now on. Okay, thank you Sid.
It's a very small group so I hope that you will make this more of a multi-log and just
interrupt me as you feel the need to and correct me which I'm sure you will. So I wanted to tell
you something about some problems that I've been working on for more than a decade. All inspired
by originally Edward Lear and the wonderful poetry that he wrote in the 19th century associated
with collective nouns for groups of animals. So I'm going to show you one and I'm going to ask
you a question. So these are starlings from a BBC documentary above Rome so probably everybody
over here does know what the collective noun for starlings is. Memorization. What is it for rhinos?
A crash. What is it for owls? Parliament. Yeah, so I think what is it for?
I'm going to say, well, no, I'm not going to go, never mind. So the point about these
collectives is that it says something about function and that's very important and that's
what I want to try and emphasize over the next hour or so that even though from the
perspective that certainly I'm going to tell you a little bit about from physics, from mathematics,
you can ask about what kinds of and what forms of order do you see in collectives of organisms
on any scale from microbes to robots. But as the language, as English actually has got so many,
and I'm sure this is true of every language, has got so many different forms for collectives
different depending on the organism, it's associated with function. So why do these
collectives exist? Presumably they're associated with every collective there's a function. And
also from a physics point of view, you can ask a mathematics point of view, you can ask how do
they form. So there are three kinds of questions that you can ask about any kinds of collective
behavior in particular associated with collections of animals. And what I'd like to do is to ask
two different types of questions associated with collective behavior. One is how is collective
behavior constrained by physics. And the other is how does physics enable function in the context
of collective behavior. And I think it's interesting to point out a framework for this which has been
laid out a long time ago outside of physics by Nicholas Tinbergen, one of two brothers, both
of whom got the Nobel Prize. Tinbergen got the Nobel Prize in physiology and medicine and he shared
it with Conrad Lorenz and Frisch in 1967 and 1968. And he raised a set of questions which have formed
the bedrock of ethology in studying behavior in animals. He was originally thinking about single
animals, individuals, but we can ask the same question in the context of collective. So he asked,
you know, what is a behavior in terms of its function? So, you know, how can you describe
that function? Why does that function arise? How does that function come to be in the context
of causation? And then both a proximal and a distal perspective in an organism, how does that
behavior develop? And how does it essentially arise across different species in an evolutionary
setting? But you don't have to limit yourself to organisms. You can of course ask the same
question in the context of collections of organisms. And what I want to do is to make this
very specific because I'm thinking about function in the context of architectures
because they are very concrete, quite literally often in, for example, with the human
situation. But in the animal situation, you also have remarkable sets of architectures which are
formed from the scale of microbes. We can essentially create biofilms to ants, to bees. I'm going to
focus on social insects, to termites. And I've shown you three different scales. Each one of them
has organisms on the scale of hundreds, two thousands or even millions. In this case associated
with maximizing transport from one location on a tree to another. In this case, which I'll come
back to associated with understanding how to minimize heating and cooling conditions within
the inside and or mechanically being stable when responding to a wind. And in this case,
a combination of making sure that you are simultaneously not fully insulated from the
environment, but not fully porous to the environment so that the vagaries and the fluctuations
associated with the environment can be buffered to some extent by architectures.
So these functional collectives in general, lots of work has been gone on from a biological
perspective, tend to roughly be capable of being broken up into ways of controlling how
in a physical context, energy matter information can be transferred with an uncertain environment.
And that environment and the ways in which the collectives form are or have to be adaptable in
a way which I'll become, which has become clearer and also are spatially heterogeneous. So they're
not just temporal, but also complex spatial patterns that form. And moving away from our
perspective and thinking about energy matter information, if I'm thinking about these systems
in a biological context, we have to start thinking about how you can or not get coordination and
communication in the context of these functional self-organized patterns. And an important thing
that I think I don't have to convince anybody over here, but worth pointing out right at the
beginning is in none of these cases, is there any evidence of a plan or a planner? There is
some sensing, there is some action at the individual level, which gradually
transcends the individual and at the collective level leads to these functional patterns.
And the most important part is that you can't leave out the environment. And that's what I'm
going to talk about in three different examples. So you have to think about the organism, you've
got to think about the organism interacting with other conspecifics, and then eventually you've
got to think about how it interacts with the environment. It changes the environment and
is changed by the environment. And you have to see these three examples, we immediately see that,
to understand that. Okay, so as I said, typical kind of question that we can ask is both ways,
how does collective behavior enabled and how does collective behavior constrained by physics?
Okay, I want to talk about social insects
for a reason which I don't think again is necessary for me to elaborate too much,
primarily because you have a remarkable, so these are the big four classes of social insects,
these wasps, ants, and termites. But from the point of view of the perspective that I came
to this from, I started out thinking about morphogenesis and thinking about multicellular
organisms. And there are lots of parallels between multicellular organisms and super
organisms, where these super organisms have a separation between the germline and the soma,
just like in multicellular organisms as well. Here you have often usually a queen,
and that's the only organism in colony that's capable of reproductive behavior. But then
everything else is shared, you have common nests, they are unlike in us, social insects are clonal,
you have reproductive mission of labor, as I said before, you have cooperative brood care,
you have overlapping generations, and the consequence of the last two is that you have
a sense of culture, and that culture is transmitted not through genetics, but through other means.
Okay, as a consequence of having these very large collections of organisms, you find that
they are extraordinary problem solvers. They can solve problems in physiology that are impossible
to solve on the scale of an individual organism, but can be solved collectively on the scale of
hundreds to millions of organisms. And as I said, I want to tell you about architectures,
and architectures are wonderful because you can essentially figure out a way to connect physiology
to physics, in this case the physiology is the architecture which is living, but not necessarily
made only of living things. It's essentially the environment which is dynamically changing,
and I'm going to show you examples of how these architectures allow for respiration and ventilation
on scales much larger than organisms in the context of bees, thermoregulation also in the
context of bees, and mechanoregulation in the context of termites and bees.
I've said this before, I want to emphasize this again. We should be thinking about the fact that
in all these examples that I'll tell you about, the environment is a malleable substrate, so it
can be changed by the organism, and a consequence of that is it changes the behavior of the organism,
and so the environment serves as a slow communication channel. The dynamics of the
environment is slow, typically compared to the dynamics of the organism,
modulo being close to where we are in the context of climate change and tipping points and what
not, but in general you have a separation of timescales associated with these things.
Okay, so the three examples that I want to tell you about which involve
connecting experiment and theory in very different places, and very different times over the last
decade. First example that I want to tell you about is associated with termite mounds. This
is an image of a termite mound from here, from Bangalore. We started out doing experiments over
here and then in Namibia and then parts of Western Africa. This is an image of a termite mound during
the day. This is an image of the termite mound at night viewed through an infrared camera superposed
on a regular image, and what you can see is essentially changes in temperature, so this
part is at night warm and cold, depending on time of the day or time of the night. Now I'll
come back to this, and this is work that was done with Sam Oko, who was a PhD student, and Alex
Hyde, also a PhD student, and I'll come back to that. So what are the questions over here? The
questions are what is the structure for, how is it built, and how does this all work out in the
context of a larger ecological question of the environment? This is a termite mound.
Oh, what? I'm going to show you all this. I'm going to tell you about the anatomy,
I'm going to tell you about the physiology, so hold the question. And please do stop me
with questions at any point. Some of them I will answer immediately, but some,
if you don't mind, I'll wait because I will have something to say about that.
The second problem that I want to tell you about was done in collaboration with Orif Pelleg, who I
know is an external faculty member over here. She started this when she was a postdoc. Now she's
in Colorado, and Jake Peters was a graduate student, and this is understanding ventilation, but not
for termite mounds, ventilation in bee hives or bee boxes, and this was done not so far from Boston
in our Concord Field Station. And then if I have time, I'll tell you about a third problem where
we essentially brought everything into the lab. Initially we wanted to do this, but we haven't
been able to. The third problem is associated with the third class of social insects. We haven't
had a chance to work on wasps yet. I would love to find a way to do so. And the third problem is
associated with understanding how architectures can be broken and built in the context of ants,
which want to try and escape from a coral in which they are essentially initially placed.
And then I want to gradually move from thinking about ants to robotic mimics of this. And the
question over there is what are the necessary, what is the minimum necessary set of rules,
and what is the minimum sufficient set of rules associated with having a programmable set of
agents that can interact with each other and interact with an environment to be able to capture
some aspects of the dynamics of organisms interacting with each other and with an environment,
all of which are malleable. And this is work that continues, actually. It started out with
Ganga Prasad and Sovik Mandal. Fabio built robots, and this was all a very close collaboration with
a colleague of mine in biology, Venkimofi, who was very interested in collectively.
Okay. So I'll give you the final result or way to think about, at least the way I've
approached this problem. And then you can come back to the talk periodically. If you feel like
a, every one of these I claim, and I'll show you evidence for, even though the problems that are
solved on much larger scales associated with very simple local sensing rules and local actuation
rules. And the key ingredient that I would like to emphasize is global physics, physics associated
with how heat is moving around, how vibrations are moving around, how fluid dynamics plays a role,
and coupled with simple local sensing and local actuation rules and global physics,
you can get both function and architecture as the claim. And I want to essentially tell you how
we think about this in all these problems. Okay. So termite mounds are remarkable. They are an
ecosystem on their own. You can actually have collections of collections, if you want. These
are collections of termite mounds from Australia. They're called magnetic termite mounds, wall
termite mounds, which seem to be oriented roughly in a particular angle with respect to magnetic
knots. So each mound can have millions of individuals. A termite itself is the size of a
fingernail. And you find them everywhere except in Antarctica. Probably the most remarkable example
of recent work in this space. This is England, Great Britain. This is the coast of South America.
This is a set of termite mounds which was excavated five or six years ago.
Look at the scale. It is not one mound. There are many mounds. A whole bunch of them.
Hundreds of thousands of square kilometers. So they essentially have the capacity to completely
change the ecology of the environment in which they are. So you can ask questions on the very,
very large scale. You can ask questions on the intermediate scale or on the very small scale.
And I'll talk about the intermediate and the small scale. What happens on the scale of an
individual termite mound when I coarse-grain and look at it? What happens at the level of
termites interacting with each other and with the termite mound as they build it? Those are the
two scales in which I want to tell you about. I won't tell you anything about on the very large
scale. So answering Sid's question, we started out, as I said, working on it in India with a
particular species, Odontoktermis obesis. You know, a few millimeters in size. Termite mounds are
hollow, but they are hollow on different scales. You don't have a chimney at the top,
contrary to what sometimes is shown in children's books. This is a view from the top. You don't
also have to have this very fluted structure. So for example, this is one from Namibia.
It's more or less axi-symmetric. Certainly it doesn't have flutes. These ones are not.
Under what conditions do you get it? Under what conditions you don't? I don't really have a sense
of that. The ecologists and the natural historians haven't actually really, I think, quantified
where and when you get this. So it's porous on multiple scales, and you can ask many questions.
You know, what is this good for from a physiology point of view? How might it be built from a
morphogenesis point of view? And what are the effects on ecology? And this is the question
that I will not answer. I'll try and answer some of these two. Okay, so start with anatomy. So this
is the anatomy of a termite mound. The most interesting part of the mound is not what you see
above. It's below. It's what's called the gallery. And within this gallery is where the brood is,
where most of the termites are most of the time. And along with the brood and the termites,
you also have fungus. Essentially, the termites will bring water and fungi from their environment
in the neighborhood of an individual mound, and they will use this to feed the brood and keep
the entire environment moist. The gallery itself, you can't, of course, see until it erupts into
a mound. So there's a very difficult question over here, which nobody's really addressed,
which is on what are the conditions for the eruption of a mound? And nobody's been able
to really build a mound in the lab. There are some attempts partially successful.
Continuing to answer the questions that you raised, a collaborator of mine, I'm sorry,
his name is not here, Rupert Soar basically took a mound, which we knew was not inhabited anymore.
And how do we know this? We know this by essentially looking to see whether it starts to degrade over
a period of time. And if there is no repair, then you know it very likely it's been abandoned.
You can pour gypsum into it, allow that to precipitate. And then you can wash out the mud.
And this is the negative image of a termite mound. So you have vast, almost vertical channels,
which are themselves connected to each other. The termite mound is micro porous on the outside.
And as you go further and further inside, it becomes more and more macro porous. So the porosity
is got a gradient, small, many pores on the outside. As you go deeper and deeper, the pores
become larger and larger. And you have essentially vertical channels. And of course, this would
suggest that it has a very important part in ventilation. I'll show you some images associated
with that. So what is the physiology of this? Best way to describe this is to ask my favorite
naturalist and probably everybody's. Here in South Africa, it can also get very hot,
but there's no danger of flooding. So termites can take refuge from the heat below ground,
where it's cool and relatively stable. But two million insects living below ground
create a different kind of problem. The air around them gets stale. So termites need to have a way
of linking the underground air with the fresh air above a ventilation system. And they do that
with this. And to see how it works, you've got to look inside.
Using the latest scanning techniques, we can create a picture of the mound's interior.
An intricate network of passages lead to a central chimney.
Hot stale air from the insect population below rises up through the chimney.
But the top of the mound is sealed. So how does this stale air escape? The mound may look as though
it has strong defensive walls like a fortress. But in fact, these walls are porous, and their
primary purpose is to harness the wind. Fresh air blowing against the side of the mound
is forced through the tiny holes in these walls. From there, it travels through the smaller tunnels
until it reaches the central chimney. Here, the cooler fresh air mixes with the hot stale air
rising from the insect community below. Meanwhile, some air is blown around the side of the mound.
This creates a suction that pulls the stale air out of the chimney and out through the outer walls.
So an internal air current is created and the whole mound ventilated.
The mound's inhabitants spend most of their time close to or below ground level.
So he said, to De Bilan Mero said two things. First, he said that you have to have transport
across the wall, which is porous, which of course makes a lot of sense. But in fact,
as you know, because the pores are small, hydrodynamic effects are all going to be
dominated by viscous forces. They're not going to be dominated by inertia. And he then said something
else, which should have gotten all your antlers or your antenna up. And he said something about the
fact that, oh, if I have air moving around it, then the velocity of the air is high,
the pressure is low, and it's going to be suction. That can't be correct. And you can do an estimate
of that. And so clearly, if you have porosity, part of the argument associated with transport,
because of differences in concentration, is correct. But the airflow argument associated with
Bernoulli is wrong. And so this is the kind of argument which has been around in the literature
for a while. And we decided we'd go and measure things. We went to Namibia and we measured. What
did we measure? So you can measure the fluid flow velocities outside. You can essentially drill
holes into the termite mounds. And you can put in temperature sensors. And you can also have
velocity sensors to measure. I want to emphasize velocity sensors, not just speed, but direction
of the motion of the air inside. And then you can ask whether this is correct or not. And I'm going
to summarize the story, because it's almost a decade old now. And the story is that the argument
that Attenborough put forward is only partly correct. An important part was missed. And what
is the important part that was missed? In fact, let me show you an image. And then I'm going to
walk you through the argument. You know, our measurements and so on are there in this paper,
which is, as I said, published almost a decade ago. I showed you this image in the beginning.
This is a termite mound using regular light. This is an infrared during the day. And this is at
night. And so what really happens is the following. The mound is heated during the day and it cools
at night. But because the mound has a large thermal mass and therefore a thermal inertia,
the entire mound can't be heated simultaneously. It has to be heated from the outside and gradually
moves inwards. And so there's going to be a lag. If my thermal inertia is large enough,
then the outside is warm during the day, the inside is cold, hasn't had chance to heat up,
and exactly the reverse at night, because the inside is starting to warm up
during the day, outside starts to cool quickly. That means you have thermal gradients.
And these thermal gradients in space are a function of temperature variations in time.
So in fact, the termite mound actually is a heat engine, which instead of working between two,
a source and a sink in temperature, as we are used to thinking in thermodynamics,
which are kept at constant temperature, now in fact, the source and sink are oscillating.
And the mound is harnessing this temperature variation in time to create spatial flows
inside the mound, which we measure. So during the day, the outside of the mound is hot,
the air right inside is warm. As a consequence, air is going to rise. But because the air can't
leave because of the microporosity, so during the day, you have cycles like this, which we measure.
And at night, the outside starts to cool, so the mound air, sorry, the air in the mound just
inside starts to cool, it starts to sink, and the whole thing reverses. And so when will this
happen? It's not going to happen continuously, it's going to happen at dusk and a dawn, or slightly
after dusk and slightly before dawn, which means that the mound is a lung, and it's a lung driven
by temperature variations. And the mound essentially breathes twice a day. In us, our lungs work
primarily because of our diaphragm. Our diaphragm is essentially fundamentally what is essentially
pushing and pulling air in and out of the lungs. And instead of the diaphragm providing the muscular
forces in us, over here, temperature variations are essentially giving rise to the same thing.
And so we measured this in dead mounds. To be sure that we were right, we said, ah, in a live
mound, if this is the same thing, if this is happening in a live mound, which we know is live,
as I said, because it's under construction, we can see termites. In a dead mound, we see exactly
the same thing. Both in a live and a dead mound, we see the same thing. And we did this with two
different species on two different continents. We did this in Africa, in Namibia. We did this
in India with a different species. In Africa, in the temperate region, temperature variations are
much larger. And I'm going to come back to this. So therefore, you have much larger variations
to temperature between day and night. The consequence of that is the velocity should be much
larger. In India, the temperature variations are much smaller. The velocity should be smaller.
All that checks out. And the idea that it works like a lung, here is the evidence for this.
So what I'm showing you over here is what's happening in the nest and the gallery and what's
happening in the chimney. The carbon dioxide concentration starts to go up during the day,
as the termites are physiologically active. And then when at about 6 or 7 p.m., when this entire
cycle reverses, instead of having flows like this, the flows reverse, you excavate the bottom,
you excavate the gallery. And when you excavate the gallery, the carbon dioxide comes up. And
when the carbon dioxide comes up, the concentration of carbon dioxide inside is high compared to
outside. Now the porosity kicks in because the concentration difference allows you to
essentially equilibrate. So you have large-scale flows coupled to small-scale diffusion,
all driven by a heat source and a heat sink, which are fluctuating. So this is an interesting
observation, if only because it suggests that unlike our heat engines, animals don't have to work
at constant source and constant sink temperatures, you can have fluctuating versions of this.
Okay, so I'll leave it at that. A second question that this raises is when I said, ah,
the thermal inertia is large, if the thermal inertia was not large, of course, temperatures
will equilibrate quickly. And if temperature equilibrate quickly, you don't have to have any
of this. And so that begs the question, how in the world do termites figure out how to
build a structure of this kind so that it actually works? And I want to introduce another
naturalist, evolutionary biologist, who basically poses the question and then I'll show you
an attempt at an answer. Okay. Now what's fascinating to me about this is that if you came
across a building like that, you'd assume that some architect had designed it and he'd had a blueprint
of some kind, right, the drawing of how it was going to go, and he told people exactly what to do.
Now, this termite mine, nobody had an image of the complete building. I mean, no termite has a
picture of the whole mound. All the termites do is they, they build a mound and they're following
some rules. And to be honest, I don't think we know exactly what those rules are. My guess is that
they're fairly, fairly simple. So he gives it at that. What are they doing? What are they doing?
Fairly simple. So he gives it at that. What are the rules? How can we essentially now connect
the building behavior to the environmental changes? Because the building behavior will
change the environment. The environment will then feed back and change the behavior. For
example, if I build a mound, there are only certain places that the termites can get to.
So can we now understand how to couple the physics of the environment to the behavioral
biology of the organism? So don't separate out, this part is living and this part is not living.
So here's a cartoon. And here's a phrase which essentially summarizes everything.
You know, so Churchill famously said, we shape our buildings after they shape us. Well,
in the context of termites, the mound morphology clearly will influence the airflow. I've already
shown you, at least I wave my hands and told you how it works. We have some measurements of that.
The airflow is going to change the olfactory currents. It's going to change the pheromone
concentrations. The pheromone concentrations are going to change the termite behavior. And the termite
behavior is going to change the mind morphology. So you can't anymore separate out the organism
from the environment just as we can't separate out the brain from the body. We have to think
about all these things together. So how do we unpack this? And I'll show you two ways of unpacking
this. First is understanding the coarse-grained morphology of the termite mound. And second,
I'm going to show you CAT scans of the mound itself. And then I'm going to see how to unpack
the fine-grained morphology. First thing that you notice is that termite mounds are conical.
The aspect ratio is, they're not spheres. In fact, I'm going to show you examples.
Termite mounds, which you see in environments which are shady or termite mounds on trees,
they're much closer to spherical. So first question is, how come they become tall? And
I don't have to, I think, explain to this audience that one way to break symmetry is to use buoyancy.
Because as soon as I heat the air, heat air is going to move up and down much faster than sideways.
And if I essentially have buoyancy, that means I can move pheromones much faster in one direction
compared to the other. That means, therefore, I'll be able to build more in one direction compared
to the other if the pheromones were essentially responsible for the behavior of the termite.
And as a consequence, and I'll show you some scaling laws for that in just a minute,
as a consequence, you would expect that as you move from environments where the temperature
variations are small to environment where temperature variations are large,
the mound should become larger. This has been known for 100 years. If you go to the savanna,
you go to parts of southern Africa, you go to the temperate zones, the mounds can be 3,
3.5, 4 meters. You go to India, they are smaller. You go to a tree, they're even smaller. So already
you say, ah, that the physics of the environment is playing a very important role. Can I essentially
unpack that? So here is an attempt to do that. I've already, this is a cartoon. I'm going to assume
axi-symmetry. You have all kinds of interesting questions associated with how you break axi-symmetry.
We haven't addressed them. This is what I told you a minute or two ago that associated with
diurnal variations in temperature. You have heat and therefore air moving around. That means
pheromones are moving around. And the simplest rule for biology, for behavior, is you build if
the concentration of pheromones increases past the critical value, you stop and then you allow
things to degrade if the pheromone concentration does not. That's it. That's the only place
where I introduce a behavioral rule. Minimally, I have to therefore couple three different fields.
Temperature, which is the driving source of all that's happening. It's a function nominally of
time, but it becomes a function of space, s and z, z and s in the radial direction because I'm
thinking about a conducting porous material, a velocity which is driven by temperature variations
because of buoyancy and then pheromone concentration because they're essentially moved around. So
minimally, we have to have these three fields and forget the equations. I'll just describe what they
mean, which I think is very intuitive. Dienal oscillation would change in time with a frequency
which is one over 24 hours. Heat flow, so temperature variations are driven by advection
because of the fluid flow and they also have diffusion. Fluid flow, this is a porous medium,
it's driven essentially by temperature variations. Temperature variations lead to buoyancy and the
fluid is assumed to be incompressible. And the pheromone is advected by the fluid, it diffuses
and it has a source. And the source of all the pheromones are in the gallery because that's
where most of the termites are most of the time. Those are my equations. Here is the only place
where the biology quote comes in. You build, if the pheromone concentration becomes large,
then large in a critical value, you stop building or you essentially let it degrade and that's
coming in otherwise. That's it. What are the parameters? So there is a thickness of the wall,
which is where you have microporosity, after which you have this microporosity. There's a
thermal diffusion length, which is essentially associated with how much of the mound you can
heat or cool during the day or night. There is a buoyancy parameter, which is telling you
as a function of the temperature variations how fast or how slow is the fluid flow moving up and
down. And there is a pheromone penetration depth. And that is the idea that if I have a source of
pheromones and I just uniformly allow them to diffuse, there comes a critical distance beyond
which the concentration has fallen down below critical value. And if it's fallen down below
critical value, you won't build larger than that. And if there was no temperature variation,
or sorry, if there was no buoyancy, then this would be isotropic, so you get a spherical
termite mound. The reason that you get an elongated mound is precisely and only because
the termites are harnessing the buoyancy without even thinking about it, to have pheromones move
much faster in the vertical direction because of buoyancy and only slowly diffuse in the horizontal
direction. So you're assuming that the pheromones would produce their constant rate.
That anything beyond that will essentially make the problem more complicated. But yes,
in the simplest setting, I'm assuming that there is a source of pheromones that's uniform and at
one location. You can start making all kinds of complexities beyond that. Yes, indeed.
Yeah.
Which is known? Yes.
No, most over there, they're mostly excavating. All the building is happening above. So in the
gallery, there's a lot of porosity. Okay. Okay. So, but that's where the brood is,
and the brood are metabolically very active. So there's a huge source of pheromones and humidity,
water vapor, consequence of respiration, right there. But I don't know what was the...
There's a motion assumption here that I don't know. So you're assuming something about the
distribution of termites across the structure, and that's not... It's not here because I've
zoomed out and I'm thinking about not the individual dynamics of the termites. I'll come
back to that when I think about a second level of a model, which is more fine-grained. Here,
I'm saying I'm thinking about the termite mount as it's being built over an entire season.
So you're assuming that they're somehow uniformly spread over the structure?
I am assuming nothing about them except the fact that the order production is happening
at a particular location with a particular rate. Right. Okay. If the termites were actually moving
around and depositing it, if you hold on, I will show you a more fine-grained model,
which asks, what is the fine-grained structure? And I think part of the message,
perhaps, which I should have said, and maybe I'll say now, is I'm going to build a sequence of models,
actually in this case, two models. One for the coarse-grained perspective to understand
the aspect ratio and the size of the mount. Another one for the fine-grained structure,
because I'm going to show you with CAT scans that, in fact, the mount has a layered,
smectic-like behavior, smectic-like structure, you know, like a parking garage. And in order
to understand that, I'll have to start worrying about the dynamics of termites which are loaded
with cement, termites which are essentially unloaded and moving around, and how the air
is moving through all that I will build in at a more fine-grained level, if you will,
just wait for a couple of minutes. Question. More questions. Yeah.
So you said, you know, this still holds in the gallery. In the gallery, they're always active
because of the concentration of pheromones. In this case, I'm assuming that the gallery
is where most of the pheromones are produced. There could be pheromones produced elsewhere,
but I'm assuming that the concentration of pheromones elsewhere is a consequence of
being produced in large amounts at the base, and then moving around because of either diffusion
or buoyancy. I guess it's just for my mental picture. Is the gallery always increasing in size?
No, no, no. The gallery is first built, reaches a critical size. I don't know. We don't know what
the critical size is. And then, and only then, does the mound start to erupt outwards. Upwards,
sorry. Okay. So I've told you the parameters. There are three-dimensionalist parameters from
these four scales. There are two scaling laws, which I'm going to tell you about, which we can
calculate as consequences of these equations, but I could just directly read off once I know
what the parameters are. One is the aspect ratio. What is the height compared to the radius?
And the most important thing is its non-unity, and the reason it's non-unity is because of the
presence of this quantity, which I'm going to call a Peclet number. It's related to things
that have dynamics associated with how diffusion and advection play off against each other.
And what is this saying? This Peclet number is a ratio of this quantity
to this quantity, a pheromone penetration to buoyancy. So what is that really saying? That means
if the Peclet number is small, it's dominated by diffusion, therefore it's going to remain spherical.
If the Peclet number is large, that means the buoyancy length is large, which means you have
very, very large flows in the vertical direction, which means that the aspect ratio becomes very,
very large. Okay. And the reason it's a square, you must expect it should go at least as a square,
is because the symmetry doesn't matter which way it's going, whether it's up or down. So you could
have just guessed that, but in fact, you can calculate it and you can do the numerics solving
these PDEs and you find that that's correct. And there is another lens at timescale and the
timescale is associated with how long does it take to reach steady state. Why will it reach a
steady state? And this is a non-equilibrium steady state. It reaches a steady state because
eventually the pheromone concentration on the walls reaches phi star. And once it reaches
phi star, it can't grow anymore outwards. And similarly, once you reach steady velocity,
it can't grow to large in a critical height. And that characteristic time, not surprisingly,
is related to, I'm going to call this the BI, the BO number, which for all kinds of
historical reasons is named for the scientist BO, and it's characterized by this thermal diffusion
lens. So how much does that heat penetrate in or out of this? And you can calculate solutions,
which I'm going to show you when here are solutions of the PDEs, which show you different
kinds of mounds. And you can qualitatively, but only qualitatively see that they don't
have a complete discordance with observations. I mean, I can't say that they capture all of it,
but qualitatively they're correct. But question. Sorry, on that. So if the population were growing.
Very good. Yeah, ask the question. Well, that final inequality then would not be here.
Indeed. And if the populations are growing, termite mound will continuously grow. And so now,
and this is where you get a second mound, which starts to come up. Because what happens is there
are two possibilities. One is just you grow this individual mound, but then that means you're
depleting resources from the immediate neighborhood. You're depleting water, you're depleting fungus,
and so there is a characteristic scale beyond which it's no longer efficient to keep growing
this one mound. Instead, you'll find a second mound that grows. And in fact, I should say, so
we worked in Namibia for two seasons. And in India for three seasons. What we found is that
mounds will be built in a period of three to four months. In India, the monsoon essentially washes
out almost everything in Namibia. We found often that grazing animals use this as a backscratcher,
and they will destroy it. But in either case, rarely do you have a mound which will essentially
persist over, for example, we came back after a year, and most of the mounds we were studying were
gone. So there are much more sophisticated analysis associated with the timescale over
which you would expect this to stay. I don't really know. I don't have anything to say.
But I do want to now zoom in. You can see I hope these mounds, these are cross sections of mounds,
and you see the mounds are actually layered structures. And I want to now tell you a little
bit about them. So not the macromorphogenesis, but the macromorphogenesis zooming in. And here's
an image from our collaborator, Geethe Rallos, who studies collective behavior in Toulouse,
took one of the West African mounds. This is a much smaller one. Look at the size over here. These
are small of the order of something that you can hold in your hand. And you see this beautiful
smectic structure. In fact, if you, you know, like love these kind of ordered structures,
and familiar with liquid crystals, for example, where you have nematics, smectics,
smectics A, smectics C, and then you have cholesterics and all, and like a discoid liquid
crystals and polarized liquid crystals and whatnot, you know that you get defects,
edge dislocations, screw dislocations, so you see all these structures. But very importantly,
unlike in liquid crystals, where those are consequences of a very racial principle associated
with minimizing energy, here these are arising from non-equilibrium considerations. There's nothing
about the system, which is at equilibrium. And yet, because of the geometry, you are
inevitably going to be forced to have dislocations. And these dislocations, as I said, can take the
form of edge and screw dislocations. How do we understand these? Okay, same picture. I have to
couple the environment with the behavior, and with the airflow. In this case, I'm going to
think of now three fluids interacting with each other. As I said, the population of a termite
mound can be in the order of millions. I have two classes of termite mounds, mounds, termites,
which are loaded. So they have a bit of clay, particle of clay that they're moving around.
I have termite mounds which are unloaded. The mounds which are loaded are going to essentially
respond to gradients in pheromone and then drop the nest material at some particular location.
That changes the local porosity. That local porosity changes the dynamics of how the pheromone is
moving around in the presence or in the absence of airflow. That then changes the behavior of the
termite. And we have to essentially couple these exactly like what I was showing you before.
What Guy and his collaborators had shown a couple of years before, we started working on this
by looking at the behavior of individual termites in a Petri dish. So they weren't able to build
anything on the scale of a mound itself, but they were able to build small attempts that the
termites made to create these layered structures. And they found that the building rate is proportional
to first approximation of the pheromone concentration. And the removal rate is not
proportional. It's constant. So they essentially build more and more in response to higher and
higher concentrations. But then when they break it, they break it at a uniform rate.
And I'm going to use this in a model. And here is my model. And I'm sorry, it's a bit messy.
But let me explain what the physics is associated with each one of these equations. And these are
just essentially conservation laws and some reaction diffusion type equations. Let me explain
what. So the nest material, U is the nest material. When U varies from zero to one, it's either not
there at all or it's solid when it's one. Nest material is moved around in consequence of termites
which are loaded and destroyed because of termites which are essentially taking material away.
N plus and N minus are the populations of the termites which are loaded and unloaded.
And the nest, when it's being built, is assumed to be a soft porous solid. So it's like clay,
which will gradually settle down. And that's settling down. We build in through this term over
here. G is an effective gravity. It's essentially just loading the system. The fact that this is a
diffusion equation is consistent with the case. If I have a porous system which is just heavy
without any loading or unloading, without activity, it will start to sag. That's essentially why the
Leaning Tower of Pisa is leaning over large periods of time because of differences in the
foundation and the soil around it. It starts to essentially degrade. So that's the nest material.
The termite workers themselves are diffusing their chemo-tactic because they essentially
respond to gradients in the soil through chemo-tactic coefficient. And the termite workers themselves
can switch from being loaded to unloaded with a rate k. This diffusivity which is non-linear is
simply there because you can't have any diffusivity when u is equal to 1 since it's a solid. So it's
essentially completely gone. When u is equal to 1, it's a solid. Therefore, the termites can't move
at all. And finally, the pheromone concentration is diffusion. There is addition because of the
pheromones, because of the termites which are loaded. And there is a rate of degradation.
And the building and removal rates are very simple forms which essentially are proportional to the
loading of the loaded termites or the unloaded termites. And this u times 1 minus u is precisely
again so that it vanishes when you have no material and it also vanishes when there is only a solid.
So you can do a linear stability analysis and pull out the dimensionless parameters.
And the key dimensionless parameters that matter are the rate at which
diffusion and degradation arise in the pheromone concentration, a rate associated with the settling,
and the chemo-tactic coefficient. How strongly or how weakly do the termites respond to gradients
in pheromones? Here is an example of a simulation. I hope that you can see it. You get this layered
structure. The layer spacing is essentially, it shouldn't surprise you, anybody who's looked
at these reaction diffusion equations, you always get a spacing when you balance degradation with
diffusion. There's a characteristic length scale, which is this square root of those two. It turns
out for the values that we have in the system, this characteristic balance between diffusion and
degradation dominate and give you this spacing. No surprises that you also get edge dislocation
like structures and you also get screw dislocation like structures because you will never be able
to build perfectly when you're trying to essentially get layers. The only last point which I want to
make is what sets the orientation of the layers and the orientation of the layers is set by
gravity. It's essentially right there because otherwise you could say, oh, why should it be
layered this way? Why can't it be layered this way? Or why can't it be layered that way? And that's
because the settling is happening in one direction. So gravity in a very humble but profound, I would
say, way dominates both the physics of the large scale buoyancy driven circulation and on this
small scale setting the polarization of the layer orientation as well. Okay, that's my second
story about mound micro morphogenesis and I hope that it's clear no plan, no planner, there isn't
even a representation of the task. Okay, we think about intelligence requiring representation,
there is no representation anywhere. There is all that's happening is local sensing and local
action and out of that you can essentially get these structures and I want to emphasize
these are also out of equilibrium. They are not solutions of any variation problems even though
they look like they may have a variational way of getting there, for example, in the crystals.
So therefore they're both repairable and they're also adaptable. They're repairable because if I
monkey around with what happens at one location, immediately these dynamics will essentially change
the way in the pheromone moves around and therefore it will repair itself and it's also adaptable
for the same reason because if the temperature variations are present, then you will essentially
upscale or downscale the pattern. I'm just wondering what limits the size of the pheromone
and also the size of the population. So the size I believe is associated with the population,
it's scaled with the population. Now you're asking what sets the population and I don't
know the answer. I do know that what has been seen and that's primarily in these three
mounds, so they're not really mounds, they're much smaller nests. You will see characteristic
population and term and mound size correlate very well. In the context of mounds on the ground,
you have to have ground penetrating radar or something of that sort to be able to first
know where to even look and then start asking the question. I don't really have a whole lot to say.
Context of how long do they persist? I think the question that you're asking is a question of
is it more efficient to repair a mound or as it ages and it's physical aging or is it better
to start a new mound and so that's I think now much harder question to understand in the absence
of any data. I mean you can make up a story that past some age it just becomes very hard to continuously
repair the mounds and then you start making another one but that's my stories as good as yours.
Okay all right so I have 10 minutes or less? Okay so I want to switch maybe I'll just give
you a brief view. I think you must have heard some of it from Orit. I'll give you...
Do you know any of the communication industry of this and strategies? I mean all that term
might sort of crap at building mounds or is there any comparative data that gives you a feeling for that?
There probably is. I am not able to recall having quantitative data. I can tell you about
quantitative data from an evolutionary point of view associated with the fact that because we've
studied three different species in three different continents you know the size of the mound, the
shape of the mound we can qualitatively understand using these scaling laws. Temperature variations
becoming larger, the mound becomes larger, populations becoming larger, the mound becoming
larger. If you're now asking me can you predict the exponents? I mean we can but can you essentially
verify anything? No, zero. I mean these experiments, yeah, no. So the only part of the history is we've
studied three different species in three different continents. They're all conforming with the model.
They are qualitatively consistent.
You know I have another life where we actually study just the physics of things where I think we can
be a lot more hard-nosed about exponents and phase diagrams and so on and if I try to compare it with
that part we are very far away unfortunately. So this is all qualitative at this point,
unfortunately. Okay, all right. In the next 10 minutes I want to first give you a view of the
kinds of problems we've studied with bees but I won't tell you about any of them and then I'll
switch to ants if I have a little bit of time but I'm also happy to stop after. It's okay. So this is
a bee beard if you like in the Concord Field Station and you know on a day like this actually
at a time like this but probably about seven years ago or so, eight years ago and so you know this
cluster of bees is hanging by essentially holding on to its neighbors. Okay and why is it doing this?
So probably the most famous thing that everybody knows about in the context of collective behavior
of bees is associated with the waggle dance. Okay so when the bees essentially have to make a
decision about creating or moving to a new home then there's this remarkable set of events. First
I think described by Carl von Frisch in the 1930s and 40s for which as I said he and Thinbergen
and Conrad Lorenz shared Nobel Prize in 1967 and 68 where the bees essentially signal to each other
by waggling their bodies, changing their orientation and having more or less vigor associated with a
location. Once that decision has been made the bees have to move from one location to the other
and they typically move in over a period of days so they don't have the capacity to do this in one
day and if they do this as it will typically happen at this time of the year early spring then
there's a potential problem which is that they may freeze at night and to prevent freezing at night
they essentially have to create a bivouac for the night for maybe two nights maybe three nights
and this is the kind of bivouac that they treat where where they create where they essentially
hold on to each other so this is a potential solution to two problems one you need to be
mechanically stable so you have to hold on to the branch not at one point but over some finite
length of the branch or the bow and another is to essentially minimize the amount of surface to
reduce the amount of loss heat loss and there's very nice questions not just associated with
how they form these structures but even the structure of the structure itself which means
what which means what type of bees are on the outside and what type of bees on the inside
for example we know due to the work of Bernd Heinrich from the 1970s that in fact the younger
bees are on the inside the older bees on the outside not only that the bees on the outside
have pneumatic order okay so a very beautiful set of questions associated with trying to minimize
the thermal shock and the mechanical shock so a few years ago with Jake Peters and Ulpela we studied
this and I want to show you an experiment where Jake did and I won't tell you what the theory
which was done a few years ago so here's an experiment Jake basically took a piece of wood
created a little cage to which he attached which he attached to the piece of wood and within which
he also had a queen and then the bees essentially aggregated around that and he put this whole
thing inside a box and changed the temperature so you want to essentially understand how does this
cluster respond to temperature variations okay let me show you
the temperature is cycling from between 15 degrees 14 degrees or so the bees will go into a chill
coma and it's changing over a period of a few hours and what you see is essentially a porous
medium which is capable of responding by becoming more porous or less porous it becomes more porous
as it heats up and becomes less porous as it cools down what does that mean that means that
it becomes hotter and hotter you essentially create change the porosity and by changing the porosity
you can essentially get airflow and by changing the airflow you can get dynamics and cooling and
then when it cold when it becomes cold it shrinks and you know we understand we teach students how
to do calculations of heat conduction temperature variations and so on in the context of a first
course in thermodynamics and this is very cool because it's functional and it's active so what
are the bees doing so they're essentially spreading themselves out or moving their legs out or moving
their legs in and one can make some sense out of this so this is an example of if you want
where temperature regulation is associated with changing the physicality the embodiment of how
the collective essentially responds we're seeing the porosity is like the area
that's the simplest measure or it has now gone on I think I've actually measured in fact using an
x she's put the whole hive into a tomograph and she can essentially watch what is inside right
now you can just see it's the same number of bees how do we know that we can measure the weight
before and after and we can see that the same number of bees the volume is much larger therefore
the porosity has increased and the density has decreased and therefore in the surface area right
there has to be naturally a change in the surface area but the total number of bees kept is kept
constant yeah okay there's mechanical adaptation so as I said you have to change you have to
figure out how to maintain temperature you have to also figure out how to essentially respond
to shocks mechanical shocks so if I put you inside an elevator and I start shaking you what would you
do I mean I've shown you the result over there but what would you do individually okay move to
the ground so that you can basically move and have your center of mass as low as possible or go to a
wall this happens collectively as well okay so when I start shaking the cluster of bees they
start spreading out okay so this is very interesting because this is a kind of mechanical if you want
way of distributing the load because if the bees at the base have to take up all the load the bees
at the tip don't have to take up any of the load at all and yet they do so so is this a mechanical
altruism I don't know okay because all that's happening move all the bees to the to the surface
and therefore the load on all of them reduces and they're much happier okay so you can you can make
sense of this again using a theoretical model which I'm pretty sure Orit has talked to you about
but fundamentally it's playing with a collective version of a set of pendula which can essentially
oscillate from side to side we can also oscillate up and down so you have two degrees of freedom
you have a whole collection of them and you can show that functionally load distribution is much
much better and much more robust when you flatten out at high amplitudes or high frequencies and
then there is a third problem so this is mechanical thermal regulation that's mechanical adaptation
and and and then there is the hydrodynamics of ventilation so in the termite mound the mound
is more or less fixed and the whole mound works as a lung
in the bee box the bees can't question yeah what would be the trade-off between shaking
very good between these two yeah I don't have an answer what we do find is that you can see
over here the yeah why don't we can you ask me the question at the end I'll come back to that
because it's a very difficult question associated with you know if I want to be mechanically stable
and thermally relatively well insulated what kinds of shapes do you get I mean we have some thoughts
on that but just can you hold on and ask me the question at the end okay so I want to contrast
ventilation in the termite mound where the mound is fixed and temperature variations as a function
of time are converted to spatial gradients which lead to flows in a bee box the bee box is fixed
and a remarkable solution seems to present itself um on the solution so this is the bee box right
here this is where the brood is now let me show you
at the entrance fan okay question for you which way should you fan
and where first which way and then where outwards or inwards
why
not only to remove the question or comment you say inwards good okay turns out that
you want to actually pull air you want to you want to get outwards why because I can measure
not only can I essentially ventilate but I can measure I can measure what is happening inside
the hive or inside the bee box by pulling material by pulling the air out and now there are two
solutions okay if I can pull air out I can do this by modulating in time that's how we do when we breathe
same entrance and same exit we modulate in time okay I don't have to modulate in time alone I can
modulate in space so it depends on the size of the orifice if I had a very wide mouth I can say
at one part I essentially pull in and if I pull in at one part I can continuously pull in and the
other part just by continuity you just move out and that's the second solution that we find so
they always pull out and then they will spontaneously when they start out originally being homogeneous
distributed they will end up on one boundary or the other so there's a transition there's an instability
and that essentially drives the transition all the bees which are pulling out end up on one side
and then they can continuously pull out and the advantage is when I'm measuring and I am
ventilating now if I need more bees I just have to signal and so bees have a nason off gland they
have essentially a whole set of pheromones associated with signaling so they push that signal out and
the same wind which is essentially associated with pulling the air out now you can essentially
advect you've probably all heard of stigmergy and in the context of stigmergy using diffusion
to essentially signal now using flow which of course that means you're essentially improving
the efficiency enormously because instead of square root of time it's going linearly as time
and this is what bees do so they will first start pulling out then they will essentially end up on
one side and then finally they will essentially get other bees to join using this nason off
sensing mechanism and you can construct a mathematical framework for this you can do
experiments and so on okay I think I have run out of time so I am happy to stop here for anybody
and same thing in every one of these problems in the termite case in the all the bee cases
there was local sensing there's local actuation here it's heat transport here with mechanical
vibrations here it's fluid flow and heat transport and carbon dioxide all of these things
embodied or available to you I wouldn't even say embodied local sensing and actuation is
embodied the rest is there and and it's used repeatedly by these organisms so I will stop
by going to the last slide I had I think three slides four slides I'm going to go to the last slide
and happy to talk to people about ants if you want to stay I showed you some examples of how
large-scale problem solving can happen very very simply using local sensing and actuation
and critically it's mediated by physical fields which you cannot ignore because all this happened
in the world it didn't happen in some abstract brain or with a set of circuits alone second
thing this idea that you can separately study you know the living and non-living perhaps but
certainly in these social systems and super organisms I don't think so and I want to bring
to mind I think somebody who I'm sure is a great inspiration for people here as as as he has been
for me which is associated with the parable of the ant I think Herb Simon famously showed
an image of an ant showing some very very complicated path and without showing the
environment at all and the point that he wanted to make is that it looks like a very complicated
path because you've forgotten what the environment and as soon as you put the environment in
everything starts to essentially make itself much more clear and so rather than thinking
only about embodiment should we be extending it in order to account for the environment as well
well I showed you these examples Stigmergy's diffusive signaling flow is advective vibrations
is non-local just like flow I want to emphasize what I said before you can have what you might
think of as adaptable learnable solutions but you don't need representation you don't need plan
you don't need planner and you automatically get robustness because you've distributed a lot of
everything that you want to do into very simple local rules okay last point I want to come back
to where I started unfortunately I didn't have a chance to tell you about this but I am happy
to talk to people privately we've really started now asking questions of how hard or how easy it
is to do this from a synthetic perspective and not synthetic biology but if you want synthetic
engineering mathematical models of course are a way to synthesize systems but also physical
mimics and I'll close with a question which I think inspired a lot of people over here and
continues to inspire me you know just like Curing was thinking about intelligence can we think
about behavior the same way how much of what is happening can I essentially understand by
looking at collective behavior and if we can't then I think this quest of pushing towards ever
smaller mechanistic understanding of the molecular scale may be a lost cause you can only say what
is minimally needed you can perhaps say what is sufficient but beyond that it's very very hard to
say exactly all the different things all the different ways in which you can essentially come
up with a solution and that's of course not at all surprising because inverse problems are notoriously
ill-posed unless I have regularization unless I have mathematically or physically ways of
essentially saying these are the classes of solutions that I'm able to deal with I can't
really answer that question how do I deduce the rules by looking at the behavior for example if I'd
shown you you know these robots as individual particles could you tell me whether they were
actual robots whether they were termites and if you can't I think there's a real issue with asking
that kind of a question okay on that I will stop thank you so much I'm sorry I went over
gotta get out of here
so it's interesting this
What's in it, dude, is what's in it.
So, physics for you is embodiment.
So, right, so the non-local large space scales,
net scales are coming from physics.
And whereas us, we get it from the whole body.
We don't need the physics to do the work.
Our body does the work.
I'm just wondering.
I would say that even for us, the environment is critical.
Well, I'm not saying it's not critical,
but in this narrative, if you're that tiny termite,
the only way you get this on non-local information
is from the physics, right?
From these circulations.
Whereas we can get it from long axons.
I don't need physics to do the work.
Well, I would say the long axons
are probably one of the physical solutions.
But anyway, but keep going.
Well, if that was, then you'd be inconsistent
in the way your narrative works
because that's a part of the organism, right?
You could say nerve conduction is physics or something,
but not useful conception physics seems to me.
But I'm just wondering whether or not
there are sort of two worlds.
There's the world of little things.
And the only way they can build large structures
is by obtaining these non-local information
from physical principles.
And there's an activity to go to us
where you just build large-scale biological structure,
which does the work, and physics becomes auxiliary.
Let me, first of all, say that even for,
so for us, are you saying that
if I wanted to build something large,
I cannot do it using physics?
I cannot, but there are these two very different ways
of doing it.
Yeah, so let me frame this from an evolutionary point of view.
So these organisms have been around
for 100 times longer than us,
for 350 million years.
With relatively simple, I think, compared to us,
in going along exactly the direction
that you're going, cognitive rules,
and yet capable of solving these physiological tasks
which are common across the entire animal kingdom.
If I have societies, I have to worry
about large-scale respiration, large-scale physiology,
locomotion, predation, pre-capture, and so on.
In early evolution, this is a solution that came to be.
As evolution moved on, and this is a question
to which I don't really have an answer
in the sense that I'm satisfied with.
I mean, there are a lot of words,
but I don't know how to convert that
into anything more quantitative.
Can you have a notion of assimilation?
That is to say, you take these physics-based rules
which are part of the environment,
and then you build them into the body.
When I build them into the body,
I have the ability to move by essentially coordination.
That was previously, this bee talked to that bee,
which talked to that bee, and they all moved together.
But now I say, no, let me just make a super bee,
and I connect them all together.
Now they become part of the organism, super organism.
So I'm not disagreeing with what you're saying.
I don't see a temporal path which tells you how to start here,
because these have been around, as I said,
for a hundred times longer than us.
They're multicellular.
They solve, by the way, the same kind of problems
that we solve on the organismal level.
I didn't talk about the physiology of respiration.
In insect respiration, it's very different from our respiration.
Small insects don't need lungs.
They don't need lungs because they can essentially
interact directly with the environment through spiracles,
which means diffusive transport is good enough.
You become big, you have to change your rules.
So I'm not disagreeing at all with you.
I guess my concern is, is it really a discrete setting,
because I sort of think of this as a whole spectrum of solutions?
Let's imagine, if the termite might now and now say,
right, and you just stomp the bout
and move around in the environment, right?
At that point, these principles are kind of useless,
because that degree of integration is not going to be achieved
by advection and diffusion anymore.
That's why we have neuron, long neurons, right?
So in other words, there really is a distinction
that comes in once you have these more structured interactions.
So I would say that transition is not as discrete
as I think what I'm hearing you say.
This is a distributed solution.
If I don't know whether you're saying
that you also have possibilities for centralized solutions,
centralized brains, if you're not saying that,
then I think we don't disagree.
But if you are, then I would say I'm not sure that I agree.
Oh, it's not central, but...
Because you can think about cephalopods, yeah.
Central, I'm not using that central.
Just this idea that, anyway,
but this idea that advection and diffusion,
we don't have a nervous system that does its work.
I don't do vision by advection and diffusion.
Oh, I didn't talk only about advection and diffusion.
I talked about there are all kinds of other things
that are mechanical, there's movement,
there's all kinds of other things as well.
I mean, I gave you a couple of examples
where you can have active movement,
which can essentially solve problems in morphogenesis.
And if you ask me questions about vision,
I mean, understanding how the orientation
dominance columns arise,
actually it is advection and diffusion
coupled with stimuli,
which lead to ocular dominance columns arising.
We can have...
Dominance columns arrive through a strict connectivity
of neurons through reciprocal advection.
That's how ocular dominance columns arrive.
There is an underlying connectivity that gives...
Yeah, but how do you get the connectivity in the first place?
No, it's fair enough.
That's different.
I mean, no, but that's part of...
You can't put the connectivity in.
You've got to get the connectivity out.
We should continue to see that.
Yeah, yeah.
Okay, thank you.
