We begin with balloons.
Each balloon is filled with helium gas.
If we release it, it rises.
Of course, the balloon is not falling up.
According to the law of gravity, everything falls with the same acceleration.
Everything falls down.
If Dave Scott had stood on the surface of the moon with a hammer and a balloon, they
would both fall the same.
So why does the balloon rise?
There must be another force acting, a force exerted by the air.
That force is not gravity, and yet gravity is the key to understanding why the balloon
rises.
At the end of the last lecture, we saw how gravity determines when we can expect the
gravitational collapse of a tenuous cloud of gas.
That's how planets and stars and even whole galaxies form.
But once a planet or a star has formed and settled down, gravity does not cease to act.
There is another force that balances gravity, internal pressure.
So what is pressure?
Pressure is a kind of contact force.
It's a force that's exerted between things that are actually touching, like the force
between my shoes and the floor, the force that keeps me from falling toward the center
of the earth.
This pressure force is perpendicular to the force between them.
And this kind of force is not only between solid objects like my feet and the floor,
it can also be exerted between different parts of a fluid.
So pressure forces are due to short range forces between molecules.
And pressure pushes equally in every direction.
So here's how we measure pressure.
Pressure is force per unit area.
Remember we measure force in newtons, kilogram meters per second squared.
So we measure pressure in newtons per meter squared.
This unit of pressure is called a Pascal.
It's named after Blaise Pascal, the 17th century French scientist and philosopher who did early
experiments on the physics of pressure.
The pressure of air at sea level is about 100,000 Pascals.
Sometimes that pressure is called one atmosphere of pressure.
Now in any condensed body held together by gravity, the internal pressure, an outward
force, must balance the gravitational force, which is an inward force.
This is called hydrostatic equilibrium.
Note that hydrostatic means water at rest.
So we'll begin by thinking about the sea.
The pressure at the top of the sea at sea level is 100,000 Pascals.
The downward force of the air must equal the upward force of the water at the water surface.
The water supports the weight of the air above it.
So now consider the top layer of the sea, the top 10 meters of water.
What holds that layer up?
Well, for each square meter of the sea, there's a downward pressure force of 100,000 newtons
at the top from the pressure of the air.
And there's also the weight of the water.
We've got a column of water, one square meter by 10 meters tall.
That's 10 tons of water.
And so that's pushing down with a force of gravity equal to another 100,000 newtons downward.
So the pressure force at the bottom of the layer, 10 meters deep, must be 200,000 newtons
per meter squared.
There must be two atmospheres of pressure at the bottom of the layer.
The point is that each layer of the ocean must support the weight of all the layers
above it.
The deeper the layer, the greater the pressure must be.
And roughly speaking, each 10 meters of depth adds one atmosphere, 100,000 pascals of pressure.
Now the deepest places in the ocean are more than 10,000 meters down.
So the pressure there is more than 1,000 times greater than the air pressure at the surface.
Higher down means higher pressure.
That's required by the balance between pressure and gravity.
Now, water stays nearly the same density as we increase pressure.
Compressed water at the bottom of the ocean is only a few percent denser than at the surface.
So each 10 meter layer of water adds pretty much the same extra weight.
We have the same pressure increase for each 10 meters of depth.
So if you made a graph of pressure versus depth, the graph would be nearly a straight line.
Now, hydrostatic equilibrium also applies inside the earth.
Rock layers are very dense.
They're many times denser than water.
And so the interior pressure is very great.
The pressure at the center of the earth must be more than 3 million atmospheres.
Why so large?
Because this pressure must literally hold up the weight of the earth.
The same reasoning applies to the earth's atmosphere.
What holds the air up?
Why does it not fall to the ground?
It must be that air pressure is greater lower down and less higher up.
The greater pressure of the lower layers supports the weight of the upper layers.
The atmosphere is in hydrostatic equilibrium.
And this is why the balloon, the helium balloon, is pushed upward.
The air pressure at the top of the balloon is less than the pressure at the bottom.
It's not a big difference.
Between the top and bottom, only a couple of pascals out of 100,000 pascals.
But that is enough to lift the balloon.
The net upward air pressure force on the balloon is called buoyancy.
If the volume of the balloon were occupied by ordinary air, then the weight of that
air would be equal to the buoyant force.
That would be in equilibrium.
But the helium balloon has the same buoyant force, the same unbalanced pressure force,
but less weight than the same volume of air.
So there's some buoyancy left over to push the balloon upward.
So the balloon is pushed upward by the pressure difference between the top and bottom.
And why is there a difference in pressure?
Because of hydrostatic equilibrium in the atmosphere, the balance between pressure and
the weight of air.
So what causes the balloon to go upward?
And the final analysis, it is gravity.
Now air is not exactly like water or rock, its density is quite variable.
At high altitudes, the pressure is low and the air is very thin.
And very roughly, the rule of thumb is that air pressure and density each go down by about
10% for each 1000 meters of altitude.
So for example, I used to live in Los Alamos, New Mexico.
There is a famous physics laboratory there.
And Los Alamos is more than 2000 meters above sea level.
So the air pressure there is about 20% less than the air pressure at sea level.
Why?
The air pressure is determined by the force of gravity, by the weight of all of the
air layers above you.
And there's simply less air above you if you're up in Los Alamos.
There's also a connection between pressure and temperature.
Now for liquids and solids, this relation is not a very close one.
High or low pressure can occur at high or low temperatures.
Water at the bottom of the ocean is actually colder than at the surface.
Rock in the Earth's interior is much hotter than at the surface, but both are at high
pressure.
For gases though, the connection between temperature and pressure is much closer.
The pressure of a container of gas strongly depends on its temperature.
The pressure is in fact proportional to the temperature measured above absolute zero.
So the air in this room is about 300 degrees above absolute zero, 300 degrees absolute,
or 300 kelvins.
If we made the room airtight and raised the temperature by 300 more degrees, doubling
the temperature above absolute zero to 600 kelvins, the air pressure in this room would
also double.
Now let's consider a star, like the Sun.
Essentially a star is made of gas, mostly hydrogen and helium.
Actually the star is a plasma.
It's a kind of gas at such a high temperature that the electrons are knocked out of their
atoms.
The gas is therefore a mixture of positively charged nuclei and negatively charged electrons,
all flying around independently, not bound together in neutral atoms.
And the Sun has a huge mass, and therefore a huge gravitational pull.
So hydrostatic equilibrium means that the internal pressure of the Sun is also huge.
The pressure at the center of the Sun is 250 billion atmospheres.
So how can that gas pressure be so high?
It's because the Sun has a very hot interior.
The surface of the Sun, the coolest layer of the Sun, has a temperature of about 6000
kelvins, but the center, the hottest layer of the Sun, is at about 15 million kelvins.
And similar figures hold for other stars besides our Sun.
The surface temperatures are a few thousand kelvins, the central temperatures are 10 million
kelvins or more.
And those high core temperatures yield immense pressures for hydrostatic equilibrium that
maintains the balance between pressure and gravity.
Now I've been describing hydrostatic equilibrium as a balance, but the forces involved are
stupendous.
The interior of the Sun is a very violent place.
So think of it not as a balance, but a battle.
Why a battle?
Well because the fortunes in a battle can change.
Balance sounds permanent, but in a battle a stalemate might be only temporary.
So here's the problem.
The Sun radiates energy, 400 trillion trillion joules of energy per second.
So we would expect that the Sun's interior would slowly cool down.
And this would decrease the internal pressure.
And so gravity would begin to win the battle and the Sun would contract.
Of course the contraction would increase pressure and temperature at the core, so a new equilibrium
would be established.
But then the Sun would cool some more and contract some more.
In the 19th century the German physicist Hermann von Helmholtz actually thought this
was what was actually happening in the Sun.
He thought that a slow shrinking of the Sun, about 80 meters per year he guessed, would
release gravitational potential energy and that energy he supposed was the actual energy
source of the Sun.
But the Sun is not shrinking at 80 meters per year.
Helmholtz was wrong about where the Sun's energy comes from.
The actual energy source, nuclear reactions.
At very high temperatures, above about 8 million K, hydrogen nuclei can fuse together.
They form helium nuclei and in the process release a huge amount of energy.
The energy released from forming one helium atom from four hydrogen atoms is enough to
make a dust spec jump visibly.
And there are a lot of hydrogen atoms available in the Sun's core to turn into helium.
So what determines the rate at which the Sun produces energy?
That depends on the rate of nuclear reactions in the Sun's core and that rate in turn depends
on the density and pressure in the core.
At higher temperatures or higher density that would lead to faster reactions and thus more
energy release.
But the internal conditions in the Sun are determined by hydrostatic equilibrium.
In other words, by a balance with gravity.
The same thing is true for other stars.
Most stars are mostly hydrogen.
Hydrogen fusion reactions in the core keep their interior hot, maintain their internal
pressure.
That is, they maintain hydrostatic equilibrium.
And the interior conditions of the star are determined by gravity.
So consider a star of a given chemical composition, mostly hydrogen and helium.
Then practically everything important about the star, it's radius, it's temperature,
it's density, it's brightness, everything about the star is determined by the force
of gravity, therefore by the star's mass.
This fact, everything just depends on the mass, is sometimes called the Russell-Voke
theorem, first recognized by the physicists Henry Norris Russell and Heinrich Vogt in
the 1920s.
So as an example, consider something called the mass luminosity relation.
Luminosity is just the total energy output of the star.
The mass of the star determines gravitational forces, thus the interior conditions, thus
the nuclear reaction rates, and thus the energy output.
More massive stars are actually much more luminous.
They shine much brighter.
A star twice as massive as the sun is actually 10 or 12 times brighter.
A star 10 times as massive as the sun is thousands of times brighter.
Now because of this, there's actually an effective upper limit to the mass of a star.
A more massive star would have greater gravity, but the nuclear reactions in its core would
generate far more energy.
For a star more than about 150 times the mass of the sun, the exact figure is still somewhat
murky, the outward pressure, even the pressure of the star's own intense light, is enough
to overcome the star's gravity and blow the outer layers of the star into space.
And in fact, we have never observed a star with 300 or 500 or 1000 times the mass of
the sun.
Such a gigantic star would release nuclear energy so fast that it could not even reach
a temporary stalemate in that billion year battle between pressure and gravity.
So for an ordinary star, the internal pressure depends on high central temperatures.
Those in turn depend on the energy released by nuclear reactions.
So let's put it this way.
In the battle between pressure and gravity in a star, one side, the pressure side, relies
on nuclear reactions.
In other words, that side is using up ammunition.
It's consuming hydrogen fuel in the core.
So a crucial question for any star is, how long will the ammunition last?
Now for our sun, the hydrogen burning lifetime is about 10 billion years.
We're about halfway along.
And low mass stars burn so much less brightly that the sun, that their more limited fuel
supply lasts much longer.
A red dwarf star one-tenth the mass of the sun would have a far greater lifetime, perhaps
10 trillion years.
On the other hand, more massive stars do have more fuel, but they burn much more brightly.
The more massive stars have, therefore, shorter hydrogen burning lifetimes.
That phase of the battle between gravity and pressure will be over quicker.
For the most massive stars, the battle can last just a few million years.
So what happens to a star when the ammunition runs low?
So most of the hydrogen in the core of the star has then been converted into helium.
And what happens next is a complicated story.
A star like our sun will settle for a while into a helium burning stage.
The core of the star will actually become much hotter, and helium fuses rapidly into
carbon in the core of such a star.
The core is surrounded by a shell of gas that still has hydrogen, which is now hot enough
for some hydrogen fusion to occur.
And the total energy release of the star actually increases, which causes the outer layer of
the star to expand.
This is called the red giant stage of the star's life.
And when this stage arrives, our sun will be large enough to actually engulf the earth.
Then more massive stars than the sun go through a succession of stages.
Helium fusion, carbon fusion, etc.
The star may become an immensely bright super giant star.
Inside a super giant, different nuclear reactions may occur in different layers, all at the
same time.
But each stage of the star's life lasts a shorter period of time than the previous one.
Eventually, all usable nuclear fuel is exhausted.
Pressure's ammunition has run out.
It can no longer fight the battle.
And what is the result?
Core collapse.
The collapse of the star's core releases a lot of energy.
Some of it comes from just gravitational potential energy as that mass moves inward.
Some of it comes from sudden nuclear reactions in the middle layers as they are suddenly
compressed.
This energy release may cause the outer layers of the star to be ejected into space.
There might be a huge explosion.
But what happens to the collapsing core, which contains a lot of the star's mass?
Well, for a star like our Sun, or smaller, what forms is called a white dwarf star.
A white dwarf is a star with the mass of the Sun, let's say, but only the radius of the
Earth.
In other words, it has a huge density, a density a million times greater than the Sun's density.
So what provides the internal pressure for hydrostatic equilibrium in a white dwarf star?
Well, it's called electron degeneracy pressure.
It's a quantum force between the electrons in the ultra-dense matter that composes the
white dwarf.
That matter is more like a solid than a gas.
Its pressure has almost nothing to do with temperature.
So no nuclear energy is being generated inside the white dwarf, but that doesn't matter.
There's still pressure.
And so the white dwarf will, in fact, cool off over time and become a black dwarf.
However, this is an exceedingly slow process.
It is so slow that even the oldest white dwarf stars in the universe have only cooled off
a little by now.
In any case, the decrease in temperature does not change the pressure force.
So the white dwarf stage is effectively the final standoff between pressure and gravity
for the star.
Now here's an interesting fact about white dwarf stars.
A more massive white dwarf is actually smaller in radius.
You see that radius is fixed by the balance between gravity and electron degeneracy pressure.
So in the 1930s, a man named Subramanian Chandrasekhar studies the physics of white
dwarfs.
Chandrasekhar is an Indian astrophysicist working at the University of Cambridge at
the time.
Later he moves to the University of Chicago and becomes an American citizen.
Chandrasekhar makes an awesome discovery.
There is an upper limit to the possible mass of a white dwarf star.
And this comes to be called Chandrasekhar's limit.
For a star above about 1.4 solar masses, even electron degeneracy pressure cannot balance
gravity.
A collapsing star that big cannot settle down as a white dwarf.
It must just keep collapsing.
And what then?
Well, let's consider a star only a little more than Chandrasekhar's limit.
Let's say two solar masses.
During the collapse, the matter of the star is compressed by gravity to an inconceivable
density.
The electrons in the atoms are driven into the nuclei.
All of the matter of the star is basically turned into neutrons.
However, neutrons have a degeneracy pressure of their own.
And that force is enough to stop the collapse.
And what's the result?
A neutron star.
How big is a neutron star?
Well, we do not know the answer as well as we'd like.
There are many things unknown about the behavior of matter under such extreme conditions.
But here's a good estimate.
A two solar mass neutron star is around 10 kilometers in radius.
That's 100 million times denser than a white dwarf star.
Neutron stars are amazing objects.
Newly formed neutron stars generally rotate very fast, up to a thousand times per second.
How come?
Well, angular momentum is conserved during the star's collapse.
Thus, as it collapses, its rotation speed is tremendously amplified.
So the neutron star probably also has strong magnetic fields.
And these become stronger too as it collapses.
These can interact with the surrounding hot gas.
And that produces radio waves.
We actually observe this.
We actually observe rapidly pulsing radio sources that are due to rapidly rotating neutron
stars.
These are called pulsars, and many thousands of them are known.
Pulsars, by the way, will play a starring role in lecture 19.
So just like a white dwarf star, a neutron star's internal pressure has nothing to do
with energy generation.
So a neutron star is also a final standoff between gravity and pressure.
And like white dwarf stars, neutron stars are smaller in radius the more massive they
are.
And like white dwarf stars, there is an upper limit to the mass of a neutron star.
That limit is roughly three times the mass of our sun.
So what happens to a collapsing stellar core even more massive than this?
Well, gravity is too strong for electron degeneracy pressure to stop it.
So there's no stopping at the white dwarf stage.
And gravity is too strong for neutron degeneracy pressure to stop it.
So there's no stopping at the neutron star stage.
And in fact, gravity is too strong for anything.
For the most massive stars in the universe, the battle between pressure and gravity has
a winner.
Gravity, gravity ultimately wins the battle.
The final state is a black hole.
That's an object so massive and compact that not even light can escape from it.
It's a place in the universe where gravity is at its most extreme.
And we're going to talk much more about black holes in lecture 20.
So the ultimate fate of a star depends on its mass.
Why?
Well, that fate is set by the final standoff between gravity and internal pressure.
In a white dwarf or a neutron star, gravity is balanced by quantum degeneracy forces.
But in a black hole, we have the final victory of gravity in the billion year battle.
But at this point, our Newtonian understanding of gravity is simply not enough.
Newton's law of gravitation, his whole framework of mechanics, simply does not accurately describe
the physics of force and motion under such extreme conditions.
We need a better theory.
Who will provide it?
Albert Einstein.
Einstein was a great genius.
He was a revolutionary figure in physics.
There is hardly a branch of physics that he did not reshape with his discoveries.
And no branch of physics bears his imprint more emphatically than the physics of gravity.
But Einstein's new theory of gravity is not really motivated by new discoveries.
It's motivated by some puzzling features of gravity that we've known all along, ever
since Galileo.
Why do all objects fall in exactly the same way?
What does that really mean about the nature of gravity?
How is gravity related to inertia, to space and time?
So this point, exactly halfway through our course, marks a big change from Isaac Newton
to Albert Einstein.
And so we need to go back and rebuild our ideas from the start.
We need to follow Einstein's long quest to understand space and time, and the nature
of gravity, and the implications for the universe.
And we'll begin where Einstein himself began, with a shift in the way we think about forces
between objects.
In Newton's physics, forces act directly between objects, even if they are far apart.
The electric repulsion between two charges, or the gravitational attraction between two
masses, is a direct action at a distance.
But in the new view, which grew up in the century before Einstein came along, the force
between two objects is mediated by a field.
Einstein regarded this field idea as a crucial step in our understanding of nature, and he
also understood that it introduced some profound puzzles into physics.
So to solve these puzzles, Einstein was forced to give a new twist to a very old principle,
to Galileo's principle of relativity.
So from fields to relativity.
That's next time.
I'll see you then.
