Last time, we saw how Einstein elevates Galileo's relativity to a universal principle.
The laws of physics are the same in every frame of reference.
Whether an observer is at rest or in uniform motion, that observer sees the same physics,
and that includes the speed of light in a vacuum.
This is called the special theory of relativity, special because it deals with observers in
uniform motion.
And among the many implications of the special theory of relativity are time dilation, the
fact that a moving clock runs slowly, and clock in this case means any kind of time-dependent
physical phenomenon.
Unfortunately, the special theory of relativity excludes gravity.
Now, that's not obvious at first.
Other forces, like electromagnetic forces, fit beautifully into special relativity, but
gravity is different.
And Einstein needs a new principle to guide him, and in 1907, he finds it.
So walking home from the patent office, Einstein sees a building encased in scaffolding, and
a thought occurs to him.
He later calls it the happiest thought of my life.
What if a worker were to fall off the scaffolding?
As he falls freely, what would he experience?
Or consider our old friend Felix Baumgartner, the record-setting Austrian skydiver.
Suppose he jumps from his high-altitude balloon.
While he is in free fall, before air resistance begins to slow him down, suppose he does some
physics experiment.
What does he see?
Galileo says everything falls with just the same acceleration.
We call that acceleration little G. On Earth, it's about 10 meters per second squared.
And don't forget the hammer and the feather from Apollo 15.
On the moon, the acceleration is less than on Earth, but it's still the same for all
objects.
Newton said that inertial mass is equivalent to gravitational mass, that was his principle
of equivalence.
And this fact explains what Galileo observed.
And Utfusch found that the principle of equivalence is true to at least one part in 100 million.
So Einstein says that everything falling with the worker, or with Felix Baumgartner, falls
at the same G. For example, an apple from the worker's lunchbox.
To the falling worker, the apple does not appear to accelerate at all.
Therefore, to an observer in free fall, gravity appears to be zero.
If a falling worker pushes on the apple, it does accelerate.
But without a push, it simply appears to move with constant velocity.
That is, in free fall, the apple obeys the principle of inertia.
A freely falling frame of reference, therefore, is an inertial frame of reference.
It is a frame of reference in which the principle of inertia holds true.
What about the frame of reference of this classroom?
Well, according to Einstein, this is not actually an inertial frame.
Suppose we let go of the apple.
Suppose we exert no force on it.
The apple nevertheless accelerates downward.
We say there is a force on the apple, the force of gravity.
The earth pulls the apple downward.
In fact, gravity affects everything in the classroom in exactly the same way.
That force of gravity is really just our way of saying that things in the room accelerate
even if we don't push them.
So, Einstein says that an inertial frame of reference is one in which the law of inertia
holds, and the law of inertia says if there is no force on an object, it does not accelerate.
Let's take a familiar example, and to keep out of trouble, we'll consider only horizontal
motion and ignore gravity.
So imagine a car on a highway, either at rest or in uniform motion along the highway,
and a cup of coffee is perched on the dashboard.
That cup of coffee will stay put.
The law of inertia holds in the car's frame of reference.
The car's frame of reference is an inertial frame.
Now, push on the accelerator or the brake, or turn the car sharply left or right.
Now the cup of coffee goes sliding and tipping.
The coffee spills out exactly as if it is pulled by a mysterious force.
Really, that's just the inertia of the cup in the coffee.
If the car accelerates in some way, forward or back, or to the side, the cup will tend
to continue to move with a uniform speed and direction.
It doesn't just follow the car.
So in the accelerating frame of reference of the car, the law of inertia does not hold.
The cup seems to accelerate even without being pushed.
The frame of reference is not inertial.
Einstein says that gravity is like the mysterious inertial force that pushes the coffee cup.
Gravity is really just an effect of inertia.
It is really just due to our choice of frame of reference.
We can imagine two frames of reference.
One is a freely falling frame of reference, the frame of the falling worker.
The other is a frame of reference tied to the earth, like the frame of our classroom.
The inertial frame and the stationary frame are not the same thing.
And the difference between them is the acceleration of gravity.
Now, this is an incredibly strange idea, and we're going to need some very careful thinking
to sort out its implications.
So to do this, we will consider four situations, and in each situation we will imagine a physics
laboratory under certain conditions.
This is like Galileo's shipboard laboratory, which can be at rest or moving, and we can
imagine doing all kinds of experiments in the lab.
The question is, what kind of results will those experiments give?
So here is the first situation.
Our laboratory is at rest, out in deep space.
It is millions of light years from anything else, so the gravitational field in the lab
is zero.
So if we do an experiment in the lab, what do we see?
Well, we see that free bodies, bodies that are not being pushed in any way, move in straight
lines in the lab at a constant speed.
So the principle of inertia holds.
If you don't push it, it doesn't accelerate.
Next, the second situation.
Our laboratory is at rest, near the earth, like our classroom.
There is a gravitational field in the lab pointing toward the floor.
So things in the lab accelerate downward at about 10 meters per second squared.
Now not everything accelerates.
If I stand on the floor, I can stand still.
But that's because the floor is exerting an upward force on me.
In the absence of other forces, everything in the room accelerates just the same.
So we say there is a force of gravity acting.
It's a universal force.
It affects everything in the lab in exactly the same way.
On to the third situation.
Our laboratory is in free fall, near the earth.
Now that sounds a bit alarming, but in a few minutes we will describe several such laboratories.
Since the lab is near the earth, we would like to say that the gravitational field is
not zero in the laboratory, but here is what we would actually see in the falling laboratory.
There are no visible effects of gravity.
Free bodies move in straight lines at a uniform speed in the lab.
The principle of inertia holds.
That is, if you don't push it, it doesn't accelerate.
In other words, the conditions inside this laboratory are a lot like conditions in the
deep space lab.
And now consider a fourth situation.
Our laboratory is once again out in deep space, millions of light years from anything.
We would like to say that the gravitational field is zero.
But the lab is accelerating toward the ceiling of the lab at 10 meters per second squared.
We might imagine that a rocket motor attached below the floor is pushing the lab in that
direction.
Now because of inertia, objects not attached to the lab will tend to lag behind.
They will tend to move at a uniform speed and direction in space.
So how will that appear in the lab?
Those objects will tend to accelerate downward toward the floor at 10 meters per second squared.
And any object in the lab would appear to accelerate in exactly the same way.
From outside of the lab, we might say, oh, that isn't really acceleration, that's just
inertia like the coffee cup in the car.
It's the laboratory that is actually accelerating.
But in the frame of reference of the laboratory, everything looks exactly as if a uniform gravitational
field exists inside the lab.
If we were standing in the lab, we would have the sensation of weight.
What is that sensation after all?
It is just the force exerted by the floor on our feet, by one part of our body on another
part.
In this situation in the accelerating laboratory, those forces are due to the rocket thrust
that accelerates the lab.
But the effect, the experience, is indistinguishable from gravity.
So here is what Einstein says.
The first and third situations, the deep space lab and the freely falling lab, are physically
equivalent.
No experiment in the lab can tell you whether you are in a region of space with no gravitational
field or falling freely in a gravitational field.
Both situations are true inertial frames of reference.
So here's an example.
We say that astronauts in the International Space Station are in zero gravity.
But the International Space Station is not very far from the Earth, it's only 400 kilometers
above the surface.
The gravitational field there is about 90% as strong as it is on the ground.
However, the International Space Station is in free fall, it is falling around the Earth
in its orbit.
Free fall is equivalent to zero gravity.
Einstein also says this, the fourth situation we described, the lab on the Earth and the
accelerating lab in space are physically equivalent.
No experiment inside the lab can tell whether you are at rest in a gravitational field or
accelerating through deep space.
In one case, objects accelerate toward the floor because of Earth's gravity.
In the other case, objects accelerate toward the floor because of inertia and because of
the rocket motor attached to the lab.
In either case, the observed acceleration of the objects toward the floor is the same.
So look at it this way, 400 years ago Galileo made a couple of discoveries about motion.
First, he discovered that the principle of inertia applies to all objects.
And second, he discovered that all objects fall with the same acceleration due to gravity.
Now Einstein is essentially claiming that those two facts are linked.
In a way, they are the same thing.
Let's take a look at a real example.
As we mentioned in lecture 7, a satellite in low Earth orbit slowly loses energy to
friction in the extremely thin outskirts of the Earth's atmosphere.
And the International Space Station is no exception.
So a couple of times a year, they do a re-boost maneuver.
They fire rocket motors to maintain the orbit.
And the rocket motors produce a very slight acceleration.
It's about 1,500th of G.
But during the re-boost, it is as if there is a very weak gravitational field inside
the space station.
So here's a video taken during one of these maneuvers.
The camera is attached to the station.
It's pointing backwards in the direction opposite to the thrust.
In effect, the camera is pointing down.
As soon as the astronaut lets go, he begins to accelerate away from the camera.
That is, he falls down in the apparent gravitational field in the accelerating frame of the International
Space Station.
So the space station appears to have no gravitational field in it because it is in freefall.
And when we turn the re-boost rockets on, we also turn on a kind of gravity within the
station.
This can happen in other ways too.
So near the Earth, we can produce short periods of artificial weightlessness.
There are special aircraft, operated by NASA, that follow a ballistic path.
That is, they follow the same path a projectile would follow if there were no air resistance.
And so for 20 to 25 seconds, the aircraft is in freefall.
So the passengers in the cabin experience a zero-gravity environment.
And this is useful for doing experiments and for training astronauts for space travel.
It is no simulation, however.
It is just as real as the zero-gravity experience that the astronauts find when they are in orbit.
Some years ago, Hollywood made a movie about the very dramatic Apollo 13 mission.
You'll remember that's a flight that came close to disaster when an oxygen tank exploded
on the way to the moon.
Now to make the scenes of spaceflight more authentic, the producers actually built a movie
set inside one of NASA's zero-G aircraft.
They filmed their scenes during the ballistic arcs in freefall.
So from Einstein's point of view, they made that movie on location in an inertial frame
of reference.
Now it turns out that our bodies are not perfectly designed for such a frame of reference.
In the absence of gravity-produced stresses, we undergo slow changes in our physiology.
Our bones lose mass.
Our muscles weaken.
So if we wish to make very long voyages in space, we might wish to bring our own gravity.
It would be, of course, very expensive to take the whole Earth along with us, but Einstein
tells us that there are other options.
For example, we might design a spacecraft that continually accelerates, like our imagined
lab, but this uses a great deal of fuel.
A better idea is to build a large spacecraft that rotates about an axis.
An astronaut inside the craft, but away from that axis, would be moving in a circle.
That is, his motion would continually be accelerated toward the center of motion.
And his own inertia would feel like a gravity pushing him outward.
And indeed, that feeling of gravity would not really be an illusion.
According to Einstein, that experience would be just as real as our experience of gravity
on Earth.
So what Einstein is proposing is a new principle of equivalence.
Not an equivalence between one kind of mass and another.
For Einstein, there is only one kind of mass.
This new equivalence is between apparently different physical situations.
Free fall and zero gravity situations are physically equivalent.
Gravitational and accelerated situations are physically equivalent.
And that is why gravitational and inertial mass are always exactly equal, because gravity
and inertia are really the same thing.
Einstein's principle is a general principle of physics.
Like the principle of relativity, all kinds of physical phenomena must be consistent with
it.
So the equivalence we've drawn holds for any sort of experiment.
For instance, it holds for an experiment about light.
So imagine an accelerating lab in deep space.
Acceleration defines up and down inside the lab.
There is a floor and a ceiling in our laboratory.
So we place a radio transmitter on the floor and a corresponding radio receiver on the
ceiling.
And we send a radio signal from the floor to the ceiling.
Of course, the signal takes some time to travel that distance.
And during that time, the lab speeds up slightly as it accelerates.
And that means that by the time the signal reaches the receiver, the receiver is actually
moving away relative to the transmitter, that is to say relative to the transmitter when
the transmitter sent the signal.
And as a result, there's a Doppler shift.
The received radio frequency would be slightly less than the frequency that was transmitted.
Now I've explained the setup using radio waves, but the same thing should happen for
any kind of electromagnetic wave.
It should work for light.
The received light would be slightly red-shifted.
Now there's nothing surprising here, not yet.
With Einstein, let us imagine a physically equivalent situation, a stationary laboratory
here on Earth.
Once again we have a radio transmitter on the floor and a receiver on the ceiling.
And Einstein's principle of equivalence says that we must observe the same phenomena
we observed in the accelerated laboratory.
And therefore, the received signal at the ceiling must have a lower frequency.
In other words, gravity has an effect on waves, a gravitational Doppler effect.
And this must be true for light waves as well.
It's called gravitational red-shift.
Light that travels upward in a gravitational field is reduced in frequency.
And that is a little surprising.
Gravity affects light.
Now there's a nice way to think of this based on quantum physics.
As Einstein and others realized, the energy of light comes in the form of discrete packets
like particles of light.
They're called photons.
And the energy of a photon is related to the frequency of the light.
The formula is E equal to H times F, where E is the photon energy and F is the light
frequency, and H is a constant of nature called Planck's constant after the German
physicist Max Planck who introduced it in 1900.
Now a photon has no mass, and it always moves at the speed of light.
But we can think of the photon energy as a kind of kinetic energy.
So if a photon moves upward in a gravitational field, it makes sense that some of its kinetic
energy is turned into gravitational potential energy.
The photon, of course, does not slow down, but its energy decreases.
And by Planck's equation, any decrease in photon energy means a decrease in light frequency.
The phenomenon of gravitational red-shift does not rely on quantum physics.
We can derive and understand the red-shift without mentioning photons, but it is always
handy to have two different ways to think about the same important phenomenon.
The phenomenon of gravitational red-shift, in fact, is very important indeed.
And to see why, let's go back to our radio transmitter and receiver.
A radio transmitter is an oscillating electric circuit, and that circuit is like a clock.
One tick of the clock is one cycle of the wave.
The receiver at the ceiling, therefore, sees the transmitter signal at a lower frequency,
and that means the receiver sees the transmitter clock at the floor running slowly.
In other words, gravitational red-shift, the effect of gravity on light waves, implies
an effect of gravity on time, called gravitational time dilation.
Effects that are lower down in a gravitational field run more slowly.
That relation, a relation between gravity and time, is a huge surprise.
Well, can we observe this effect?
Yes, remember white dwarf stars, stars that are very dense with very strong gravity.
We can observe spectral lines from the elements in such a star, and we see that those spectral
lines show gravitational red-shift, because the photons have climbed up through the gravitational
field of the white dwarf.
How much?
For a white dwarf star, the effect is about 0.01 percent, thus a clock on the surface of
a white dwarf star runs 0.01 percent slower than a clock far away from the star.
The atoms in the white dwarf star vibrate 0.01 percent slower too, and that slowing
down is what we perceive as gravitational red-shift.
But gravitational red-shift and time dilation have also been observed right here on Earth,
in the elegant and astonishing Pound-Rebka experiment.
This was performed by Robert Pound and Glenn Rebka at Harvard University in 1959.
They used gamma rays, ultra-high frequency light from radioactive nuclei.
Now it seems impossible to observe gamma ray frequencies precisely enough, but Pound and
Rebka made use of something called the Mossbauer effect, which was discovered by Rudolf Mossbauer
the year before.
When a nucleus emits a gamma ray photon, it recoils, and this affects the gamma ray frequency.
But in the Mossbauer effect, a whole crystal of atoms recoils together as one, so the recoil
effect is billions of times less.
So by using this effect in both the source and the detector, Pound and Rebka could determine
extremely tiny shifts in the gamma ray frequencies.
So the source of the gamma rays was in the basement, and the detector was four floors
up, about 22.5 meters higher.
And a gravitational red-shift was observed for the gamma rays flying upward.
How big a frequency shift?
Well about 2.5 times 10 to the minus 15, that is to say 2.5 parts per quadrillion.
A clock in the basement of the lab would run that much more slowly than a clock on the top
floor of the lab, and that's an extraordinarily tiny effect, but just detectable.
In fact though, gravitational time dilation near the Earth is more than just detectable.
It has everyday practical consequences.
So the Global Positioning System, GPS, is a constellation of more than two dozen satellites
in orbit high above the Earth.
And here's how GPS works, aboard the satellites are highly precise atomic clocks.
The satellites broadcast timing signals that are picked up by a receiver on the ground.
And by combining the signals from at least four satellites, the receiver can then locate
itself, in both space and time, to within a few meters.
But the satellites are orbiting high above the ground, so the clocks on the satellites
run a little faster than clocks on the surface.
How much faster?
It's about 40 microseconds per day.
Now 40 microseconds per day does not sound like much, it's less than one part in a billion.
But in 40 microseconds, the satellite signals travel 10 kilometers, which is quite a lot.
Now the GPS engineers know all this, and they make software corrections for gravitational
time dilation.
But if they ignored it, then GPS data would be off by 10 kilometers after just 24 hours.
And like a bad watch that gains five minutes a day, those errors would be cumulative.
And the global positioning system would quickly become useless without taking into account
the effect of gravity on time.
Now we've been telling an amazing story.
Gravity has been hiding a profound secret, hiding it in plain sight.
Galileo observed that everything falls with the same acceleration.
And Newton explained it this way, there are two quantities, inertial mass and gravitational
mass for an object, and they always have the same value.
But now Einstein says, this means that gravity is not exactly a force at all.
Friction, pressure, electric and magnetic forces, all of these are forces in the usual
sense.
But Einstein discovers that gravity is a different kind of thing.
The frame of reference tied to the Earth, a stationary frame, is not the frame of reference
in which the law of inertia holds, a freefall frame.
What we call gravity is really just that mismatch of the two.
And that means that gravity affects light, there's gravitational redshift.
And it means that gravity affects time, gravitational time dilation.
Lower clocks, deeper in the gravitational field, run more slowly.
Now that might not seem very significant after all the effect is so tiny near the Earth.
But it is actually a fact of supreme importance for us.
It means that gravity distorts the very geometry of space and time.
Space and time are actually curved by gravity.
So to understand what that means, we need a new way of thinking about space and time.
We need to think of them as parts of one unified thing, space-time, the four-dimensional world
that is the realm of all physics.
So next time we'll turn to this new realm and consider what happens in freefall, in
conditions of zero gravity, when space and time are replaced by this new four-dimensional
realm called space-time.
I'll see you there then.
