In 1912, Einstein returns to Switzerland after a year as a professor in Prague.
He has now been working on the problem of gravity for five long years, and he is stuck.
Einstein knows that he has already made the key breakthrough for a new theory, his new
understanding of the principle of equivalence.
That's based on Galileo's old observation that everything falls with the same acceleration.
And therefore, Einstein realizes, in a freely falling laboratory, we would see no effects
of gravity at all.
A frame of reference in free fall, in other words, is equivalent to one with zero gravity.
And conversely, in an accelerating laboratory, we would see various effects of inertia, but
those effects would be indistinguishable from the action of gravity.
That is, an accelerating frame of reference is equivalent to a gravitational field.
Einstein has used this principle already to derive some amazing consequences.
He has learned that gravity does not only affect objects made of matter.
He has predicted gravitational redshift, which was later confirmed in a laboratory experiment
by Pound and Rebka.
More amazing than that, he has predicted gravitational time dilation.
In a gravitational field, lower clocks run slow.
Also, Minkowski has reformulated Einstein's relativity in terms of spacetime.
Spacetime is the 4D world that is the arena for all physics.
Instead of ordinary distance, the separation between events in spacetime is measured by
Minkowski's spacetime interval.
In spacetime, objects are described by world lines stretching from past to future.
Einstein has come to believe that spacetime is the best way to think about relativity.
But now, as I said, in 1912, Einstein is stuck.
He is facing conceptual and mathematical problems unlike anything ever seen in physics.
He simply does not know what to do.
So, Einstein goes to his old college friend Marcel Grossman, who is now a professor of
mathematics in Zurich.
Einstein says, Grossman, you must help me or else I'll go crazy.
So Grossman listens.
And then he makes a suggestion.
Einstein, your problem is really a problem about geometry.
And luckily, Grossman is an expert in geometry.
So he begins to help Einstein learn some of the most recent mathematical research
on geometry.
Einstein gradually realizes that Grossman is correct.
And he throws himself even more fully into the problem of gravity, to the exclusion
of his other scientific work.
Einstein has finally found the way forward for a marvelous new theory.
Now, we talked about geometry when we talked about Minkowski's spacetime in the last lecture.
But to understand Grossman's fateful suggestion, we need to dig a little deeper.
So, consider once again the geometry of the plane, the geometry of points and angles and
circles and, most importantly, straight lines.
What is a straight line?
Given two points in the plane, call them one and two, there is a line segment,
a straight path between them.
But what is it that distinguishes that path from all the other paths from one to two?
And the answer is the straight path is the shortest path from one to two.
So here's a simple way we might see this.
We can choose x and y coordinates for the plane, as we wish, so we choose them so that
both of our points lie on the x-axis.
So that path from one to two must cover the whole distance along that axis.
But a path that curves out of the x-axis, in some way, must cover a little more distance.
That path has made an excursion in the y direction.
So the shortest path is one that lies entirely along the x-axis.
The shortest path is the straight path.
Now, in the early 19th century, several mathematicians began to realize that ordinary
plane geometry, the geometry of Pythagoras, the geometry of Euclid, is not the only
possible kind of two-dimensional geometry.
And one of these mathematicians is Johann Karl Friedrich Gauss.
Gauss is a German mathematician, and he's one of the most brilliant mathematical minds of all time.
Gauss is famous for contributions to algebra, number theory, calculus, statistics, astronomy,
electromagnetism, optics, you name it, and Gauss is also fascinated by questions of geometry.
So in 1818, Gauss is put in charge of a new survey of the Kingdom of Hanover.
Now Hanover is not that big a kingdom.
It is less than 40,000 square kilometers, which is about the size of Maryland and
Delaware combined.
But this is just big enough so that Gauss, making his calculations, cannot ignore the
fact that the Earth is not flat.
Roughly speaking, the Earth is a sphere.
So Gauss asks himself, what is the geometry of a spherical surface?
That's the natural geometry of surveyors and map makers on the Earth.
So let's consider geometry on a sphere.
Now we know what a point on a sphere is, but what is a straight line between points?
And the simplest answer is that a straight line on a sphere is the shortest path between the points.
This kind of path is called a great circle.
And we can visualize it as the intersection of the sphere with a plane that passes through the center of the sphere.
So on the Earth, the equator is a great circle, but the other lines of latitude are not great circles.
The meridians, the lines of longitude, are great circles.
Well, they're great half circles, running from the North Pole to the South Pole.
And the shortest path between two points on a sphere is a section of a great circle.
So suppose I take a piece of string and I lay it on the sphere between two points on the globe
and stretch it tight.
I'm stretching it tight to make the string as short as I can.
Then the string follows a great circle path between the two points.
That is, it follows a straight path along the curved spherical surface.
Now, that path is also straight in another sense.
Suppose you were to take a walk on a sphere, and so you do not turn right or left.
You make sure that the steps taken by your right foot equal the steps taken by your left foot.
Then your path will be a section of a great circle.
And that's an important point.
If we want to walk in a straight line on a sphere, we don't have to take our marching orders
from distant points at the beginning and end of our journey.
We can just follow our nose.
So that's what a straight line would be on the spherical surface of the earth.
But these straight lines can look very surprising on a map.
As cartographers have known for centuries, we cannot make a perfect flat map of the curved earth.
Any flat map that we make will distort distances or angles or areas
in some way.
Now, for a small region on the earth, if we were mapping our county, say,
that distortion is very tiny, we can ignore it.
But if we try to map a larger region of the earth, or maybe even the whole surface of the earth,
then map distortion is inescapable.
So here's a common map projection, the Mercator projection.
The Mercator projection of the earth.
It's named after Gerardus Mercator, who was a 16th century cartographer.
And in the Mercator projection, north-south distances are represented accurately.
However, east-west distances are somewhat screwy.
One inch of east-west distance on the map does not always correspond to the same distance on the earth.
So suppose that inch represents 100 miles at the equator.
Then an inch, the same distance on the map, represents only 50 miles at 60 degrees latitude,
either north or south.
And the farther you go from the equator, north or south, the worse this distortion becomes.
At 80 degrees latitude near the pole, that inch on the map represents only about 17 miles.
So the lesson is that east-west distances are shorter than they appear at points far from the equator.
So think about airline routes between cities.
Now these are approximately great circles, since airlines try to conserve fuel by flying the shortest paths.
The airline routes, however, appear curved on the map.
Up in the northern hemisphere, they seem to go far to the north.
They don't look like the shortest routes to the destination.
So consider a flight from Seattle to Paris.
These two cities are at about the same latitude.
You could get from Seattle to Paris by flying directly east.
But flying directly east is not the shortest path.
The shortest path from Seattle to Paris is a great circle that bends far to the north.
It actually flies over Greenland.
Why?
Why is that the shortest path?
Don't we add some extra distance to go so far out of the way up to the north?
And yes, we do add some extra distance.
And if we go too far north, that will add too much distance.
But remember, east-west distances are much shorter than they appear on the map when we are up close to the pole.
And the ideal path makes use of this Arctic shortcut effect.
So it's worth going a little way north to take some advantage of the shortcut.
The shortest path is a kind of compromise between going out of your way and taking that Arctic shortcut.
The straight path, therefore, the shortest path does appear curved on the map.
But that is merely an effect of our imperfect map projection.
Now, this much, Gauss understood very well, but it was his successor, Bernard Riemann, who completed the theory.
Riemann's geometry is far more general than what we've been considering.
And it does not just apply to a sphere, but to a surface of any shape whatsoever.
And indeed, it does not just apply to a 2D surface, but to a space of any number of dimensions.
A straight line in Riemann's geometry is called a geodesic.
And a geodesic is the shortest path between two points in a curved space.
And finally, this is a very important point. Riemann's curved geometry is intrinsic.
That is, we do not need to think about the space from the outside.
From the outside, that would be like looking at the curved 2D surface of the Earth from a point in 3D space.
In Riemann's theory, the geometry of space is determined by distances between points within the space.
So we can talk about straight lines and distances and even curvature on the surface of the Earth
without ever leaving the ground, just by looking at the data about distances between points on the
Earth, like Gauss's survey data for Hanover. So here, in a nutshell, is Grossman's suggestion
to his friend Einstein as Einstein seeks for a general theory of relativity.
He says, the mathematical tool you need is Riemannian geometry.
What Einstein needs to do is put together Minkowski's spacetime with Riemann's curvature.
So let's return to Minkowski's spacetime. Let's draw a spacetime diagram. We have two events
and we'll label them one and two. And we have a world line, that is, a possible spacetime path for
an object passing between them. So what is special about the straight world line from one to two?
Well, we can change our coordinates. That is, we can shift our frame of reference so that
event one and event two actually occur at the same point in space.
And so that means that event one and event two differ only in time.
Now, let's imagine various world lines joining one and two. A straight world line
represents an object at rest, an object that does not move at all. And a curved world line
represents an object that moves around back and forth, starting at one and ending at two.
And we can think of each world line as the world line of a clock.
Now, we remember that a moving clock runs slower. That's the phenomenon of time dilation.
And therefore, the time measured by a clock moving from one to two
is greatest if that clock stays at rest. That is, if it follows the straight world line.
So in spacetime, a straight world line is a path of longest clock time between two events.
Now, this sounds a little strange at first. So let me make two important points.
Point number one, we made this argument by choosing special coordinates. We chose coordinates so that
event one and event two occurred at the same spatial location. But that was just a choice of
coordinates. The same fact would remain true even if one and two were not at the same spot.
Either way, the straight world line is the path of longest clock time between one and two.
A clock will therefore register the longest elapsed time going from one to two if it follows
that path. And if it follows some other path, the clock will register a somewhat shorter time.
And then there's point number two. Straight world lines are particularly important for physics.
Why? Because of the law of inertia. Remember how that law
works out in spacetime. If no net force acts on an object, then its world line is straight.
That is, it has a constant velocity path. So the law of inertia is where physics meets
spacetime geometry. Now, remember Einstein's essential insight about gravity.
A freely falling reference frame is an inertial frame. That is, in freefall, an object that is
not pushed in any way will move in a straight line path. But a frame of reference attached to the
Earth, say, is not inertial. In that sort of reference frame, objects appear to accelerate,
even if we don't push them. That's what we've been calling gravity.
Their world lines, in other words, look curved. So let's drop an apple in our classroom.
The apple accelerates downward. As I said, that's what we call gravity.
How would we represent this motion in a spacetime diagram?
Well, our spacetime diagram has a time coordinate ct. Let's not forget to multiply time
by the speed of light so we can measure time in meters. And we draw this axis pointing up in the
diagram. And we also have a space coordinate, we'll call it y this time, representing a vertical
spatial direction. But in the diagram, we'll draw it pointing horizontally to the right.
And the Earth is a big thing off to the left in the diagram. And the apple starts out at rest.
And then it gets moving faster and faster downward. So the world line of the falling
apple appears to bend toward the Earth. How curved does that world line look?
Well, actually, not very much. The elapsed time for the apple to fall is about one-third of a second.
That's 100 million meters in the ct direction. Our diagram is not tall enough to draw that much
time accurately. We've squeezed it down quite a lot. The total amount of space traveled, on the
other hand, is about one meter. So in fact, the world line in spacetime only appears to be very
slightly curved. Now Einstein says, well, actually, the world line of the falling apple
is not curved at all. The world line of a freely falling object is actually straight.
Yes, it looks curved in our diagram. But that was a diagram based on our frame of reference
attached to the Earth. It's only because of our map projection. The world line is a geodesic path
in this curved piece of spacetime. So what is a geodesic path in spacetime? That is,
what is a straight world line? Well, as we've seen, that means it is a world line of longest
clock time. So let's consider two events. The apple drops and the apple is caught down below.
There are lots of possible world lines connecting the two events. Each world line
describes some possible motion of the apple. The apple might go down at a constant speed.
The apple might fly all over the place before landing neatly. The apple might accelerate
downward uniformly. That's the actual path. And here is Einstein's claim about the apple.
If we attach a clock to the apple, perhaps we strap a wristwatch to it, then that clock
will register the longest elapsed time between start to finish if the path is the freefall path.
That is, if the path is a gravitational trajectory. That path is the straightest path,
a geodesic in the curved spacetime near the earth. And that is quite a claim.
But does it make any sense? If we wanted to maximize our clock time, wouldn't it be best
to move uniformly from the top to the bottom? That is, wouldn't the straight line path in this
sense look straight in our diagram? After all, that's what we found in Minkowski's spacetime.
But remember, gravity affects time. There's gravitational time dilation.
In a gravitational field, lower clocks run slower and higher clocks run faster.
So consider two vertical segments in our spacetime diagram of the region of spacetime near the earth.
The two vertical segments each represent a certain amount of time. And they appear to be
the same length in our diagram. There's the same change in our C-T time coordinate.
But the outer one is really a longer physical time, because a real clock runs faster out there
farther from the earth. So if our job is to find the best path for the apple from start to finish,
the geodesic path, the path of longest clock time, then we should spend a little extra time
farther out, where clocks naturally run faster and will cover most of the distance downward
in the later part of the path. That's the path, as I'm saying, that's the path that's taking
advantage of gravitational time dilation in order to maximize the elapsed time on the apple's clock.
Therefore, the geodesic path, the path of greatest clock time, will appear curved.
If it follows the geodesic path, the apple will appear to accelerate downward in the gravitational field.
So why does that straight path appear curved? It's that map projection business again.
An airliner flying from Seattle to Paris seems to follow a curved path on the map.
But the pilot does not turn his aircraft right or left to follow it, he just keeps flying straight
at a constant altitude. The route looks curved because we aren't taking into account actual
physical distance. East-west distances are shorter up in the north, so the airliner can follow a
shorter path by making some of the trip up north. And similarly, the world line of the apple appears
curved as it falls, but that's just our map projection for space time. The apple does not
feel as if it is accelerating at all, it's just following an inertial path, it's following its
nose through space time. The world line looks curved because we aren't taking into account
actual physical time. Clocks run a bit faster farther from the earth, so those times in the
diagram are longer. So the apple can follow a path of longer time by spending more of its trip
farther out. So what is special about the path the apple follows?
In space time geometry, it's the straightest world line, the geodesic path. And the same path
would be the straightest path for any object, not just the apple. And in the same way, the
shortest path on a curved earth does not depend on what kind of airplane you're flying to follow it.
It's only the shape of the path that matters. And that is why all objects fall in just the
same way in a gravitational field. Einstein's view of gravity is a little startling at first.
Think about all kinds of different motion in gravitational fields. There's free fall,
projectile motion, there's orbital motion. And so far we have described all these things as
paths in space shaped by gravitational forces. But Einstein takes a very different view of the
matter. He says all of those kinds of paths are really geodesic paths, the straightest paths
in curved space time. There's one aspect of this that I find simply flabbergasting.
Let me try to explain. From the principle of equivalence, we inferred that gravity must
affect time. That's gravitational time dilation, an effect that's very slight near the earth.
Remember how precise the experiment of Pound and Rebka had to be to detect it?
It seemed a mere curiosity. But think back on our discussion here of the world line of the
falling apple. Gravitational time dilation was a key factor in shaping the geodesic path.
It was gravitational time dilation that kept the straight path, the inertial path, from being
simple downward motion at constant velocity. We said gravity has such and such an effect on time.
But in reality, what we call gravity is that effect on time. The effect of gravity on time
is not a side issue or a curiosity, but the heart of the matter.
Gravity is curvature of both space and time. But the world lines we usually encounter are much
longer in the time direction. The falling apple world line stretched a hundred million meters
in time, but only one meter in space. So it's the time effect that is important for the gravity
that we know. We've been exploring Einstein's astonishing idea that gravity is not a force.
It's a curvature of space time. And to understand this, we find we must combine the geometrical
ideas of Minkowski and Riemann. The trajectories of free fall bodies are space time geodesics.
And that's true for falling apples and for orbiting satellites. Those trajectories appear
curved, but only due to our map projection as in the great circle airplane routes.
And what is the key ingredient in determining those trajectories? It's gravitational time dilation.
The gravitational field around the Earth, around any star or planet, is really a field of time distortion.
So here's how John Wheeler, the American gravitational physicist, puts it.
Space time tells matter how to move, but of course that can only be half of the story.
Where does the curvature of space time come from? What determines how space time is curved?
The answer is space time curvature is determined by the contents of space time,
by mass and energy, or as Wheeler put it, matter tells space time how to curve.
Here are the ingredients that we need. We need a practical definition of curvature,
which we will get from Riemann. And we're going to need our old friend,
the tidal effect from lecture eight. And here is what we will obtain.
One of the great equations, one of the great laws in all of physics,
Einstein's field equation for space time curvature. I'll see you then.
