On this channel, I want to give you a panoramic overview of higher mathematics.
Let's start right away by looking at the big picture.
Don't worry if you don't understand the details yet at this point.
That's what all the other videos in this channel are for.
We will divide our topics into two big blocks.
Complex numbers and algebra on one side, and the study of functions and calculus on
the other.
This is obviously not all there is to learn, but it's a good place to start.
We will begin with a quick overview of number systems, with specific focus on complex numbers,
because those are still a bit mysterious for many people.
Complex numbers are fundamental to many of the other domains we will explore, so it's
crucial to get a solid grip of them right from the start.
In particular, I will help you understand both the algebra and the geometry of these numbers,
so that you can clearly see what they are, not just how to calculate with them.
After that, it makes sense to move from specific number systems to more abstract algebraic
systems, such as monoids, groups, and perhaps also rings and fields.
Groups are an indispensable tool if you want to study mathematical operations, such as
arithmetic, operations on matrices, or the symmetries of this square.
The rules of a group tell you exactly how you can compose two symmetries into a new
one.
Groups are everywhere in math, so we should spend some time with them at the beginning
of our journey.
Next, we will look at linear algebra.
This is the land of vectors and how you add them and transform them.
We will look at linear transformations and their eigenvectors.
As you can see, some linear transformations leave certain straight lines intact, and those
lines typically tell us a lot about the transformation as a whole.
We've barely started, and there are already many interesting connections to be found here,
such as connections between group theory and linear algebra.
Many groups of matrices play a key role in physics.
Basically, the language of the universe is written in matrix groups, so they are fundamental
to our understanding of particles and forces.
But there is another deep connection.
Many groups can be represented with matrices.
For example, the symmetries of a square, which rotate or flip a square to itself, can be
encoded as 2x2 matrices that transform the corner points of the square.
This connection is extremely useful, because it allows us to reduce the study of groups
to the study of matrices, so that all of the tools of linear algebra are made available
in group theory.
These are typical examples of connections between two seemingly unrelated domains.
Math is full of these connections that allow us to transfer our knowledge from one domain
to another.
These are always on the lookout for such opportunities to reduce complicated questions
about one domain into simpler questions in another domain.
We will then look at dual vectors and tensors, which are often used in general relativity.
The main question we answer here is how exactly do the coordinates of vectors change when
we view them in a different basis?
The goal will be to construct mathematical objects that don't depend at all on our specific
choice of basis.
Along the way we will discover many interesting connections.
For example, you can describe a landscape by looking at the contour lines on a map,
but also by following the arrows that lead straight downhill.
Both of these views are complementary.
If you know one, you also know the other.
Linear algebra explains exactly how this works.
That brings us to the subject of geometric algebra.
This is an extension of linear algebra that allows us to perform a kind of arithmetic operations
on geometric shapes.
We will learn how to glue two vectors together into a small parallelogram, or three vectors
into a small volume element.
The biggest advantage of geometric algebra is that it brings many other areas of math
together and unifies them.
For instance, you can describe projections, rotations, reflections, intersections and
many other operations in a unified way in any number of dimensions.
The operation that gives you the line through two given points turns out to be essentially
identical to the operation that gives you the point where two given lines intersect.
This kind of unification has advantages for programmers who want to create computer graphics
and animations.
Geometric algebra has the potential to bring together many other areas of math and physics
into a single, rich, beautiful, powerful framework.
I know this probably sounds like an advertisement for geometric algebra, but believe me.
You will agree that it's really remarkable.
I have to point out another deep and beautiful connection here.
We started our quest with the complex numbers.
It turns out that complex numbers pop up in almost every other topic along the way.
When you add or multiply complex numbers, they are an example of a group.
They can be easily represented as matrices that rotate by various angles.
They are also hidden inside many of the higher dimensional spaces that we will encounter
in geometric algebra.
Each of these encounters will give you a new perspective on the complex numbers, deepening
your understanding of them.
Every connection between two domains gives you a new perspective or viewing angle on
both and I will do my best to share as many of those angles as possible.
Right, that covers the first big block, the algebra.
It might help to think of this block as the discrete side of math, where mathematical
objects are clearly separated from each other.
This is of course an oversimplification, but it gives good contrast with the second block,
where we turn to continuous mathematics, where objects are tightly connected even when you
keep zooming in.
We will start with a brief look at functions and basic calculus.
I assume that you are already familiar with most of this from high school, so a quick
recap of tangent lines and integrals should be sufficient.
And with the tools of calculus in our toolbox, we can now study each of the domains on the
left all over again, but this time in a continuous way.
The complex numbers can serve as inputs and outputs for functions, just like the real numbers
can.
This leads to a very rich and surprising theory.
Instead of integrating a function over a real interval, we can now integrate over any curve
that runs over the two-dimensional complex plane.
We will see that sometimes the value of such an integral only depends on the endpoints
of the curve.
Other times, such as when you integrate over a circle, the result depends on what happens
inside the circle.
This will be our first encounter with a surprising and deep principle, that the boundary of an
area contains information about the inside of the area.
We looked at groups of symmetries earlier, and now we can study groups of continuous
symmetries, known as Lie groups.
Instead of the rotations of a square, which are discrete multiples of 90 degrees, we can
now explore the rotations of a circle.
A circle is symmetric under rotations by any angle.
We can even look at tiny angles, as close to zero as we want.
This will lead to important connections between the tangent line and the circle itself, giving
another view on Euler's formula for complex numbers.
Like I said, everything is connected to everything else.
In vector calculus, we look at functions that return vectors as output.
The derivative of such a function tells us how fast an object travels along its trajectory,
which is very useful for classical mechanics.
Finally, we look at differential geometry, the continuous counterpart of both tensors
and geometric algebra.
Remember that we can glue two vectors together into a small parallelogram?
This allows us to divide larger areas into smaller ones.
We can then integrate a function of two input variables over such an area.
We will discover that we can often calculate such an integral by simply integrating a different
but related function over the boundary of the area.
It seems hard to believe that the boundary can contain basically the same information
as the entire area it encloses, but think about it.
This is really just a generalization of the fundamental theorem of calculus, which you
already know from high school.
The integral of a function over an interval depends only on the boundary points of that
interval.
Differential geometry allows us to generalize this beautifully to higher dimensions.
And we will also finally figure out what the letter D means in expressions such as df
over dx.
So those are the two main pillars of mathematics that I hope to cover in my videos.
But we are not done yet.
I also want to introduce you to some applications of math.
Whenever you collect lots of data, you need statistics to summarize and analyze the data.
We will explore a few of the main concepts.
In particular, I want to show you where all those bell-shaped curves keep coming from.
You see them very often in statistics, and it might make you wonder why this pattern
is so common.
It has something to do with marbles dropping down a triangle of pins, believe it or not.
Math is also a crucial tool for engineers.
Many different machines, electric circuits, buildings, bridges and vehicles can be modeled
and analyzed using the elegant mathematics of sine waves.
Complex numbers once again play a key role in the description of these waves.
And did you know that a traveling wave is actually really just a corkscrew that simply
turns around its axis?
That brings us to physics, which also makes heavy use of mathematics.
Even the most abstract subjects, such as group theory, play a massive role in particle physics.
When we take the continuous symmetries of the universe, and we represent them as matrix
groups, and then we study them as Lie groups and Lie algebras, the fundamental particles
and forces of the standard model of physics automatically appear, as if by magic.
The math of symmetries makes the standard model inevitable.
Many of the areas of math that we will explore come together in this one amazing result.
This is one of the deepest and most beautiful applications of math that I'm aware of.
One of my personal goals with this channel is to understand how this works and then share
it with you.
Finally, the house of mathematics is built on strong foundations.
All of mathematics makes heavy use of logic, which you could call the language of mathematics.
There is also a rich theory of computation, which is used by software developers to organize
their computer programs.
This overview is obviously far from complete.
We may dive into many other topics along the way, so here I'm just giving you a very crude
map of the territory.
I want to make the videos on this channel as useful to you as possible.
To get notified when I publish a new video, click the subscribe button below and hit the
notification bell.
You can also give this video a thumbs up to help other people find it.
Share the video with friends and family if they are interested in mathematics.
Finally, you can get early access to new videos on Patreon, where you can also participate
more directly by chatting with me and the rest of the community.
Thank you.
