Hi, everybody. Hello, hello.
Welcome. I'm so psyched to be here today.
Maybe before I even get started,
can I just get a show of hands?
If you're a creator, raise your hand.
Let's see, creators. Oh, my gosh. Yes.
Okay. If you're in the music industry,
folks in the music industry, management companies, labels,
okay, great. Cool.
And then how about if you're just in tech,
like anybody in tech, creator, economy, tech?
Okay, awesome. Cool. All right.
So, I have a little cool mix of folks here today.
I've been thinking a lot about the whole arc of the Internet
and how it's evolved over the last couple of decades,
and then how I think it's going to evolve,
and Patreon's place in all of that.
And that's what I want to share with you today.
So, I started making music and videos
and putting them on the Internet right after I finished college
in 2007, and I made a ton of movies in school.
I also made animations as a kid,
so making stuff wasn't particularly new to me,
but I had just spent, at the time,
when I finished college, six months and thousands of hours
on a new record called Nightmares and Daydreams.
I was living at my dad's house at the time,
working out in my old childhood bedroom,
and I was trying to figure out how to reach people
with this new record that I had worked so hard on.
Like, even the cover, that guy on the cover
is an actual clay guy that I made out of Sculpey,
and then I did a photo shoot with him,
and I did a great job, but then I had to use the lasso tool
and Photoshop to cut him out,
and this was before the magnetic lasso tool,
so I had to do that shit by hand,
and that took way too long, but none of that mattered,
because by sheer luck, I happened to finish school
right when this budding technology called the Internet
was going through a massive shift.
It was just starting to move from what people called Web 1
to Web 2.0.
Sure, everybody knows about this in this room.
You all are here at South by Southwest, so you probably know this,
but Web 1 was essentially a read-only version of the Internet.
In retrospect, people call this 90s version of the Web
the static Web.
It was like AOL, where you could browse Web pages
and read the news, but there was no easy way
for people to upload and share,
and then in the early 2000s,
a slew of new companies like YouTube and Facebook
and Twitter came onto the scene,
and YouTube's motto was broadcast yourself.
The whole idea of Web 2
was that for the first time as a creative person,
you could easily participate on the Internet.
You could post and tweet and upload
instead of just being a passenger,
and I thought that was fucking awesome.
Honestly, I still think it's fucking awesome.
It's so easy to forget how magical this is,
how special this is,
but this moment in history marked a shift
for humanity and for artists and creators especially,
because for the first time on the Internet,
you could do more than just consume.
You could create.
You could reach other people,
and it was in that moment,
right here in 2007, when I had to graduate college
and finish my record, Nightmares and Daydreams,
and I was trying to reach people with it,
and at the time, my best bet was DMing bands on Myspace
and asking if I could open for them
at local bars up and down the West Coast.
I sent cold outreach to music venues to get booked,
and then I got in my car because I couldn't afford to rent a van,
and I drove up and down the West Coast to the United States,
and I played the dankest local bars,
and I sang my guts out,
and I sweated, and I sang, and I sweated, and I sang,
and I ate tacos out of the back of my car
while my friends were all getting promoted
in high-paying jobs as investment bankers,
for years, tour after tour,
and I'm using the word tour lightly here.
Like, there weren't people at my shows.
Like, nobody came!
I had no fans!
On a good night, there were a couple stragglers
who wanted in off the street,
but I was playing empty bars.
It was so hard to reach people.
So you can imagine how excited I was
when a friend sent me a video of a guy named David Choi
singing with a guitar in front of his webcam
on a new website called YouTube.
And this video had, like, 300,000 views
or something like that.
I couldn't believe it! David was reaching people!
This phase of the internet had the potential
to solve a fundamental problem for me as an artist.
I felt like I had to jump in, and I did.
I immediately started uploading videos to YouTube.
Back then, no one else was showing
the, like, at-home recording process,
so I just filmed myself playing instruments,
and then I layered them in the video with split screens
so people could see all the musical elements
coming together to form a song.
And it's funny, because in 2023, this idea seems totally obvious,
but nobody was doing that back then.
It wasn't a fancy recording studio
with millions of dollars' equipment.
It was a bedroom with an M-Box audio interface
and a cheap version of a laptop recording software
called Pro Tools LE and an old Sony handicap
that I lugged around with me everywhere
that shot on high eight tapes
and a bed comforter humming on the wall
to dampen the sound and broken cymbals
but I was making real music.
I was screaming my fucking guts out
and playing accordion and doing collabs with friends
and it started working.
People started watching my videos and listening to my music.
I was reaching people.
My videos started getting thousands of views.
It wasn't millions of people at first,
but it was so much better than playing empty bars.
So I kept doing it.
And by 2009, I had made 43 YouTube videos of my songs
and I was feeling amazing
and the first time in my life,
I was actually reaching people with my work.
Okay, but the real beauty
of this new website called YouTube,
the most amazing thing about it,
was that it had a subscribe button.
I only realized how truly special
this idea was in retrospect.
But in my opinion, this concept turned out to be
one of the most important things
about this new era of the internet,
called Web 2.0.
The subscribe button was foundational.
It changed YouTube from being a tool to reach people,
to being a way to reach them
and then build a following around my work.
The subscribe button allowed people who liked my stuff
to sign up to see more of it in the future.
And as a creator, it gave me a channel of distribution
to ensure that my future work was sent to those people.
So it turned out that Web 2 solved more than just reach,
more than just discovery.
It represented the birth of the follower.
In my opinion, the follow is not some handy feature
of a social network.
The follow is foundational architecture
for human creativity and organization.
The idea of a creator, an artist, or a community of fans
around them who want to see their future work,
this concept, the follow, it's profound.
Whether it's the following that I was building as a musician
or a podcasting duo who talks about what it's like
to be single moms in a community of single mothers
who finally feel seen and understood
or a science education creator and students
who didn't previously have access to high quality education,
the follow was a system of organization
for the entire internet.
It was a framework for the distribution of creativity
and communication, not just reach,
but a step past it, ongoing communication,
connection, a sustained relationship, community.
And I learned just how magical the concept of the following could be
when I did my first collab with my girlfriend Natalie.
We put up a video on my YouTube channel in 2008
that was a song we created together,
and it was different than my music.
It was way less screamy and insane,
but it was more active and fleshed out than her music,
so we decided to create a new separate channel for our collabs
and we called this new YouTube channel, Pomplimus.
Oh, all right, got some Pomplimus fans in the house, all right.
But we posted our first video,
the first Pomplimus video was actually posted on my channel,
and I had about 7,000 subscribers at the time,
and my subscribers loved this new video.
And at the end of it, we posted a little link
to the new Pomplimus channel to tell people about it,
and almost instantly, the new Pomplimus channel
got 3,000 subscribers.
That's what a following is.
People see your new shit, literally they follow you,
wherever you go on the internet.
So Natalie and I started making more videos and more videos,
and within a year, we got 18,000 subscribers,
and then in one video, we announced that we were playing a show,
and we showed up to the show in San Francisco,
and there were 40 people there, and oh my God, guys,
I cannot tell you what it's like to have 40 people at your show
after years of playing empty bars.
Fucking magic. It was amazing.
It was so great.
That night was such a great night.
I feel like I literally can remember that.
Another time, Natalie and I were filming a vlog
to put in one of our videos,
and my sister happened to walk in behind us,
and she was holding a bar.
She's a soap maker.
She was holding a bar of grapefruit-scented soap.
Pomplimus means grapefruit in French.
And she said, hey, guys, look, I have Pomplimus soap.
And Natalie and I just saw that and decided to keep it in the video,
and we put it up in the video,
and our fans were like, oh my God, Pomplimus soap.
We want a bar of Pomplimus soap.
So we made another video, and we said, okay,
now you can order Pomplimus soap,
and we got hundreds of orders for Pomplimus soap.
Another time, when USB thumb drives were starting to get huge,
we thought, why do CDs?
Let's put all of our music on a thumb drive.
And so we did.
And we loaded up the thumb drives.
We put up a video. We said, hey, if you want to buy a thumb drive,
you can buy a thumb drive now.
And we ended up selling hundreds and hundreds of thumb drives.
We decided to sign every one of them,
and it was really personal with our fans.
And it was kind of crazy.
We had to figure out the packaging.
We had no idea how to package that many thumb drives.
My family ended up helping out.
My parents were freaking out.
Dad's taking pictures and stuff.
It was really fun. It was amazing.
Another time, we decided to put our album on iTunes,
our first Pomplimus album back in 2008,
and we didn't have artwork.
So we asked our fans, hey, do you want to make the artwork
for a Pomplimus?
And we got hundreds of submissions for the cover
of the new Pomplimus album from our fans.
And they were freaking talented.
Their artwork was amazing.
This is the one that actually won.
Natalie and I just love this one.
So this is the artwork for our first album.
It was made by one of our fans.
Another time, we booked a show at a laundromat.
That's a sentence I just said.
We booked a show at a laundromat.
The idea was like as a laundromat,
you could go order food, do your laundry,
eat by the time you're done eating, take your laundry home.
That was the idea of a laundromat.
And we booked the show.
If you crammed people in there,
it held 60 people in this laundromat.
And then we uploaded this video.
And this was the first video that we ever uploaded
that went viral.
And it got like half a million views overnight,
and we showed up to our show at the laundromat,
and there were 200 people crammed inside the laundromat.
And then 150 or 200 people outside,
like spilling in the street, cars were swerving around them.
And like there was no stage.
Like it's a laundromat.
So literally, I'm playing music, and there's a person.
Like I'm like looking out of person's eyes
while I'm playing pompomous songs.
It was insane.
Honestly, it was the first night.
It was mayhem.
I don't have any pictures of the night,
but this is what it felt like.
Like it was just like insane.
And this was the first time I was like,
oh my God, this is going to work.
Like having a following is amazing.
This is going to work.
We're going to be able to be full-time musicians.
Another time we posted another video.
And at the end of the video, we told our fans,
hey, we're uploading a song to iTunes.
We decided not to ever sign or kind of enter the music industry.
We did everything ourselves.
We negotiated our own contract with iTunes directly.
We posted our songs directly to iTunes.
And so we kept almost, you know,
all of the revenue associated with that.
And when we posted this album,
told our fans about it online, told our followers,
we sold 30,000 songs that month.
And we got $22,000 deposited directly into our bank account.
It was more money than I'd ever seen in one place,
ever in my life.
I was losing my mind.
It was so incredible.
Then Pompomoo started playing shows,
and we started touring.
And, you know, hundreds of people started showing up.
And then many hundreds of people,
and then thousands of people started showing up.
And this is my wife, Crowdsurfing,
because she's a fucking badass.
And that's what I mean when I say that the subscribe button
is not a silly feature.
The concept of the follow changed my life.
It made my dreams come true as an artist.
It took me from playing empty bars
to living out my fantasy as a musician.
The follow is a piece of internet architecture
that felt closer to magic than anything
I had ever experienced in my life.
Right around the moment that Pompomoo was starting to work,
right through all of this,
there is this genius named Kevin Kelly.
Has anybody heard of Kevin Kelly?
Founder of Wired, yeah, a bunch of people.
Okay, amazing thinker and mind.
He wrote an essay called A Thousand True Fans.
And his premise was simple.
It was that in the age of the internet,
you don't need millions of fans to be successful.
If you can just find a thousand people
who are willing to buy 100 bucks of stuff from you per year,
that's $100,000 per year,
which is a pretty freaking great business as a creative person.
You just need a thousand true fans
who really connect with you and believe in you.
And this is different than just reaching people.
It's even deeper than followers.
This is super fans, true fans, real fans.
Call it whatever you want.
The idea is that there's this group of people that is your core.
If reach means people see it,
and follower means people want to see more,
then true fans are the people who go to the shows
and buy the merch and download the record
and pay for the course and get the live stream tickets
and all the things.
And this idea really resonated with me.
We had fans showing up to Pompomoo shows
with tattoos of the band.
We had fans literally making custom t-shirts
of Pompomoo posters, drawings, artwork, cookies.
We had a fan do icing of my face on a cookie.
I ate my face.
We had a fan who made an oil painting
and me screaming my fucking guts out.
I learned HTML and I had a little website.
I used this link release software called eJunkie
and I cobbled together like a little MP3 store
for myself on the internet.
I would sell original music and I was selling 500 bucks a month
of my original songs on my own website
with my own shitty thing that I made.
Fans were showing up to buy things, to be there.
One time we asked our Pompomoo fans
to come film a music video with us on a Saturday,
like show up to Dolores Park in San Francisco,
show up and be in this music video.
50 people showed up.
They even learned this dance.
We shot this dance.
The dance is in this Pompomoo's video.
Another time we would actually always use this software
called Stage It, which is like a ticketed live stream software.
We could play our songs.
People could buy tickets and show up live on the internet.
Natalie and I would just sit at home
and play these songs for 45 minutes
and people would buy tickets and leave tips during the concert
and we would routinely make like three grand
in 45 minutes playing our songs.
It's like these are true fans.
Another time Natalie raised over $100,000
for her record from just 2,000 people.
Another time we made a Pompomoo's album
and we went online on YouTube.
We put up this video and we said,
hey, everybody, we have a new Pompomoo's album.
It's not for sale.
You can't buy it.
You can't get the new Pompomoo's album.
The only way to get the new Pompomoo's album
is if you donate a book to the Richmond School District
and then send us the receipt for that book
and we will send you the Pompomoo's album for free.
Just donate a book.
It's super easy.
We'll send you the album in the mail for free.
And the Richmond School District
ended up having to rent a shipping container
to keep up with the packages.
It's like 11,000 books that got sent to the Richmond School.
It's like $140,000 worth of books.
It was amazing.
It felt incredible to see that many people show up for this.
That's true fans, real fans, super fans.
Call it whatever you want.
But this was the concept that was rattling around in my head
when I started Patreon 11 years ago.
This is actually the first sketch of Patreon.
I called up my co-founder and he turned this
into what is now Patreon.
And the idea was very simple.
It's like a membership platform
where fans could sign up for a subscription payment
to the creator and the creator could run a membership
and get paid for their work.
I'm not going to tell the Patreon founding story.
I've told it a million times.
But the company is now over 400 people, 11 years in.
We have over 250,000 creators
who have made over $3.5 billion on the platform,
which I think of as proof, if we ever needed it,
that the true fans are there and the true fans are ready.
Okay.
In the background, while Patreon was being formed,
building over the last decade,
the whole internet was again starting to shift.
And if you think of the 90s as Web 1 and the 2000s as Web 2,
right around the 2010s, there was a new change happening.
Facebook started experimenting with a new thing called ranking.
And I realize most everybody here knows about this.
Ranking did was essentially it took the feed,
which you can think of as a list of posts from creators that I follow,
and it analyzed each and every post for how engaging it was.
And if it wasn't engaging enough,
Facebook would then take that post and push it down in the feed.
In other words, they started ranking or ordering posts
according to what was best for their business.
This was actually great for Facebook.
It was the right business decision for them and their company
and their revenue model.
But what it meant for creators was that for the first time since Web 2.0,
my followers might not necessarily see my posts.
And this idea of a subscription started to break down.
If the person doesn't receive the things,
it's not really a direct true connection between a creator and their fans.
It's not really a subscription.
The channel of distribution is broken.
And it creates another problem too around creative freedom,
because now suddenly, my post has to be better than the other posts,
according to a set of criteria that I don't know or have control of
or even agree with.
So instead of thinking, what do I want to make?
What lights me up?
What is the output that I want to create as an artist?
What will my fans love?
Instead of thinking those questions, now in the back of my mind,
I'm thinking, what will the ranking algorithm favor?
And that subconsciously or consciously changes my creative output
to achieve Facebook's goals, not my goals as a creator.
And if it were just Facebook doing this, fine,
creators would just leave and post somewhere else.
But it worked really well.
It was great for Facebook's business.
And people started spending even more time on the platform.
So the other platforms had to compete.
And YouTube launched the Cosmic Panda redesign,
centering the entire company around watch time.
And Twitter and Instagram followed with ranked feeds in 2016.
And we only saw it in retrospect.
But now I think of the 2010s as the decade of ranking,
the decade when the original promise of the creator-led community,
the true follow was broken for the first time.
I want to just do a quick aside here,
because I know there's this big debate in the world
about chronological feeds versus algorithmic feeds.
And I don't want to make it sound like I'm a zealot
on either of the two polarized sides.
It's actually not the takeaway here.
It's not how I think of it.
I actually see problems with chronological feeds,
because as a creator, if it's chronological,
then you have to keep posting to stay on top.
So I don't think that's necessarily the best way
to build strong relationships either.
The problem that I have is if you're going to change that,
if you're going to adjust the way you create a feed,
what is the purpose behind that?
What is the intention behind that?
Are you trying to create a place
where you can build strength of relationship
with your community,
where your fandom gets energized over time,
where people are guaranteed that subscription,
where you get a direct connection with your community
and your true fans?
Is that it?
Or is it maximizing attention?
Is it maximizing watch time?
Those are two very different goals
and very different ways of organizing
your entire product as a technology company.
This one helps me as a creator,
and this one hurts me as a creator.
It hurts my community.
It hurts my business.
It hurts my creative output.
I wish that it stopped there,
but around the turn of the decade,
a new company came onto the scene called TikTok,
and TikTok had a much deeper impact on the ecosystem
I think anyone foresaw at the time.
It wasn't just short form vertical first video.
That wasn't it.
That's a red herring, I think.
It was much more fundamental than that.
TikTok said,
we want to make the most engaging feed possible.
This whole idea of a list of your subscriptions,
forget about that.
In fact, forget about the whole concept of subscriptions.
TikTok started from the ground up
with something totally different called For You,
where each of these posts are chosen for me by TikTok
instead of me choosing what's in my feed,
and this completely abandoned the concept of the follow.
But it worked.
TikTok had a billion users by 2021,
and traffic on the internet started flowing away
from the legacy social companies and toward TikTok.
So just like with Facebook and ranking,
the other platforms had to compete.
YouTube launched shorts,
Instagram launched reels,
and Twitter launched a For You feed as well,
and within a couple of years,
this whole system of organization for the internet,
the creator-led community,
started to fade into the past.
I have really felt this personally as a creator
in the last four years, especially.
My fans don't see as much of my stuff anymore.
It's harder to sell tickets to a show.
It's harder to reach people with my new work.
It's harder to build community.
It's harder to build a business.
It's harder to energize my fans.
I was curious for the creators and the audience.
Are you feeling this too?
Are folks in the room feeling this?
I'm seeing nodding heads, raised hands.
Yes, okay.
This is, I just feel it.
What's happening here is we are in the middle of another shift,
and this is a big one.
If the 90s was Web 1,
and the 2000s was Web 2,
and the 2010s was ranking,
I'm worried that the 2020s
could become the death of the follower.
I got an email from a creator
that I was spending a lot of time with
a little while ago, about a year and a half ago,
and I got this email in my heart,
just sank in my stomach.
Can we get the slide up? Great.
Hey, Jack.
I'm writing this letter to you hat in hand
due to changes at Facebook.
Overnight, the traffic to my links in my page
is dropped by 80%.
As such, it looks like I'll have to sell my home.
I'm dusting off my resume
and looking for jobs in social media management.
This is now,
I'm seeing more and more of things like this,
and it's not just happening to creators.
It's happening to anyone who posts stuff on the internet.
It's happening to media companies.
Look at what's happening to Vice and Buzzfeed
and Rooster Teeth's announcement a couple of weeks ago.
This is a really hard change to navigate
for anyone who's posting stuff online
and trying to build community and business.
For the creators in the room,
I think it's really important to remember that
and to understand that.
If you're not connecting
as much as you want to with your audience right now,
that does not necessarily mean
there's something wrong with you.
A lot of us as creators have this tendency to be like,
what can I do better?
And that's a good impulse, honestly.
It's like growth mindset.
How am I contributing to this?
What can I do better?
And again, I think most of the time that's really good,
but there is also something happening in the background right now.
It's a macro thing that's happening on the web
that makes our jobs as creators really hard right now.
There's a lot of smart people at big companies
that are well-funded, big media companies,
trying to figure this out too,
and they're having trouble with it too.
So as creators, just know that.
It doesn't necessarily mean there's something wrong with you here.
I believe that this problem is the single most important problem
that faces creative people today.
The weakening of creator-led communities,
of our distribution channels to our fans.
This is the hardest, most challenging,
and most painful issue threatening the present
and the future of creativity on the internet.
So I want to be very clear about this.
I actually, I don't think that this is going to happen.
I don't think that we're actually going to see the real death of the follower.
That's not what I think is going to happen.
I think the follow is too important to die.
I think it's too valuable to ignore.
I think it's too useful and awesome for creative people,
for publishers, for media companies,
and I think the next wave of internet
and media technology companies are going to surge on this problem
and try to solve it.
And it's actually already started.
And the incumbents of the audience
are not going to be able to fight it
because their revenue relies on maximizing attention.
To drive their businesses, they're being forced up
towards discovery, towards reach, personalization, algorithmic curation.
These are the levers that drive attention
and therefore they drive their strategies.
That's why there's a whole already opening up
and why we're starting to see a whole new set of companies emerge
that look fundamentally different from the legacy social landscape.
Discord and Kajabi and Fourth Wall and Gumroad Moment,
which Patreon acquired last year.
The Courses Platforms, Events Companies.
Some people are calling this subset of companies the creator economy.
I don't even think of it like that.
It's a fundamental shift in approach.
And the hallmark strategy of the drivers of these businesses
is the focus on deeper connections,
as opposed to just more connections.
The true fan, the real fan, call it whatever you want.
It's the 5% of fans that drive 90% of the community and business.
This is a direct to fan business.
This is an ads business.
This is about depth of connection.
This is about maximizing attention.
This is about deeper fans.
This is about more fans.
And what binds this new wave of emerging companies
is that their strategic focus is down here.
The next decade of creative and media technology companies
will focus on building direct to fan connections
and community strength.
As creators, we'll still need the social platforms.
We'll still need those companies up here for discovery, for reach.
We need that.
But those companies will be one component
of the many tools that we have as creative people
to help us run our communities and businesses.
That's where the world is going.
I'm sure of it.
And personally, right now,
I feel a sense of responsibility through this.
I feel a sense of responsibility because
I remember what it feels like to be a creator
on the outside of these platforms,
watching the internet move in a direction
that I don't agree with and that I don't like
and that I don't think is good for my community and my business.
I remember what that feels like.
I remember feeling anxiety.
I remember feeling fear.
I remember feeling scared of where that was going
and what it meant for me.
And now, through whatever crazy life path
I have been on as an artist,
I'm now finding myself as a CEO
of one of these fucking tech companies
and I feel this sense of
I want to help build the type of internet
that I want as a creator.
That's what I want to do.
So I really don't want this talk to feel like a Patreon ad.
Actually, I really hope it doesn't.
But I do want to give you a sense
of how I'm thinking about this problem
given this seat that I'm in
and how Patreon is now thinking about this problem
and what we think our place is in it
and what we want to do about it.
And the headline is this.
It's been 20 or 30 years.
And the current version of how art and community
exists on the internet today,
I don't think is the right version.
How community and art exists on the web.
I don't think it's the right way.
And I want Patreon to contribute
to building a better version
of how art and community could exist on the internet.
We've oriented the whole company
around this problem.
And we've been building a lot in the background
over the last couple of years,
but we made some big announcements a couple of months ago
about the next phase of Patreon
and how we're thinking about this problem.
Specifically, we started as a membership platform
11 years ago, subscription payments.
But we have built a lot,
especially in the last three years,
in an effort to take a more holistic approach
to building this.
We built video, community, podcasting,
better posting, a new media player, commerce,
free membership, which is essentially like a follow
gated on an email and live.
And while this might look like a lot,
it's actually just three things,
media, community, and business.
And we're now thinking of Patreon
no longer as a membership platform,
where we started,
but as this whole thing,
the media, community, and business foundation
for the next decade of professional creativity
on the internet,
organized around the concept of the true follow
in an effort to build a better way
that art can exist on the web.
That's the theory.
That's what the company is setting out to solve now.
And in practice, what that looks like
is a new set of products and tools
that we built into Patreon.
This is our first foray into community.
And essentially this allows fans
to connect with each other
and build energized fandoms
and creators to hop in there and talk with fans.
It's a place for true fandom.
Why do we build this?
What's the thinking? What's the strategy
and the idea behind this? Here's why.
As a creator on the internet today,
I can get subscribers and I can get views
and if I can send my fans to Instagram
or TikTok and they can be there,
but what I've noticed is those communities
degrade over time.
They don't get energized over time.
They get de-energized.
It gets harder and harder to reach those people.
I make a post. I reach 2% of my audience.
I reach 1% of my audience.
I lose touch with those people
and there's no way for me to find
those real fans, those true fans,
the small portion of my fans
that drive everything for me as a creator.
The way we're building this
and what I want as a creator
is a place where I can send my fans
and that fandom gets energy over time.
That fandom gets closer.
That fandom gets more vibrant,
more connected over time,
more enthusiastic over time.
That's what I want as a creator.
That's the space that I want to have
as a creative person.
Creators deserve a place like that.
That is important.
It's important for the future of creativity.
Another thing that we built
is commerce.
Commerce allows creators
to sell a digital thing,
anything that you can sell online,
any digital thing.
Why did we build this? Why did we build commerce?
Because
creators
send lots of people to their Patreon,
millions of people to their Patreon pages every month.
What we found is
a lot of those people are true fans.
They're like the really intense,
interested, excited fans.
But not all of those fans
are ready to pay with a subscription payment.
In fact, a lot of them don't want to pay
with a subscription payment.
A lot of them.
Why? Why don't they want to pay with a subscription payment?
Either they have subscription fatigue,
which is a real thing,
or they're not in the right financial situation,
or they don't want to commit to a payment every month.
But they're still true fans.
Rather than having those true fans
leave the creator,
we want to give creators a way
to start forming connections with those fans,
to build businesses with those fans.
We built commerce as a way
to participate in the creator's business
and community through this commerce product.
Meanwhile, the creator can build
an awesome business along the way, too.
The logic is very similar for free membership.
Why do we build free membership?
What is free membership, by the way?
Think of this as a follow gated on your email.
It's kind of like an email capture,
almost, as a creator.
It allows a fan to follow your page
without paying
in exchange for giving them your email.
It's the same logic as commerce.
They're sending their true fans millions
every month to their Patreon pages.
And we wanted to give creators a way
to reach that portion of their fans
that they go to the shows,
they have the merch, they have the hat.
They're true fans, but for whatever reason,
they don't want to buy one of the things you have digitally,
and they don't want to pay a subscription.
And this allows creators
to continue forming relationships with those fans.
And what's super exciting about this
is we have found that about 40 to 50%
of these fans
actually say
that they intend to pay the creator
in the next few months.
They have high intention
to be a part of the creators' community and business.
And this gives creators a way
to start building community with those folks.
Okay, we also
acquired a live experiences
platform called Moment.
And I don't even
want to call it ticketed live streaming,
because it's so much more beautiful than that.
Arjun and the team did such an incredible job
of building this place
for creators to sell tickets
to these live experiences,
and they can debut their work.
A stand-up special, a movie that they've made,
a special episode
that they know is going to be a total banger,
whatever it is, it allows creators
to sell tickets to that experience
and then have community with those fans
while they're all watching it together.
And they've launched amazing creators,
Tam and Paula and Bieber,
and they've worked with folks like Arjun Schultz,
to have that live community experience
and start gathering those community members
around their work.
Okay, so
all that to say,
the way we're thinking about it,
and the way we're thinking about this next phase is that
we're not just a membership company anymore.
We're a true fan company.
We're a creator company.
We're building a better way for art and community
to exist on the internet.
Because I want Patreon to build
an internet where creators have
true creative freedom.
I want Patreon to contribute to a web
where creators have control of their businesses
and their careers.
And I want it to feel like fire
to be part of a creator's community.
I know what it feels like
to be part of an energized community.
I remember it.
And I have that same conviction now
that I did back in 2013 when I started Patreon.
I know that it is possible
to build an internet where fandoms thrive
and where professional creativity is possible
for anyone.
I believe this in my bones.
It is not a choice.
It's not optimism.
It's just deep down what I actually know
to be available to humanity
if that is the path that we choose.
Okay.
That's what Patreon is doing.
It's how we're thinking about this future
and Patreon's place in it.
But for the creators in the audience,
creators don't have to wait.
Creators don't have to wait for this.
Over the last decade,
I've talked to thousands of creative people.
I've had my own creative projects.
I've learned a lot.
And I want to share just a few thoughts
about navigating the shifts
in the internet
and how we can all
prepare ourselves
and our communities for those shifts.
And we don't even need to wait
for any of the tech platforms
to catch up.
Can I get next slide?
Great.
The first,
invest in those true fans.
Invest in the depth of connection.
Not just new.
It's not all about new views,
new subscribers, watch time up and to the right.
It's about depth.
It's about quality of interaction.
It's about finding that small portion of your fans
that are your engine,
that are your core,
that are your core.
And that's what I'm trying to reach them.
Sometimes when I talk about this,
creators think,
does that mean like DMs?
Should I be talking to individual fans?
No, not necessarily.
That's not actually what I mean.
Finding those people
and building real connections with them
in whatever capacity you have.
And my team will probably kill me for saying this.
It's not even using Patreon.
There's a bunch of ways that you can do this.
I'm a little biased, but I think you could.
You could find
some other place
where you can build that community
with your true fans.
The point is find those people
and invest in that community.
That is the engine that will drive your business,
slingshot your business
through these shifts in the internet.
Okay.
The second thing,
make beautiful things.
There is so much tension,
especially right now,
to make for the algorithm.
And I've seen the diagrams.
I've seen the charts.
I've even drawn them in my history.
Make for the algorithm, make for yourself,
and then make the things that help you build a business.
This is a Venn diagram, little center part,
and that's the sweet part. I've seen all that.
And I get that.
But the gravity,
the gravity,
everywhere we look as creators today,
the gravity is just pushing us.
It's just pushing us toward
making for other reasons
than why we set out to make things in the first place.
It's so important
to remember to make beautiful things,
to make things that light you up,
and to make things that you care about.
There's a wonderful metaphor that I love.
It's a business metaphor,
but it makes sense for creators too, I think.
It's a metaphor of the business
of the hot dog stand under the Eiffel Tower,
or the local restaurant.
And the hot dog stand in the Eiffel Tower
gets thousands of new customers
coming through their hot dog stand every day.
It's just tourists just coming through.
And they know they're going to get lots and lots of new customers,
and none of those people come back, but it doesn't matter,
because they're just always getting new customers every day
because of the Eiffel Tower,
and they just make hot dogs and sell them,
and some portion of those customers buy their hot dogs.
Actually, you don't even have to be very good hot dogs.
They just sell hot dogs. They know they're going to keep making money.
And that business works.
Like, it works. It's an okay business.
There's another business, which is the local restaurant business,
where the people there just focus on making
great food and having great service.
And they actually are not in a place that gets a lot of foot traffic,
so they don't get lots of new customers,
but everybody in like a five-mile radius
eats there twice a month.
And they just get lots of repeat customers
because they've built trust,
and they've built depth of connection with those people,
and people know that restaurant
and love it and know they're going to have a great time
when they're there.
That is a great business.
You don't have to get lots of new
and billions and acquisition,
and you don't...
That's not the only type of business you can build as a creator.
There's this wonderful group of creators
who are like, God, I've fallen in love with them.
Anybody heard of the YouTube New Wave?
Has anybody heard of these folks seeing some hands?
It's this group of creators.
They make these wonderful 30, 45-minute long form
films, many documentaries
about their lives and their struggles
coming into the world and quitting college,
and they're beautiful. It's incredible.
They're patient, they're slow,
the films are long,
but, oh, my God,
the depth of the message
in these films is incredible,
and they're building such a strong community
around their work.
People just love what they have to say
and wait to see the next one.
That's a real business.
That's a real community.
It's different than what we're incentivized to do
everywhere on the Internet,
but that works.
Okay.
The last thing.
Ooh, that was loud.
Know what you want.
The hardest lesson I have learned
as a creative person
and as an operator and CEO
over the last 10 years
is to know
and trust what I want
and to be true to that over time.
That's easier said than done.
Don't let somebody else
tell you what you want,
because then you'll end up with what they want
instead of what you want.
I think a good example of that
is as creators,
we open up our dashboards
and we see
these metrics on what success is.
This is a dashboard that someone else
built for us,
and it tells us what we want,
and the weird thing is after a couple of years,
we start to believe that.
Our minds get reprogrammed
and we believe this is what I want.
This is success,
and we chase that.
If you went back in time
and you asked Ella Fitzgerald
or David Bowie or Prince,
what do you want?
What's your goal as an artist?
What matters to you?
Do you think Bowie would have said,
my goal as an artist
is to maximize
the amount of human hours
spent consuming my work?
I don't know
what Bowie wanted.
I'm not going to pretend to,
but I can tell you what I want as an artist.
I can tell you what matters to me
as a creative person,
and what I know will matter to me
10 years ago, now,
and 10 years from now.
I want to say something
that matters to somebody.
I want to say something that only I can say
because of whatever experience
I've had in my lived experience
something that is uniquely
pointed to me.
I want to say that.
I want to figure out how to say that.
I want to find that core of human truth
in my experience
and communicate it eloquently and clearly
and have it be true and feel true
and have someone else see that
and have that person think,
yes, that feels true
and it feels true to them.
And I want that person to feel connected to me
that I've never met before in our lives.
But I said a thing that resonated with them
and made them feel a little bit less alone
because they felt like there was another person
who had that same experience.
I want to make things that are timeless.
I want to make things that feel true now.
I want to make things that feel true in 50 years.
I want to make things that still feel true
500 years after I'm dead.
I want to figure out how to use my
short years on this planet
to find that kind of truth and say it.
That's what I want
as an artist.
And that's a very different goal
than watch time.
That may not be what you want
as an artist and that's okay.
But the point is to know
what you want,
what matters to you,
what are you trying to achieve
as a creative person.
We have this tendency to look outside
for those answers.
I do it too.
This advice is honestly more for me
than it is for anybody else in this room.
We want there to be a Yoda.
We want there to be a leader
or a manager or a voice of authority
that can tell us what we want
because it's a scary thing to ask.
But that does not exist.
What we want comes
intrinsically, not extrinsically.
It comes from in here.
That's where we find it.
So as we navigate
this next phase of the internet
as creative people,
as we go through these ups and downs
of the web
in its ever-evolving state,
do not forget
what matters to you as an artist.
Do not forget what fills you
with pride to make.
Do not forget
your purpose for making things
in the first place.
Don't forget why you wake up in the morning
and energy to your craft.
Don't forget what gives you
a sense of meaning
as a creative person.
And lastly,
don't forget to scream your fucking guts out.
Thank you, everybody. Appreciate you being here.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Thank you.
