More than two billion years before the protomolecule was discovered in our solar system, it was
created by an advanced civilization we refer to as the Ringbuilders.
Capital R, Capital B. We don't know what planet the Ringbuilder civilization developed
on, or what their home system is, but we do know that over what is probably a very long
period of time, they became much more technologically advanced than humans.
They mastered spaceflight, they gained an understanding of wormholes, and were able
to utilize those for faster than light travel.
From there they started building a massive network of ring gates, which connected several
systems inside the Milky Way, which all had at least one habitable planet.
This allowed their civilization to thrive.
And in the process of building that network, using the protomolecule for the construction
of the ring gates, they sent what was essentially an icy rock loaded with protomolecule on a
trajectory towards Earth long before advanced life had developed.
This got caught in Saturn's gravity and stayed there for a couple billion years.
It looked like a moon we named it Phoebe, and it just sat there in orbit, full of protomolecule
just waiting to be discovered.
The fact that it got captured may have been necessary for human life to develop in this
scenario.
And while it was stuck there, the ring builder civilization that sent it were completely
wiped out.
Somehow they got themselves in the sights of an even more advanced civilization, which
we refer to as the Unknown Aggressors.
This may be related to the ring gate network that they created, but we don't know for
sure by the end of the fifth book or the fifth season of the television show.
We just know that something set the Unknown Aggressors off, and they did end the ring
builder civilization.
So as far as humanity's concerned, the expanse happens in our solar system in the future.
There's no point of divergence or something like that.
Basically the history we know still exists, there's nothing to contradict that, but it
takes place in the 24th century.
So I guess just for context, when I say that Phoebe's been trapped for two billion plus
years, if we think about humans, modern humans first showed up about 200,000 years ago.
So the protomolecule and the ring builder stuff was happening way before we existed.
When we think of the present in the story, pinning down the year has always been a little
bit murky.
They never mentioned dates in the books.
And there's this weird thing where they put the 23rd century in the text crawl in the
first episode of the series, which is weirdly probably not right.
So this is what I'm going to do.
The best theory has always been that the show starts in the year 2350, because that was
the name given to the role playing game this was developed from.
In season five, we do see some dates for the first time on a time lapse in the opening
credits and it ends with 2355.
So that would fit with the 2350.
Time passes a little bit faster in the TV show.
So that would mean that it's been about five years since the series started compared to
something like 10 in the books.
Either way, that's the way I'm going to do it.
So the Canterbury say happens in 2350.
And in that they're just estimations, it's so we can move around and think about how
things relate to each other.
And it's easier than using a before protomolecule after protomolecule scale, because that's
discovered eight years before the series gets started.
Not long after our present, the colonization of Mars gets underway in the expanse universe.
Over the next hundred years or so, the population of Earth continues to swell, ecological and
climate disasters compound, and the damage to the ecosystem of Earth starts to reach
critical levels.
This leads to a shift in the development of space travel technologies, and this is probably
when development on Luna really started to take off.
During this period, the United Nations becomes Earth's unified government.
After a few generations of being a UN colony, the people on Mars, who were largely self-sufficient
by that time, started to push for independence.
There are actually tensions here, and there was a real chance for war.
It's kind of similar to the events of the American Revolution, the American colonies
in Great Britain.
And there may have been actual fighting if it weren't for a man named Solomon Epstein.
Sometime around 2213, he makes a breakthrough and develops what will become to be known
as the Epstein Drive.
It's a modified fusion drive, and it makes it possible for humanity to start to colonize
the solar system.
As you can imagine, this was really valuable technology, and Mars decides to exchange the
Epstein Drive, share it with the UN, in exchange for independence.
From there, the Martian Congressional Republic is formed.
In the next few generations, the UN and Mars start to spread out into the solar system.
They go to the asteroid belt, they start to extract resources, and over the years colonization
continues to expand.
Differences like Ganymede show up at this time to become an agricultural center for
the outer planets, and in those generations we start to see differences appear in the
bodies of people who are developing in low gravity.
This is where we get the differences between Inners and Belters.
There starts to be a slight difference between Earthers and people who grew up on Mars as
well.
It's in this period where the division lines between the three factions in our story become
clearly defined.
Earth is the birthplace of humanity, it's the homeworld, it's the superpower in the
system.
They've got a lot of problems on the planet itself, but they still have incredible power.
Mars has embarked on a generations-long terraforming project.
But something like that is just so far down the road.
To counteract some of that power that Earth has in their superpower status, Mars has set
out to build a powerful navy of their own.
And of course some advanced military tech and some badass marines to go with it.
And out in the belt, a lot of the people who went out there to try to strike it rich are
finding themselves as an exploitable class of labor.
The fact that these anatomical differences start to happen, when you can visibly see
a difference in someone who grew up in the outer planets, that makes it even easier for
them to be otherized.
They might be people, but they're not Earthers, or even Martians for that matter.
So a life in the belt is one that's defined by oppression.
This leads to the creation of the outer planets alliance at around the turn of the 24th century.
At around 2330, Timmy becomes Amos and leaves Earth.
Around that same time, Philip Inaros is born, and not long after that, the Augustine Gamara
is destroyed by Marco and his fledgling faction of Radical OPA.
At this time, Alex would be doing his 20 years that he did in the navy.
Christian Avicerala would be moving her way up the ranks through the UN government.
And in the late 2330s, James Holden will join the UN's navy and leave Earth.
In 2339, UN Marine Colonel Fred Johnson led a raid on Anderson Station to retake it from
striking workers.
A lot of people died, including civilians who lived there, and he became infamous earning
the title the Butcher of Anderson Station.
After learning that his superior set him up, he resigns, and eventually is recruited into
the OPA by Anderson Dawes.
So in 2342, Mars surveys Phoebe and discovers the protomolecule.
They partner with a corporation called Protogen in order to set up a long term facility to
investigate what this substance that they found is.
A couple years later, James Holden is dishonorably discharged from the navy.
After that, he goes and gets himself a job with the Pure and Clean Water Company, and
about five years later, where the series starts, he's working on an ice hauler called the Canterbury.
Before we get into the timeline of events of the main story, I just want to say that
of course they play out a little bit differently between the books and the show.
In this video, I'm going to lean more towards the show because that's what people are more
familiar with, but with the caveat that while the details are different, they both end up
in the same place overall.
So at the beginning of the story, the future crew of the Rossinante are all working on
the Canterbury.
At the same time, Julie Mao boards a ship called the Scopulae, and they go looking for
a ship called the Anubis because she believes a weapon her father is working on is on that
ship.
She thinks if they can get a hold of that, they can make sure that this weapon is never
used against the Belters.
When they find the Anubis, they're surprised to learn that it's a stealth ship which they
have no chance against, and the Scopulae basically has to surrender.
Julie's taken prisoner, and she's put in a room while the crew of the Anubis tries
to figure out what to do with her.
Protogen then uses the Scopulae to send out a fake distress signal, which the Canterbury
responds to.
Holden, Naomi, Alex, Amos, and Shed take a shuttle called the Knight to investigate.
While they're doing that, the Anubis arrives and destroys the Canterbury.
Holden's doing this in a plan to increase tensions between Earth and Mars so that they
can continue to do their protomolecule research without any interruption.
Because of the Anubis' stealth tech and the distress call coming from a Martian-made beacon,
everyone on the Knight begins to believe that Mars may be behind the attack on the Canter.
When the MCRN Donager responds to the Knight's distress call, Holden sends out a message
saying that there was Martian naval tech planted on the Scopulae.
So he inadvertently plays into Protogen's plan.
The survivors on the Knight are picked up by the Martian vessel.
It's attacked by more stealth ships, but they're able to escape on a frigate that's
docked inside that's named the Tachi.
The Martian Marine who helped them escape dies shortly after.
And so now Holden, Naomi, Alex, and Amos have their own ship.
Fred Johnson from the OPA reaches out to them and tells them that they can come to Tycho's
station.
In the process, the Tachi becomes the Rossinante.
Timeline-wise, Season 1 happens pretty fast.
Space travel does take time, but in Julie's flashback episode, we learn that the Scopulae
encountered the Anubis seven weeks prior to the Rossi crew and Detective Miller discovering
her on Eros.
After her bodies discovered, Protogen moves forward with their plan to conduct an experiment
with the protomolecule on a large population.
They intentionally contaminated the citizens of Eros and exposed them to radiation to speed
up the effects.
Season 1 of the show ends with them setting up the experiment where they can observe what
will happen when the protomolecule has that much biomass to work with.
There's no time jump in between seasons because Season 1 doesn't complete the first book.
I'm glossing over the political and military tensions and engagements between the three
factions because they're somewhat different books to show.
But we do see Phoebe Station destroyed by Mars in the beginning of Season 2.
In the big picture, things are working out for Protogen and Jules Pierre-Mau.
Up until the crew of the Rossi, Detective Miller and Fred Johnson launch a raid on Toss
Station.
This is where Anthony Dresden was coordinating the Eros experiment.
And after the raid is completed, Miller executes Dresden.
From there, they make a plan to push Eros into the sun, using the Mormon colony ship
the Navu as a battering ramp.
They also plan to rig Eros with explosives, and in the process of that, Miller gets stuck
there.
Just before the Navu crashes into Eros, it's able to move out of the way, and then it starts
accelerating towards Earth.
This leads to the UN firing off a bunch of missiles in its direction.
But on Eros, Miller goes looking for Julie, because he's been hearing her voices in the
sounds of the protomolecule in the station.
He's able to find what is basically her consciousness in a body made out of protomolecule.
And he's able to communicate, convincing her to guide Eros into Venus instead of Earth.
The station crashes to the surface of the planet, and this is where Josephus Miller dies.
This is the end of the first book, but it happens in the middle of Season 2 of the show.
And this is where the timeline of the show starts to get condensed and they diverge.
In the first chapter of the second book, it says it's been 18 months since Eros.
In the show it seems somewhat seamless, as there isn't an indication of a lot of time
passing.
The same things happen though.
Kids start to go missing, Project Caliban is going on, they're testing protomolecule
human hybrids, and eventually one of those is released, leading to the conflict at Ganymede.
There one of the hybrids engages with UN and MCR forces on the ground, and that leads to
engagement in space, where the orbital mirrors that focus light on the planet are damaged
and start to fall to the surface, compromising the agricultural domes.
This leads to an armistice summit on Earth, Bobby becomes disillusioned with Mars in relation
to the handling of her reports about the hybrid, and ends up working with Avacerala.
They meet with Jules Pierre Mow on his yacht, and eventually escape on the razorback.
This eventually brings them in contact directly with the Rossinante crew, and that's when
they all meet for the first time.
On Venus, the science vessel the Arbrogast is deconstructed and absorbed into what the
protomolecule is building there.
Hostilities break out around Io, where work on the protomolecule hybrids is continuing.
This will turn out to be the last stand of Jules Pierre Mow and the people who are loyal
to him.
There's an attempt to launch protomolecule hybrids at Mars, which is stopped, and Jules
Pierre Mow is taken into custody.
After that, the protomolecule project on Venus emerges from the planet and launches itself
towards the outer planets.
Just beyond Uranus, it becomes a ring gate, and this event brings the inner planets back
together as all efforts are focused on trying to understand what it is.
This is the transition between the second and third books.
Again, the condensing of the timeline is a little vague here.
Sometimes should have passed while it was traveling from Venus to Uranus, and then also
for the next event which is the EK slingshotting into the ring.
In the show we see that it takes the fleet going to investigate the rings more than six
months after it appeared to get there.
When they do, the ring is opened after the EK has flown into it.
Clarissa Mow sets her plan in motion to set up Holden by blowing up the Sung Yun.
The Rosinante becomes the first ship to enter the ring and survive as they're being chased
down by a torpedo from the behemoth, and then all the ships outside the ring gate follow
after entering the ring space.
Ever since the ring assembled, Holden has been seeing visions of the investigator, what
looks like Detective Miller.
He convinces him to go to the ring station and go inside to help him access the records.
While he's there, they both learn about what happened to the ring builder civilization,
how they were wiped out in an instant by the unknown aggressors.
While they were going to the center of the station, they were being pursued by Martian
Marines, and through acting like a threat, they caused the speed limit outside to be
slowed down again.
This set up a situation where all the ships need to power down so they no longer appear
as a threat to the security system on the station, and after they do that the investigator
is able to turn off the system, eliminating the speed limit in the slow zone.
This is the end of the third book and the third season, and the Rosinante agrees to transport
Clarissa Mow back to Luna so she can be arrested for her crimes.
This is a months long journey, and this is where Amos and Clarissa form their friendship.
Moving into season four, this is the first time we see a one to one adaptation, as season
four just covers the fourth book more or less.
And the book's a lot of time passes because these are long journeys, but the show again
seems to condense things a little.
The time they spend on Illas isn't very long, most of the time that goes by would have happened
on their trip there and the way back.
What happens is a group of refugees from Ganymede run the blockade on the rings and
make it to the surface of a planet which they call Illas.
Avasarala is trying to stop a mad rush through the ring gates because that will essentially
destabilize Mars.
So she sends the Rosinante to act as a mediator between the belters that already are there
and an earth corporation that has a charter to extract lithium from the planet.
Secretly she hopes that things will fall apart, Holden being there won't help anything, and
he'll actually broadcast how precarious things are whenever you try to rush out to one of
these worlds, but that doesn't work out.
Back when the hybrid was on the Rossi, it left behind some active protomolecule, and
that's what was acting as a note on the network, making it possible for the investigator to
appear to Holden.
So when the Rossi went to Illas, the investigator was able to activate all the protomolecule
tech on the planet.
In the process of that, he realized that there was a magic bullet left behind from the unknown
aggressors, and that was a weapon they used against the Ring Builder civilization.
He's able to use that to deactivate everything he turned on and avert crisis for everyone
on the planet.
Before he does that, he tells Holden to destroy the active protomolecule on the Rossi to make
sure something like that doesn't happen in the future.
So on Illas, things did get pretty bad, but almost everyone survived.
This is the opposite of what Abbasarala was hoping would happen, seeing that the situation
was survivable and that the Belters had a ship full of lithium that they'll be bringing
back to sell, only increased enthusiasm for people wanting to colonize the planets on
the other side of the Ring Gates.
By destroying the active protomolecule on the Rossi, this trip marks the end of Holden's
connection to the Blue Goo.
So from there, we get into Season 5 and the Fifth Book, and the Rossi returns the Sol
System where the ship will have to be repaired, and that's going to take about six months.
The crew splits up at this time, and so if we look at the timeline, you could make it
work that this is 2355, like it showed on the opening screen.
At the end of Season 4, we saw the Free Navy get stealth tech and put the plan to throw
rocks at Earth in motion, but we don't know when that happened in relation to the Rossi's
return trip to Sol System.
In other words, some time may have passed between when Ashford was spaced and when they launched
the rocks.
And I mention that because at the beginning of Season 5, we see that it's been nearly
six months after the rocks have been launched.
From there, the events that happened in Season 5 happened pretty quickly, and the books they
say that it takes Amos and Clarissa about 14 days to get from the prison to Baltimore,
and everything else happens concurrently.
So the rocks hit Earth, Tycho Station is attacked, Fred Johnson is killed, the breakaway
Martian Fleet burns towards the Ring, and at the end of the Fifth Season, we have the
battle for Soulgate, and the Bar Keith disappearing as it passes through the Laconia Ring.
In the show's version of events, we lose our first Rossi crew member, too, when Alex strokes
out after a hygiene maneuver.
This hasn't happened in the books yet.
The actor who portrayed him was fired by the show after more than 40 allegations of abuse
and harassment made by fans and co-workers, so they decided to kill him off.
Three major things happen in Season 5.
The asteroid attack against Earth, the breakaway Martian Fleet taking Fred Johnson's protomolecule
sample and passing through the Ring gates to the Laconia System, where they plan to start
their own civilization using the protomolecule to help them advance.
And the rise of the Free Navy and Soul System, where they took control of Medina Station,
which means they now have control of any traffic going through the Rings.
By the end of working on this, I can say I understand why the authors chose to keep the
timeline vague when they developed the story.
There aren't many examples of blatant discrepancies in the timelines of the books.
These mostly make sense when you look at it closely, but there is a lot of discussion
about whether some of the travel times that show up there are correct or not.
And I'm not a math guy, so that's beyond my skill set.
One of the first things I noticed when I started looking at the timeline in the past is that
most of what happens inside any of the books happens pretty quickly.
And then the real time passes in between when they're traveling or if there's just downtime
between where one book ends and the next one picks up.
Based on the obvious markers, I think the timeline of the books through number 5 is
between 8 to 11 years, and the show seems to condense that into a 5 year span.
And I think that is a great place to leave things.
We can continue the conversation in the comments, so make sure to let me know what you think.
What do you think of the timeline?
Do you think it should take longer like it did in the books, or do you like how the show
condense things down?
Please like this video if you enjoyed it.
Please subscribe to my channel if you haven't already.
Thanks for watching.
I'll talk to you soon.
