Well, we're all waiting for nightfall, but, you know, there are things to see in the daytime
sky as well.
And so to wet your appetite for observing the heavens, let me describe some easily visible
phenomena in the daytime sky, starting with the rainbow.
Everyone has seen a rainbow with its beautiful colors arcing across the sky, red on the outside,
blue on the inside.
What produces a rainbow?
It's not that hard to understand, it turns out.
We just have to first start with the fact that light, for whatever reason, we'll discuss
it more in lecture 19, gets bent when it goes through glass or water.
And the violet and blue light gets bent more than the red light does.
So let's look at what happens when incoming sunlight hits the top of a raindrop, a spherical
raindrop.
That light gets partially reflected, but some of it enters the raindrop, and in so doing
it gets bent or refracted, with the blue light refracted more than the red light.
It then goes over to here, the backside of the drop.
Some of the light goes through to the air outside, but some bounces off, it's reflected.
And that light then travels down to here, some of it exits, and some gets reflected.
And let's focus on the part that exits, there's this red ray there, and the blue ray coming
out here.
Now, if you look at a whole set of raindrops, here they are, with the sun's rays coming
in and hitting them.
Each of them will bend the light into a rainbow of colors, but the angle that each color is
bent depends on the color.
So blue is bent more than red by entering the raindrop, and upon exiting, the angle
of blue light is like this relative to the incoming angle.
The angle of red light is slightly different.
It's 42 degrees for red, 40 for blue or violet.
This angle is measured from the center of the rainbow, which is the point opposite the
sun to where the ray is coming into your eye.
So that angle there is equal to this angle here, and they're roughly 42 degrees.
Now let's make a note that a degree is just one 360th of a circle.
So a full circle is 360 degrees, going from the horizon to the zenith is 90 degrees.
So 42 degrees is about halfway from the horizon to the zenith.
It's a big arc, okay?
Rainbows are pretty big phenomena.
So if you go back to this diagram then, and you look at these raindrops, a bunch of raindrops
scattered throughout the sky will produce the rainbow, and all the drops along this direction
here will produce what we perceive to be the red ray.
All of the drops along this direction here will contribute to the blue ray, and the very
same drops that contribute to the blue ray as seen by us will contribute a red ray as
seen by someone else down here, let's say, okay?
So the different colors of the rainbow come from raindroplets, but each drop contributes
its own set of colors.
If we now ask what the appearance of the rainbow is when the sun is in different parts of the
sky, we can see that when the sun is high in the sky, the angle that we observe being
42 degrees gets partly cut off because the anti-solar point, the point that's opposite
of the sun, is well below the horizon.
So you only see a small part of the arc here, most of it is well below the horizon, alright?
But as the sun gets lower and lower in the sky, more and more of the arc rises to appear
above the horizon.
So with the sun fairly low in the sky, you can see much of the semicircular arc because
more of it has risen above the horizon.
When the sun is perfectly on the horizon, then the anti-solar point, the point opposite
the sun, is right down here somewhere, and you would see a full semicircle, a half-circle
of light above the horizon.
But you can't see the full circle because the ground blocks the view, okay?
You can see part of the rest of the circle by looking down into a canyon.
Here the Victoria Falls in Africa, and looking down into the canyon, you can see part of
the arc that goes below the true horizon.
To see the whole circle, you would need to be in an airplane above the rain, or sometimes
when you have spray coming out of a hose, you can recreate a rainbow, and by being comfortably
above it like this, you can see the entire circle, play with some spray and a hose at
home, and you can try this.
I've seen a full circular rainbow up from an airplane a few times.
Now you could ask, why do the rays actually bunch up?
Isn't it the case that a blue ray coming out in this direction because of incoming sunlight
here might get mixed with a red ray coming out in this direction from sunlight that's
striking the raindrop at a slightly different area?
In other words, why don't the different rays mix together and blur each other out?
Why do we see mostly blue light along this angle and mostly red light along that angle
there?
The rays bunch up for the same reason that someone climbing a hill doesn't change elevation
very much while nearing the top of the hill, okay?
So when you're going up a steep hill like this, your elevation is changing rapidly, but
when you're near the top, your elevation is changing slowly, okay?
It's not changing very much, and then as you go down from the top, it starts changing rapidly
again.
So there's a range of elevations here where the elevation isn't changing very much.
And in a similar way then, the rays bunch up in a raindrop by changing only slowly for
a certain range of entrance positions of the incoming ray.
Let me illustrate that with this diagram.
I'll do it only for blue light, although the different colors will be present just for
illustrative purposes.
So here's a blue ray coming in at this part of the raindrop, and it comes out at this
angle there.
If the blue ray were to strike the raindrop in a different location, it would come out
at a different angle there.
At a still different location, it comes out at yet a different angle, and so it wouldn't
hit your eyes.
But watch what happens if I continue to enter the raindrop at different positions.
There will come a time where with increasing distance from the center of the raindrop,
the outgoing angle will remain nearly the same.
Watch this next ray.
See that?
It entered at a slightly higher position on the raindrop, but it exited at nearly the
same angle as the immediately preceding ray.
And then the next one up comes out at a very different angle, but you can see here, this
region here was like the top of the hill.
The angle wasn't changing very much, and so the light rays bunch up at that angle and
produce an excess of blue light coming along that direction.
All right, so that's why they bunch up.
Well, sometimes you don't see even the full arc that you might see.
You might see only just a small part of the rainbow, as is shown here.
And that's because not all the conditions necessary for the full arc were met.
First of all, you need raindrops in a particular direction of the sky, and you need them to
be illuminated by sunlight.
If there aren't raindrops, or if they're being blocked by a thick bank of clouds, as
is happening right here, you won't see a rainbow.
What is at the end of the rainbow?
Well, the mythology is that there's gold, but usually you just get a bush or a tree
or something else that's relatively uninteresting.
It's just a complete myth that there's a pot of gold at the end of a rainbow.
There just isn't, all right, unless you set it up that way.
But you can actually set up a rainbow to land anywhere you want by changing your position
appropriately.
So here, viewed from this line of sight, the rainbow is ending at this butte in Arizona.
But if I moved over to a different location by half a mile or whatever, that rainbow would
end elsewhere in the desert.
If you look at the rainbow, you can see the very bright, so-called primary bow, whose
angle, as I said, is roughly 40 or 42 degrees.
But if the sunlight is very strong, you can sometimes see a secondary bow at a radius
of 51 degrees from the point opposite to the direction of the sun.
This secondary bow is caused by the same sorts of raindrops as caused the primary bow, but
you get two internal reflections instead of one.
The sunlight comes in near the bottom of the raindrop, instead of near the top.
It gets bent or refracted.
It bounces off the backside of the raindrop.
Some of it keeps going, okay, and that would produce a primary rainbow according to someone
up there.
But some suffers a second internal reflection, a second bouncing.
But when that light exits the drop, it can produce a secondary rainbow.
So if we look at the picture here, here are the droplets that form the primary rainbow.
The incoming sunlight comes in near the top of the drop, bounces once, goes through the
raindrop, and emerges as the primary bow.
And up above there are raindrops where the light is entering near the bottom of the drops,
and it goes through, suffers one reflection, then another reflection, and then comes out
of the raindrop and goes down toward your eye.
So this would be a secondary bow with a radius of 51 degrees, contrasted with the primary
bow with a radius of 42 degrees.
The colors of the rainbow are opposite for the secondary bow versus the primary bow.
You can see that blue is on the inside for the primary bow and red is on the outside,
whereas for the secondary bow, red is on the inside and blue is on the outside.
Now if you look carefully at a primary rainbow and the sunlight is really bright, you can
sometimes see what are called supernumerary bows.
These are these little striations here inside of the radius of the violet or the blue main
part of the rainbow.
Those bows cannot be understood in a particle theory of light.
So far everything I've told you is in principle understandable either from a particle theory
of light or a wave theory of light.
But the supernumerary bows cannot be explained without a wave theory of light, and indeed
Newton had only a particle theory and was completely perplexed by the presence of the
supernumerary bows.
We will discuss exactly what kind of a wave light is in lecture 19.
For now it suffices to say that it's something that's oscillating up and down, turns out
to be electric and magnetic fields, and you can get two kinds of interference, constructive
interference when the two waves are in phase and they add up to form even bigger oscillations
with the same wavelength, or destructive interference when the two waves are out of phase.
You see here the crest is up and it destructively interferes with a troth which is pointing
down here to give you zero, and that's the case all along the wave.
And of course there's partial constructive and partial destructive interference in between.
So what can happen is two rays can enter a raindrop at two different locations yet have
the same exit angle, but the two paths traveled by these rays are different inside the raindrop.
So even though they may have been in phase to begin with, you see they're in phase here,
all the crests and the troths are together, by the time they emerge they are out of phase.
So you can get destructive interference or constructive interference depending on exactly
which angle you're looking at.
And so here indeed you see in some places there has been destructive interference and
in other places there has been constructive interference.
Where it was constructive the bow looks bright, where it's destructive the bow looks faint.
That's the origin of the supernumerary bows.
Now rainbows are easy to see because the sunlight is so bright, but during times of full moon
you can sometimes see a moon bow.
The explanation is exactly the same as that for the sun, it's just that here the light
from the moon is illuminating the raindrops.
And of course the light from the moon ultimately comes from the sun, it's just sunlight reflected
by the moon.
The moon bow is faint and hard to see, but here in a time-last exposure you can see
it pretty well.
A related phenomenon are the so-called solar halos.
Now they're related in that they depend on the bending or refraction of light when it
enters certain substances, but in the case of the halos light is entering ice crystals
rather than raindrops.
So here is a solar halo, it's got a radius of 22 degrees, so from there to there is 22
degrees, about one eighth of the distance from horizon to horizon.
It's good to obstruct the sun with an obstacle because then it's not as bright and you can
see these faint things better.
Here's another halo surrounding an obstructed sun and the birds aren't necessary to see
the phenomenon, it's just they happen to be there.
So how is this produced?
Well you've got these hexagonal ice crystals and they're shaped sort of like a pencil.
They're long and skinny and sunlight enters them from a certain angle and gets bent and
it turns out that the rays bunch up at an angle of 22 degrees away from the sun.
So in the case of the rainbow it was 40 or 42 degrees in the direction opposite to the
sun, in the case of the halo it's a 22 degree angle but in the direction of the sun, that's
where the rays bunch up.
So the diagram could look something like this, you're looking roughly toward the sun
but you want to look a little bit away from it and at an angle of 22 degrees and all around
the sun then there's this concentration of light because the rays have bunched up and
it forms this circular halo around the sun.
Now the ice crystals are up there because they're thin ceris clouds and the ceris clouds
can exist high in the atmosphere even when it's quite hot at ground level.
Here's a halo that was taken when surface temperatures were about 80 degrees on the ground
but way up in the atmosphere temperatures are below freezing and these thin pencil shaped
hexagonal ice crystals can form and produce the halo of light.
You can see that red is on the inside and blue is on the outside there.
Again it's best to block the sun so that it doesn't appear so bright and if you position
a person judiciously you can see sort of a saintly figure not only is there the halo
caused by the ice crystals but there's the diffuse glow of the sun itself bending around
the person's head so it kind of looks like a saint here but anyway you don't have to
block the sun especially if you are using digital cameras because they have at this
time sufficient dynamic range to be able to record bright things and faint things and
here in fact is a photograph of the halo taken with the digital camera without the sun being
blocked and you know the sun is very overexposed here but that's okay you can see the halo
quite nicely and with old photographic emulsions you couldn't do this they wouldn't have such
a dynamic range the sun would be so overexposed that it would bleed into the halo but with
modern digital cameras it's actually quite easy to record these phenomena if you can
see it you can photograph it just point a camera up and and shoot all right well related
to the solar halos is a phenomenon known as sun dogs or mock suns they are a particularly
bright part of the halo so here's the halo being blocked by a lamp and you can see it
goes all the way around the sun but there's a concentration of light to the left of the
sun and to the right of the sun at nearly the same altitude above the horizon as the
sun is they're a little bit higher you can see these concentrations they're a little
bit farther out in radius than the main part of the halo you can see the inner edge of
the halo is there the outer edges right about there so these things are near the outer edge
of the halo and they are a particularly bright concentration of light in this halo so people
call them mock suns or sun dogs kind of like a dog following a person around and indeed
here's some arctic sun dogs you can see the the sun dogs just above the horizon here and
you can see the arctic dogs pulling this the sled here so that's kind of a an interesting
juxtaposition these guys are produced again by hexagonal ice crystals but in this case
instead of being long and skinny and shaped like a pencil these hexagonal crystals are
flat and plate like and by tracing the rays and how they enter the ice and how they exit
by doing the so-called geometrical optics you can figure out that indeed the sun dogs
are at a location where there would be a particularly big concentration or bunching
up of these rays coming through the hexagonal ice crystals these sun dogs can be so bright
that you can often see them without seeing any part of the rest of the halo so here's
a good example there's the sun conveniently behind a cloud so it's not too overexposed
and here 22 degrees away is a sun dog with red on the inside and blue kind of indistinct
on the outside it's amazing how often you can see these things just look up into the
sky when there are clouds passing overhead serious clouds in particular high thin wispy
clouds not thick thunder head type clouds here's a solar moxon or a sun dog with the
sun actually to the left off the screen here and there's Mount St. Helens a volcano that
erupted in the early 1980s well there's a bunch of related phenomena to the sun dogs
in the solar halos if you have very clear conditions and very cold conditions where
your view of the sun and surrounding areas is pretty unobstructed yet there are ice crystals
up there that are able to bend or refract the brilliant sunlight then you can sometimes
see some very very faint phenomena here's a good example there's the sun partially blocked
by these trees there's the primary halo 22 degrees in radius and some sun dogs but you
notice here there's a secondary halo way out here at a radius of 46 degrees halfway up
from the horizon to the point overhead the zenith and you can see some other things here
these are known as tangential arcs and there's a bunch of them there's one right there there's
one there's also a big circular arc that joins the sun dogs with the outer halo and
then keeps on extending outwards just a brilliant range of phenomena that can be seen where
you have very clear skies aside from some ice crystals in thin cirrus clouds high in
the atmosphere but otherwise very clear skies and nice and cold conditions so that a bunch
of these of these crystals conform I personally have never seen the outer halo because I've
never been in a cold enough place at the right time to see them here's another example of
the variety of arcs that conform from different kinds of hexagonal ice crystals bending light
through different angles and causing a bunching up of the rays again similar to what I described
in more detail for the rainbow but different in particular circumstance for each of these
different phenomena but they're beautiful to look for now you can also see a halo around
the moon it's fainter than the solar halo because the moon light is fainter than the
sunlight but it's it's often more obvious than the solar halo because it's easy to look
up at the full moon people often do it's kind of romantic and if there are clouds in the
sky you will often see a 22 degree moon halo people tend not to look up at the sun in the sky
because it's just so blazingly bright you know so people don't want to look up at the sky if you
look up during the daytime you will often see halos but they're easier to notice around the moon
because the moon is not so blindingly bright and here's another example of a lunar halo and the
international space station streaking across the sky next to it another related phenomenon is
called the corona now the corona is in the direction of the sun and blocking the sun here
makes it easier to see but you can see these these multi-colored halo like rings around the sun
but they're much smaller in angular extent than the solar halo that we just discussed the solar
halo that I first discussed was 22 degrees in radius it was big like that this is small it's
right in the direction of the sun and they're just these little rings of light okay they're called
the corona they have nothing to do with the outer atmosphere of the sun the outer atmosphere of the
sun is also called the corona and you can see it beautifully during total solar eclipses and it's
unfortunate that the atmospheric corona bears the same name but you know that's the way it goes you
just have to live with it the corona is caused by the fact that light is not only bent when it
goes through a droplet it's also bent when it goes past a droplet it turns out that's a phenomenon
known as diffraction and I'm not going to discuss it here because it gets quite complicated but the
point is is that the light gets bent the different waves get bent by different amounts and the path
lengths are different and they can then interfere with one another you can get constructive and
destructive interference much like that which caused the supernumerary bows okay so you get
these coronas around the sun and also around the moon and you can also see them if you look at a
bright headlight through fog I'm sure many of you have seen these things looking at distant cars
through fog you will see this this corona around the headlights and it's caused by this bending of
light around droplets and the constructive and destructive interference of that light with
itself related to corona is a phenomenon known as the glory which is seen on the opposite side of
the sun and it's very difficult to see but here I captured it when I was on top of Mount Hamilton
location of Lick Observatory in California here's the shadow of the mountain here's actually the
shadow of one of the domes and around this there's this very thin almost imperceptible corona you
can see it nicely around the shadows of airplanes sometimes here's a beautiful example of it where
there's the shadow of the airplane on the cloud deck down below the observer is sitting near the
front of the plane I can tell because the center of the glory is the perspective of the person
viewing it so the person must be right there not at the tail end and so that's the glory and it's
again caused by light bending around and within water droplets but in this case the incoming
sunlight comes in something like that it gets bent or refracted it also gets reflected and then it
comes out again and this simple picture doesn't quite work because the angles don't quite work out
it turns out you also need what's called surface waves traveling through the raindrop a little bit
and people still aren't completely in agreement as to how the glory forms but it's something like what
I've illustrated in in this simple diagram now yet another phenomenon that you can see in the
daytime sky relating to ice crystals is what's called the sun pillar all right so if you look at
the sun here in this photograph you happen to see a sun dog in the very same frame but here's the
sun below the sun there's a column or a pillar of light this is not an artifact of the photographic
process in this case this is an actual column of light produced by light reflecting off of ice
crystals and the ice crystals are the flat hexagonal variety that we encountered before there are
these plate-shaped things that produce the sun dogs the muck suns so the phenomenon is quite
similar to what happens when sunlight reflects off of the ripply water of a pond or a lake when
the water ripples like this the angle of reflection varies with time and sometimes at some moments
any small part of the water might direct the sunlight or the moonlight toward you and the
angle is different for this light here near the bottom of the pond than it is for that light
there if the pond is very close by so you get this phenomenon then with these plate-like crystals
hanging around in the atmosphere there are parts of these cirrus clouds and in this particular
photograph the sun has actually already sat but there's a bunch of plates above the sun in the
atmosphere and they are reflecting the light much like the light was reflected in the previous
photograph that I showed you off of the pond and you are seeing that as a pillar in the sky
here's a particularly bright pillar that you can see after the sun has set indeed the pillars are
easiest to see after sunset compared with before sunset because before sunset you've got to contend
with this bright sun shining in your eyes and the faint pillar is relatively hard to see but
after the sun has set you don't have the competing effects of the sun in your way now sometimes
you might think that there shouldn't be a pillar because you don't see any obvious clouds yet in
fact the pillar is there and here's an example the clouds are mostly above the horizon way up here
but there are some thin ones there that produce the pillar and indeed when you have nearly transparent
thin clouds of this sort you get an enhanced effect because you're not dealing with light
reflected every which way from clouds I mean here if the pillar were on top of these clouds there
it would be much less distinct the contrast wouldn't be as great because you'd have to contend with
all the competing light coming from all the other directions so here's a beautiful beautiful example
of a pillar well I hope in this lecture I have shown you that you don't have to be bored while
waiting for nightfall there are plenty of beautiful things to see in the daytime sky full of color
full of wonderful geometry all produced by the complex interaction of light waves with water
in its liquid state and in solid form with ice crystals
