In the previous lecture, I discussed phenomena associated with sunrise and sunset and the
beautiful colors that you can see in the sky, the clouds, the sun. Here, for example, is
a red sun, clearly a sun that's setting in a very dusty atmosphere where a lot of the
light is being scattered and absorbed. Well, the sun, of course, rises in the east and
sets in the west as do the stars, and we discussed sunrise and sunset. Here you can see a visual
and animation of this process where all the stars and the sun set in the west stay below
the horizon for about 12 hours, the length of time depending on your location on Earth
and also on the season. We'll discuss those factors later and then rise again in the east
and go across the sky. The so-called diurnal cycle, this 24-hour cycle, is of course caused
by the rotation of the Earth about its axis. The Earth is spinning like this. It's spinning
about its axis, and that process takes a full 24 hours. And we're standing somewhere
here on Earth looking out, and of course, as the axis spins, our perspective changes,
so we see different parts of the sky. And so as the Earth spins from west toward east,
the sun and the stars rise in the east, move across the sky, and set in the west. That's
the cause of the 24-hour day-night cycle. It's not that the sun is orbiting the Earth,
okay? A lot of people for many thousands of years thought that that was the cause of the
day-night cycle. The sun is orbiting the Earth, moving around the Earth. Well, that's not
true. The Earth is, of course, moving around the sun. The Earth is orbiting the sun, but
that is the cause of the year. That's the 365 and a quarter day year that the Earth's
trajectory takes in its orbit around the sun. So it's important to distinguish an orbit
from a rotation about an axis. Now, the fact that the Earth is spinning about its axis,
causing the 24-hour day-night cycle, is hardly Earth-shaking news nowadays. You know, most
people know this. But occasionally, there are still some headlines, especially in newspapers
that like to sort of spoof or make parodies of common phenomena, you know, give them in
really sensational sort of terms. And in fact, there's a parody newspaper, a weekly parody
newspaper that you can find on the Internet or published in print called The Onion. And
it had this amazing headline, Rotation of the Earth Plunges the Entire North American
Continent into Darkness. You know, it's kind of a fun headline to see. And they tend to
do all sorts of headlines like this about common everyday phenomena. But it's amazing
that, in fact, a lot of people don't know that this is the cause of the day-night cycle
or that the Earth orbiting the sun causes the year. Well, now that the sun has set, let's
start looking at the stars. And we'll start with a discussion of the constellations, groups
or patterns of stars that are easily visible in the sky. Now, there are 88 constellations
in the sky, mostly of ancient Greek and Egyptian and Chinese origin. And these are familiar
looking patterns. Some are a bit hard to distinguish, others are quite easy. There are now some
more modern constellations, especially in the southern hemisphere, such as Telescopium.
Now, Telescopium couldn't have been an ancient Egyptian or Greek constellation because, you
know, the telescope wasn't invented until the early 17th century. But most of them have
this origin. And there's a lot of mythology associated with them as well. Some are easily
recognized like Orion, the great hunter. And Orion is shown here. Anyone can visualize
the belt, a shoulder there, another shoulder there. The head is this little grouping of
stars. One foot is there and another one is right there. And the sword is hanging below
the belt. And Orion is holding a club up here, sort of off of the screen, and either
a shield or a lion that the hunter managed to vanquish holding with the other hand there.
Orion is perhaps the brightest constellation in the sky and is really quite easily recognizable
by most people. Now, another one that looks a lot like the thing it's named after is Scorpius,
the scorpion. And here's an enhanced view of it. You can see the body arching down like
this to the tail and then the stinger right there. And the pinchers are up here. So this
is Scorpius, the scorpion. And this is actually an enhanced view. The main stars of the scorpion
here have been enhanced relative to the other stars to make them more apparent. The area
in which Scorpius sits is so rich in stars that it can actually be a little bit hard
to recognize it when you have a long exposure that shows all these other fainter stars.
But Scorpius looks like a scorpion. And the mythology, as I mentioned, can be kind of fun.
For example, in Greek mythology, Orion was a great hunter, a huge, wonderful hunter who
was rather arrogant, actually. He thought he was the greatest hunter in the universe.
And this sort of annoyed a lot of his friends and stuff, and they sort of thought he was
just too arrogant for his own good. And the scorpion in particular was pretty annoyed
by this and started stinging him repeatedly. And Orion supposedly battled the scorpion for
several days, but ultimately lost and died. So Zeus took pity on Orion and put him up
in the sky for all to see forever after. But the scorpion was also put up in the sky as
a constellation on the opposite side of the sky so that the scorpion and the great hunter
would never again bother each other. They'd never get in each other's way. So as the scorpion
is rising, Orion is setting and vice versa. You never really see them at the same time
in the sky. But in different cultures, the mythology can be different. For example, the
native Hawaiians say that the scorpion is a giant fish hook, a fish hook of the demigod
Maui. And as Maui was fishing with his brothers off of an outrigger canoe, he was pulling
the fishing line and this fish hook, you can see it kind of, it kind of looks like a fish
hook, and Maui was pulling the Hawaiian islands out from underneath the ocean. And then his
brothers looked around, he told them not to look around until he was done. They looked
around and this stopped the process. And so the Hawaiian islands are a rather small chain
instead of a great land the way the demigod Maui wanted them to be. So that's an example
of some of the mythology, which is kind of fun to learn about. Another constellation
that looks a lot like what it's named after is Leo, the lion. Here is the head, this backwards
question mark. Then the body stretches out in this direction and then the tail is out
over here. And again, this is an enhanced view where the main stars of Leo have been
accentuated relative to the other background stars. Generally, constellations are named
more in honor of something rather than because they explicitly resemble that object or that
entity. And a good example is Ursa Major, the Great Bear, shown here. Now again, this is
an enhanced view where the main stars of the Great Bear are brightened relative to the
surrounding backdrop of stars. And here is sort of a bear drawn in the same field. And
I don't know, I can't really see a bear there. Anyone who can see a bear there either has
a very vivid imagination, much, much better than mine, or is hallucinating on something
weird. I don't know. I can't see a Great Bear there, Ursa Major. But in any case, Ursa
Major is one of the more prominent constellations. It's a big constellation in the northern sky.
A lot of us are very familiar with part of the Great Bear, an asterism, a grouping of
stars that is not itself a full constellation, but is part of a constellation. And this particular
asterism is the big dipper, okay? That's easily recognized in the sky. There's the handle
of the dipper, and here is the bowl, all right? And this is a pretty bright, easily recognized
asterism, not a full constellation. So a lot of people think that the big dipper is the
Great Bear. It's really only part of the Great Bear. The handle of the dipper is the tail
of the bear, but most of the bear goes off to the right of the bowl here. So that's an
asterism easily recognized. The two end stars here of the bowl are known as the point of
stars. They're the pointer stars because they roughly point toward the north celestial pole,
the north star, about which I'll have more to say in a few minutes. But here is Ursa
Major and the big dipper outlined within Ursa Major. And here are these two pointer
stars that roughly point toward Polaris, the north star. And Polaris happens to be the
end of the tail of Ursa Minor, the small or minor bear, which also has an asterism within
it, the little dipper shown here. Now the little dipper is actually pretty hard to see
in the sky. Here's a view that is not enhanced. There's Polaris. There are the two end stars
of the bowl, all right? Those are the easily visible ones. And then the other ones are
this one right there, that one there. That's the two other end stars of the bowl. And then
we go off into the tail, there, there, and then to Polaris. That's pretty hard to identify.
Here's an enhanced view of the same asterism where you can see it much more clearly. Of
course Polaris is easily seen, although it's by no means the brightest star in the sky.
It's actually relatively faint as far as the bright stars go. Here are the two fairly
bright stars at the end of the bowl. Here's the rest of the bowl, and then there's the
tail. So a lot of people have seen the big dipper. Fewer have seen and recognized the
little dipper. And once again, who can see a bear in this collection of stars? I mean,
if you can see a bear, then you've got a better imagination than I do. All right, let me tell
you a few interesting things about the brightest stars in the sky, a few of the brightest stars.
I'll start with Betelgeuse, the left shoulder of Orion. This is an enormous star. Its physical
size is absolutely astonishing. Here's an actual picture of Betelgeuse taken with the
Hubble Space Telescope, where it no longer looks just like a point like most of the stars
look like. It actually is resolved. You can see that it spatially takes some physical
extent. It's not just a little point like these things there. And if you superpose on
this diagram a physical scale, you can see just how big the star is. Here is the size
of Earth's orbit, twice 93 million miles, because this is twice the radius as the diameter.
There's the diameter of the Earth's orbit. Betelgeuse is way bigger than that. Here's
the diameter of Jupiter's orbit. Jupiter is about five times farther from the Sun than
Earth is, so there's its orbit. You can see that Betelgeuse is about the size of Jupiter's
orbit around our Sun. So that's a really magnificent star, and we'll discuss it later. It'll explode
later in its life. If you extend the belt of Orion down to the lower left, that is to
the southeast, you come to the brightest, the apparently brightest star in the sky,
Sirius, the dog star. And here's a close-up photograph of it through a large telescope.
It has a faint small companion, which is known as a white dwarf. Now a white dwarf is a dead
star. Our own Sun will become a white dwarf in about six or seven billion years. It's
a compact remnant of a star that has lived out its life, and roughly half the mass, or
up to the same mass as the Sun, is compressed into a volume about the size of the Earth.
So the material in a white dwarf is really dense. A teaspoonful of it would weigh something
like five tons if you had it here on the surface of the Earth. That's a white dwarf, and we'll
discuss these stars a lot more later. I'm just telling you a few tidbits to wet your
appetite for what's to come. Now, as I mentioned, a lot of people think that Polaris, the north
star, is the brightest star in the sky, far from true. It's actually relatively faint as
far as they go. And here in this diagram, you can see Earth's a major, the big dipper,
with the pointer stars pointing approximately at Polaris. It turns out that Polaris is
pretty representative of stars in that it is not a single star, it's three stars. Now
most stars in the sky are either double, or triple, or quadruple stars. You just don't
see that because your eyes don't have the clarity of vision, okay? But if you could
look at them through a telescope, you would see that there are two or three stars. And
the two main components of Polaris are pretty easily separated with the Hubble Space Telescope,
Polaris A and Polaris B, but Polaris A itself has a close companion, which requires very
sharp optics to discern. There it is, Polaris uppercase A, lowercase B. So this is a triple
star system, and they're all orbiting around each other. This is pretty common of stars
in the sky. All right, another interesting star that is easily visible in the sky is
Vega in the constellation Lyra, the harp. Here's Vega in the constellation Lyra. It
is one of the brightest stars in the sky, not quite as bright as serious, but still
very bright and high up in the sky during summer months. Indeed, it is one of the stars
of the so-called summer triangle. There's Vega in the harp, Deneb in Cygnus the Swan,
often called the northern cross because you can make a up-down segment here and a left-right
one there, and it looks like a cross, especially if you delete that segment and that one there.
It looks very much like a cross. So anyway, Deneb is a pretty bright star in Cygnus the
Swan or the northern cross, and then down here, Altair in Aquila, the eagle, is a bright
star, and this is known as the summer triangle. Well, Vega is a star that has a dusty disc
of gas still circling it. So there's a star, Vega. It's a pretty young star, but it's still
got a lot of gas and dust circling it, and we think that that gas and dust has recently
formed planets and may still be forming planets. And indeed, some astronomers claim that they
have good evidence for a planet twice the size of Jupiter in the dusty disc of Vega,
the brightest star of the summer triangle. Well, some of the stars, the so-called stars
that you see in the sky are actually planets, and you can tell because they move around
from night to night relative to the other stars. You know, the big dipper doesn't change
its appearance from night to night. It may rotate across the sky, but the separation
and physical spacing of the stars in the big dipper don't change. But when you have a planet,
it wanders across the sky, and its physical separation from other stars changes or appears
to change. And here, for example, is Jupiter, which is near a cluster of stars at this moment,
the seven sisters or the Pleiades. A few nights later, Jupiter will have moved to a
different part of the sky, a slightly different part of the sky, so the orientation will change.
And the planets indeed are the wanderers. Planet means wanderer in Greek, and the Greeks
notice that some stars appear to wander across the sky and are unlike normal stars, and the
patterns change with time. I like photographing the planets in the moon. Sometimes you can
get some really striking configurations. Here's the crescent moon with Venus, Saturn,
and Jupiter, all in a relatively small angular area of the sky. It was a very pretty sight
just before morning twilight. And here's another one in evening twilight where Venus, the bright
one, and Jupiter, still quite bright, but not as bright as Venus, were very, very close
together in the sky, about the separation equal to the diameter of the full moon. So
it was really a striking sight, and these kinds of sites are really wonderful. Indeed,
when Venus is close to the moon, astronomers at observatories tend to get a lot of phone
calls from the general public claiming that there's a UFO in the sky, because Venus close
to the crescent moon is a really striking sight. People notice it, and they call us
up and they say, hey, there's a spacecraft rushing toward us. Well, no, no, it's just
Venus. It's just Venus. And they're, oh, no, no, we're sure it's a UFO. We tell them,
well, just look tomorrow night. The spacing between Venus and the moon will have changed,
but Venus will still basically be there and won't be any closer to us or whatever. Anyway,
so it's kind of fun. Now, here's a nice grouping where you have Mercury, Venus, Saturn, and
Mars all quite close together in the sky. So it's fun to look at planets like this and
how they wander across the sky. Now, what if you're looking at a bright star and you
think, gee, that doesn't quite look like it's in the right place. That doesn't fit any
of the constellations I know. Well, indeed, you might be confused by the presence of a
planet. You can try to verify this by looking at how much the object twinkles. It turns
out planets twinkle less than stars in general. So let's consider what causes twinkling.
Here is an image of a star dragged across the field of view, and you can see that its apparent
brightness is changing. It is twinkling. What causes that? Well, our atmosphere is turbulent.
It contains many layers of air, having different temperatures and densities and stuff. And
as the light from a star hits the atmosphere, it gets bent or refracted. We've already
discussed that in the first few lectures. And because the atmosphere is always changing
with time, the amount of bending is changing as well. So sometimes a lot of light is hitting
your eye, and then a moment later, most of that light may have been deflected by the
atmosphere to someone else's eye, or the ear next to your eye, or something like that.
That is, the rays of light hitting your eye are variable in time because of the variations
in the bending by the atmosphere. And the effect is really quite similar to what you
see at the shoreline of the ocean when you go into the shallow water here, and you look
at the sandy bottom. You can see bright spots and darker regions. Now suppose your eye were
right there at this moment. Looking up, your eye would see a bright sun. But a moment later,
this bright ridge would move over to here, let's say, and this dark spot would move over
to where your eye is. And so the sun would appear darker. And then a moment later, some
other little thing would move past your eye, and you would see a brighter sun. So these
are little images of the sun on the sandy bottom below. And if you were looking up from the
bottom, you would see the sun varying in brightness because of the rippling effect of the water,
analogous to the rippling effect caused by the Earth's atmosphere. And you see this quite
well at the bottom of a swimming pool. If you look at the bottom of the swimming pool,
you can see these alternately bright and dark regions as the water concentrates the light
rays in some areas, such as this, at the expense of other areas like that one there. I mean
the total amount of light has to be constant, but it gets concentrated in different regions
at the bottom of the pool because of the rippling effect of the water. Now, the rippling effect
of the water here is quite strong, and I show this particular image to illustrate what happens
when you're looking close to the horizon in the sky. When you're looking close to the
horizon, your line of sight is peering through a lot more atmosphere than when you're looking
straight up. We discussed that in the previous lecture when considering the blue sky and
the red sunsets. So when you're looking through a long path in the atmosphere, there's more
different layers all moving around, causing this bending of light to and fro, and the
twinkling effect is enhanced. When the star is high in the sky, the twinkling is sort
of muted because you're not looking through as much atmosphere. So when you're looking
close to the horizon, stars and even planets twinkle, twinkle a lot more than when they're
high in the sky. But I mentioned a few moments ago that planets don't twinkle as much as
stars do in general, and here's an example of that. There's the star whose path across
the sky I showed a few minutes ago, and there's a planet, Jupiter, and you can see that its
light is much more constant than that of the star. Now you've got to be sure to compare
a star and a planet the same altitude above the horizon, precisely because of this effect
that I just mentioned, that if you're close to the horizon, a planet can twinkle just
as much as a star straight overhead because of the larger amount of atmosphere that you're
looking through. But if you compare two star-like objects at the same altitude above the horizon,
and one is twinkling a lot and the other is not twinkling much, that other one is likely
to be a planet. And here's the reason. Stars look like points of light even through a telescope.
I mean stars are giant things, they're giant suns, but they're so far away that they are
just little points of light. Planets are physically smaller than stars, but they're a lot closer
to us, so through a telescope you can tell that a planet consists of a disk. Here is
an image of the planet Jupiter, it consists of a clear disk much bigger than a star. Here's
a moon of Jupiter, even that looks bigger than a star would. I think that might be a
star down there, this little tiny speck. So planets appear as disks, even though every
point on the planet is twinkling, some points will be twinkling brighter, others fainter
at any given moment. And if you have many, many points across a disk, a thousand points
of light say, the twinkling tends to average out. Some will be twinkling high, some low,
and the whole thing averages out. So when you're looking at this thing with a naked eye and
you can't tell that it's a disk, all these points of light have merged together and the
average stays roughly constant. And that's why planets twinkle less than stars do.
So here you can see a diagram of this effect, a star looks like just a little point, a planet
is many points, each of those points is twinkling, but the twinkling tends to average out because
some are bright while others are faint, and when you have a thousand points of light,
the whole thing sort of averages out. Look at the planets that are in this photograph,
for example, all of them twinkle. Now you can't tell that because this isn't a time
lapse photograph, but when I was looking at this, I could tell, for example, that that
one is a planet, that's Mars, and that thing is a star, because Mars was twinkling a lot
less than the star was, and yet they're about the same altitude above the horizon. And the
twinkling is most easily seen for brighter stars, so you'd expect something this bright
to be twinkling a lot if it were this close to the horizon, but it wasn't twinkling very
much at all, and that's a dead giveaway that that bright thing is Venus. A really bright
star in the sky that isn't twinkling while the other stars that you see are twinkling
a lot, that's really likely to be Venus, or Jupiter. I mean Jupiter gets to be quite bright
as well, but if it's close to the horizon, it's likely to be Venus. Now when Sirius,
a very bright star, is really close to the horizon, it twinkles in a way where you can
even see colors. So here's a color photograph of the same view that I showed earlier. Here's
Sirius twinkling, and you can see that the color is changing with time. And the reason
for that is that as I discussed when I talked about the green flash, a sun or a star in
the sky that's close to the horizon has its light bent or refracted, and different colors
are bent by different amounts. So in the case of the sun or Sirius, the true position might
be down here, but the red, green, and blue images will be displaced upwards because of
this bending or refractive effect. Each of these then forms its own individual image
of Sirius, and they twinkle independently. So while the red image might be bright at any
given moment, the green one and the blue one might be faint, and then the next instant
of time, maybe the blue one will be bright, and the red one will be faint, and maybe the
green one will be in between, and then the green one will be bright. And so you can see
that if different parts twinkle independently, a particular color may dominate at any given
instant of time, and that's what causes that effect. And you don't have to have Sirius
be below the true horizon for this to happen. It can actually be up here somewhere, and
its image is still refracted up, not as much as in this case, because the higher up the
star is to begin with, the less bending there is. But in any case, anytime Sirius is pretty
close to the horizon, you get this effect to some degree, and the twinkling can be chromatic
or dependent on color. Another easily visible thing is the phases of the moon, and I'll
be discussing the phases of the moon in much greater detail in lecture nine, but here you
can see the various phases of the moon, and it's just fun to monitor them. It takes a
month for the moon to go through its full set of phases. Indeed, the word month comes
from the word moon and the lunar cycle. Bright meteors or shooting stars can also be seen,
and I'll discuss those in a lot more detail as well, but here is a shooting star, a streak
of light through the sky, and it's not a star at all. It's just a small grain of sand
pummeling through our atmosphere, heating up due to friction and burning up. Here's another
one which happened to be over a particularly calm lake, and you can see its reflection
and the reflection of the stars in that lake. I love that photograph. You can also see satellites
in the sky, such as the International Space Station. Here it is, streaking across the
sky in a time exposure next to the lunar halo. There are lots of satellites up there. Here's
a telescopic view of the International Space Station. You can see it's not just a point,
it's a fairly complex structure, and occasionally these things appear to streak across the sky
and cause a bright flash, and that's especially the case for a set of satellites known as
the Iridium satellites. There's about 70 of them. They're communication satellites,
but they're not used very much these days, but they have these bright reflective panels,
and at certain angles these reflective panels can reflect the light of the sun toward you,
causing a bright flash that lasts for just a few seconds. Here you can see a photograph
of these bright panels. It's easy to confuse an Iridium flare of this sort with a bright
meteor because there are flashes of light in the sky, but if you see one near sunrise
or sunset, it could well be a satellite reflection. If instead you see one around midnight or
late into the night, it can't be a satellite reflection because the satellites are in low
earth orbit and only see the sun shortly after sunset or before sunrise. You can confuse
these things with meteors, but not at certain times of the night. I hope this shows you
that there's lots of cool bright things that you can see with the unaided eye in the sky.
Go out and look and enjoy the splendor of the heavens.
