In the previous lecture, I discussed constellations, bright stars and planets, things that are
easily visible even from within a bright city.
Now let's move on to faint, diffuse phenomena, where you need really dark skies.
Such phenomena include the Milky Way, auroras, and the zodiacal lights.
And you don't need any special equipment to see these things, binoculars or a telescope
are not needed.
Just look at the sky with your naked eye.
Here's the Milky Way, a faint, diffuse band of light stretching from horizon to horizon.
It consists of many, many faint, distant stars.
And to see them, you really have to get away from bright city lights.
Here's what happens when you are in a city whose lights are getting brighter and brighter.
When the lights are faint, you can see lots of faint stars there, including the bright
ones of course that you can see even from within a bright city and bright planets.
But the faint stars are hard to see unless the sky is really dark.
So to illustrate that, let me increase the amount of light pollution in this city.
The city is growing, population is out of control, it's growing and growing and growing
and look at what's happening to the faint stars.
They're being washed out by the glow of the city.
The bright stars are still visible but the faint ones are not.
And the bright planet like Jupiter here at the left is also visible through a telescope
although the contrast decreases somewhat.
So bright city lights really hurt, so does bright moonlight.
You don't want to look for the Milky Way when there's a really huge full moon out illuminating
the whole sky.
It just washes these faint things out.
Here's an example of two views of the Milky Way taken under bright conditions with a city
down here illuminating the sky.
You can see some of the faint fuzzy clouds of the Milky Way but if you move to a much
darker location, look at the dramatic change in the amount of faint material that you can
see.
It's just astonishing.
This is actually not that bad a view considering it's near a city.
You can see at least some of the Milky Way but look how much more you can see when you
get away from city lights and when you wait until the moon has set.
You can see so much more and there's all this structure in the Milky Way.
Look at that.
We'll discuss all that in a few minutes.
How does the Milky Way form in the sky?
What causes this band of light?
Well really, as I said, it's the countless stars that you can see through our galaxy.
Our galaxy is a collection of billions of stars.
It's shaped something like this galaxy, a spiral galaxy.
If we could view ours from the outside, it would look something like this, not in detail
but in overall structure.
It's a disk perhaps 100,000 light years across but only about 1,000 light years thick.
So it's a very thin structure, kind of like a CD or a DVD and in the middle it's got
kind of a bulgy region like this.
So a schematic of what it looks like is shown here.
Good edge on, the disk is this thin plane, kind of like a CD.
The bulgy region is in the middle, the very nucleus is right in the center.
Our sun is about two thirds of the way out from the center to the edge and there's no
well defined edge.
This is a bit of an arbitrary number, two thirds.
But you know, when you take a photograph of a galaxy, depending on how long you expose,
you can make the edge go farther out or closer in.
But for most typical photographs that are taken of galaxies, if you were to put our
sun at the same location as it is in our galaxy, it would be something like two thirds of the
way out.
And when you look along the plane of our galaxy, the Milky Way galaxy, you see a multitude
of stars in any direction along the plane.
That's the Milky Way.
If you look perpendicular to the plane, you see relatively few stars because the whole
plane is only about a thousand light years thick, much thinner than the extent of the
disk in these directions here.
So you see very few stars or comparatively few when you look outside the plane.
I like to show these kinds of things with simple models that anyone can make at home.
This, you know, you don't need complicated equipment to visualize the universe in many
cases.
You can just put together a couple of paper plates and a tennis ball.
And this is representative of the flat disk of our galaxy and the bulgy middle.
Here our sun is about two thirds of the way out.
I've drawn it on the surface here, but it's actually inside.
It's somewhere near the middle of this disk.
And when you look along through the plane of this galaxy, you see myriad stars.
Whereas when you look basically perpendicular or at angles that are nearly perpendicular
to the plane, you see comparatively few stars.
So the origin of the Milky Way is the view through the plane of our disk-shaped galaxy.
Okay?
That's all it is.
All right.
Well, it's really fun to look at the Milky Way from a dark location because you can see
fantastic structure.
Here are relatively dense clouds of gas and dust mixed with stars.
In other places, the stars are relatively isolated.
You don't have the clouds of gas and dust enveloping them.
But in other places, the clouds of gas and dust are so thick that they actually block
our view of the more distant stars.
So it's not that there's a dearth of stars in these locations of the Milky Way.
Rather, it's that there's dust and gas blocking our line of sight in those directions.
Kind of like gas and dust in our own Earth's atmosphere blocks the sunlight when the sun
is setting.
It appears fainter and redder.
Here's a wide angle view of the Milky Way where you can see its structure very nicely.
This is looking toward the direction of the center of our galaxy, toward that bulgy part.
So it looks thicker.
And there's the rest of the plane.
And you can see these splotches of dust blocking our view in certain directions.
This area here is very nice because it looks like a cross.
This in fact is the Southern Cross.
It's a rather small constellation, crux, and it looks remarkably like a cross.
And it has a very dark region next to it called the coalsack.
This region has a heavy concentration of dust that blocks our view of the more distant stars.
To the east of the Southern Cross, which is very easily recognized if you're in the Southern
Hemisphere of the Earth, is the nearest star to our own sun, Alpha Centauri.
The Alpha Centauri is a double star system, and the star that's closest to us right now
is the companion, the faint companion of the bright star, and it's called Proxima Centauri.
It's prox, it's proximate to us.
So it's a little bit closer than the bright one, but both of them are about 4.2 light
years away.
So we're seeing them as they were about four years ago.
So there's Alpha Centauri and Beta Centauri in the constellation Centaurus.
If you take a wider angle view of this region in the Southern sky, you have Alpha and Beta
Centauri, you have the Southern Cross and the coalsack, and to the west of the Southern
Cross is a diffuse nebula, a glowing cloud of gas and dust.
And in that nebula is one of the most fantastic stars known.
We'll study it later.
Here's a Hubble Space Telescope photograph of it, but it's a very massive erupting star.
It's perhaps 150 times the mass of our sun, and it's going through an incredible period
of instability where it's gurgling off its outer atmosphere in outflows like this.
It's just a fantastic star which we think will truly explode within the next few hundreds
of thousands or millions of years, something like that.
Give or take a few days or years.
Anyway, going further west from the Southern Cross and this nebula with the amazing star
in it, by the way, the nebula is called the Ada Karina Nebula, so going further west you
reach another grouping of stars called the False Cross.
You can see it looks like a cross, join those two stars and those two, and that looks like
a cross, but it's not the true Southern Cross.
The true Southern Cross is this one.
This one is a little bit bigger and a little bit more irregularly shaped.
It precedes the Southern Cross in the sky because it's to the west of the Southern Cross and
stars rise in the east and set in the west, so a constellation or an asterism that is
to the west of another one precedes it in the sky.
You see it earlier in the night than the other one.
As I mentioned in the previous lecture, sometimes planets can mess up the apparent shapes of
constellations.
Here is Scorpius, there are the pinchers and there's the body and the tail and the stinger.
Here's Antares, the heart of the scorpion, a red supergiant star, and this thing here
doesn't belong.
Well, you know, it belongs that night.
It's the planet Jupiter, but a few months later it'll be in a completely different spot,
so sometimes you can get confused by these apparently extra stars and constellations.
Here's a nice image of Scorpius.
It beautifully shows the complex structure of the Milky Way in this region of the sky.
Indeed, to the east of Scorpius is Sagittarius, and the center of our galaxy is toward the
direction of the constellation Sagittarius, but I love this part of the sky.
Look at the structure of the Milky Way in this part of the sky.
It is just fantastic.
An enhanced view of the main stars of the scorpion is shown here, and now you can see
the constellation Scorpius a little bit more clearly, perhaps, than you could in this previous
picture where the stars are shown in their true relative brightnesses.
The center of our galaxy is toward the constellation Sagittarius and Scorpius, this region here.
But the whole plane of the Milky Way extends to the east and to the west of that.
And when you're in the Earth's southern hemisphere, that part of the Milky Way is high in the sky.
It's low in the sky when viewed from the northern hemisphere, because Scorpius and Sagittarius
are relatively southern constellations.
So they're pretty low in the sky when you're in the northern hemisphere, and these clouds
of gas are a bit harder to discern.
But when you're in the southern hemisphere, it's magnificent because you can see this
band of light stretching across the sky, and the brightest parts are overhead at certain
times of the year, and you see the central part of our galaxy overhead.
It is a truly marvelous view.
You feel like you're a real part of the galaxy.
When you're in a dark sky with no city lights, no moonlight, and just these stars, and here's
the Milky Way going from horizon to horizon, you feel truly immersed in it in a way that's
difficult for me to describe.
I first had this experience when I was in the southern hemisphere at Las Campanas Observatory
in the Chilean Andes Mountains, and there it's really dark, you're hundreds of kilometers
from any major city, and it was really, really dark, and I just felt like so much a part of
our universe of the galaxy at that moment.
I was really looking forward to my first trip to Las Campanas Observatory to gather
data for my PhD thesis.
At that time, I was single, and my graduate student colleagues said, oh, you'll love
this observatory.
There's a woman behind every tree at Las Campanas Observatory.
So I went there with bated breath, and to my disappointment, I found that there are no
trees for hundreds of kilometers in the Chilean Andes at the edge of the Atacama Desert.
You can see this is the typical site.
There are no trees.
So sure, there's a woman behind every tree, but oh well, there are no trees.
But fortunately, I had this splendor of the Milky Way to look at instead.
Well, the central part of our galaxy is in the constellation Sagittarius, and it's marked
by the green square here.
Later on, I'll tell you that there's an incredible black hole in the middle of our Milky Way
galaxy in the direction of the constellation Sagittarius.
It has four million times the mass of our sun, and it will turn out that massive black
holes are a common characteristic of the central parts of galaxies like our Milky Way.
If you are in the Southern Hemisphere, you get the additional advantage that you can
see two satellite galaxies of our Milky Way galaxy.
There's the plane of the Milky Way, the band of light that we call the Milky Way.
Here are these two patches of light that appear to be distinct from the Milky Way, and those
are galaxies.
They are small galaxies that orbit around our Milky Way.
They're called the Magellanic Clouds named after Ferdinand Magellan, who wasn't by any
means the first to see them.
But I guess that shows the influence of Europe at that time because they're named after
him and his voyages.
There's the Large Magellanic Cloud, and there's the Small Magellanic Cloud.
The Large one is about 170,000 light-years away.
The Small one is about 210,000 light-years away, and they orbit our galaxy.
Here's a close-up of the Large Magellanic Cloud.
It's a beautiful structure with a fantastic nebula here called the Tarantula Nebula, a
glowing cloud of gas where new stars have recently formed and are still forming before
our very eyes.
There's the Small Magellanic Cloud.
It too has some wonderful regions of star formation.
Sometimes, distinct from the Milky Way, another faint diffuse phenomenon can be seen.
That's called the Zadiacal Light.
Here's an example of it.
You really have to be in a dark sky to see it, but it's a sort of a conical diffuse
band of light seen to the west shortly after the end of evening twilight and to the east
shortly before the beginning of morning twilight.
You don't want twilight to have quite begun because it tends to swamp out this faint glow.
This is known as the Zadiacal Light.
It appears in the plane of the sky through which the sun moves.
The sun moves through certain constellations that I'll discuss in a little while.
They're called the Zadiacal Constellations, and this conical shaped band of light appears
in those same Zadiacal Constellations.
It is really quite distinct from the Milky Way.
There's the Milky Way almost perpendicular to the horizon in this photograph, and there's
this Zadiacal Light just above where the sun set a couple of hours earlier.
This photograph, by the way, was taken with a fisheye lens.
That's why the horizon looks curved.
It is produced by sunlight being scattered by dust, little particles in our solar system.
So here's the sun, and it emits different colored rays of light, red, green, blue.
Some of them scatter or reflect or bounce off of particles and end up reaching our eyes.
So the green and blue and red ones, but they all kind of merge together.
There's no chromatic effect.
There's no rainbow effect.
They all kind of merge together to produce white light.
Most rays, like the ones represented by these white arrows, forward scatter.
They just keep on going in the same or about the same direction in which they were going.
But some rays scatter a little bit and can reach our eyes, and that is what produces
this glow in the direction in which the sun had set an hour or two earlier.
Okay?
Well, of course, the sun is shining in other directions as well.
For example, here's a direction in which it's shining.
But since most of the bouncings or scatterings tend to be in the forward or nearly forward
directions, these rays don't reach our eyes, okay?
It would be hard for a ray of light to bounce off of a dust particle and reach our eye because
that's a big scattering angle.
Most of the rays like to scatter in nearly the forward direction.
And that's why you don't see the zodiacal light far from where the sun has set, and
you don't see it at midnight or late in the night because the sun is way, way down below
the horizon, and the only light you would see is the light that's scattering from these
dust particles far away from the sun, and very little light reaches us from there.
The zodiacal light is best seen in February and March in the evening and in October and
November in the morning because that's when the plane of the sun's motion through the
sky tends to make its steepest angle relative to the horizon.
Here's a very good example where the angle is very steep, you know, it's nearly perpendicular
to the horizon in this particular photograph.
During other seasons, the angle might be more shallow, and so there's not enough time for
the sky to darken sufficiently before the particles that give rise to the zodiacal light
have set below your horizon.
But when the zodiacal light is perpendicular to the horizon, those particular particles
don't set for quite a while, and so there's a chance to see the zodiacal light.
And sometimes it can even merge with the Milky Way above, it's just a beautiful sight.
Well another thing that you can see from a dark sky is the faint tail of a comet.
The head of a comet you can see sometimes even from a city, but the faint tail of a
comet requires a dark sky.
Now I'll discuss comets more later, but comets are basically dirty snowballs, blocks of or
bunches of ice and dust and rock, that come from distant parts of the solar system, they
come close to the sun, evaporate, and those evaporated gases and dust particles that were
liberated from the head of the comet, then reflect sunlight, and it is this reflected
sunlight that forms the long diffuse tail.
So here's a photograph of a comet Yakutaki in 1996, and then the next photograph is comet
Hale Bopp, which was easily seen in 1997.
And the head could be seen even from bright cities, but this faint tail required darker
conditions to see.
The tail is pushed away by electrons and charged particles and light emanating from
the sun.
Here's a picture of the sun, and it's very active, it's got lots of stuff coming out
of it, and in addition to the light, there are charged particles that come from the sun
and push the tail of a comet back, so the tail of a comet points away from the sun.
These charged particles emanating from the sun cause another interesting phenomenon,
and that's the auroras, the northern or southern lights.
They are a truly amazing phenomenon.
If you're sufficiently far north, or way down south, and you're looking at a dark sky,
you can sometimes see faint bands of light with multiple colors, reds and greens and
sometimes blues flickering across the sky.
Those are caused by the interaction of charged particles from the sun with atoms in our atmosphere.
Let me explain how that happens.
First of course, let me just show some examples, a picture is worth a thousand words, so if
my description of what we see wasn't enough, here's some actual photographs of auroras,
and these photographs were actually taken from Nebraska, not even all that far north.
They are just stunning.
They're produced by an interaction of charged particles from the sun with Earth's magnetic
field.
Now the Earth's magnetic field looks like that of a bar magnet.
You have a north pole and a south pole, and the field lines look something like this.
I'll discuss electric and magnetic fields more when we talk about the nature of light
in a few lectures.
But it looks something like this.
Charged particles come in from the sun and they interact with these magnetic field lines.
They get trapped.
Charged particles don't like to move across field lines.
They like to move along field lines.
So charged particles from the sun get trapped and they tend to get trapped in certain bands
where the magnetic field is stronger than in other regions.
These are called the Van Allen belts and there are two major ones and then an inner one here.
In any case, the charged trapped particles are way out here, far from the Earth.
But because they don't mind moving along the magnetic field lines, these energetic charged
particles slam into the molecules and especially into the individual atoms in the thin atmosphere
of the Earth.
Now the Earth is a big thing compared to the thickness of the atmosphere.
The atmosphere is only about 100 kilometers thick.
The radius of the Earth is something like 6,400 kilometers.
So the atmosphere is very thin and the charged particles don't interact with the atmosphere
until they are very close to the Earth.
But when they're very close to the Earth, these energetic charged particles slam into
the molecules causing the electrons in atoms to get excited to upper energy levels.
I'll describe this process more later on and these excited electrons then come back down.
They jump down to lower levels and they can emit light and it is that light that manifests
itself as the northern and southern auroras.
So you're taking the energy of the charged particles, kicking electrons in atoms up to
higher energy levels, then those electrons cascade back down and emit light.
And I'll describe this process of absorption and emission later on when we discuss the
nature of light.
But that's what's happening.
So if you look at these auroras they can change pretty quickly with time because the number
of charged particles streaming along the magnetic fields changes and the amount of interaction
with the atmosphere can change.
So here's one photograph and just maybe 10 minutes later here's how the aurora had changed.
It had changed its structure.
Now on another night it looks this way and then a few minutes later it looks something
like that.
The different colors by the way are caused by emission of light from different kinds
of atoms in the Earth's atmosphere.
There's nitrogen and oxygen in atomic and molecular forms and they have various kinds
of electronic transitions that produce these lights of different colors.
To show you how much the auroras can change in nearly real time, here's a movie of the
sky sped up by only a factor of eight and you can see how much the aurora is changing
over a very short time interval.
There's also some clouds coming in at the lower left there.
On another night this green aurora sped up by only a factor of eight is changing in a
marvelous and intricate way.
Look at that, curtains of light shimmering with time as the charged particles interact
with the Earth's atmosphere.
It is a truly marvelous sight to behold.
I've seen a good aurora only once when I was in Alaska and I will never forget it.
I want to see more of them and I envy people who live at far northern and far southern
latitudes for whom such phenomena are relatively frequent.
Look at that.
Oh man, imagine just watching that in the sky.
It's just beautiful, just beautiful.
Well you don't have to be way up north or way down south to see an aurora.
Occasionally we get lucky and the magnetic fields allow charged particles to reach the
surface of the Earth even relatively close to the equator.
If you have a particularly energetic set of charged particles they can pummel their way
through the magnetic field and reach lower latitudes on Earth.
So here is a picture of an aurora seen from Greece.
Now Greece is not particularly far north, okay, but here it is, the picture of the aurora
seen from Greece.
And here's another one seen from Arizona.
Again, Arizona is not particularly far north but occasionally you can see an aurora from
Arizona.
Let me show you how this happens with the following animation.
Here we have the Earth lit up on one side by the sun and there's the side that's not
lit up, the side that's experiencing night.
And this band of light here represents the aurora.
Now watch what happens if I change the strength of the solar wind, this barrage of charged
particles that hits the Earth.
If I strengthen the solar wind, the aurora moves south and can be visible from farther
south than is the case when the solar wind is relatively weak.
So here the solar wind is weak and the charged particles that are coming in are being strongly
trapped by the field and are confined to far northern or far southern latitudes.
But if the charged particles are very energetic, they can penetrate down closer toward the
surface of the Earth and hit magnetic field lines that bring them to an interaction with
the atmosphere at more southerly latitudes, sometimes even as far south as Arizona or
Greece.
Interestingly if the Earth's magnetic field were much weaker, the auroras would extend
even farther south than they do and if the Earth's magnetic field were stronger, the
auroras would be confined to even more northerly or more southerly latitudes because a stronger
magnetic field is more able to confine the charged particles.
If the Earth's magnetic field were very weak, these charged particles would hit the Earth
in quite a few places and cause more mutations of cells and things like that, so the risk
of cancer would be greater if the Earth's magnetic field were considerably weaker.
Sometimes when photographing an aurora, you get two phenomena for the price of one.
Here's an aurora with Comet Hale Bop in March of 1997 in the same direction of the sky.
How great is that?
And here's an aurora with a bright shooting star, a meteor, not a star at all, flashing
through it.
Auroral activity tends to be strongest when the activity from the sun is the greatest.
Here is a movie of the sun taken by Soho, a satellite that observes the sun and obstructs
the bright solar disk.
You can see that in the corona there's all these charged particles that appear bright
streaming out and that the amount of charged particles changes with time.
Occasionally, you have these incredible outbursts.
There was one just now, and it is these outbursts that send huge amounts of charged particles
toward the Earth.
Oh, there was one.
Wow, there was another one.
And when these charged particles slam into the Earth a day or a few hours later, that's
when you get the most vivid auroral displays because you've got lots of energetic charged
particles hitting the Earth's magnetic field and being channeled down to the atmosphere,
where the charged particles can interact with the atmosphere.
Now depending on the strength of the solar flare, or coronal mass ejection as they are
sometimes called, the delay between the ejection and when it reaches Earth can be from a few
hours to a few days.
So astronomers by watching the sun can actually predict roughly when the next great auroral
display will be visible.
Finally, it is interesting that auroras can also be seen from space.
Space shuttle astronauts often see auroras looking down at the atmosphere of the Earth.
And auroras have also been seen on other planets.
Here's an aurora on Jupiter, where the magnetic field brings charged particles down to interact
with the atmosphere of Jupiter, and also an aurora on Saturn caused by a similar phenomenon.
So I hope this shows you that there are lots of wonderful things to see with the naked eye
as long as you have a very dark sky away from city lights and away from bright moonlight.
It's a fantastic sight to look at all these faint phenomena out there without any telescopic
aid whatsoever.
