In the previous lecture, I described faint, diffuse phenomena that you can see in a dark
sky while you're on a camping trip or something like that.
That includes the Milky Way and the Zodiacal Light and great auroras if you're sufficiently
far north or south like this one right here.
These phenomena don't require any binoculars, any telescopic aid at all, but you can get
a more detailed view of certain objects if you use binoculars or a telescope.
They have a very narrow field of view, so you can't see wide areas of the sky with
binoculars and telescopes, but you can see individual objects much more clearly and in
more detail, so in this lecture I'd like to describe the use of binoculars and telescopes.
Binoculars and telescopes collect more light, making objects brighter and allowing you to
see fainter stars in the sky.
They also magnify objects, making them look bigger or closer.
They also provide a clearer view, and I'll discuss that in more detail when I talk about
professional large telescopes later on, but they sharpen the image.
One thing to note in understanding how binoculars and telescopes work is that the rays of light
coming from distant stars are nearly parallel.
Previously, when discussing crepuscular rays, I had told you that the rays of light from
the sun, which is 93 million miles away, are nearly parallel.
They're coming in like this from a point so far away that you can't really tell that
they're diverging.
Well stars are even farther away than the sun, much, much farther away than the sun,
so the rays are parallel.
They are not diverging the way they do for objects that are close to us.
This is important to understand when looking at how a telescope or binoculars work.
Binoculars and telescopes work by bending or refracting light from objects using a lens
or a mirror.
Let's consider a lens first.
Here's a lens made of glass with the incoming parallel beams of light.
First from one direction, those are the black ones, and then from another direction, those
are the blue ones.
You can see that the light is bent by the lens to a common focus right there.
And light from different directions in the sky gets brought to a different focus, but
in the same plane, something called the focal plane.
And the focal plane is one focal length from the middle of the lens.
So now let's look how light brought to a focus by a lens in a so-called refracting or bending
telescope can be used to get a clearer, more magnified view of an object.
There's the primary lens that brings the light to a focus, and then an eyepiece is used to
view the image and to magnify it.
So if we take a refracting telescope like this, take the lens cover off, open it up.
The light can come in, it gets bent by the primary lens, gets brought to a focus, but
there's nothing at this particular focal plane.
No photographic emulsion or anything else was put there, so the light keeps on going.
It goes through another lens called the eyepiece lens, and this allows your eye to see an image
of the object.
So there's the ray tracing diagram through a refracting telescope.
The combination of the primary lens and the eyepiece lens is what gives you the amount
by which an object is magnified.
If you take lenses having different focal lengths, and here I'm adjusting the focal
length of the primary lens, you can see that the image down below gets smaller or larger
depending on the focal length of the primary lens, and hence on its distance from the eyepiece
lens.
Quantitatively, the magnification is given by the focal length of the primary lens divided
by the focal length of the eyepiece lens.
It's also that the image is inverted.
Similarly, I can change the focal length of the eyepiece lens and watch the effect it
has on the image.
It gets magnified more or less depending on the relative focal lengths of these two lenses.
If I increase the diameter of the main objective lens, I can make the image look brighter because
more rays of light are being captured by a bigger lens than by a small lens, so the
object got faint when I made the lens small.
The refracting telescope was invented by Dutch opticians in the early 17th century, but their
models were essentially toys.
Galileo heard of the design and made a better working version of a refracting telescope,
and he showed the Venetian Navy that you could see ships far away coming up over the horizon.
The Navy was very impressed by this because they could see ships coming in long before
they actually approached, and so they gave Galileo a rather large salary to continue
building telescopes for them.
A few of Galileo's early telescopes are shown here.
They were much better than the initial Dutch versions because they could be used to make
serious astronomical observations and to give very clear views of ships and other approaching
objects, but they were very small telescopes.
Now if you take two of these small telescopes and put them together, two refracting telescopes
and put them together like this, you get a pair of binoculars.
Actually, that's a bit of a funny name, binocular, because why would you call it a pair of binoculars
when, in fact, this is one binocular, but anyway, that's the way it goes.
Here's a pair of refracting telescopes put together, and you look through them like this,
and you can see objects magnified and appear brighter.
So you're just using a couple of simple refracting telescopes.
In movies, the common depiction of what you see through binoculars is something like this.
They have you seeing a different part of the image through each of the different refracting
telescopes or the binoculars, if you will.
That's actually not the way things work.
When you look through a pair of binoculars and you have them properly adjusted, your eyes
actually see the same field of view through each of the binoculars, and then your brain
puts them together to give you one clear image.
You do not see two different images like this juxtaposed next to each other.
A view of a cluster of stars through binoculars is shown here, and you can see what I just
said, that you get a single circular field of view.
Now, there's a problem with refracting telescopes that Newton recognized, and that is that the
lens brings light of different colors to a different focus, that is, to a different distance
from the lens.
Violet light is brought to a shorter focus than green light, and red light is brought
to an even longer focus.
So if your eye were here, the green light would be in focus, but the violet and blue
would not, nor would the red.
So you would get a fuzzy image of the object, and this is called chromatic aberration.
Chromatic stands for color.
The Scottish mathematician James Gregory proposed a different design that eliminated this problem,
and Isaac Newton was the first to actually build a working model of a reflecting telescope,
this other design.
And the reflecting telescope, instead of using a lens, uses a mirror to collect light and
bring it to a common focus.
Here is a diagram of a mirror, a shiny reflecting surface, with light rays coming in parallel
from a distant star and being brought to a common focus, and all of the light rays, regardless
of color, get brought to the same focus in the case of a reflecting telescope, so you
don't have chromatic aberration.
Now, if your head were right here at the so-called prime focus of a reflecting telescope, your
head would block most of the incoming light rays, especially if your head is bigger than
the mirror itself, then it would block all of the incoming light rays.
So here's a reflecting telescope with the open end staring up at the sky up here.
If I were to look into it, positioning my eye at the prime focus, look at that, my head
would block all of the incoming lights, there'd be really nothing to see.
So you need some sort of a design that eliminates that problem.
That design comes in one of several forms.
One design, a casegrain reflecting telescope, has a hole in the primary mirror and a secondary
mirror, which is smaller than the primary mirror, that secondary mirror would block
some of the incoming light, but not all of the incoming light.
So if we open the lens cap or the telescope cover, light rays coming from a distant star
can bounce off of the primary mirror, reflect back to a secondary mirror, and then bounce
off of that and go through a hole in the primary mirror, finally coming to an eyepiece lens
and then to your eye.
Certainly some of the light rays are being blocked by the secondary mirror, but if the
secondary mirror is small relative to the opening of the telescope or to the primary
mirror size, then most of the light rays are not being blocked, and you simply have a slightly
fainter image than you would have had had you not had that blocking of some of the light
rays.
You don't get a hole in your image.
If you're looking at Jupiter in this case, you don't get a hole in the image of Jupiter
caused by the secondary mirror, and that's because every part of the primary mirror forms
a complete image of the object.
Every part forms a complete image.
So by blocking some of the light rays, you've simply made the image a bit fainter than it
could have been.
You have not created a hole in the image.
There's another design that's easier to make.
Grinding a hole in the primary mirror is a little bit tough.
Suppose instead that you tilted the secondary mirror at an angle like this, then light coming
in from the primary could bounce off of the secondary perpendicularly and off to the side
of the telescope where your eyepiece could be placed.
A diagram of this, called the Newtonian Reflecting Telescope, is shown here.
The rays are coming in, they hit the primary mirror or the objective mirror, the light rays
reflect off of the objective, hit a secondary which is tilted, and that secondary, in its
tilted way, deflects the light sideways to the side of the telescope where the eyepiece
and your eye can be located.
So in this telescope, this is precisely the Newtonian design.
The primary objective mirror is down there, light comes in from the stars, goes through
the tube, hits the primary mirror, comes back up, hits a tilted secondary up here which
deflects the light in this direction, and you can look through the telescope like so.
So it's very easy.
You can also have a little finder telescope that allows you to identify the broad region
of the sky in which you're looking in order to find Jupiter or whatever object that you
precisely want to focus in on.
You will notice that when we looked through a refracting telescope, the image was inverted.
Now if you're using a telescope to look at birds or people or buildings, that can be
kind of distracting.
So a lot of telescopes come with an erecting lens.
An erecting lens is simply another lens that inverts the image, making it look upright,
and you can attach that to a telescope.
Now if you're looking at celestial objects, up and down doesn't really make any difference.
You know, Jupiter upside down or right side up looks about the same.
But if you're looking at, say, birds or deer or if you're a nature photographer and you've
got a camera attached to your telescope, you'd like to have these things right side up.
So here is my son looking at a bird through a refracting telescope that has an erecting
lens.
The bird just happened to be inside a cage in someone else's house, so he's not spying
on anyone there.
But it is interesting that you find refracting telescopes in lots of homes, sort of looking
at other homes and in tall office buildings, looking into the windows of other tall office
buildings.
So one of the more common uses of telescopes, at least the small kinds that you can buy in
department stores, seems to be for sort of spying on other people.
You can even see these things on large structures like the Eiffel Tower.
At the top of there, there's a platform which has a bunch of refracting telescopes.
And here is a famous astrophysicist viewing buildings or people or whatever they're doing
through a telescope at the top of the Eiffel Tower.
But astronomers want to use telescopes to look at celestial objects.
So at this point, let's go back and turn our attention to the sky.
Objects will consider the kinds of objects that are easily seen with a pair of binoculars.
Knowing the constellations allows you to find interesting objects to look at easily.
For example, going back to the summer triangle, which I introduced in the previous lecture,
it consists of Vega, Denneb, and Altair.
A photograph of it is shown here.
So if you go from Vega to Denneb and keep going in that same direction, you will run
across an interesting object, Messier 31, M31, another galaxy.
And it's in the direction of the constellation Andromeda.
Here is a picture of Andromeda taken through a telescope no more powerful than a typical
pair of binoculars.
You can see this fuzzy little streak next to the stars of the constellation of Andromeda.
But instead of being just a few tens of light years away, like these stars, this is a galaxy
of billions of stars about two and a half million light years away.
So with a simple pair of binoculars, you can see quite well the Andromeda galaxy, the nearest
large collection to our own.
There it is.
It's 100,000 light years across, 2.4 million light years away, and you can get a good view
of it through a simple pair of binoculars.
Another way of finding the Andromeda galaxy is by finding the constellation Cassiopeia,
a vain queen in Greek mythology.
That constellation kind of looks like a W. And if you take this part of the W, it's
just sort of a V, and extend it down, you'll find the Andromeda galaxy.
If you take the other part of the W, this part here, and extend it down, you come to
a pair of clusters known as the double cluster in Perseus, a fine sight through binoculars.
This is about what it looks like.
Two clusters of stars, gravitationally bound together.
In the constellation Orion, there's a beautiful object to see, right smack in the middle of
the sword.
That's the Orion Nebula, a giant glowing cloud of gas and dust, within which new stars
have recently been formed and are still forming before our very eyes.
Now, when you look through binoculars or a telescope, let me note that you will not see
the vivid colors that I've been showing you in these images.
That's because your eyes don't work very well at discerning color when they're observing
very faint light.
The cones in your eyes don't work well when the light is very faint.
They only work well when the light is bright.
So when you're staring at these faint objects, even through binoculars or a telescope, you're
just barely seeing them and the colors will simply not register on your eyes.
These colors are seen in photographs taken through multiple filters and combined together
to bring out the true color of the celestial object.
Looking now at a wider view of Orion and Sirius and other places along and close to the Milky
Way, you come to a group of stars appear called the Pleiades or the Seven Sisters.
These are a fine sight through binoculars.
Again, they are a gravitationally bound cluster or a grouping of stars.
A really fun thing to do with binoculars is to simply cruise around along the Milky Way.
I said in the previous lecture that the Milky Way is fun to look at simply with one's naked
eye, and that's true, but you see more details.
You see more nebulae and clusters if you look through a pair of binoculars.
Let's examine a few of the objects that you can see.
A rich part of the Milky Way is near the tail of the scorpion.
Look at all these clouds of gas and dust.
Here with the naked eye, you might have been able to see just barely some of these features,
but through binoculars, they come out more clearly.
You can see these objects as distinct clouds of gas glowing in these regions of the Milky
Way.
Admittedly, with shaky binoculars, you might not see all these little details, but you
will at least see the general shape of the object.
Another fun thing to look at through binoculars is the moon.
The moon, through binoculars, shows an irregular surface with craters and lava planes.
The maria, the seas, as they were called initially.
We now know that they are not water oceans, they are just frozen dead lava planes, but
Galileo saw that the moon is pockmarked with lots of craters and other things like that.
It was not a perfect celestial object, and this caused some concern, as I'll discuss
when we talk about Galileo in more detail.
The moon is just a great sight through binoculars.
With a telescope, you can get an even more detailed view of celestial objects, because
telescopes are mounted usually on a tripod like this, making them steady so you're not
shaking around as you are with binoculars.
Moreover, the mirror or the lens can be made much bigger than in the case of binoculars,
so it can collect more light, it can magnify the light more, and it can provide greater
clarity.
Accomplished amateur astronomers routinely not only look through telescopes, but take
wonderful photographs with them, and many of the photographs that I show throughout
this course were given to me by amateur astronomers to show in the course, and I'm very grateful
to them.
I'll acknowledge a few of the specific contributions in this lecture.
Stefan Sape took this wonderful view of the moon.
Look at those craters.
I mean, oh gosh, could you just imagine standing there and taking a hike through this area?
It would be fantastic.
Notice that the craters are most easily seen near the place where darkness begins on the
moon.
That is, this is the location where either sunrise or sunset is occurring, and at those
locations where sunrise or sunset is occurring, the light is coming in at a glancing angle,
so the shadows are long.
Just as the shadows are long on earth near sunrise and sunset, and many of the best photographers
of course take some of their most famous photographs during times of sunrise and sunset, not when
the sun is straight overhead and the contrast isn't great.
So similarly, when you're looking at the moon then, you should concentrate your attention
on the area near sunrise and sunset.
The so-called terminator.
That's the terminator.
Not that it's going to kill anyone or anything.
The termination of where the light shines on the moon.
And here we're just drifting across the moon, and look at all this wonderful detail.
You can see ridges here, which are the tops of craters.
There's the top of a crater lit up.
Here's the top of one lit up.
There are mountain chains.
There are valleys.
There are ridges here.
There are craters within craters.
Look at that one there.
There are relatively clean craters on top of smooth maria.
There are other places where craters are on top of craters.
Multiple impacts have occurred.
The moon can provide almost endless fascination to someone who's looking at it carefully through
a telescope.
Here's a beautiful sight.
These are the high ridges surrounding craters that are still lit up by the sun, even though
most of the surrounding area is already in darkness.
So these are mountain tops, or they're ridges at the tops of craters.
The moon is just a wonderful sight.
Sometimes you can see the moon occulting or covering up one of the planets.
Here's a wonderful series of photos by Heidi and Isaac Kikawada showing Saturn being gradually
covered or blocked by the moon.
That's called an occultation.
The Kikawadas also took this picture of Saturn showing what Saturn looks like through a modest
sized telescope.
You can get a thrilling view of Saturn through even a small telescope.
I remember as a freshman in high school receiving a telescope for Christmas, taking it outside,
and the third bright object I happened to point at was Saturn, and it just knocked my
socks off.
I couldn't believe it.
I had discovered Saturn at that moment.
No one told me to point at that bright star.
I was getting kind of bored after looking at one or two stars, and they just looked like
points through a telescope.
So I thought, okay, I'll look at one final star, and then I'll pack it up for the night,
and I'll go to the library the next day, and I'll look up where all the good stuff is,
the galaxies and the planets and all that.
Well the third object I looked at was Saturn, and there it was, and I could see the rings,
and I that night discovered Saturn.
And I experienced the thrill of discovery.
Even though millions of people had seen Saturn before, that night I discovered it.
Imagine the feeling that a scientist has when he or she figures out something for the first
time ever in humanity.
It's a really exhilarating feeling.
It's a real rush, and this is why we become scientists.
Here's a photo of Jupiter through a modest sized telescope, again by the Kikawatas.
If you watch Jupiter over an extended period, you will notice that it has moons that orbit
around it.
Not only is Jupiter itself rotating about its axis as the Earth is, but it has moons
orbiting it, and it is these orbiting moons that Galileo so famously saw in his observations
around 1609, 1610, and which showed that Earth is not the only object around which other
things can orbit.
That was the prevailing view at the time, that everything circles the Earth.
Well, not so.
Some things circle Jupiter, suggesting that Earth might not be the one central object in
the universe.
Through a small telescope, you can also reproduce another one of Galileo's observations, one
that provided an even more fatal blow to the Earth-centered geocentric theory of the universe.
That was the phases of Venus.
Venus goes through a complete set of phases, and later I'll explain why that disproves
the Earth-centered model of the universe.
You can see that with a small telescope, you can reproduce some of the observations made
four centuries ago by Galileo as he provided evidence that resulted in the Copernican Revolution.
Going back now to the summer triangle, a familiar place by now, from which we can find
lots of other interesting objects, if you go to the northern cross, or more formally
Cygnus the Swan, and go down to the bottom part of the cross, the end star, or the head
of the swan, if you prefer, and look at it through a telescope.
It appears as a double star.
Now with the naked eye, it looks just like one star, but through a telescope, it appears
as a double star.
This is an example of a binary star system.
We'll discuss them more later, but over half of the stars you see in the sky, though apparently
single, are actually multiple systems with two, three, or four stars, or more, gravitationally
bound together and orbiting one another.
And I particularly like this pair because the colors are blue and gold, and those happen
to be my university school colors.
The University of California at Berkeley, or Cal, has colors blue and gold, and a few
years ago I got the academic senate to informally recognize alberio, beta-cygni, to be the official
Cal school star.
Near Vega is another constellation called Hercules, and its main part is this structure
here, and that little dot there is a cluster of stars, a globular cluster consisting of
hundreds of thousands or even a million stars, gravitationally bound together in a very tight
grouping like this.
Globular clusters are a wonderful site, especially through big telescopes, because you can see
just a myriad of stars there, all clustered together, much more closely than the stars
in the vicinity of the sun are clustered together.
Going back now to Cygnus the Swan, or the northern cross, shown here, that was alberio
there, if you go to Lyra the Harp, you can see within it a cloud of gas called the ring
nebula.
It appears right between these two end stars of Lyra the Harp.
It's the ring nebula, and it's the cloud of gas ejected by a dying star.
Our sun will do something like this in about six or seven billion years.
In a cosmic burp of fairly minor proportions, it'll eject its outer atmosphere, and it'll
do this multiple times during its slow death.
If you go to the Big Dipper and find the end of the handle and go down a little bit like
this, you can get a nice view of a beautiful galaxy, the Whirlpool Galaxy.
Although you won't see as much detail through a telescope as you do in these photographs,
I won't lie, you can see more in the photographs, nevertheless you see enough through a telescope
to give you a pretty stunning view, and when you recognize that the galaxies that you're
seeing are millions of light years away, and it took that long for the light to travel,
it becomes even more awe-inspiring.
Going now to Orion, in the sword of Orion is the Orion Nebula, and a view by Richard
Crisp shows it very nicely, all these glowing gases illuminated by hot, young stars.
Young stars can be seen in the middle of the Orion Nebula.
We can tell that they're only a few million years old, which is young by cosmic scales,
and I'll tell you later on how we can tell their age, and their radiation is illuminating
the surrounding clouds of gas, causing them to glow, and it is within these clouds of
gas and dust that new stars are forming even as we speak.
Well, if you go out to your local Amateur Astronomy Club, and they hold these star
parties, where they bring out their telescopes and their binoculars, and they're eager to
show you the splendors of the night sky, they love showing you things, each one says, I'm
proud of my telescope, look at the view of Jupiter or Saturn or whatever.
These amateur astronomy organizations are a wonderful thing, they provide a fantastic
public service, because they allow the general public, most of which does not own any telescope,
to come out and view objects like this through equipment, which in some cases is pretty big
and expensive, but they're happy to share the splendors of the night sky with anyone
who is interested.
I hope that in the past few lectures, you have seen that there is a tremendous amount
to be seen in the sky, with the naked eye, with binoculars, and with the telescope, and
just as one should take time to smell the roses, all of you, I hope, will take the time
to go out, look at, and appreciate the night sky.
