in lecture four I introduced some of the brightest
constellations. They are plastered in the heavens on something we call the celestial sphere. And in this lecture I'll tell you more about the celestial sphere and how to navigate it. Some of the constellations that I introduced included Orion, the great hunter, Scorpius, the scorpion, and Leo, the lion. These are three of the 88 constellations that have been defined by astronomers in the sky.
Each star is a number of one and only one constellation, and it's a little bit arbitrary to which constellation each star belongs. The boundaries of these constellations are kind of arbitrary. But that's just the way it is, and there are 88 of them, and not that many people even know all 88 constellations, just some of the major ones.
In most cases, these constellations consist of stars that are in no way physically bound to one another by gravity or anything else, and they weren't formed in the same place, they're not living together. They have nothing to do with one another. They just happen to be in approximately the same direction in space.
So an example is Cassiopeia, the vain queen, looks kind of like a W, at least the five main stars do. And if you look at the distances of these five main stars of Cassiopeia, you find that they are very different.
Here's the Earth and the relative distances of these stars. Of course, the distance between beta and the Earth is a huge distance. These stars are many light years apart from each other. And I remind you that a light year is the distance that light travels in one year. It's about six trillion miles.
I'll define it more carefully and show how it's calculated in a future lecture.
So the stars of the constellations have nothing to do with one another. They happen to be at approximately the same line of sight in the sky, but they were not physical groupings of stars.
And the fainter stars are not necessarily farther away than the brighter stars. You could have a faint star that's nearby, but it's intrinsically not as powerful as another star that's farther away. So it looks fainter.
To a very good approximation, the stars are all so far away that we can consider them to be essentially infinitely far away. Now they're not, of course, infinitely far away. Some stars are more nearby than others. I just showed you an example of that.
And later we will see how we determine the distances of stars. But you need telescopes to do that. You can't do that with an unaided eye.
And so as you're looking at the sky, you can't tell what the distances are. You don't know that the faint stars are farther away than the bright stars. They aren't even necessarily farther away.
So you just see all these stars effectively infinitely far away, glued to what we call the celestial sphere, this spherical orb that is sort of surrounding the Earth to which all the stars and planets and even the sun appear to be attached.
From our perspective on Earth, we can only see about half of the celestial sphere at any given moment of time. And the reason for that is that if you're standing on the Earth and you are standing here looking up, up is your zenith.
Your horizon is defined by the tangent to the Earth at your position. So you draw a line that barely intersects the surface of the Earth. You can't see below that line because below that line you would be looking through the Earth.
And last time I checked, you can't do that. You can't look through the Earth. So you can only see stars that are above your horizon.
If the celestial sphere were nearby, you see that the only stars that are visible would be the ones along this arc, not even a full half circle or semi-circle, and certainly not the full circle.
If the celestial sphere were further away, then the fraction of the full circle that's visible would be greater than if the sphere were nearby.
If the sphere were even farther away, then again the fraction of the full circle that you could see would be even larger than before, and for a bigger distance still, the fraction would be even larger still.
Approaching one half of the full circle and the limit that you get, that is one half of the full circle or the full sphere being visible, occurs if you imagine this celestial sphere to be incredibly far away, essentially infinitely far away.
Then from this position on Earth, you would see this half of the celestial sphere, and a person on the opposite side of the Earth would see the opposite side of the celestial sphere.
So let's look at this celestial sphere and the Earth. Here's the Earth, and here are two observers at positions A and B.
The observer at position A can see the part of the celestial sphere that's to the left of this line here that represents the horizon of A. They can see everything over here.
The person at position B can see everything to the right of the line that marks the horizon of the observer at position B.
Notice that most of these areas of the sky don't overlap, but here in this sector of the sky, both the person at position A and the person at position B can see the same stars.
Let me demonstrate what parts of the celestial sphere different observers could see.
Here we are on Earth at the position of San Francisco near where I live, and I can see this part of the celestial sphere at night, half of it.
If I move down to the southern hemisphere, say Quito, Ecuador, just for kicks, the part of the celestial sphere that I can see largely differs from that scene from San Francisco, but there is some overlapping region.
If I go down to the south pole, down here, the part of the celestial sphere that I can see, again, differs. In addition to the zenith and the horizon, we can define a few other interesting parts of the celestial sphere.
The celestial equator denoted by this curve here is just the projection of Earth's equator out onto the celestial sphere.
Imagine that the Earth is transparent, but it has a black curve drawn for the equator, and let's say you've got a light bulb in the middle of the Earth, and it's on.
That black line would cast a shadow onto the celestial sphere, and that is known as the celestial equator.
The celestial poles are simply an extension of the Earth's north and south poles along the axis of rotation out to the celestial sphere.
So the north celestial pole is the intersection of the north pole with the celestial sphere, and the south celestial pole is the intersection of the south pole extended out to the celestial sphere.
We can also define what we call the meridian. The meridian is simply the place in the sky where all stars reach their highest point if you observe them.
So they rise in the east and they set in the west, and they all reach some highest point in the sky.
Connect up all those points and you get the meridian, or if you connect up the zenith with any of the poles, you get the meridian, the highest point in the sky that a star reaches.
The meridian and the celestial equator are known as great circles. They are intersections of a plane passing through the Earth and through the center of the Earth and extending out to the celestial sphere.
Any plane that intersects a sphere through the center defines a great circle. The equator or lines of longitude on the Earth are all great circles.
If we take a look at the sky from different latitudes on Earth, here's what we would see.
From the equator, Polaris, the north star, would be at the horizon, because if you were on the equator, then your horizon points toward the north celestial pole and also toward the south celestial pole.
So if you were on the equator, Polaris, the north celestial pole, would be right on your horizon. So here you are standing at zero degrees north and Polaris is on your horizon.
This is sort of a distorted map. Your zenith or overhead point is not properly shown here because there's some distortions in projecting a spherical geometry onto a flat plane like this.
But let's suppose that we represent the zenith with this mark here.
Alright, now if we go to a position that's at 20 degrees north latitude, so you're roughly at the latitude of Hawaii, for example,
Polaris is now 20 degrees above the horizon and you've seen some stars that were below the horizon as seen previously from the equator.
If we now go to 40 degrees north latitude, roughly the latitude of San Francisco, you see that Polaris is now 40 degrees up toward the zenith and additional stars have risen above the horizon.
At 60 degrees north latitude, Polaris is getting pretty close to the zenith and additional stars have risen from below the horizon.
At 80 degrees north latitude, Polaris is only 10 degrees from the zenith.
And finally, if you were at the pole, 90 degrees north latitude, Polaris would be right at your overhead point, the zenith.
And that's because from the pole, you would see Polaris straight up above you.
Now let's consider what you see while the Earth rotates.
As the Earth rotates, different stars rise and set because this whole Earth is rotating about its axis and stars are rising in the east and setting in the west.
You can take pictures of the sky that illustrate this.
Toward the North Celestial Pole, the pole star you see moves very little and the stars away from it move in little arcs.
And this is a photograph that represents perhaps a two hour exposure.
Farther and farther away from the pole star, the arcs are longer and longer because they have to traverse a bigger total circumference in the sky.
So in any given amount of time, the arc has to be longer.
Near the South Pole, there is no bright star like Polaris. There's only a faint star.
But again, you get the same sort of effect from the Southern Hemisphere.
You can see stars rotating around the South Celestial Pole during the course of the night.
You can see how to get these sorts of photographs by taking a camera and removing the lens cap, pointing it up at the sky, setting the focus to infinity,
opening the f-stop so that much of the lens is gathering light, and turning off the flash unit.
That's very important.
You then put the camera on a setting that allows you to make an arbitrarily long exposure.
Now, instamatic cameras won't let you do this, but some cameras like single lens reflex cameras will allow you to do that.
You advance the film, trip the shutter using a cable release so that you don't vibrate the camera, and expose for however long you want with this fixed stationary camera,
stationary relative to your body.
Of course, the whole earth is rotating and the stars are rising and setting.
So they will appear to streak across the sky very slowly, streak is perhaps the wrong word.
After 15 minutes or an hour, close the shutter, develop your film, and you will get photographs like those seen here.
You will notice when looking at the North Celestial Pole that some stars never go below the horizon.
See, these stars are not below the horizon at all, whereas those ones here rose and then were up for a while and then they would set somewhere over there.
The stars that never rise or set are called the circumpolar stars.
In this animation, you can see that some stars rotate around the pole and never rise or set.
Other stars do set and sometime later rise, so those are not circumpolar stars.
You can make animations like this with commercially available software.
The software that was used for these particular cases was Starry Night Pro.
Now, we can demonstrate with an inflatable earth here and a little person on the earth what he or she would see from different locations on earth.
From the pole, from the North Pole for example, the earth is rotating and this person would simply see stars always maintaining their same altitude or height above the horizon.
That's because you're rotating around the pole, your feet are stationary and the earth is rotating down there underneath you and there's no reason for the stars to rise or set because you're right at the pole.
So the stars make circles around the horizon and that's demonstrated in this figure here where you can see the stars making circles at a constant elevation above the horizon.
Each star is a constant elevation above the horizon.
Here's the animation showing what you would see.
You're on the pole and the stars are maintaining the same height above the horizon except for some small distortions again related to projecting a sphere onto a plane.
When you take pictures of circumpolar stars, you get those that are close to the pole moving very little, those that are farther away moving a lot and sometimes you can even get a meteor streaking through.
Now suppose you were at the equator.
The stars appear to rise and set perpendicularly to the horizon.
They just go straight up and straight back down after arching across the sky.
So using a demo like this and putting a person at the equator, if you rotate the earth from west to east, then this person sees stars rising and setting straight up and straight down.
And over the course of a full 24 hour day, that person has access to the entire celestial sphere even though parts of it will be when the sun is up and you won't see the stars.
When you're at the poles, a person only has access to one half of the celestial sphere because the stars never rise or set.
I guess he just fell off the earth, gravity stopped working at that moment.
Never really happens that way in real life, of course.
If we take a look at what the stars look like in an animation, they go straight up from the eastern horizon and then they set straight down on the western horizon.
So that's what you would see if you were at the equator.
Now suppose you were at some intermediate latitude.
Well, your person might be, for example, in Columbus, Ohio, and he's rotating around like this.
Some of the stars would be circumpolar.
Remember, all of the stars were circumpolar as viewed from the pole, but some would rise and set.
Remember, all the stars rise and set as viewed from the equator.
So at intermediate latitudes, you get some combination of what is seen from the pole and from the equator.
Let's look at an animation of that.
From Columbus, Ohio, the stars rise at an angle to the horizon, go up, arch over the sky, and then set in the west.
So that's what you see if you take a photograph with a long time exposure.
You get these streaks of light as the stars have risen in the east and gone along their stately path through the sky.
Now the sky changes not just over the course of one night, but also over the course of the year.
And that's because the earth orbits the sun.
Let's take a look at this diagram here.
It shows, for example, the earth in December.
And let's put ourselves on the equator for simplicity.
In December, the constellation of Orion is overhead at midnight.
Now the earth is rotating.
So at noon, the sun is up.
At sunset, Orion is just beginning to rise.
At midnight, Orion is overhead.
At sunrise, when you're here, Orion is setting and so on.
So the earth is rotating, but the earth is also orbiting the sun.
Three months later, in March, you will notice that the direction toward Orion,
and Orion is in this direction here, not in that direction there.
Because remember, Orion and all the stars are essentially infinitely far away,
so all the rays are coming in parallel.
It is the limitations of this finite screen that make it look like Orion's angle is different in March than in December.
But really, in March, Orion is in this direction just as it was in December.
But now notice that you see that direction right at sunset.
See, here's the demarcation between the lit up earth and the dark earth.
That's the point of sunset right there.
So Orion is overhead at sunset in March.
It was overhead at midnight in December.
From December to March is three months, or 90 days.
90 times 4 is 360.
90 days times 4 minutes per day is 360 minutes.
360 minutes is 6 hours.
Well, Orion was overhead in March 6 hours earlier than in December.
Remember, at sunset versus midnight.
Let's go back to that diagram.
In December, Orion was overhead at midnight.
In March, Orion is overhead at sunset.
Sunset is roughly 6 hours earlier than midnight.
So over the course of three months, Orion has risen 6 hours earlier.
And clearly, it couldn't be a discontinuous jump.
It must happen at a slow rate, a rate of 4 minutes per day.
So the stars rise 4 minutes earlier each day.
Thus, they also reach their highest point in the sky, the meridian, 4 minutes earlier each day.
And they set 4 minutes earlier each day as well.
Let me illustrate microscopically what happens.
Let's suppose this big red ball is the sun.
And you, the audience, you're a star.
And right now, I'm the earth, and I've got the sun and the stars aligned.
Now, if the earth weren't orbiting the sun, then in one 24-hour day-night cycle,
both the sun and the stars would become aligned once again.
They started out aligned, and after 24 hours, they are once again aligned.
That alignment could be overhead or whatever.
But the earth is orbiting the sun.
So in the course of 24 hours, it has moved partly around the sun.
And after 23 hours and 56 minutes, the stars, those same stars as I was looking at before,
are once again overhead or along a particular line.
But the sun is not yet along that same line.
I have to rotate for 4 more minutes for that sun to become aligned with my line of sight again.
So the solar day, the day that we call from noon to noon, the 24-hour day,
is 4 minutes longer than what's called the sidereal day, the day according to the stars.
And what that really means is that, as I said before, a given star rises and sets 4 minutes earlier each day.
Over the course of the year, that allows you to see the different parts of the celestial sphere.
Orion overhead at midnight in December, Virgo overhead at midnight in March,
Ophiuchus in June, and Pisces in September.
Over the course of the year, the position of the sun projected onto the celestial sphere changes.
In September, if the sun weren't bright, you would see it projected against the stars of Virgo.
In March, if you could see the stars during the day, you would see the sun projected against Pisces.
By the way, though it looks like the sun is projected against Orion in June,
actually it misses Orion a little, because of the 23.5 degree tilt between the Earth's orbital plane and the celestial equator.
In December, the sun nearly misses Ophiuchus,
but actually does spend part of its time in that constellation, which extends over a fairly large area of the sky.
The path of the sun in the sky is known as the ecliptic,
and the constellations through which the sun passes during its yearly journey across the sky are the zodiacal constellations.
Planets also slowly wander among the zodiacal constellations because the solar system is a plane,
and as the Earth is moving, we see planets in the sun projected against certain stars in the celestial sphere
that are simply along an extension of the plane of the solar system.
This wandering of the planets among the stars as they themselves orbit the sun
is not to be confused with the daily east to west rotation of the celestial sphere caused by the rotation of the Earth.
But the sun and the planets wander among the constellations,
and people thought that these planets in the sun are associated with gods, or perhaps even were gods themselves,
and they ascribed to them these amazing properties that your life could be determined by where Mars or the sun happens to have been at the moment that you were born.
This is the basis of astrology, that the position of the sun and the planets affects your entire life.
It's an interesting hypothesis. Unfortunately, it doesn't bear up to the scientific evidence.
If you try to find astrological influences on people's lives and you take a statistically complete sample of people and you do the study carefully,
there has never been any clear correlation between astrological signs and how people's lives turn out.
So I would treat your horoscope as a mild form of entertainment and not take it seriously and certainly don't base major decisions in your life according to your horoscope.
Astrology and astronomy had common roots, but they've now branched off from each other completely.
You should also be aware that the sun passes through the constellation Ophiuchus as seen in December, so in December the sun is projected against Ophiuchus.
So Ophiuchus is one of the zodiacal constellations, or at least it should be, but in fact it's not a member of the tropical zodiac used by astrologers.
I'm not sure why. This is a contentious issue among astrologers themselves. They missed one of the constellations.
You never hear anyone saying, oh yeah, I'm an Ophiuchus, right? Well, if they missed one of the constellations, how confident can you be in their predictions?
Not too confident.
Well, though astronomy and astrology had these common roots and have the same Greek root, astro, they're now very different, but people still confuse them.
And indeed, we had a picnic of our astronomy department at Berkeley in a local park, and here was the reservation sign that happened to have been put up at that park, reserved for the UC Berkeley astrology department.
Professional astronomers get kind of insulted when they're confused with astrologers, and that's just the way it goes.
But astrology is kind of fun, you know, read your horoscope, play around with it, but don't take it seriously.
Given that the constellations move around from season to season, you have to have a way of finding where they are at any particular month.
And to do that, you can use a star chart. You can use a chart like this that shows you the positions of the constellations at different times of the year.
And to use it, you just take it and the part that says north will just raise it overhead and let it point north as you're facing north, and that image of the sky that you see will be roughly what's up there.
Similarly, if you want to look south, you turn in the opposite direction, put the sky chart above you so that the label south is pointing toward the southern horizon, and the stars that you see will be displayed as they are in the sky.
Another way of doing this is using a little thing called a planosphere, where for any given month and day of the month and time of the night, you can rotate these little circles into place, and this shows you that part of the celestial sphere that is visible to you at that time of the night, at that particular time of the year.
And you can do it for the northern sky, or if you flip it over for the southern sky. And once again, the way to really use this is to point the label north toward the northern horizon if you're looking at the northern sky, or point the label south toward the southern horizon if you're looking at the southern sky.
Every star in the sky, besides being in a particular constellation, also has a specific set of coordinates. These are just like longitude and latitude on Earth. Every city has a longitude and a latitude. The latitude is the measure above the equator, the longitude is the measure sort of along the circle of the Earth, along the equator.
So in a similar way, stars have latitudes and longitudes, but the latitude we call declination, and the longitude we call right ascension. These are details that you don't really need to know about unless you're trying to find something in the sky.
But the latitude is just the number of degrees above the celestial equator. Here's 50, 60, 70, 80, and so on. The longitude, or right ascension, is the number of hours along the equator. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, all the way around to 1920, 21, 22, 23, and 24.
So knowing the latitude and longitude, or declination and right ascension of a star, you can point your telescope to the proper location of the celestial sphere, and you will see your object through the telescope. You might have to first identify the field by looking at a wider-angle finderscope image, and then you look through your eyepiece and you see the narrow field image of your object.
But suppose I'm looking at a star, and now my body is the Earth, and the Earth is rotating underneath me, like this. It's going like that, and the telescope is attached to the Earth, so if the telescope were a fixed structure that could not rotate, then a few moments after I fix my gaze on Jupiter, or Sirius, or Betelgeuse, it would move out of the field of view. It would set after a while.
What we do is we fix telescopes in such a way that their axis, or one axis, points along the direction of the poles, so you set up one axis to be parallel to the axis of rotation of the Earth. This is for a so-called equatorially mounted telescope.
The other axis swings in a perpendicular or a generally perpendicular direction, but if you have this one axis parallel to the rotational axis of the Earth, and if you move or rotate the telescope along that direction, you can counter the rotational effect of the Earth.
So you're a star there, and the Earth is rotating, and the star would set if I weren't rotating my telescope. But if I rotate my telescope about that axis at exactly the same rate at which the Earth turns, but in exactly the opposite direction, then the star remains fixed in my field of view, like this.
See, the Earth is rotating, but so is my head, so I'm still looking at you, the star. And that's how equatorial telescopes are set up.
Here's an example of one at Lick Observatory, where this axis here is parallel to the axis of rotation of the Earth. It's the thing that rotates left and right, and you can point to the correct declination of a star by swinging the telescope inside this horseshoe mount.
A lot of telescopes these days come with a little gizmo that allows you to just dial in the name of a star or a planet, and the computer on board knows where the thing is and will point the telescope directly to your object.
This makes finding objects in the sky much easier, and I think that these go-to telescopes have been a wonderful boon to amateur astronomers, allowing people to easily find objects in the sky.
So this summer, go out, lie down in a sleeping bag, look at the sky, and watch over the course of hours the stately progression of the stars across the sky, and over the course of many seasons, watch as the constellations that you can see change from season to season.
