In the previous lecture, I discussed the celestial sphere, upon which all the stars appear to
be glued, and several aspects of the celestial sphere, such as the celestial equator, which
is a projection of the Earth's equator onto the sphere, and the ecliptic, which is a projection
of the path of the Sun among the stars in the celestial sphere.
Now, the 3D geometry can be kind of tricky.
It's spherical geometry, and often we project these images onto a two-dimensional sheet
of paper, which makes it a little bit confusing.
So you have to think a little bit about the geometry and spheres, and play with balls
and rings and stuff, and you'll get a better idea of it if you make some small
models at home, like the ones that I showed last time, and which I will show in a different
way today.
But the celestial sphere and the relationship between the celestial equator and the ecliptic
has an important role in explaining the seasons, and the subject of this lecture is the seasons,
the nature of the seasons, the reason for the seasons.
Now it's amazing, but if you ask people what the cause of the seasons is, almost all of
them will say that they are due to the differing distance of the Earth from the Sun over the
course of the year.
Many people know that the orbit of the Earth around the Sun is not a perfect circle, it
happens to be elliptical, we'll talk about that later.
They've heard about that, and they know that it's sometimes closer to the Sun and sometimes
farther from the Sun.
Indeed, in a recent survey of graduating seniors at a major Ivy League university, only 2 out
of 25 students got the correct reason for the seasons.
And this was at a major league university, and other surveys of a similar sort at other
universities have been done with consistent results.
So I think it's important to spend a whole lecture on the reason for the seasons and
the application of that knowledge.
So you might say, okay, well, if the seasons were due to a changing difference in the distance
between the Earth and the Sun, would they be opposite in the Southern Hemisphere compared
with the Northern Hemisphere?
A lot of people have heard that when it's summer in the Northern Hemisphere, it's winter
in the Southern Hemisphere, right?
So if it were simply a difference in distance, you wouldn't have this opposite pair of seasons,
summer, winter, winter, summer.
But you might say, well, I've never been to the Southern Hemisphere, let's say, how
do I know that people aren't just fooling me and telling me that the seasons are opposite,
right?
Maybe they are, maybe they're not.
Who am I to tell?
What common observation, I ask you, could you make from a given location on Earth that
would tell you that a changing distance from the Sun cannot be the reason for the seasons?
It's a common everyday observation.
You might say, oh, it's hot in the summer and it's cold in the winter.
Well, not always.
Not every summer day is hot, not every winter day is cold, so that's not it.
But something that is very different in winter and summer is the length of the day, how long
the Sun is above the horizon and how high it is above the horizon.
It's high in the summer and up above the horizon for a long time, regardless of whether it's
cold or hot, cloudy or sunny, and in the winter, it's always low and not spending much time
above the horizon.
So that's something that tells you that it can't be a difference in distance from the
Sun.
Let me show you some demonstrations of what I mean.
I will use this red ball once again to represent the Sun.
And here is the Earth, let's have the North Pole pointing up as its customary.
The Earth's axis of rotation is tilted by 23.5 degrees relative to the up-down direction,
that is relative to the direction that is the plane of the Earth's orbit around the
Sun.
If the Earth's axis were perpendicular to that plane, it would be oriented like this,
but it's actually at 23.5 degrees.
It just happens to be that way.
It's tilted.
And that is the fundamental cause for the seasons, because look, when it's tilted this
way, the Northern Hemisphere is being bathed by sunlight more than is the Southern Hemisphere.
But six months later, the Southern Hemisphere gets a more direct view of the Sun compared
with the Northern Hemisphere.
Now you will notice that I kept the orientation of this axis fixed as the Earth orbits the
Sun, fixed relative to the distant stars, because that's the way it is.
It's a spinning Earth, and this axis has no reason to flop around on short timescales.
It is fixed.
It's kind of like when you're riding a bicycle.
If you're moving quickly, you actually have to make some effort to turn.
And if you stop at a stop sign, well, you'll fall over unless you put your feet down, right?
You easily fall over, whereas if you're riding along, you don't fall over, and you have to
actually twist the bicycle in order to turn it, right?
But you're not afraid of falling when you're moving quickly.
That's because you're on something that's spinning, and spinning objects don't like to
change their axis of spin.
So with the Earth spinning like this, and nothing much pulling on it, there's no real
reason for the axis to change, at least not on short timescales.
So it remains fixed relative to the stars, but the orientation relative to the Sun changes.
See right now, the Northern Hemisphere is tilted toward the Sun.
Six months later, the Southern Hemisphere is tilted toward the Sun, and that is the
reason for the seasons.
I'll elaborate in the next few minutes.
A diagram showing what I just showed in 3D is given here.
Here's the 23.5 degree tilt of the Earth's axis of rotation relative to the perpendicular
to the plane of the Earth's orbit, and in this particular configuration, the Southern
Hemisphere is more bathed in sunlight than is the Northern Hemisphere.
Sure, parts of the Northern Hemisphere have daytime skies right now, but here near the
North Pole, it's perpetual night, and near the South Pole, it's perpetual daytime for
a few months.
The points at, say, mid-Northern latitudes spend part of their time bathed in sunshine,
but a greater fraction of their time in darkness.
So that's winter in the Northern Hemisphere and summer in the Southern Hemisphere.
If we look six months later, the situation is the opposite.
It is now summer in the Northern Hemisphere, winter in the Southern Hemisphere, because
you have more hours of sunlight in the Northern Hemisphere, and the sun is higher in the sky.
For example, from the perspective of someone standing here, the sun is nearly overhead,
whereas from the perspective of someone standing right around here, the sun is on the horizon.
So you remember, the horizon is the tangent to the point at which you're standing.
Let's look again at our demonstration.
Here we have, orienting the Earth correctly, summer in the Northern Hemisphere, winter
in the Southern Hemisphere.
We define the first day of summer, June 22, to be that moment when the Northern Hemisphere
is most tilted toward the sun.
That's just defined to be the first day of summer.
Even though the days have been long, quite long, for a month before June 22, we just
define it to be the day when the Earth's axis is most tilted toward the sun.
As we go through July, August, and onto September, you notice that at this point in late September,
the equator of the Earth is most pointed toward the sun, and neither pole has an advantage.
That's the autumnal equinox.
In going from summer over to the end of September, you go from the summer solstice to the autumnal
equinox, and you have equal days and nights everywhere on Earth, 12 hours of each day
and night.
Now going from September 22 to December 22, you see that the Southern Hemisphere starts
getting favored, and the days start getting shorter, progressively, or they get shorter
very quickly in the Northern Hemisphere, and longer very quickly in the Southern Hemisphere,
until reaching this point here, where the length of the day doesn't change very much
from day to day.
That day, December 22, is defined to be the first day of winter in the Northern Hemisphere,
the first day of summer in the Southern Hemisphere.
And then three months later, in March, say March 22, again, the equator is pointing at
the sun, or is closest in a sense to the sun, although the distance, as I'll emphasize in
a few minutes, has no relevance.
It's just that the equator is more directly exposed to the sun, neither pole has any advantage.
So again, it's the equal day and night everywhere on Earth, and this is now the vernal equinox.
You're passing into spring, and the days are getting longer in the Northern Hemisphere
shorter in the Southern Hemisphere.
So that's the 3-D geometry.
Okay, let's take a look at what this looks like on a two-dimensional sheet of paper.
Here's the tilt of the Earth's axis, and you have the projection of the Earth's equator
onto the celestial sphere, that's the celestial equator, and you have a projection of the sun's
motion in the sky, or alternatively, the plane of the Earth's orbit around the sun.
That's here, that's the ecliptic, and they're tilted relative to one another, and they have
this angle of 23 and a half degrees between them.
So in December, the sun shines mostly on the Southern Hemisphere, and in June, the sun
shines mostly on the Northern Hemisphere.
And I have a little demo to illustrate that.
Again, these are things that you can build at home yourself to help illustrate these
concepts.
Here I will represent the sun as the ping-pong ball, and the Earth is just the Earth here.
Just grab it here.
The Earth's axis is tilted by 23 and a half degrees, like this, and so the celestial equator
is this ring here.
The ecliptic, which is the path of the sun in the sky, is this ring here.
And in the summer, you can see that the sun is basically in the Northern Hemisphere, predominantly,
and it's darker, generally darker in the Southern Hemisphere, whereas six months later, and
here I'll cheat a little bit, and I'll rotate the sun, but really of course it's the Earth
orbiting the sun, but here I'll move the sun, it's just a change in perspective.
So six months later, the sun is shining predominantly on the Southern Hemisphere, and the Northern
Hemisphere has fewer hours of daylight.
So I love these kinds of simple things that you can build at home.
You don't need complicated equipment to understand some of these concepts.
I call this kitchen sink physics, even though no water or sink was involved in this particular
one.
All right, so let's look at the sun's path on a two-dimensional sheet of paper at different
seasons.
On June 22nd, the sun in the Northern Hemisphere remains above the horizon for a very long
time and below the horizon for a relatively short time in the Northern Hemisphere.
If we then go to the vernal or autumnal equinoxes, the sun's position is on the celestial equator,
so it remains above the horizon for 12 hours, as seen from essentially everywhere.
And then at the winter solstice on December 22nd, the sun appears above the horizon as
viewed from the Northern Hemisphere for only a short time, below the horizon for a much
longer time, and of course it's the opposite for someone viewing from the Southern Hemisphere.
So really, the sunrise location and the sunset location should change with time.
And here is a little simulation of what should happen to the point of sunrise as seen from
Big Bend National Park in Texas, which is roughly 30 degrees north latitude.
As you go towards the fall, the sun starts rising to the south of due east.
So due east is right around there somewhere.
And if we run this simulation again, going from December to March to June to September
back to December, you see that in the summer, the sun was rising north of east.
In the winter, it's rising south of east.
Due east was right around there somewhere.
Well, that's theory.
Let's see if it actually works in practice.
Here's an example of the position of the sun at three different times of the year during
sunrise as seen from Greece.
Here's due east, here's northeast, and here's southeast.
And you can see that at the equinoxes, the sun does indeed rise due east.
In the summer, it rises north of east, and it stays up for a long time, longer than 12
hours.
And in the winter, it rises south of due east.
And so it's up for a relatively short time.
Now when the sun is high up in the sky, there's a lot of heating per unit area of the ground.
You can see that in this diagram here.
When the sun is high, a beam of light, a cylindrical beam of light, illuminates a relatively small
area, so the amount of heating per unit area is large.
When the sun is low above the horizon, that same beam of light gets spread out over a larger
area, so the same energy is spread out over a larger area, you get less heating per unit
area, and the days are generally cooler in that case.
Now a lot of people think that, well, sure, it's the tilt of the Earth's orbit.
It's the tilt of the Earth's axis of rotation that causes the seasons, but they incorrectly
think that the main effect is that when the Earth is tilted toward the sun, the northern
hemisphere is slightly closer to the sun, and that that causes greater heat and all that.
That's a totally minor effect.
The Earth is 24,000 Earth radii away from the sun, so any additional tilt toward the sun
brings it only a slight amount closer to the sun, so that's a negligible effect.
Rather, the tilt gives you sort of more direct heating, more light per unit area, as illustrated
in that previous example.
Another thing people think is that, well, given that the Earth's orbit is elliptical
around the sun, maybe you get a lot of additional heating when the Earth is close to the sun
versus farther away.
Well, the Earth's distance varies from the sun by only about 3 percent, so that's not
a major effect.
It's a bigger effect than the one I just talked about, the extra amount of heating
from the Earth being a bit closer when it's tilted, but it's still only a 3 percent effect.
It turns out that, in fact, Earth is closest to the sun during the northern hemisphere
winter, around early January, Earth happens to be closest to the sun.
That gives you a little bit of extra heating, and that mitigates the seasons a little bit.
It makes the winters in the northern hemisphere slightly warmer than they would otherwise
have been.
You might think it should make the summers in the southern hemisphere even hotter than
they would have been otherwise, but in the southern hemisphere you have a lot more water,
fewer continents, less land area than in the northern hemisphere, and water tends to heat
up and cool down more slowly than land, and so the southern hemisphere doesn't get affected
by this extra 3 percent very much.
Well, the orbit of the Earth around the sun is indeed elliptical, and I'll discuss ellipses
much more later, but basically an ellipse is a set of points such that the distance
of the object from two foci, or more correctly, the sum of the distances from the two foci
remains a constant.
So here's the sun, here's the Earth, here's the distance A from the sun, here's the distance
B from some other focus, there's nothing there, and ellipse is that set of points such
that A plus B is equal to a constant.
So the Earth's orbit around the sun is elliptical, we'll discuss that more later, but there's
not much of a difference in the sun's apparent size as a result of this changing distance.
When the Earth is closest to the sun, the sun is about 3 percent bigger in angular size
than when the Earth is farthest from the sun.
Here's the sun at the position of the vernal equinox when it's moving from the southern
hemisphere to the northern hemisphere.
There's a lot of sort of incorrect mythology about special times of the year, in particular
the equinoxes, and some people in particular think that you can only balance an egg on
its end at the time of the vernal equinox, or maybe the autumnal equinox.
This is utterly false, and you might say it's false because you can never balance an egg
on its end, but that's not true, you can balance eggs on their end, and you can do it any time
of the year.
So here are five eggs balanced on their end, and it was not March 22nd or September 22nd.
And here's Noelle, my wife, balancing a sixth egg, and she was able to successfully do it.
During the southern hemisphere summer, the sun appears above the horizon for about six
months as seen from the South Pole.
And similarly, during the northern hemisphere summer, the sun appears above the horizon
for about six months as seen from the North Pole.
And here is a photograph of James Lloyd, a former graduate student at Berkeley, standing
on the South Pole with the Australian flag, he's Australian, celebrating the solstice.
And he didn't see the sun set for many, many months, and indeed, here we are with the sun
23.5 degrees above the horizon as viewed from the pole on December 22nd.
And it stays above the horizon for about six months.
So here it's setting, and I told you earlier that when the sun is setting or rising, it's
actually slightly below the horizon, but the bending by the Earth's atmosphere brings it
up to above the horizon.
So in fact, you get a little bit more than six months of daytime from the pole of either
hemisphere because of this refraction effect.
And indeed, at the moment when the sun is on the horizon like this, an observer at either
pole would see the sun because the refraction caused by the Earth's atmosphere brings it
up for both observers.
Both of them see the sun slightly risen above the horizon because of this effect right here.
That's kind of fun.
If you go to another special place on Earth, the Tropic of Cancer, which is at 23.5 degrees
north latitude, then the sun appears overhead as seen around June 22nd.
And here in fact is a marker, one of three such markers in Taiwan at 23.5 degrees north
latitude marking the Tropic of Cancer, the position at which the sun is straight overhead
on June 22nd.
So there is the sign, Tropic of Cancer.
And at the Tropic of Capricorn, which is at 23.5 degrees south latitude, the sun appears
straight overhead on December 22nd.
It's just the opposite of the Tropic of Cancer.
There's a phenomenon known as the analemma, which describes the position of the sun in
the sky at a given time of day over the course of the year.
We can photograph the sun, say, at 10 o'clock in the morning in the winter months.
But when you spring forward for summer an hour, making that 11 o'clock, well, you should
make the photograph at that corresponding time, as though there weren't any daylight savings
time.
Anyway, you do this photograph, and you photograph the position of the sun, and you get an interesting
and unexpected figure eight pattern shown here.
In the morning, it's tilted from upper left to lower right, as seen from the northern
hemisphere.
At noon, it is tilted not at all.
It's just straight up and down.
And in the afternoon, it's tilted from the lower left to the upper right, shown here
against some Greek ancient ruins.
So this is caused by the fact that the Earth's orbit is elliptical around the sun, so it doesn't
travel with the same speed at all times.
And also, there's this business that the celestial equator and the ecliptic are tilted relative
to one another.
The interaction between those two effects leads to this figure eight, and it's kind
of complicated, so I'm not going to go into the explanation.
But you find that the sun is not, in a sense, at the expected position for a given time
of day.
You would expect, at noon, say, clock time, for the sun to be right on the meridian, crossing
the meridian, at its highest point in its arc across the sky.
But you find that, depending on the season, it's a little bit to the east or a little
bit to the west of where it should be.
And if you photograph it, that's what you get, you can see that in the photographs.
You might say, well, why is this relevant?
Well the difference between where the sun should be, according to clock time, and where
it actually is, can be as much as about 15 minutes, depending on the season.
And that affects sun dials.
If you look at a sun dial, you have like a stick casting a shadow, and at different
times during the day, the shadow both shortens and lengthens and rotates, because the sun's
position in the sky along the horizon is changing east and west and south, and also its altitude
is changing, so the length of the shadow changes as well.
And by marking on the ground like this some hour numbers, you know, 12, 11, 10, 9, 8,
you can use a sun dial to figure out what time it is by looking at the shadow of the
sun.
But it turns out that this slightly incorrect position of the sun, caused by this complexity
in its orbit and tilt and all that, leads to a correction that needs to be made to sun
dials of at most 15 minutes.
So it's not a huge correction, but you know, let's say you're trying to catch a plane and
you're using your sun dial and, you know, you're 15 minutes too late, that can make
a big difference, okay, if you're going to an important business meeting.
So be sure you calibrate your sun dial correctly if you use it to tell time, all right.
If you use a stick like this over the course of the year, better to use the pole of a tether
ball or a basketball pole or something like that, something that's much more fixed than
a pencil in the ground.
You want something to be constant over the year, and if you mark with a blob of paint
the position of the tip of the shadow at a particular time, the same time over the course
of the year, you will get a distorted figure eight, much like the analemma.
Because the tip of the shadow is the projection of the sun's position onto the earth.
So you can do this much more easily than taking photographs.
I mean, Anthony Amiomimitis took these photographs from Greece, and it took him a lot of effort
to get it just right, and he needed, you know, cloudless days at the right times and all
that.
There are a lot of opposites that you can talk about.
We said that the seasons are opposite in the southern hemisphere from the northern hemisphere,
and there are other opposites like the direction that hurricanes rotate is opposite in the
northern and southern hemisphere.
This is Hurricane Katrina from August of 2005, which was in the northern hemisphere.
It rotates counterclockwise.
In the southern hemisphere, hurricanes rotate clockwise, and that's due to the fact that
the earth is rotating, and in a rotating frame of reference you get a fictitious force
known as the Coriolis force, and it affects the movement of air over very large distance
scales like that of a hurricane.
You can see this amazing storm moving, unfortunately, toward New Orleans, Louisiana, and causing
huge devastation.
But anyway, it's an amazing sight from a satellite, but the counterclockwise rotation
in the northern hemisphere is opposite to the clockwise rotation in the southern hemisphere.
You might think that this Coriolis force also produces water that goes down in opposite
directions down a toilet, but in fact that's not the case.
The effect is not big enough over something as small as a toilet to show up, and here
I actually tested it.
Here's a toilet into which I placed a little bead that was supposed to give off some paint.
But anyway, this is in the northern hemisphere, and the water happens to be going down clockwise
for this toilet and other toilets that went down counterclockwise, so it doesn't operate
over distance scales as small as those of toilets, although you often hear that water
goes down toilets differently in the northern hemisphere and in the southern hemisphere.
It's just not true.
There are some things that are opposite, though, in the sky.
The stars go around the pole counterclockwise in the northern hemisphere and clockwise in
the southern hemisphere.
That's because they rise in the east and set in the west.
That's the clockwise direction around the south celestial pole, and rising in the east
and setting in the west is the counterclockwise direction around the north celestial pole.
Orion is something else that looks different from the southern hemisphere.
In the north, he's right side up.
There's his head.
In the south, he's upside down.
So there are lots of opposites.
I was on a flight to the southern hemisphere once, and even the silverware appeared to
be the opposite of what we have in the northern hemisphere.
We were on a flight on air to Hedi Nui, and noticed that the spoon was plastic and the
fork and knife were metal.
It's like, wow, a spoon is a really dangerous weapon, right?
Unguard.
I'm going to attack you with this spoon.
Anyway, I don't know why they had it that way.
It has nothing to do with the hemispheres, but that's just the way it goes.
It turns out that the seasons will be opposite in about 13,000 years, and that's because
although the Earth's axis of rotation right now points toward the Sun as seen from the
northern hemisphere on June 22nd and away from the Sun on December 22nd, over the
course of 26,000 years, the axis of rotation actually will undergo a conical motion like
this.
And this is much like what you get when you spin a top or a gyroscope.
When it's spinning and on a point on the ground, you will notice that it undergoes a conical
motion like this called precession.
In this case, the precession is caused by the fact that gravity is trying to change
the angle, but the top is spinning, so it doesn't want to fall all the way, and instead
it precesses.
Well, in a similar way, the Moon and the Sun are influencing the axis of the Earth, trying
to tip it over, trying to make it fall in a sense, but instead of falling, it precesses.
So in 13,000 years on June 22nd, the axis of rotation will not be tipped toward the
Sun, rather it will be tipped away from the Sun because of this gradual conical motion.
So in 13,000 years, the seasons will be opposite to those which we have now, but it's a very
very slow effect known as precession.
For now, the seasons are remaining constant, and I hope that if you get asked this question
in a survey, you will know the correct reason for the seasons.
