In the previous lecture, I mentioned that the Moon influences the tilt of the axis of rotation
of the Earth over timescales of thousands of years.
In this lecture, I'd like to talk about various lunar phenomena.
After all, the Moon is one of the most commonly observed objects in the sky.
Let's take a look at the lunar phases.
Here is the familiar crescent phase.
A few days later, the Moon reaches what's called first quarter.
A few days after that, it becomes gibbous, waxing gibbous, it's getting bigger, and
then full moon.
From new moon to full moon takes about two weeks.
Beyond that, it becomes gibbous again, in this case waning gibbous, or getting smaller,
and then third quarter, and then waning crescent, and finally new moon, when you can't see it.
The cycle from new moon to new moon, or full moon to full moon, takes about one month.
That's the origin of the word month, the lunar cycle.
It's relatively easy to understand how this cycle is produced.
We go from new moon through crescent, first quarter, gibbous, full, then back to gibbous,
third quarter, crescent, and new, not because the Earth is casting a shadow on the Moon,
and not because there are clouds in the way.
There are some people that I've met who think that the lunar phases are due to clouds in
the Earth's atmosphere blocking part of the Moon.
Well, if that were the case, of course, you would see different phases from different
parts of the Earth, because they don't have the same cloud patterns, and others think
that, oh, maybe the phases are due to clouds on the Moon.
Well, surprise, surprise, the Moon has no atmosphere and no clouds, so it can't be that
either.
Instead, the lunar phases are due to a changing geometrical relationship between the position
of the Sun, the Earth, and the Moon.
As the Moon orbits the Earth, the part that's lit up is seen from a different perspective
by us here on Earth, and so we see the phases, as I will demonstrate.
Let's look at this diagram.
Here's the Earth rotating in a 24-hour day, although here I show just a fixed position,
and here is the Moon orbiting the Earth over the course of about a month.
We can neglect the motion of the Earth and the Moon around the Sun during this time.
The Earth and the Moon, of course, are orbiting the Sun, which is off to the right here, but
you can ignore that motion because at any given moment, the Sun's rays are just coming
from some direction relative to the Moon and the Earth, and we can draw a fixed diagram
like this to represent that direction.
So it's only the relative orientation that matters.
At New Moon, the side of the Moon that's illuminated by the Sun is the side that faces away from
the Earth, so we see only the dark side of the Moon at that position.
We don't see the part that's being hit by the Sun.
However, a few days later, when the Moon has moved to this position, the side of the Moon
that's being illuminated by the Sun is still the same.
It's still the side pointing to the right, but the side that we see is defined by this
little motion here.
I can draw this little arrow.
The hemisphere we see is the one facing us, and you can see that there's a little pie-shaped
part of that hemisphere that has become visible at this point, and on the surface of a sphere
then projected onto the sky, that looks like a crescent.
A few days later, or a week after New Moon, the Moon has moved to this position relative
to the Earth and the Sun that the illuminated face is still the face that hits or is facing
the Sun.
The face that we see is the hemisphere below my arrow here.
It's this hemisphere here, the one pointing toward the Earth, and you can see that only
half of that hemisphere is illuminated from our perspective, and that is what we call
first quarter Moon.
A few days later, the Moon is over here, the lit up hemisphere is this one facing the Sun,
the hemisphere we can see is the one closest to the Earth, and now you can visualize how
most of that hemisphere appears lit up from our perspective and so you get a gibbous Moon.
Over here, the Moon is lit up once again by the Sun unless it's in the Earth's shadow,
I'll talk about that later, that's an eclipse, and the lit up hemisphere is also the hemisphere
that we see.
So you get a full Moon.
And then in the subsequent two weeks, the phases just reverse themselves from full to
gibbous to third quarter to crescent and back to new.
We can take a look at the motion of the Moon around the Earth and the illumination caused
by the Sun with this animation here.
Here's the Moon moving around the Earth, orbiting the Earth over a one month time scale.
The Sun's rays are coming in from the right, here's the Sun off on the right, and it's
not being blocked by this little inset here.
So you can see that illuminated face of the Moon is always the face that faces the Sun,
but the part that we can see changes in its illumination from nearly full to full to less
full, that is, gibbous, to only half lit up, to waning crescent, and then to new Moon,
or occasionally a total solar eclipse, as I'll discuss later.
So these are the phases as viewed from Earth, and they only depend on the changing relative
geometry between the Sun, the Earth, and the Moon.
Let me illustrate this also by using a golf ball to represent the Moon.
My head represents us here on Earth, and this lamp will represent the Sun.
I'll turn it on, and it might not be visible too well on the television, but if you try
this at home, you'll be able to demonstrate the lunar phases very easily in your own home.
So here's the sunlight shining on the Moon, and the Moon is orbiting the Earth, my head,
and the Moon isn't really much smaller than the Earth, it's a little bit smaller, but
it's not this small, so there's some problems in the relative sizes and spaces of things
here, but you can get the general idea.
When the Moon is between, or roughly between, the Sun and the Earth, the illuminated face
is not the face that we on Earth can see, so we see the dark side of the Moon.
Later on, I can begin to see part of the Moon lit up, part of the golf ball lit up, and
it's a crescent shape.
Further still, I now see half of the visible Moon's face lit up, we call that the quarter
Moon, then gibbous, then full, if I could look behind your head, eyes at the back of
my head, then waning gibbous, and I'm not going to try to do that because I don't want
to destroy my neck, but you try this sort of thing, and it's easier if someone holds
the lamp for you.
But you can demonstrate the phases of the Moon in this way pretty easily.
Okay.
Now there are many forms of commercial software that allow you to see what phase the Moon will
be in, or was in, at any particular date.
For example, June 2006, here's the phase of the Moon on June 1, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, and
so on.
You can choose any year you want, for example, 2017, and any day that you want.
For example, August 21st.
And you can see that on August 21st, 2017, there will be a new Moon.
In fact, at that particular new Moon, we will experience a total solar eclipse, as I'll
describe in the next lecture.
Such software is particularly useful if you're a werewolf, and you need to know when the
full Moon is, but it has many other applications as well.
Indeed, occasionally, astronomers are asked to be expert witnesses in criminal trials,
because it turns out that the phase of the Moon might be important for either the prosecution
or the defense.
If the Moonlight was claimed to be sufficiently strong to allow a crime to be committed or
something like that, and you can demonstrate that the Moon wasn't up at that time, or was
a thin crescent or something like that, that can weaken or strengthen one case or another.
But notice that there is an inconsistency in terminology.
We call this the first quarter Moon, or simply the quarter Moon.
But it looks half lit up to me.
Well, yes, it's half lit up, but it's one quarter of the way around the Earth at this
point in its orbit.
So that's why we call it the quarter Moon.
But in that case, why do we call the full Moon the full Moon and not the half Moon?
When it's fully lit up, we should call it the half Moon, because it's halfway around
its orbit.
That's just the way it goes.
I'm sorry, it's not my fault.
I did not come up with the terminology, but you just have to get used to it.
It's interesting that many people are not aware that you can actually see the Moon easily
during the day.
They think that the Moon is only a nighttime phenomenon, but in fact, it's easy to see
during the day.
And here's a nice picture of the Moon seen in brilliant daytime skies.
And if you consider the diagram of how lunar phases are formed, you can easily see that
you should be able to view the Moon during the day.
Here for example, is the crescent Moon, which is visible near the overhead or near the meridian
at 3 p.m. Earth time, or the first quarter Moon, which is also visible at 3 p.m.
See, it's above the horizon because the horizon is defined to be the tangent to the Earth
at your location.
So there's the Moon well above the horizon and nicely lit up.
It's brighter than the background sky, so in fact, it's easy to see the Moon during
the day.
You can also tell from this diagram that the different phases of the Moon rise and set
at different times, depending on the phase.
For example, since new Moon would be visible, or you can't see the Moon during new Moon
because it's dark, but if you could see the new Moon, it's aligned with the Sun.
So clearly, it rises at sunrise and sets at sunset.
It rises and sets with the Sun because it's in the same direction as the Sun.
In contrast, the full Moon is in the opposite direction to that of the Sun, so as the Sun
is setting, the full Moon rises, and as the full Moon sets, the Sun rises because they're
diametrically opposite each other as viewed from the Earth.
Going back to the diagram, you can see that at 6 p.m., the first quarter Moon is on the
meridian, possibly nearly overhead, depending on where you live on Earth.
But as you rotate into the night here on Earth, at 9 p.m., it's closer to the western horizon,
and at midnight, it is on the western horizon.
It is setting because the horizon is defined by this tangent line here.
At 3 a.m., you can't see the first quarter Moon.
So for example, suppose a crime were committed at 3 a.m., and someone was saying that by the
light of the Moon, the first quarter Moon, that crime was committed, impossible.
The first quarter Moon is simply not up at 3 a.m.
So the lunar phases have the corresponding times at which they are visible.
You can sometimes see the dark side of the Moon faintly lit up, as in this case here,
where the Moon is above San Francisco.
There's the crescent, and here's the dark side, which you can see.
Why is that?
Why is that?
Well, I'll give you a clue.
The phenomenon is called Earthshine.
Why is it called Earthshine?
Because from the perspective of someone on the Moon, they would see a nearly fully lit
up Earth at this point.
They would see a gibbous Earth.
Let's take a look at the diagram.
Here we are on Earth.
We're seeing a crescent Moon.
They from their perspective, if they were Moon creatures, would see a nearly fully lit
up Earth, a gibbous Earth.
So they see a lot of light coming from the Earth, and that light reflecting off of the
Earth comes back to the Moon and can reflect off of the Moon, creating the Earthshine that
we see.
So the Earthshine is light first reflected from the Earth.
Then it goes back to the Moon, it reflects from the Moon back to the Earth, and we see
that faint glow, hence the name Earthshine.
Now the Earthshine gets less pronounced as the crescent becomes bigger.
That's in part because the bright crescent, the growing, the waxing crescent, begins to
outshine the faint light on the dark side of the Moon.
It's just the contrast becomes so great that you can't see the faint part.
But also, as the crescent Moon is waxing, as it's getting bigger from our perspective,
what's happening to the Earth's size of the illuminated region from the perspective of
the Moon?
Well, it's a waning gibbous Earth, right?
A waxing crescent Moon from our perspective corresponds to a waning gibbous Earth from
the perspective of someone on the Moon.
So since the part of the Earth that's lit up gets smaller and smaller, there's less
and less light hitting the Moon and less and less, which could be reflected back toward
the Earth.
So the Earthshine gets hardly visible when the crescent is even that thick, and by the
time of first quarter Moon, it's really very difficult to see the Earthshine at all.
The Earthshine is such a beautiful and eerie sight that it has even been portrayed on T-shirts.
And in fact, there's a lot of astronomy-related T-shirts that you can get by searching the
Internet.
One of my favorite companies is called Velocities, and they have put the crescent Moon with the
Earthshine prominently displayed on one of their shirts.
When you look at the rising Moon, especially if it's a pretty full gibbous Moon or a very
full Moon, and you look at it near the horizon, it looks quite big, doesn't it?
How many of you have seen this phenomenon, right?
The rising Moon looks gargantuan compared to how it looks when it's higher up in the
sky.
Is it really bigger when it's on the horizon than when it's high up, or is that just an
optical illusion?
Turns out to be an illusion, though it doesn't look that way.
Look at that Moon there.
Looks huge.
Well, it looks huge in comparison with the tree.
There are familiar things on the horizon with which we compare the rising Moon, and we judge
its size in relation to trees and buildings and people and things like that.
And it's only its apparent size that looks large compared to familiar objects.
The true angular size of the Moon when it's rising is actually smaller than later that
same night when it's high up in the sky.
I'll demonstrate that in a few minutes.
Now you might say, well, wait a minute.
Isn't it the case that the Moon has a non-circular orbit around the Earth?
It's actually an elliptical orbit.
So isn't it really the case that sometimes the Moon is relatively close to the Earth,
and at other times it's far away?
So when it's close, it looks big, and when it's far away, it looks small?
That's true.
It's not the case that the Moon's orbit around the Earth is elliptical.
I'll discuss ellipses in more detail later, but basically an ellipse is that set of points
defined such that the sum of the distances between the object and two foci, in this case
the Earth is at one focus, nothing is at the other focus, but in any case the sum of the
distances is equal to a constant.
So that's an ellipse, and we'll discuss it more later.
So the Moon is sometimes closer to the Earth and sometimes farther away, and you can see
that the differences in size are quite dramatic.
When it's far away from the Earth, it looks considerably smaller than when it's close
to Earth.
So there is the effect that sometimes the Moon really does appear bigger than at other
times because it's closer to the Earth than at those other times.
And here the Moonrise effect that I'm talking about is on a given night.
On a given night, the full Moon, when it's rising or setting, looks really big compared
with how it looks when it's high in the sky, and that can't be caused by the elliptical
orbit because the elliptical orbit takes a whole month, whereas I'm talking about apparent
changes over the course of a night.
So what's going on?
What's going on?
Well, it's an optical illusion, and here's a beautiful photograph of it by Anthony Aeomimetes
in Greece, a big Moon rising.
Really, this effect persists even when you look over a horizon defined by a lake or an
ocean, and you might say, well, that's weird because didn't I just say that it's the apparent
size of the Moon relative to trees and buildings and all that that leads to this illusion?
Well, that's true, but you're so used to looking at the Moon when it's on the horizon near
some trees and buildings that even when you look over an ocean, your brain somehow imagines
that there are other objects there with which to compare the Moon.
So the large size of the Moon persists even over an ocean.
And I claim that the Moon's angular size, if anything, is smaller when you're looking
at it close to the horizon than later that same night when it's high up in the sky.
And I can prove that by showing you this diagram here.
When you're observing the Moon near midnight, you're actually closer to it than when you're
observing it near Moon rise or Moon set.
Indeed, you're roughly one Earth radius closer to the Moon when it's high up in the sky than
when it is rising or setting.
So if anything, the Moon is smaller when it is close to the horizon than when it's high
up because it's one Earth radius farther away and one Earth radius is about a 60th of the
distance to the Moon.
So really, that's about 2%.
The Moon is actually 2% farther away when it's rising than later that same night when
it's high in the sky, yet it looks so much bigger when it's rising.
It's just a weird effect.
It's just your brain and your eye comparing the Moon with cacti and trees and buildings
and things like that.
It's entirely psychological, and your brain is just doing it.
It's an illusion.
And you might say, well, I trust what I see, but you shouldn't trust what you see.
Here's some famous optical illusions.
Are these lines, these horizontal lines, parallel or do they slope?
Looks to me like they slope, but if you were to make a measurement of these horizontal lines,
you would find that they are parallel.
But boy, oh boy, they look sloped and curved, and they kind of give me a headache a little
bit.
You know, looking at them, they are perfectly parallel lines, yet your brain and your eye
is telling you something different.
Another example is the left central circle bigger or smaller or the same size as the
right central circle.
So here's this one here.
Looks bigger than that one to me, but if you measure them, they are the same size.
This is an optical illusion caused by this one being surrounded by smaller circles and
this central one here being surrounded by bigger circles.
In comparison to these outer circles, the one on the left in the center looks bigger
than the one on the right.
But if you make the measurement, they are the same size.
So don't believe everything that you see.
It's not always real, and the illusion of the large rising moon is an example of that.
Some people say that if they look under their legs, they can make the illusion go away.
So look upside down at the moon, and the illusion goes away, at least for some people.
Okay, well, you might ask, why isn't it the case that during the new moon, the moon blocks
the sun, and during the full moon, the shadow of the earth should block the moon?
In other words, there should be eclipses at new moon and full moon.
And since this lecture is about the moon, let me talk about lunar eclipses.
Why isn't it the case that at full moon, the moon isn't immersed in the earth's shadow?
Well, that's because looking at the 3D geometry projected on a two-dimensional plane, you can
see that as the moon orbits the earth, there are times when it should go in the earth's
shadow.
The earth casts the shadow in space, and the moon should go in it.
Here we see it sort of from a perspective drawing, the moon is orbiting the earth, and gosh,
at full moon, it seems like it should go into the shadow of the earth.
It does, sometimes.
And when that happens, you see a lunar eclipse.
Here's a partial lunar eclipse where the moon is entering the earth's shadow.
Here it is somewhat later.
This is a total or a nearly total lunar eclipse.
You see it's not completely dark, for reasons I'll explain in a few minutes.
And here's a wonderful series of photographs taken by Akira Fuji, which show the moon entering
the earth's shadow being fully within the earth's shadow and then exiting.
So that's the earth's shadow, this circular thing here.
Well the moon enters the shadow like this and then exits.
The partial phases, when it's just entering the shadow, can each last about an hour.
When it's entering, that lasts about an hour, and when it's exiting, lasts about an hour.
And the fully eclipsed moon also lasts about an hour.
So the whole stately progression takes about three hours.
There's a lot of time to sit around and enjoy it.
That's unlike the case of solar eclipses that I'll discuss in the next lecture.
You have lots of time, but that gives you time to be creative and photograph it in various
ways and arrange your photographs, again as done by Anthony Aiyu-Memitis in this beautiful
set of photographs.
The total eclipse of the moon is not completely dark.
You could see that in the photographs that I'm showing here.
It appears sort of a coppery color, reddish or orange.
They vary from one eclipse to another.
See that?
Even variations of illumination on the moon.
And in fact, one part is illuminated more than another.
The moon has this eerie three-dimensional effect.
I mean, its appearance is just wonderful when it's illuminated this way.
It really looks like a sphere out there.
The reason is that some of the light from the sun goes through the Earth's atmosphere
and is bent or refracted by the atmosphere, and that light can reach the moon and illuminate
its dark face.
And that light then reflects off of the moon and comes to the Earth.
Now the light that is able to traverse the Earth's atmosphere and illuminate the moon
is predominantly the yellow, orange and red light for the same reason that sunsets on
Earth are predominantly yellow, orange and red.
Look at the light going through the atmosphere.
The violet's blues and greens are both scattered or reflected by molecules of air and also
by dust, and they are also absorbed by dust and smoke and things like that.
So the blues and greens are selectively diminished relative to the oranges and reds, which make
it through and bend and illuminate the moon.
So you get red lunar eclipses or orange lunar eclipses for the same reason that we see
red or orange sunsets and sunrises.
If there's a lot of dust in the Earth's atmosphere, the eclipse tends to be dark.
And if there's less dust absorbing the light, you get a brighter eclipse because more of
the light can reach the moon.
You also get a relative brightening of the moon for that part that's closest to the edge
of the Earth's shadow because more light can filter into the shadow of the Earth by bending
through the atmosphere of the Earth, close to the Earth's shadow, then in towards the
center where it's harder for the rays to reach.
Notice that a total lunar eclipse is visible from the entire dark side of the Earth.
In other words, everywhere in this hemisphere, as long as you have good weather and the moon
isn't being blocked by trees or whatever, you will see the dark or partially illuminated
moon.
You don't have to be in a special position on Earth to see a total lunar eclipse.
So total lunar eclipses, although they are intrinsically pretty rare once every year
and a half or so, they can be seen over a good fraction of the face of the Earth, roughly
half in fact.
And so lots and lots of people have seen lunar eclipses in contrast to solar eclipses,
as I'll discuss in the next lecture.
So finally, you might ask, why doesn't the moon get eclipsed by the Earth each time it
goes through the full phase, the question I asked a few minutes ago?
Well the reason for that is that you've got the sun here and the Earth and the moon, and
the moon's orbit around the Earth is not exactly coincident with the Earth's orbit around
the sun.
If they were exactly the same plane, they would look like this, and the moon would get
eclipsed each time it's full.
But there's a bit of a tilt like that.
And so in this particular case, the Earth's shadow misses the moon, because the Earth's
shadow is along the line from the sun to the Earth and beyond, and in this case the moon
is above that shadow.
Now three months later, the shadow of the Earth could hit the moon if the moon happened
to be in the right place of its orbit.
So this configuration gives you the potential for a total lunar eclipse, but you don't actually
get a total lunar eclipse unless the moon happens to be at the right place in its orbit.
If it's there or there, you won't see it, but if it's there, you will see a total lunar
eclipse.
So three months later, again there's no potential for a total lunar eclipse because the moon
is below the Earth's shadow.
But three months after that, you once again get the potential for a total lunar eclipse
because the moon can be in a position that is collinear, or that is in a straight line
with the Earth and the sun.
So lunar eclipses are a wonderful phenomenon.
You get them occasionally, mostly partial lunar eclipses, occasionally total lunar eclipses,
and they're a wonderful site to behold.
It's a beautiful, eerie red orb floating around out there.
There's plenty of time to enjoy the phenomenon.
Keep alert to when the next total lunar eclipse will be in your area and go out and watch.
