In the previous lecture, I described various lunar phenomena that can be seen, such as
the lunar phases and partial and total lunar eclipses.
In this lecture, I'll focus on the sun, things that you can observe on the sun, and in particular
glorious total solar eclipses.
Suppose we take a look at the sun.
It's got basically a featureless disc, but there are these spots on it, dark spots called
sunspots, which I will describe in more detail later.
They are actually cooler spots near the surface of the sun.
But the surface itself, though gaseous, has a distinct boundary, and this boundary is
known as the photosphere.
So when you have an image of the sun like this, you're looking at the photosphere, and
the sunspots are essentially on the photosphere.
But to see these sunspots, you can't just look at the sun.
The sun is blindingly bright, and it would harm your eyes.
So you need to use a proper filter.
And the best kind of filter to use is shade 14 welder's glass.
It's a very, very thick coating of stuff that blocks out all of the harmful rays that could
hit your eyes and cause damage.
So you put this arc welder's glass in front of the sun, blocking it completely from your
eyes, and you can look at the sun this way, and it'll be safe to do so.
The sunspots will look kind of small if you view them that way.
You can get a magnified view if you use a telescope.
So here's an example of a telescope fitted with a filter at the top end so that the sunlight
is blocked before it enters the telescope.
That's very important.
And people can look through the eyepiece of the telescope and get good views of the sunspots.
Here's another example of a filter on the telescope.
The importance of blocking the light before it comes in is that that way not much light
is hitting the primary mirror, bouncing around, and then going out of the eyepiece.
Only a little bit of light is going out of the eyepiece.
If instead you didn't have this filter on the telescope at the top end, a lot of light
would enter the telescope, and even if it were to hit a filter at the eyepiece end,
that would be dangerous because that eyepiece filter could crack.
And if it cracks while you're looking through the eyepiece, this huge amount of light collected
by the telescope would enter your eye, and you could get blinded easily.
Indeed, a teaching assistant of mine many years ago left an eyepiece cap on a telescope
that was not properly filtered, and that eyepiece cap got completely melted through.
Look at that.
Even if your eyes were there, that would not be good.
So never ever look at the sun through binoculars or a telescope without having a filter at
the top end.
It's very important, even though sometimes these telescopes are sold with filters that
go on the eyepiece end.
That's just not safe.
Well, if you look at the sun through a telescope or binoculars, the sunspots become magnified
and you can see them very nicely, and they change a lot with time.
In fact, just a few days before this picture was taken, there was a really spectacular
sunspot.
Look at that.
It shaped like an airplane.
Well, that wasn't an airplane, of course.
But anyway, the sunspots move around and close up views show all this intricate structure,
and I'll discuss them more thoroughly when I talk about the sun, but it is fun to look
at them.
Now, you can also look at sunspots by projecting an image of the sun through a telescope onto
a sheet of paper.
So here, for example, is a refracting telescope with an eyepiece at this end, but instead
of looking through the eyepiece, you allow the image to get projected onto a sheet of
paper.
If you're doing it this way, you shouldn't have a filter at either the top end or the
eyepiece end, because you want as much light as possible to go through the telescope and
be projected onto a screen.
Otherwise, the sun would look very faint, as it is with a small telescope using the projection
technique, the sun looks kind of faint.
So you definitely don't want a filter in this case, but you should make sure that no one
comes over to the telescope and looks through the eyepiece while it is in this mode, because
they would get a harmful amount of radiation in their eyes.
In this way, by projecting it like this, the advantage is that a lot of people can look
at the image at the same time, and you can discuss the sunspots and enjoy them together.
You can also view the sunspots by using a little device called a sunspotter.
It has a lens here and a series of mirrors which image the sun onto a sheet of paper,
and you can either trace the sun and the sunspots or photograph the sunspots on this sheet of
paper.
And indeed, here's a series of six photographs showing a set of sunspots traversing the face
of the sun.
That in fact is because the sun is rotating, and Galileo was apparently the first to notice
the sunspots moving across the disk of the sun like that, and he inferred that the sun
in fact is rotating.
He also inferred that the sun is not blemish-free, it has zits, and you know, it isn't the perfect
celestial sphere that people in the Roman Catholic Church wanted it to be.
That's part of what put Galileo in trouble as we'll discuss later on.
Well, a marvelous thing to observe are total and partial solar eclipses.
They occur at the time of new moon, when the moon is between the sun and the earth.
But the alignment has to be perfect in order to block part or all of the sun.
Usually the alignment isn't perfect, and you just get a new moon, but you don't get an
eclipsed sun.
If the moon is precisely between the sun and the earth, it can block the photosphere.
And the reason it can block the entire photosphere is this marvelous coincidence.
The sun is about 390 times physically larger than the moon, so the sun is huge compared
to the moon.
But it's also about a factor of 390 farther away, and that means it subtends or covers
about the same angle in the sky, about half a degree.
Now remember, from the horizon to the zenith, the overhead point, there's about 90 degrees.
In fact, there's exactly 90 degrees if you have a perfect horizon.
So 180 suns or moons could fit stacked end to end from the horizon to the zenith.
So it doesn't take up much of the sky, but the amazing thing is that the moon and the
sun take up the same angular amount in the sky, despite being such different physical
sizes.
An example is shown here with a quarter and a plate.
The plate is 9 times bigger in diameter than the quarter is, so in fact normally they look
very different sizes.
But if I place the plate, a factor of 9 farther away than the quarter, then to my eye they
look the same size.
They have the same angular size in the sky.
If I put the moon or the quarter too close, then it more than covers the plate.
If I move it too far away, it hardly covers any of the plate at all, so the distance has
to be exactly right.
The ratio of distances has to equal the ratio of sizes, and that is the case for the sun
and the moon, and as far as we can tell, it is purely a coincidence.
It need not have been this way.
And indeed, in the future it won't be this way, because for reasons I'll discuss later,
the moon is gradually moving away from the earth, appearing smaller and smaller and
smaller over hundreds of millions of years.
So normally you see the photosphere of the sun, unobstructed by the moon.
But if the moon obstructs all of the photosphere, if it blocks the photosphere, then what you
see is the faint, tenuous corona of the sun.
You can't see it, because the brightness of the daytime sky overwhelms the brightness
of the corona, and moreover, you can't look right at the sun because it blinds you.
But when the sun is blocked by the moon, the corona comes out, a wonderful phenomenon,
a glorious phenomenon.
And the corona's shape changes from one eclipse to another because it is structured by the
shape of the magnetic fields that emanate from the sun.
I'll discuss that a little bit more later as well.
So you might ask, why don't solar eclipses occur each time there's a new moon?
Well, it's for the same reason that lunar eclipses don't occur each time there's a
full moon.
If you have the sun, or familiar red ball, the earth and the moon in this position, note
that, once again, the moon's orbit around the earth is not the same plane.
It's not in the same plane as the earth's orbit around the sun.
They're tilted by about five degrees.
So in this position, the moon could not block the sun because it's not collinear with the
earth and the sun.
It's not exactly along the same line.
Three months later, it could be along the same line.
It could be right there, and its shadow could fall on the earth.
But it need not be there.
So the potential for a solar eclipse occurs at this stage.
But you only have a solar eclipse if the moon happens to be in the right place of its orbit
at the time that an eclipse could potentially occur.
If it's at the wrong place of its orbit, then the eclipse won't occur.
But if it's at the right place of the orbit, it can occur.
So there are only certain times of the year when eclipses can occur, and most of the time
the shadow of the moon does not hit the earth.
My first total solar eclipse was experienced on February 26, 1979, in Northern Oregon,
in the Cascade Mountains.
And conditions were horrible.
Here's the partial phase starting out, and there were a few breaks in the cloud.
But you know, mostly it was a solid cloud bank.
We were pretty depressed.
But as the eclipse progressed and became closer and closer to total, the clouds cleared away
more and more and more, and just at the onset of totality, the clouds completely cleared
away.
It was one of the most exhilarating moments of my life.
I could not believe what I was seeing and what I was feeling at that time.
The photographs do not convey the magnificence of a total solar eclipse.
You have to be there to experience it, to hear the sounds of other people, to watch them
reacting.
It's just unbelievable.
To those of us who have seen a total solar eclipse and describe it to someone who hasn't,
we sound, if you'll pardon the pun, like lunatics.
But once you've seen one, you will know what it is I'm trying to say.
There are few feelings that match it.
You know, a first kiss or the birth of a baby or something like that.
There are all things that should not be missed in life.
Well, a total solar eclipse is one of those events that should not be missed in life.
If you're a really creative photographer, you can produce a fantastic sequence, such
as that done by Akira Fuji during a total solar eclipse in Mexico in 1991.
I personally just sit around and enjoy it, you know, but if you want to take great photos,
there's the opportunity there.
So usually the eclipse doesn't occur, or if it is occurring, it's occurring at one specific
spot or a range of spots on Earth, but other spots don't see the eclipse, or at least not
a total eclipse.
For example, from this position on Earth, the moon would block part of the sun, but
not all of the sun.
All right?
It's only blocking part of it.
Or from this position here, the moon blocks part of the sun, not all of it.
So usually, in fact, you have a partial eclipse, or you might be at a location on Earth where
the total eclipse is simply not visible.
If that's the case, you know, make the best of it, a partial eclipse is nowhere near the
glory of a total eclipse, but it's still fun to see.
So here's a map of the United States showing the various partial phases that could be seen
throughout the United States at the time when a total eclipse was occurring over Mexico.
And the farther away you are from the path of totality, the less of the sun is eclipsed
from your perspective.
Here's a filtered picture of what the sun looks like during a partial eclipse.
If you're very creative, such as Anthony Aeomometis was, you can produce a sequence
like this, shaped in the shape of an S. It gives all of the various phases of a partial
eclipse.
Or you can create a little movie of the eclipse, like that, by taking a series of images, such
as those done by Sylvain Weiler.
You can purchase eclipse glasses that have the proper shade 14 or equivalent material
attached to them and view the eclipse that way too.
This is a eclipse I went to in Peru, and we were so afraid of missing it in the morning
that we actually slept among these rocks instead of at a hotel and, you know, risk driving
up the next morning and getting a flat tire or something like that.
A good way to examine the partial phases is by creating what's called a pinhole camera.
So you can see in this diagram that a pinhole camera is simply an opaque screen with a hole
in it, and an object can get imaged on a viewing screen on the opposite side of the opaque
screen.
So here's a bright arrow whose light rays from the tip pass through the hole and end
up inverted on a viewing screen on the other side.
And at the other end of the arrow, the light rays go through the hole and produce an image.
So you get an inverted image of the arrow.
And it's easy to make a viewing screen and an opaque screen of this sort.
Just take a piece of cardboard, puncture a hole through it, and shadow a viewing screen
with the cardboard.
You'll get a little image of the sun on your viewing screen.
And normally it looks circular because the sun isn't eclipsed, but when the sun is eclipsed,
you will see a crescent shape or whatever the sun's shape happens to be at the time.
And here I'm demonstrating this process by writing my son's name in a sheet of cardboard
with a bunch of holes.
And if you look closely at the images that are projected onto the viewing screen, you
can see a whole bunch of upside down crescent suns, because this was a stage of the eclipse
where that's what it looked like, and we're getting a whole bunch of images there.
Holes through leaves and trees also serve as pinhole cameras and produce a series of
images on the brick sidewalk down below.
You can also project the image of the sun through a telescope and get a magnified view,
such as is done in this case right here.
And with that magnified view, you can then become creative and set up a series of little
Pac-Man type monster eating the candy.
I don't know, you've got to do something to amuse yourself during the one plus hour
partial stages preceding a total solar eclipse, because the partial phases are fun, but they're
not glorious, and so you amuse yourself this way.
You can also use a monocular or a refracting telescope to project the sun onto the shadow
of a person.
And if you use a pair of binoculars, then there are two images of the sun and you get
a pair of sea cups like this if you position them carefully.
Well let's look at the geometry of a total solar eclipse once again.
Suppose you are in the right place, suppose you're right at that position right there.
What would you see?
Well before the eclipse starts, you would see just the photosphere of the sun, but as
the sun gets progressively more and more eclipsed, you'd get less and less of it showing.
And finally, just before totality, only a little bit of it would show.
And this then appears as the diamond ring effect, because a little bit of the sun is
shining through here, it's uneclipsed, and so it overexposes this photograph, yet the
inner corona is beginning to appear.
So it forms this ring with a brilliant diamond or a series of diamonds if the sunlight is
passing through a bunch of valleys on the surface of the moon.
In those cases, actually you can get several little jewels, and these are called Bailey's
beads.
So you have not only the slight uneclipsed part of the sun, but you also have a slight
part of the sun which is shining through a valley on the surface of the moon.
The moon isn't perfectly smooth, so there are mountains and valleys, and here the sunlight
is shining through a mountain valley, and that produces a Bailey's bead.
When the sun becomes completely eclipsed, you can see a thin layer called the chromosphere.
It's a very thin, hot layer right above the photosphere, and then there is the corona.
And a short exposure shows only the inner corona, a longer exposure shows the outer corona
in all its glory.
Short exposures also show you small little protrusions from what appears to be the moon,
but of course these are protrusions from the sun.
These are called prominences, and a magnified view of one of them is shown here.
They are hot plumes of gas going along magnetic fields that stick out of the sun.
We'll talk about them more when we discuss the sun in greater detail.
You can and should view totality through binoculars or a telescope.
The corona is incredibly faint, it's fainter than the daytime sky.
So once the sun is completely blocked by all means, take off your filters, put up the binoculars
in your telescope, look at prominences, things like that, but it's also a great view simply
with the naked eye because you see the corona and all the colors around and everything.
But don't remain filtered at that time, that would be a bad mistake.
At the end of the eclipse, you have the second diamond ring and maybe a Baileys bead, and
then more of the sun becomes exposed and you have a very nice, brilliant diamond ring.
Here's a movie of an eclipse sped up by about a factor of 20.
So boom, there it is, and after two seconds it's gone.
Well this was sped up by a factor of 20.
So it lasted maybe 40 seconds in this particular case.
Total solar eclipses don't last long.
You don't have time to muck around with equipment and stuff.
Be ready with whatever binoculars or telescopes or whatever you want to use.
Typically they're just a minute or two in length.
The maximum duration of totality is only about seven and a half minutes and those eclipses
are very rare.
Just are only about two minutes long.
This one that I just showed was a particularly short one, only about 40 seconds.
To give you some idea of the reaction people have when viewing an eclipse, let me play
a video of an eclipse that occurred in Bolivia in 1994.
Son of a gun!
Whoa!
Wonderful!
Wide angle.
Oh, this video is cool.
Video is cool.
Pull the video back a little bit.
Man, we're doing it again!
All right, yes!
Data.
Only a little bit of time.
Beautiful!
Chromosphere!
Alpha at 125.
Beta at 30th.
Alpha at 125.
I want to show them.
Beta at a 30th.
Alpha at...
Well, as you can see, people go crazy.
They become lunatics during an eclipse.
And animals go wild as well.
I mean roosters start to crow.
Various animals don't know what to do.
Birds start flying around.
It's just incredible.
And in fact, in many ancient cultures and is still the case today in some parts of the
world, people think that a dragon is eating the sun.
And so the gods must be mad or something.
People beat pots and pans and sacrifice roosters and stuff.
In fact, I was at an eclipse in Thailand and there were roosters being sacrificed.
Here's a fake one, a picture of a fake one, because I didn't want to show you the gory
details of what was being done by the locals there.
But anyway, during totality, it's fun to look all around you because you see twilight sky
colors all around the horizon, 360 degrees.
Because the path of totality is typically only 50 or 100 or 150 kilometers wide.
So if you look in every direction, you will be seeing atmosphere that is being illuminated
by nearly fully eclipsed sun, but not a fully eclipsed sun.
So there's a little bit of light hitting that atmosphere.
And then it's reflecting off of the atmosphere and filtering toward you.
And during the filtering process, the blues and greens get absorbed and scattered and the
oranges come through.
So it's the same sort of setting sun or twilight effect, but all around you.
It's just amazing.
Here, in fact, is a photograph that shows you a little bit of what I'm talking about,
although it doesn't show the full 360 degree panorama.
At the very beginning and end of an eclipse, it's fun to look for what are called shadow bands.
Now, if you look at the partially eclipsed phase here, only a little bit of the sun has
had a bite taken out of it.
But when only a tiny bit of the sun is left, then you have kind of like a bright star,
kind of like Sirius in the sky, but it's a little crescent because a little bit of the sun
is still showing.
And just as Sirius twinkles a lot when it is low in the sky, so too does this little tiny
crescent sun twinkle a lot.
And that means that you will alternately see slightly brighter sun and slightly dimmer
sun, and on the ground, what you will see are these shadow bands of bright and dim regions.
They're very subtle.
They are much more subtle than the bands that you see at the bottom of a swimming pool.
But the cause of the phenomenon is the same.
You get this rippling effect due to different layers of the atmosphere bending the light
every which way, and at any given instant, a given spot of ground might be hit by relatively
more or less light.
And these are these so-called shadow bands.
Hard to see, but I've seen them even harder to photograph.
Well, at the end of the eclipse, you can see the second diamond ring, and the eclipse has
basically ended.
At that point, you can look for shadow bands again, and another phenomenon you can look
for is the shadow of the moon racing away from you.
The shadow comes in from west to east.
You can sometimes see it approaching you just before totality, and then you see it racing
away from you after totality.
But you might be looking for shadow bands or the diamond ring or whatever.
It's hard to take it all in during just one eclipse, which is why a number of us are eclipse
addicts and try to see as many as we can.
Viewed from above, the shadow of the moon on the earth can be nicely seen.
This is the view from a spacecraft, and this shadow produces a roughly circular or elliptical
shape on the earth, depending on exactly what part of the earth it's being projected onto.
And that shadow races across the earth.
It doesn't stay fixed in position.
And the reason for that is that, of course, the moon is orbiting the earth during the
time of the eclipse, so the shadow gets projected to a progressively different location from
west to east along the face of the earth.
The projection of the shadow intersects the earth at different locations, and you end
up with these curved paths on a spherical earth.
So on this map, you can find the eclipse, for example, of July 22, 2009.
It'll start in India, go over China, and then go over the Pacific Ocean.
And then here's a nice one coming up in 2008.
It starts way off in northern Canada, goes towards northern Greenland, then over Siberia,
Mongolia, and into China.
So you can trace the paths of these eclipses if you have the right kinds of software.
Any given location on earth only experiences a total solar eclipse roughly once every 360 years.
So you'd be lucky if a total eclipse came to you.
Normally, you have to go and seek it.
But it's a great excuse to travel the world and go to all sorts of exotic places.
Why not plan your vacations around total solar eclipses if you like to travel to exotic lands anyway?
It's a great two-for-one sort of deal.
In fact, I've seen eight eclipses successfully.
My first one was in Oregon.
Then I traveled to Mexico, Peru, Thailand, the Caribbean, Turkey, Zimbabwe, and then the South Pacific.
And the next one I plan to go to will be in August of 2008 in Mongolia.
And then 2009 in China.
I'm an eclipse chaser.
Velocities has this t-shirt with eclipse chaser on it.
You can get it on the web.
I'm an eclipse addict.
And I'm not alone.
There are many of us in the world progressively more and more as it becomes easier and easier to travel.
And indeed, we see some of the same people at eclipses and I'll be at the ones in 2008 and 2009.
And near the end of the course, I'll give you a website where you can find out where I'll be in case you want to join me.
So in 2008, give it a try if you can.
It'll be a pretty short one, however.
Maybe two minutes, three minutes, depending on where you are.
In 2009, there will be a very long one, six minutes long.
And then, if you don't like to travel outside of the US, well, in 2017, finally, the luck is on our side.
There will be an eclipse which traverses the United States from northern Oregon here down toward South Carolina.
That'll be on August 21st, 2017, followed seven years later by another eclipse on April 8th, 2024.
They will intersect here in southern Indiana.
Lucky them.
If you are close to the path of totality, but don't make the effort to actually travel to the path of totality,
and if I find out, I'll be really mad at you, okay?
Because being 97% total is not the same thing as being total and you're not just 3% of the way.
It's like the difference between night and day.
It's more than the difference between night and day.
A partial eclipse is fun.
A total eclipse is completely overwhelming and exhilarating.
It is one of the most moving experiences that I have had in my life.
And I think you will find that to be the case as well.
Seek total solar eclipses.
If not before 2017, then at least in 2017 and 2024.
I guarantee that you won't be disappointed.
