In the previous lecture, I discussed the phenomenon of a total eclipse of the sun, where from
the perspective of someone at a lucky place on earth, the moon and the sun are perfectly
aligned and the moon is just barely big enough to completely cover the disk or photosphere
of the sun.
Now we now have this good scientific explanation, but prior to this explanation there had been
generally four ways in which people explained total solar eclipses.
One very common one was that a dragon or a monster was trying to destroy or devour the
sun.
Another explanation was that the sun was fighting with its lover, the moon.
Conversely, some people thought that the moon and the sun are making love and they are doing
so discreetly in darkness to hide themselves.
And finally, some people thought that the sun grows angry, sad, sick, or neglectful
and goes away for a while.
Well the scientific explanation may be drier and less colorful, but the majesty and the
grandeur of the event and the emotions that one feels while watching it are no less.
Just because we have the scientific explanation doesn't make the beauty of the thing go down
whatsoever.
Moreover, having the scientific explanation allows us to correctly predict when these
eclipses will occur, precisely when and precisely where.
And this is very important.
The first written record of a total solar eclipse was in the year 2134 BC in China.
And the two royal astrologers, Xi and He, had apparently neglected to predict this event
and were beheaded as a result.
So now that we know how to predict these things, astronomers are no longer being beheaded regardless
of whether they're astronomers or astrologers.
All right, well suppose you've got the moon here in line with the sun and the earth, but
suppose that the moon is a little bit too far away from the earth so it doesn't completely
cover it.
So you've got this situation where the moon is not quite at the right distance from the
earth to completely cover the disc of the sun.
What would you see in that case?
Well, you would see what's called an annular eclipse of the sun.
The moon looks slightly too small compared with the sun's disc, and so it doesn't completely
cover the photosphere or the bright part of the sun.
This annular eclipse has nothing to do with the yearly cycle.
It doesn't happen every year.
Annular rather refers to the annulus of the sun that is visible in this situation.
This can occur because the moon's orbit is elliptical.
It's not a circular orbit around the earth, and so sometimes it's farther from the earth
than average, and sometimes it's closer to the earth than average.
When it's closer than average, it looks bigger than average, and the eclipse tends to last
a long time, four to seven minutes, and it's total.
But when the moon is farther than average from earth, the moon is physically too small
in angular size to cover the sun, and so you just get this annulus.
You can see the rather dramatic difference in the apparent size of the moon when it is
far from the earth compared with when it is close to the earth.
It's really considerably smaller in angular size when it's far from the earth.
Here it is near the times of quarter moon and also near the times of full moon.
When it's far from the earth, it's considerably smaller in apparent size than when it's close
to the earth.
Similarly, the earth has an elliptical orbit around the sun, although it's nearly a circular
orbit.
So the sun sometimes looks a bit bigger than average and sometimes smaller than average.
When it looks bigger than average and when the moon looks smaller than average, you get
a rather large annulus appearing.
If the sun, however, is farther away from the earth and looks smaller than average and
the moon is closer to earth and looks bigger than average, then the moon is easily able
to cover the sun and you tend to get the long eclipses, six or seven minutes.
So here's this annulus, the annular eclipse, and it's fun to watch.
It's an interesting curiosity, but it's just an example of a partial solar eclipse.
It's just a very special example of a partial solar eclipse.
There's no corona visible, there are no prominences, so it's not as exciting.
It's not as breathtaking and the adrenaline doesn't rush quite as much.
Moreover, you have to use adequate protection when watching an annular solar eclipse.
You have to block the sun with shade 14 welder's glass, otherwise it's very dangerous to your
eyes because quite a bit of the photosphere is still showing.
Nevertheless, you shouldn't become too grumpy about the prospect of watching an annular
eclipse.
Still lots of fun things to see and do and you can be creative and position the sun behind
trees and other structures and living things or combine a bunch of photographs and make
a smiley face, as was done by Stefan Saipir, very creative fellow.
These are just photographs of different stages of this annular eclipse, superposed on one
another.
In the future, total eclipses won't be possible in about half a billion years or so.
They just won't be possible at all.
They will all be annular eclipses and in a few hundred million years, most eclipses
will be annular, although there will be a few total solar eclipses.
The reason for this is that the moon is gradually receding away from the earth.
I'll explain why later when I discuss tides on earth and on the moon, but it's receding
at a rate of about four centimeters per year.
Although right now the moon is often big enough to cover the sun's photosphere, in a few hundred
million years, usually it will be too small and in half a billion years it will always
be too small to cover the sun's disk.
We will not have total solar eclipses after about half a billion years.
Conversely, a few hundred million years ago, or a few billion years ago, the moon was considerably
closer to the earth than it now is, and so it was much bigger in apparent size, and that
made it cover not only the photosphere of the sun, but a lot of the inner corona as well.
The eclipses weren't as dramatic because you couldn't see the inner corona and you couldn't
see the prominences and the chromosphere and things like that.
You're living not only in a special place, but at a special time in the history of the
earth to see these perfect total solar eclipses.
So be sure to see one before it's too late, because in a few hundred million years they'll
be kind of rare.
Moreover, you've got to be here on earth to see a perfect solar eclipse.
No other planet has moons of the right size and at the right distance to produce a total
solar eclipse, a perfect kind.
For example, Mars has two tiny moons, Phobos and Deimos, and as seen from the surface of
Mars, they're much too small to cover the sun's disc, so you only get annular eclipses
and the annulus is quite wide.
Conversely, Jupiter's four main moons more than cover the sun.
Most of Jupiter's dozens of moons are too small and they just produce a little speck
on the sun.
The four big moons of Jupiter are too big and too close to Jupiter and they not only
they not only cover the sun's photosphere, they cover the inner corona and the prominences
and all that as well.
Even the most distant of Jupiter's four main moons, Callisto, is about one and a half times
the sun's apparent angular diameter.
Ganymede is about three times the sun's diameter, Europa 2.9 times, and Io 5.8 times.
So even Callisto would cover not only the photosphere of the sun, but this entire inner
corona because it's 50% larger in angular size than the sun's photosphere, so it would
cover all this.
You could see perhaps the outer corona of the sun, but you wouldn't be able to see the
inner corona, so that's not a perfect eclipse.
On the other hand, from Jupiter, you can occasionally see a wonderful double eclipse.
So here's an example of two of Jupiter's Galilean satellites casting shadows on Jupiter.
And notice they're coming together here and right at this instant here, someone on the
surface of Jupiter would have seen two moons covering the sun.
Is that great or what?
A double eclipse.
Now neither of the eclipses would have been perfect because both of the moons are too
large, but nevertheless there would be two moons covering the sun, and I'd like to go
to Jupiter and see that someday, it'd be fun.
Notice of course that if aliens wanted to see a perfect total solar eclipse, they would
come to Earth, not Mars or Jupiter or Saturn because only Earth has these perfect eclipses.
Well, let's return briefly to angular eclipses as seen from here on Earth.
Here's a sequence showing a beautiful angular eclipse.
This map shows the paths over which angular eclipses will occur over the next few decades.
Again, they're pretty skinny, as in the case of total solar eclipses, and they're long.
Now you'll notice that there's a few paths here that show a red color indicating an
angular eclipse and a blue color briefly indicating a total eclipse.
So red, blue, red, that means annular, total, annular.
That's known as a hybrid solar eclipse, an annular slash total eclipse, and the geometry
is the following.
The moon is between the sun and the Earth, and at the position of the Earth where we
are closest to the moon, the moon's angular size is just barely big enough to cover the
sun's disk, the sun's photosphere, so you get a total solar eclipse.
On the other hand, at the beginnings and the ends of the eclipse, where you're a little
bit farther on the surface of the Earth from the moon, the moon appears a bit too small
to fully cover the sun, and so you get an annular eclipse.
You get an annular eclipse near the beginnings and the ends of the path, and you get a total
eclipse right in the middle.
So that's kind of really cool, because even where you're getting the total eclipse, the
moon is only just barely big enough to cover the sun's photosphere.
So this gives rise to good occasion to see the chromosphere, a thin hot layer outside
the photosphere, about which I'll talk more when we discuss the sun formally, and you
can also see the prominences very well in cases like this, and Bailey's Beads, the sunlight
shining through valleys on the surface of the moon.
So here's a little prominence sticking out, and here's several Bailey's Beads shining
through irregularities on the moon's surface.
You can see the chromosphere very nicely in such a case as well, because the moon is just
barely covering the sun, so you can see this thin reddish or pinkish layer, the chromosphere,
just surrounding the moon.
It's kind of neat to look at eclipses like that.
Well, if you go back to this map of where they occur, you'll notice that there was one on
April 8, 2005.
It started out annular, became total in the middle of the South Pacific, between Tahiti
and the Galapagos Islands, and then became annular again as it crossed over Panama and
Venezuela.
Here is the path in more detail.
It started way out here in the southwest, in the southern ocean off of the coast of New
Zealand, and it had its greatest eclipse here, where it was total, lasting just 42 seconds,
kind of an interesting number, the answer to the question of life, the universe, and
everything, according to Douglas Adams.
And then it passed sort of to the north of the Galapagos Islands and over towards South
America.
And I was on a cruise to view that eclipse from the South Pacific.
And on April 6, two days before the totality, Noel, my wife, at that time, my girlfriend
and I were on this cruise and having fun, passing by lots of cool islands.
And we got to Pitcairn Island, the place where the mutineers of the bounty finally settled.
They hid there.
They had to hide somewhere in order to get away from the British who were seeking them
for their mutiny.
So they settled on Pitcairn Island, and we got a chance to go on to Pitcairn Island on
April 6.
Then it was fun.
Look at that.
Last resting place of the HMS bounty.
So it's just this rock in the middle of the South Pacific.
It's amazing, but you get these great views, and we had a fun couple of hours on Pitcairn
Island.
And that evening, I gave a lecture to the people on the cruise ship about the phenomena
of total solar eclipses and what they were about to see two days later.
And during this presentation, I decided to formally propose to Noel because I had been
reminded many times that I had never formally proposed.
And so in the middle of the presentation, I actually proposed to Noel, and remarkably
enough, she accepted on the spot, and it was all good.
But I guess it could have been kind of embarrassing had she not.
So anyway, two days later, in the morning, it was quite clear, and everyone was happy.
So here we are playing around with the projection of the partially eclipsed sun using pinhole
cameras onto a screen on the deck of the cruise ship.
So everyone was happy, and it was good.
Life was good.
But then the clouds started building up, and the tension rose, and the excitement was just
thick in the air because, oh my gosh, the anticipation of this eclipse, but it's getting
cloudy, and oh my, it got cloudier, and cloudier as the morning progressed.
And we were not happy at this point.
This is not good news.
So I was going crazy.
I want to see the total eclipse, and my reputation was at stake and everything.
So even though I can't do anything about the weather, anyway, moments before totality,
this thick cloud started clearing away from the sun, and just as totality started, the
last bit of the cloud cleared away, and oh, was it glorious.
Here's a wide angle of view of everyone looking at this totally eclipsed sun from the middle
of the South Pacific near Pitcairn Island.
I mean, it was just unbelievable.
The excitement is heightened, actually, when you have lots of clouds and when weather conditions
are uncertain, because if you're sure to see it, it's like, okay, I'm going to see it,
for sure.
But if it's nip and tuck, touch and go, then it actually adds to the adrenaline.
And true to the predictions, because the moon was just barely covering the photosphere,
we could see a very nice chromosphere on that eclipse and some nice prominences as well.
We saw a nice inner corona as well.
The whole thing was very beautiful, and we were all very, very happy at this point after
totality ended.
Here are the partial phases again, and everyone was happy.
And a short time later, it even started raining, but we were still happy, because totality
was over, and who cares what's happening in the partial phases once totality is over.
So anyway, it was really great, a lot of fun.
Well that evening, Noel and I actually had a formal commitment ceremony, and although
we could not get officially married in foreign waters, we did have our commitment ceremony
the day of the eclipse.
So in a sense, we got married informally that day, April 8th, 2005, the day of an eclipse.
And I gave Noel not just one diamond ring, as is shown here, but two diamond rings, one
at the beginning of the eclipse and one at the end of the eclipse.
And I'm sort of too poor to give a true huge diamond ring and all that, but this was a
celestial diamond ring, and in a sense, what could be better than that?
But some people thought that this was perhaps a little bit cheap, and so maybe we should
make a t-shirt that has this written on it.
I got engaged at the South Pacific Total Solar Eclipse, and all I got was this diamond ring.
So, well, it wasn't just this one diamond ring, it was two of them.
The story doesn't end there, actually.
By a cosmic coincidence nearly as amazing as the existence of total solar eclipses themselves,
the official due date of our daughter was to be March 29th, 2006, the very date of the
next total solar eclipse that was to happen on Earth.
They happen roughly once every one and a half years, roughly 70 times per century, so here
about a year had passed, and I was going to go to that eclipse.
In fact, I was going to lecture to a group traveling in Egypt, but I didn't go.
I mean, I sort of would have been in the doghouse had I gone, and plus I wanted to experience
the birth of my daughter.
But in honor of this amazing nominal due date, the date of the eclipse, and in honor of the
fact that we got engaged at an eclipse, we decided that one of our daughter's middle
names would be corona, not named after the beer, but rather named after the thin, hot
atmosphere of the sun.
Let me make that very clear.
Though I didn't go to this eclipse, many of my friends and acquaintances did, and they've
sent me lots and lots of beautiful photographs of the March 29th, 2006 total solar eclipse,
and the corona, I'm pleased to say, was apparently stunning.
You can't see the whole intricate structure at a glance using a photograph because the
photographs don't have enough dynamic range.
Your eye is really much better than a photograph at seeing the corona.
Nevertheless, from a series of several photographs, you can get some idea of what the corona looked
like on March 29th.
Here's a picture from my friend, Gary Benger, nice corona.
Here's a picture from Kuhn Van Gorp, and it shows a lot of the structure in the corona.
By processing this photograph in the right kind of way, Kuhn was able to accentuate
the structure, and this is more of what the eye would have seen.
It would have seen all this structure where the hot gases are moving around, being sculpted
by the structure of the magnetic field of the sun.
I will discuss the magnetic field later.
It was a gorgeous eclipse.
Now, Capri was born a few days late on the 2nd of April, and though she was a few days
late, the 2nd of April is sort of an auspicious date, 4, 2, 0, 6, 42, again, the answer to
the question of life, the universe, and everything according to Douglas Adams in The Hitchhiker's
Guide to the Galaxy.
So that's sort of my eclipse tale for the last year or two, or my eclipse tales.
They're not all quite as exciting as one's first one and the one in which one gets engaged
or sort of unofficially married, but I assure you they're all quite thrilling to watch,
especially in a sense your first one, because you really don't know what to expect and what
you see ends up being very different from your expectations.
There are a number of eclipses that changed history, and the most famous of a non-scientific
nature was an eclipse in 585 BC in an area of central Turkey that wasn't Turkey back
then, but it was a location where the Medes and the Lydians were engaged in a battle that
had lasted already over five years.
And although this eclipse had been predicted by some astronomers, apparently the armies
didn't know of this prediction.
Most people didn't know of these arcane scientific predictions.
And so when the eclipse occurred, they were just blown away.
These two armies were blown away.
They took this as a sign from God that they should not be involved in these frivolous,
compared to cosmic scales, frivolous arguments and stuff.
And so on the spot, apparently, the war ended and they came to a peace agreement and they
actually cemented the bond with a double marriage.
So this was an eclipse that stopped a war.
That's pretty important, at least it was, for the people there.
Scientifically, however, the most famous eclipse was the one which gave the first evidence
for Albert Einstein's new general theory of relativity, a modified theory of gravity,
one that encompasses all of classical Newtonian gravity, but does more.
As I'll explain later, it fixes some of the problems of Newtonian gravity.
So just to give you a brief introduction to what the general theory of relativity is
before formally discussing it halfway through the course, general relativity essentially
says that gravity is caused not by some sort of a force between two objects, but rather
by a warping, a distortion of both space and time surrounding a massive object.
And the denser the object is, the more compressed it is, the more mass there is per unit volume,
the greater is the warping, the greater is the distortion of space and time.
And objects, say in orbit around other objects, such as the earth around the sun, they are
simply following their natural path through an intrinsically curved geometry.
This is really weird stuff, and we'll discuss it much, much more later.
This is just the briefest introduction right now, but it's kind of like a bowling ball
placed on a rubber sheet.
The bowling ball curves the rubber sheet.
Of course, it curves it because the gravity of the earth is pulling down on the bowling
ball, causing it to distort the sheet.
In general relativity, it's the bowling ball itself, not the gravity of the earth pulling
on it, but rather the bowling ball itself that distorts space and time around it.
So analogies only go so far.
Every analogy has problems associated with it, and is an inexact representation of what
you're trying to describe, otherwise the analogy would be identical to what you're
trying to describe, and it wouldn't be an analogy anymore.
So you have to know where to take what to believe and what not to believe in an analogy.
But here's sort of an example of this distortion.
If I have this rubber sheet and an ant decides to go from here to there, its shortest distance
is a straight line.
But if you have a curved sheet like this, well, it could go around the hole, but if
it wants to go directly toward the hole, it actually curves down for a while and then
comes back up and then gets to its destination, and in this case has traveled a longer path.
So this is curved space time.
It's very weird, and it's what causes gravity.
All right, well, let's utilize this to understand how it can be tested.
This was a brand new theory, 1916, very strange.
How could it be tested?
Well, it could be tested by looking at the apparent positions of stars, which should
be affected by the gravitational warping of the sun.
Let's take a look at this diagram.
Here we have the sun, and the moon right now is irrelevant.
Let's forget about the moon.
But starlight coming from distant stars and passing close to the edge of the sun would
get bent by this warping of space, and the starlight would enter our eyes from a direction
which extrapolated back into space would yield an apparent position for the star differing
from its true position.
And this occurs both above the sun or below it in this diagram.
The rays get bent so that the star appears in a different place, and it doesn't matter
where the star is, you know, they all appear in a different place.
That was Einstein's prediction, and he calculated how much the bending should be.
So this might look like a really safe prediction.
How can you ever see a star during daytime to see whether its position is the true position
or some displaced position?
Well, during an eclipse, you can see stars because the sky grows dark enough to see
the brightest stars.
It doesn't become completely dark because there's still the corona and there's still
light scattering in from regions on the earth that are not fully eclipsed, but you can see
bright stars.
So if you wait for a time when the moon is present and in between the sun and the earth,
the sun gets blocked, the stars come out, and you can take a photograph of their positions
in the sky.
You can take a photograph of that same region of the sky six months earlier or later when
neither the sun nor the moon are in that direction, you do it at night, and you can compare those
nighttime photos with the daytime photos taken during a total eclipse of the sun.
And this was done during an eclipse in 1919 in two expeditions organized and led by Sir
Arthur Eddington, a very famous British astrophysicist.
Eddington went to Principi off of the west coast of Africa, and some of his associates
went to Sobral in Brazil.
And they made measurements of the stars during the total eclipse of the sun in 1919.
And they found that in accord with Einstein's predictions, the apparent positions of stars
were displaced outwards from the sun compared to their true positions or the positions that
were measured on the photographic film that had been taken at a time at night when neither
the sun nor the moon were in the way.
And this displacement is greatest for those stars whose light rays come closest to the
edge of the sun.
The displacement is largest for those, smaller for the stars that don't quite graze the edge
of the sun, and smaller still for those stars that aren't coming so close to the edge of
the sun.
And in all cases, it is a very, very slight effect.
Here the measured positions of stars are circled, you can't actually see the stars, but when
you compare them with the true positions, they're a little bit different.
And when the news came out that Eddington's expedition had confirmed Einstein's quantitative
prediction, Einstein became an overnight celebrity worldwide, among everyone, the common folk,
non-scientists, everyone.
He was already pretty famous among physicists.
But with this incredible prediction having been verified, he became an overnight celebrity.
In the New York Times, November 10th, 1919, the headlines ran, lights askew in the heavens.
Men of science more or less agog over results of eclipse observations.
Einstein's theory triumphs.
Stars were not where they seemed or were calculated to be, but nobody need worry because of relativity.
It explains it all.
A book for twelve wise men, no more in all the world could comprehend the theory, said
Einstein.
Well, a reporter once asked Arthur Eddington, is it true that only three people understand
relativity?
And Eddington said, hmm, I can't think of who the third would be.
In other words, himself and Einstein, and that's all.
So far from even twelve men or women understanding relativity, Eddington thought only two did.
Einstein was so happy that he wrote a letter to his mother, which he didn't often do apparently.
And the letter was very short, but he said, dear mother, I have good news for you today.
H. A. Lorenz has cabled to say that the English expedition has really proved that light is
deviated by the sun.
So he was ecstatic.
He became an overnight icon, and since that time he has become perhaps the most famous
physicist of all time.
It's sort of a tie between him and Newton.
This was, however, a very difficult measurement to be fair by today's standards of science.
We would not consider it to be at all a compelling measurement.
It was suggestive, but it was not at all compelling.
It was sort of wishful thinking.
They looked at the data and ignored data that didn't agree with the predictions and sort
of favored the data that did agree.
And you can see that the observed star was displaced, even in the best of cases, only
by a tiny bit from where it should have been.
This picture is magnified by a factor of several hundred compared to the photographic emulsion.
So it was a very difficult measurement to make, and it wasn't at all conclusive.
But it was, nevertheless, a very first important step in verifying general relativity.
And as I'll show you later, since that time, relativity has been abundantly verified.
And it's interesting that it was first sort of verified during a total solar eclipse.
