Having completed the lectures on observations of familiar celestial sites, I now turn to
the second unit in the first major part of this course.
For the next five lectures, we'll be discussing the early history of astronomy.
Astronomy had its roots in ancient civilizations, Mesopotamia, Babylon, India, Egypt, China,
and so on.
Now, much of the impetus, of course, was of a practical nature.
People needed to know when to plant crops, when rivers such as the Nile would flood,
things like that.
So they really needed to have good calendars, and they also wanted to navigate.
So they needed to have some knowledge of the stars, the stars were used for navigation.
Now some studies, of course, were astrological.
The sun, moon, and planets were associated with gods, and people thought that their positions
influence human traits and how your life is going to progress.
So astrology was a very important subject back then, and indeed the roots of astronomy are
in astrology.
We owe a lot to astrology in that way.
But surely the development of consciousness and curiosity also led to astronomical inquiry.
People wondered about the celestial objects, they wondered what they are, what their relationship
is to humans, and indeed what the human relationship is with the entire cosmos.
I think that's something that must have developed along with intelligence.
We know a lot about the early history of astronomy in some cultures from the extensive
documents that they left behind, in particular throughout Asia.
There were a fair number of written documents which we can now analyze.
There's not as many as we would like everywhere in the world, but at least in some places
we really knew what they were thinking because it was documented in written form.
But in many places there were no documents left behind, they had been burned, destroyed
or whatever.
They were never even written.
And so what astronomers have done to study what those cultures knew or thought was to
look at structures that they built and the ruins of those structures that now remain.
This link between archaeology and astronomy is known as archaeoastronomy, the study of
ancient structures and astronomically significant alignments and things like that.
There's a few very famous examples.
One in Europe, in what is now England, is Stonehenge on the Salisbury Plain.
It's a structure consisting of giant standing stones, 100 feet wide in a circular pattern
with some stones in the middle as well, about 13 feet high, and it weighs many, many tons.
I mean, it's a huge thing.
It took its thought several centuries to build.
It was built in several stages, 4 to 5,000 years ago.
Now this was hard work, folks.
You know, I mean, you don't just erect giant stones like this overnight.
It's really hard to do when they're that high and that heavy.
There's no doubt that Stonehenge had huge social, political and religious implications
for the people back then.
They probably held all sorts of rituals within the confines of Stonehenge.
And archaeoastronomers have been analyzing Stonehenge in terms of possible astronomical
alignments, significant astronomical alignments that may indicate what the people back then
knew about the stars and how interested they were in the stars.
The most prominent such alignment is with a stone outside of the main circle.
It's called the Heelstone.
And as viewed from the center of the circle of Stonehenge, if you look along the Heelstone,
you will see the sun rising at the moment of the summer solstice.
Okay, so that's an astronomically significant alignment.
And there are other stones that are aligned with the sunrise or the sunset at other times
of the year, such as the equinoxes.
So that's pretty clear.
On the other hand, there are many possible alignments.
You know, when you have dozens of stones and many edges and tops and sides and all that,
and many possible viewing locations, you'll find alignments which occasionally coincidentally
happen to coincide with those that may be astronomically significant.
But that doesn't necessarily mean that they were built to coincide with astronomically
significant events.
So there's a danger of overinterpretation when you look at structures like this.
And some people have even suggested that Stonehenge was sufficiently complex and elaborate to
even allow the prediction of eclipses, lunar and solar eclipses.
And that hypothesis has been discredited.
There's no real evidence that Stonehenge could do something as complicated as the prediction
of solar eclipses.
Another example of an ancient structure are the Egyptian pyramids, and various sides of
the pyramids are oriented north-south or east-west, and the angle of a pyramid might
point toward a star, a bright star, when it's on the meridian, things like that.
And again, some alignments are probably real, but there is this tendency sometimes for overinterpretation.
The Mayans, 1,000 years ago, had a very advanced understanding of astronomy.
They had a number of structures like the Karakol in Chichen Itza, where you can see alignments
with astronomically significant positions, the position of sunrise or sunset at the solstices
or the equinoxes, things like that.
So their structures did have astronomical significance, and we also know that the Mayans
had a very elaborate calendar involving Venus and the moon and the sun and all sorts of things.
They were really very interested in Venus, it turns out.
For the rest of this lecture, I will concentrate on ancient Greek astronomy.
Not because the astronomy of other cultures was less important to them, but because the
astronomy of the ancient Greeks led to the greatest influence on current modern Western
thought.
The ancient Greeks had a lot of ideas which were eventually shown to be true.
One of the most famous of these in physics is that over 2,000 years ago, democratists
believed that substances are made of indivisible particles that he called atoms.
And although the proof of this did not come for 2,000 years, nearly 2,000 years, it turned
out to be true.
And he had this thought by looking at substances and thinking what would happen if he divided
them in two, once, twice, three times, four times, always dividing them in two.
And he realized that in the end, a certain kind of a rock must be that kind of rock,
and some other thing, bread must be bread, and there must be some final indivisible unit,
a molecule or an atom of which that substance consists.
That was his line of reasoning, and he ended up being right.
Astronomically, the ancient Greeks knew of a number of important facts.
One of which was that the earth is roughly spherical, and they based this on a number
of arguments, two of which were clearly articulated by Aristotle, a very, very great philosopher
and scientist.
He had many good ideas.
He also had many ideas that ended up being wrong.
But remember, this was over 2,000 years ago.
He was quite a great thinker.
One argument that Aristotle used was that the earth's shadow on the moon during a total
lunar eclipse is always circular.
You don't see the full circle.
You just see an arc cutting across the moon, but it's always part of a circle.
So in modern photographs, we can see that very easily.
Here's a multiple exposure of the moon traversing the earth's shadow, and you can see the edge
of the shadow delineated here from this multiple exposure, and it's clearly part of a circle.
And this was always the case.
That was one eclipse.
Here's another eclipse.
The arcs are always part of circles, not ellipses, not line segments, not some other
complicated shapes, but always circles.
And Aristotle realized that to always get a circular shadow, regardless of the direction
of illumination, the earth had to be spherical.
Let's demonstrate that with this lamp.
I've got the earth here and the moon.
You can't see it too well in this room because of all the lights, but the earth casts a circular
shadow into space, regardless of the illumination angle of the sun, in this case, the lamp.
And that can only be the case if it's a sphere.
If the earth were, say, a flat disk, a circle, something like this, let's say, then sometimes
it would cast a circular shadow, but at other times, depending on its orientation relative
to the sun, it would cast an elliptical shadow, a circle viewed from an angle.
And if the angle were too great, then the shadow cast by the earth would even be a line
segment on the moon.
So if you had a flat, skinny earth, or even an earth with some thickness, you'd get a
line segment or a thicker line, but you'd rarely get a perfect circle.
Let's turn this lamp off.
OK.
Well, and this conclusion seemed reasonable because, after all, pictures of the moon show
that it is circular.
The phases of the moon suggest a spherical moon because the phases show these arcs.
As I discussed when I talked about the phases of the moon, when you have light shining on
a sphere and you view it from different angles, you tend to get these arcs.
And that wouldn't be the case unless the moon were spherical.
So the moon looks spherical, and that suggested that the earth is.
And the sun looked like a circle, suggesting that it's spherical.
So all these things seem themselves to be spherical.
So Aristotle reasoned that the earth is probably spherical as well.
Another argument that he used was that different stars are visible in the sky if you go to
different latitudes on earth at the same longitude and at the same time.
So just view the sky from different latitudes.
For example, from 20 degrees north, there's Polaris, there's these other constellations.
Turns out Polaris wasn't the north star back then, but that's irrelevant for these purposes.
If you go to a different latitude, all of the stars, not just Polaris, have shifted their
position relative to the horizon.
And if you go to 40 degrees north, they've shifted once again.
And Aristotle reasoned that this could be easily explained if the earth is spherical,
and your perspective is changing.
The angle at which you're looking out in the sky is changing.
Another argument used later was that ships approaching from far away would come over
a horizon.
And if you had a flat, infinite earth, they would just get dimmer and smaller when they're
far away, but they wouldn't come up over the horizon as shown in this diagram.
So these ideas led to the conclusion that the earth is spherical, and there were other
conclusions as well.
But a lot of these subsequently seem to have been lost, forgotten, or ignored, and they
didn't really resurface in a very serious way until the Renaissance or beyond.
Now let's consider Aristarchus of Samus, one of the great astronomers of his time.
He lived around 310 to 230 BC, and he correctly deduced that the sun is very large and distant,
although he underestimated, it turns out, the true distance of the sun because of the
difficulty with the measurements.
The approach he used was the following.
He noticed and understood the phases of the moon, and he realized that when you observe
the quarter moon, the relative geometry between the moon, earth, and sun must be as follows.
To see a precisely quarter moon that is half of the visible face of the moon lit up, the
angle between the earth, moon, and sun must be precisely a right angle.
So at first quarter moon this angle must be a right angle, and at third quarter moon this
angle must be a right angle.
If he could then measure this angle here between the moon's direction and the sun's direction,
then knowing the earth-moon distance, or just assuming that it's some number, you can solve
the triangle exactly and figure out the relative distance of the sun, how many times larger
that distance is than the distance between the earth and the moon.
You can figure out this angle by simply timing how long it takes to go from third quarter
moon to first quarter moon, and comparing that with the time it takes to go from first
quarter moon to third quarter moon.
The ratio of those times is equal to the ratio of this full angle to this other one there,
and then you just take half of this full angle to figure that out.
That's of course assuming a circular orbit and a uniform motion along that orbit.
He had to make that assumption.
Now in practice it's really hard to make this measurement, because it turns out that the
sun is very distant from the moon and from the earth.
So the sun's rays are coming in, as I've explained before, nearly parallel.
And this angle that you're trying to measure is nearly 90 degrees, and that's the case
regardless of precisely how far away the sun is.
As long as it's quite far away, this angle will be nearly 90 degrees.
And indeed, Aristarchus measured this angle to be 87 degrees.
Had the sun been even farther away, it would have been 89, or 89.5, or 89.9.
The point is it would have been very close to 90, and nearly independent of the true
distance of the sun.
And that's hard then, that's hard to measure, okay?
An angle close to 90 and to discern slight differences from 90 degrees.
Moreover, it's hard to measure the precise moment of the first quarter or third quarter
moon.
I would say in this photograph, it's just a bit beyond first quarter.
If it were perfectly first quarter, this would be a straight line, not at all arched.
But it's hard to tell that precise moment.
But of course, it happens to be not true that the moon's orbit around the earth is
circular.
It's actually elliptical, and the speed, the orbital speed, varies with time.
So there were some errors in the process, but the idea was correct, and Aristarchus
was just great to have come up with this.
He found from the measurements that the sun is 19 times more distant than the moon.
Now, the true value is 390 times more distant.
So he was a bit off.
But look, this is thousands of years ago, folks.
And it was really hard to make these measurements, and he had to make some assumptions about
the orbit of the moon, which happened to be incorrect.
All right, so since the moon and the sun have about the same angle in the sky, yet the sun
is 19 times more distant than the moon, Aristarchus correctly reasoned that the sun is a lot bigger
than the moon.
In particular case, 19 times bigger than the moon.
All right, turns out to be, in reality, 390 times bigger.
But oh well, Aristarchus then argued that since the shadow of the earth is not that much bigger
than the moon, you can see it here, it's about three times bigger than the moon.
He thought it was twice as big, or a little bit more than twice as big.
He misestimated that.
But anyway, since they're about the same size, the earth is not that much bigger than
the moon.
Maybe two to three times as big.
So if the sun is 19 times bigger than the moon, and the earth is two or three times
bigger than the moon, then the sun is about seven times bigger than the earth, Aristarchus
decided.
Now in reality, the sun is 109 times physically bigger than the earth.
So again, he got it a bit wrong by more than a factor of 10, a factor of 15 or so.
But the idea was correct, and the sense of the measurement was correct.
In other words, he deduced that the sun is bigger than the earth, considerably bigger,
and that it's pretty far away.
And he reasoned that the sun is probably the dominant object in the universe, not the
earth.
So Aristarchus, over 2,000 years ago, correctly deduced that the sun, not the earth, is probably
the dominant object.
Around the same time, Eratosthenes, the director of the Great Library in Alexandria around
250 BC, started making some measurements.
And he was already a great geographer whose maps were among the best of their time.
But he decided to determine the circumference of the earth through a very clever technique.
He noticed that a pencil or a rod sticking straight up out of the ground casts a shadow,
even at noon at many locations.
But at some locations, in particular in Syene, which is near what is now called Oswan, at
noon at the time of the summer solstice, there was no shadow.
Now legend has it that he actually noticed that from the bottom of a deep well, you could
see the sun at noon on the day of the summer solstice from Syene.
But you can do this also with a stick.
Somewhat north of Syene in Alexandria at the same longitude, but at a different latitude,
on the same day, the stick cast a shadow, a short shadow like this one.
From the length of the shadow compared with the length of the stick, you can figure out
the angle that the sun makes relative to the stick.
So here's the sun as viewed from Syene.
The stick casts no shadow.
You can see the sun at the bottom of the well.
So the configuration looks something like this.
From Alexandria, north of Syene, the angle cast by the shadow was seven degrees.
And since two parallel lines intersected by a diagonal give rise to two identically equal
angles, Eratosthenes reasoned that this seven-degree angle was the same as this angle here, connecting
the center of the earth to both Syene and Alexandria.
And he reasoned that seven degrees is the same fraction of the full circle, 360 degrees,
as is the distance between Syene and Alexandria to the full circumference of the earth.
A very clever geometrical argument.
Well seven degrees out of 360 is about one-fiftieth.
So the distance between Syene and Alexandria must be about one-fiftieth of the circumference
of the earth.
By manipulating the numbers, he figured out that the circumference of the earth is about
250,000 stadia.
The stadium was the unit of measure at the time.
We don't know exactly which stadium he was referring to, however.
Turns out there were different sized stadia, from 160 meters in diameter to 210.
Many historians think that the common one used back then was 160 meters.
If that's the case, then these 250,000 stadia, or 50 times the 5,000 stadia connecting Syene
and Alexandria, some poor slob actually had to measure this out by walking the distance.
That turns out to be the correct circumference of the earth to an uncertainty or to an error
of about one percent.
So Eratosthenes got it right to about one percent.
Or if it was the wrong kind of stadium, maybe he was off by 20 or 30 percent.
But that's still pretty good, and the method was very elegant.
The next great astronomer I'd like to discuss is Hipparchus, perhaps the greatest astronomer
of pre-Christian antiquity.
He worked around 160 to 127 BC, and he had major astronomical accomplishments.
For example, he made the first very accurate catalog of about 850 stars, their positions
and their brightnesses, a very accurate catalog.
And he refined the method of Aristarchus and found that the moon's distance is about 59
earth radii.
The correct number turns out to be 60 earth radii.
The moon is 60 times farther away from the earth than is the earth's radius, and Hipparchus
got that nearly smack on, just two percent off.
He also determined the length of the year to within six minutes.
That's pretty darn good for being 2,000 years ago.
And he noticed, most importantly, for what follows, that the direction of the North Celestial
Pole changes with time.
It had changed over the 150 years or so over which accurate records had been kept.
Now, you will recall from Lecture 8 that I said when discussing the seasons, that right
now June 22 is the date in the Northern Hemisphere when the North Pole of the Earth tilts most
closely toward the Sun, or most directly toward the Sun.
That's June 22, the first day of summer, correspondingly the first day of winter, December 22, is when
the Southern Hemisphere points more directly toward the Sun, and the Northern Hemisphere
points away from it, so that's winter in the Northern Hemisphere.
Well you'll recall that I mentioned that in 13,000 years the situation will be the opposite.
On June 22, or thereabouts, it'll be the first day of winter in the Northern Hemisphere
and the first day of summer in the Southern Hemisphere.
That's because the earth, I said, is doing this kind of thing, like a top.
It's called precession, and you'll notice that the pole points toward different regions
in the sky as this occurs.
Hipparchus noticed and measured this motion.
The situation is very much like that of a top.
If you're spinning a top and spinning along, it'll stay upright as opposed to if you stop
the top, it'll just fall down due to the force of gravity trying to pull it down.
But if it's spinning, it'll stay upright, but if you've started it at a slight tilt,
you'll notice that the spinning top undergoes a conical motion.
The earth's gravity is trying to topple the top, and indeed if the top were not spinning,
it would fall over.
But it's now understood, physically, that if you have a spinning top being pulled down
by gravity, it'll precess, it'll undergo conical motion of this sort.
And let me show you a demo of that.
Here I have a gyroscope, just a top, and if it's not spinning, the earth's gravity makes
it topple over, like this.
But now if I let it spin, and I start it at a bit of an angle, the earth's gravity will
still try to topple it over, but the spin won't allow it to fall completely over, and
it'll achieve a compromise.
Instead of falling over, it'll undergo precession.
There it is, undergoing precession, spinning quickly, precessing more slowly.
Friction makes it slow down, of course.
So the earth is doing this as well, because the moon, and to a lesser extent the sun,
are gravitationally acting on the bulge of the earth.
The earth is not perfectly spherical, and it's kind of a complex interaction, but the
moon and the sun are trying to make the earth more upright, and instead of making it do
that, the result is precession, because the earth is spinning just as the top was.
So it turns out that as the earth spins, its pole precesses, and the north celestial
pole points to different stars among the sky with time.
Right now, the north celestial pole is near the star Polaris.
It's about half a degree away, about the diameter of the moon, or the sun.
But you can see where the north celestial pole will be in the future.
Here it is right now, around 2000 A.D., near Polaris.
In 12,000 years, it'll be near an even brighter star, Vega, one of the brightest stars in
the sky.
That'll be nice.
But you see, most of the time, the pole will not be near a bright star.
Indeed, the south pole is not near a bright star right now.
Someday it will be.
Here's a star, Thuban, near which the pole will be someday.
But anyway, this precession of the earth takes 26,000 years.
So in half that time, 13,000 years, the seasons become the opposite.
The 26,000 years is a long time, and to have detected even the slightest motion over a
human lifetime is remarkable.
This precession of the pole also means that the vernal equinox, the intersection of the
earth's equator, or more precisely, the celestial equator, the projection of the earth's equator
onto the celestial sphere, and the ecliptic, the plane of the earth's orbit around the
sun, that will shift in time as well.
It is currently in the direction of the constellation Pisces, but eventually it'll move into the
constellation Aquarius.
And the dawning of the age of Aquarius will be when the vernal equinox, the position in
the sky where the celestial equator and the ecliptic intersect, the moment when it enters
the constellation Aquarius will be the beginning of the age of Aquarius.
Now many people think that the age of Aquarius began in the year 2000, that's simply not
correct.
It'll occur around the year 2600 or so.
But this dawning of the age of Aquarius is presumed by astrologers to be a time of enlightenment,
and indeed it was touted in the song from the musical hair.
The dawning of the age of Aquarius, I have no musical talent whatsoever, so I'm not
going to attempt to sing it.
But anyway, it's been discussed a lot, and indeed people think that it has already happened
or will happen soon.
Well looking at this map here, you can see where we are around the year 2000.
We're nicely in Pisces, the intersection of the equator, and the ecliptic is in Pisces.
It's gradually moving over, and around the year 2600 or so, it will enter Aquarius.
Don't hold your breath, and I hope you don't wait that long to find your own path to enlightenment.
