Last time, I introduced two competing hypotheses for the universe.
In Aristotle's geocentric system, which in fact was based on ideas of his predecessors
such as Pythagoras, all celestial bodies rotated on spheres around a stationary Earth.
So the Earth did not rotate about its own axis, instead all the celestial objects, the
planets, the sun, the moon, and the stars were on spheres rotating around a stationary
Earth.
And outside the outermost sphere, in which the fixed stars were held, was some sort of
a prime mover who moved the fixed stars and all of the motions of the various spheres
influenced one another, and it was kind of complex.
Here's a simplified version of Aristotle's model.
In Pythagoras's case, the spheres were actually crystalline.
So here's the firmament of the fixed stars and the various planets rotating around a
stationary Earth.
Now, Claudius Ptolemy had a detailed version of the geocentric model in which planets moved
along epicycles whose centers moved along a deferent around the Earth.
And the Earth was not at the center of this deferent, but that was a detail.
The Ptolemaic system was particularly adept at accurately predicting the positions of planets.
So here, in fact, is a nice animation of a planet, Mars, moving along an epicycle whose
center moves around the Earth.
Now this is an oversimplification.
Here the Earth is at the center of the deferent.
In Ptolemy's system, it was actually a little bit offset.
But the point is, is that while Mars is going along this direction, the same direction as
that of the deferent, its motion is from west to east.
It was prograde.
But while Mars is moving in the opposite direction to that of the center of the epicycle, the
motion was from east to west or retrograde.
Now it's prograde again for a while.
And then as Mars starts going backwards, it goes retrograde like that.
So this was a wonderful calculational tool Ptolemy was able to predict in great detail
the positions of the planets, and in particular, he nicely explained this retrograde motion.
But I also mentioned that the Polish astronomer Nikolaus Copernicus had come up with a heliocentric
or sun-centered model of the universe.
Though his ideas stemmed from as early as around 1510, he didn't publish his work until
1543.
Indeed, the book was put on his deathbed on the day of his death.
He thus revived the belief held by Aristarchus nearly 1800 years earlier that the sun, not
the earth, is the center of the universe.
His book was called Derevolutionibus, or concerning the revolutions.
The orbits of the planets were thought to be circular, so Copernicus still believed in
perfect circles.
And the retrograde motion was explained easily by having the planets going around the sun
in these circles, but their speeds of orbit were different.
And as they passed each other up, you would naturally get retrograde motion.
Let me consider an analogy.
Suppose you have a traffic circle with several different lanes.
There's an inner lane where cars are really moving quickly, and then a middle lane and
then an outer lane.
And progressively farther out, let's say the cars are moving more and more slowly.
So here are the inner cars zipping around quickly.
Here's an outer car moving more slowly.
While the inner car is moving basically perpendicular to the outer car, or in the opposite direction,
or again perpendicular, that is, along these parts of the journey, the outer car is moving
forward and the perspective of the inner car is that the outer car is moving in this direction
forward.
As the inner car is moving along here, the outer car is moving forward from the inner
car's perspective.
But as the inner car passes up the outer car, the perspective changes.
You go from here to here, and suddenly this inner car is viewing the outer car sort of
more along that direction instead of that direction.
So instead of looking like it's going forward, the outer car relative to the inner car looks
like it's going backward for a little while.
And then as the inner car goes along the U here, the outer car starts moving forward
again.
That's the basis for retrograde motion in the Copernican system.
So it was really quite simple and it didn't require these epicycles, although as I mentioned
last time, epicycles were still required in the Copernican system to account for certain
details of the positions of planets.
Now the predictive power of Copernicus' system was no better than the Ptolemaic system, at
least not significantly better.
Ptolemy could predict the positions of planets just as well as Copernicus could.
And there was no real evidence for the Copernican system.
Indeed, the Earth didn't seem to be moving.
When we jump up, the Earth doesn't rotate out from under us.
It also does not zoom along in its orbit out from under us.
So it was perfectly natural to think that the Earth is stationary, neither rotating
nor orbiting the Sun.
And moreover, this heliocentric view contradicted the Bible.
So the Ptolemaic system, which had ruled for already around 1400 years, kept being used.
Not that many people believed in the Copernican system.
So how was the Copernican system proven to be correct?
Well that task came to Galileo, whose telescopic observations in 1610 and in the years thereafter
confirmed that the heliocentric hypothesis was the correct one.
Galileo had initially been a professor in Padua, but he got relieved of his teaching
duties, or at least most of them, when he received the patronage of the Medici family,
which supported him greatly.
Galileo was an amazing person.
He believed in the Copernican system just as a philosophically more attractive idea,
sort of the same way that Copernicus believed in it as a philosophically more attractive
idea.
But he set out to see whether it really is true by conducting observations.
He was a firm believer that observations should be used to distinguish whether some hypotheses
are true or false.
He was a faithful Catholic, but he questioned the teachings of the Church in detail, and
in particular he questioned the literal interpretation of the Bible.
He said something to the effect that God gave people eyes to observe nature and brains to
understand it.
Don't just take everything to be dogma, don't believe everything that people tell you.
So he improved on the design of the early Dutch toy telescopes, and he made really good
working telescopes with which he could see considerable detail in the heavens.
And in particular, one of his followers, Benedetto Castelli, told Galileo that if the Copernican
system is correct, Venus, when observed in detail through a telescope, should go through
a complete set of phases, as the moon does, and not be restricted to only a few phases,
like new Venus and crescent Venus, as in the Ptolemaic system, which I will now show you.
So Castelli encouraged Galileo to observe Venus.
Galileo observed Venus over the course of many months and found that, lo and behold,
it does indeed go through a complete set of phases.
And this alone was a pretty fatal blow to the Ptolemaic geocentric model of the universe,
for the solar system.
They didn't know that it was a solar system yet, but that's when the transition was made
from the universe to the solar system, when people realized that the planets orbit the
Sun.
So here is what Galileo observed.
He observed a crescent Venus all the way through to gibbous Venus.
And although it's not shown here, he also observed a full Venus, though it's hard to
observe a full Venus because Venus is very close to the Sun in angular separation when
it's full.
He also noticed that the crescent Venus appears larger than the gibbous or full Venus.
So now let's see how those observations are a blow to the Ptolemaic system.
According to the Ptolemaic system, Venus and the Sun rotate around the Earth.
And it is known that Venus is between the Earth and the Sun.
We know that because Venus is sometimes projected onto the surface of the Sun.
It passes directly between us and the Sun, and so you can see it projected onto the Sun's
surface.
So if Venus is between the Earth and the Sun, and if Venus's epicycle does not go behind
the Sun, and that was mandatory in the Ptolemaic system because these spheres are non-overlapping.
They're nested spheres.
They're within one another, but they do not overlap.
So Venus's epicycle cannot go beyond the Sun.
It is restricted to be between the Earth and the Sun.
Well, you can see from the geometry, and here we see it sort of at an angle, the orbits
are not that elliptical, they're nearly circular, but we're looking at it for perspective from
an angle.
You can see that at these positions here, way off to the left and to the right, Venus
will appear crescent as seen from Earth because most of Venus's illuminated face is not visible.
And when Venus is right between the Earth and the Sun, well then it will look new.
In other words, very little or none of the illuminated face would be visible.
So Venus should be new or crescent.
It can't be full or gibbous as it would be if it were way out here in its rotation around
the Earth because one had to acknowledge the observed fact that Venus is always relatively
near to the Sun in the sky.
In other words, you always find Venus within a few tens of angular degrees from the Sun.
It always rises just before the Sun or sets right after the Sun.
You never see Venus at midnight or at 11 p.m. or at 2 a.m. or something like that.
In other words, Venus can never be roughly opposite the Sun from the perspective of the
Earth.
That's just an observed fact.
You can ignore it if you want to, but if you want to describe the real world, that's
an important fact.
So Venus can't wander over into positions at which it could in principle be seen as full
or gibbous.
So it can only be seen as crescent or new in the Ptolemaic system.
However, in the Copernican system where both Venus and the Earth orbit the Sun, sometimes
Venus is between the Earth and the Sun, in which case it appears new because you don't
see the illuminated face.
That's fine.
Then sometimes it's a crescent as in the Ptolemaic system.
But look here, as it wanders over to roughly a 90 degree angle from the Sun, it looks half
full or quarter Venus, if you think of a quarter of the orbit.
And then here it looks gibbous and here it looks full because it's on essentially the
opposite side of the Sun compared with the Earth.
Then you have a waning gibbous, a third quarter or half lit up Venus, a waning crescent and
new Venus once again.
No, you can see the full set of phases of Venus in the Copernican system, but you cannot
in the Ptolemaic system.
That was really important.
That was really, really important.
Moreover, when Venus was crescent, it was larger as expected in the Copernican system.
But it's interesting that it wasn't Galileo who had the initial idea, he just sort of
verified it.
Even a Castelli is often not given enough credit for having come up with the idea.
Galileo made a number of other telescopic observations that were important.
Perhaps the most important was that Jupiter has moons orbiting it.
Here you can see them orbiting Jupiter in two different photographs taken just about
35 minutes apart from each other on February 11, 2003.
Two of the moons are very close to each other in that photograph and slightly farther apart
from each other in that one, so they have moved.
Here's a series of photographs showing two of the moons orbiting Jupiter and also the
fact that Jupiter itself rotates.
That's important as well because if Jupiter rotates and also Galileo found that the Sun
rotates, maybe the Earth rotates as well.
The moon observations were important because they show that, first of all, things can orbit
around other bodies, not just the Earth.
Earth is not unique in that regard.
And moreover, since Jupiter clearly moves through the sky and its moons follow along
with it, they aren't necessarily left behind.
In other words, the Earth could be moving in an orbit around the Sun and clouds and
birds and people jumping up and down are not left behind.
Because after all, Jupiter's moons aren't left behind, enormously important, enormously
important, but not quite as fatal to the Ptolemaic system as the phases of Venus were.
Here is a page from Galileo's own notes, written in Italian, where he has the moons
of Jupiter sort of changing the orientation from night to night.
And here's a translation.
On the 7th of January, 1610, Jupiter is seen thus, he shows it, then on the 8th the configuration
had changed and he noted that the motion was direct or prograde and not retrograde.
And then on the 12th and then on the 13th and 14th it was cloudy, well the 13th it wasn't
cloudy, the 14th it was cloudy, then on the 15th all four of them were on one side.
So it was really interesting that he had all these notes and he could tell that Jupiter
had these moons, amazing, you know.
He also found that our own moon is not smooth, it has craters and mountains and valleys.
It is not a smooth perfect surface.
Indeed, it looks a lot like Earth, which has craters and mountains and valleys.
Maybe Earth and the moon aren't so different.
Maybe the moon isn't a god and maybe Earth isn't some special place, maybe they're similar.
Also the sun, which was supposed to be a perfect unblemished, unchanging pristine sphere,
well it turned out that it had spots, it had dark blemishes.
Here's a modern photograph, but through his telescope Galileo could see little spots on
the sun.
And here's one of Galileo's drawings of a whole bunch of spots when the sun was really
quite active.
And he measured the positions of these spots from day to day and found that they move and
correctly concluded that the sun is actually rotating and that it's not pristine, pristine
and unblemished.
Next, he found that Saturn has handles.
Now here's what a modern amateur sized telescope would show, a nice image of Saturn and the
rings.
Galileo's telescope wasn't good enough to show that.
He only saw that Saturn has handles or ears, he couldn't really tell that they were rings.
But again, Saturn is not a perfect sphere, it has attachments.
And finally he found that the Milky Way consists of an almost countless number of stars and
he wondered, as Giordano Bruno did before him, whether these might be other suns, other
worlds perhaps orbiting them.
For heretical view at that time, indeed Giordano Bruno suffered greatly for that and his belief
in Copernicanism.
Giordano Bruno was burned naked at the stake alive for believing in other worlds, in the
Copernican system and other heretical ideas.
So these sorts of observations, especially the phases of Venus and the moons of Jupiter
convinced Galileo that the Copernican system was the correct one, that the Earth is not
only rotating about its own axis but also orbiting the sun and that the whole Aristotelian
and Pythagorean edifice that had been built up and then modified by Ptolemy was simply
incorrect and might be a wonderful calculational tool but was not physical reality.
It was not what's actually out there.
However, it's interesting that Galileo did suppress at least one set of observations
that did not directly support the heliocentric hypothesis.
He noticed that some stars in the sky through his telescope appeared double and he did not
know that they are physically bound together by gravity.
He simply thought that the fainter appearing star is the more distant star.
If that's the case, then under the heliocentric hypothesis they should appear in slightly
different positions depending on where the Earth is in its orbit.
The analogy is that if I hold up my finger like this and look at it with one eye, it
appears projected against certain background objects, you right there.
Now if I close that eye and open the other one, the finger is projected against another
person in the audience.
So the projection changes depending on the vantage point from which you view it.
So if the Earth is changing its position by orbiting the Sun, then it's kind of like
the surveyor looking at a tree against a backdrop of much more distant trees.
The nearby tree will shift in position relative to the more distant trees and mountains depending
on whether you're observing from position A or from position B.
So if you look at these two stars, and yeah I assume that the fainter one was the more
distant one, viewed from this position here at left, the faint blue one looks to the left
of the bright yellow one.
But six months later in Earth's orbit, the faint blue one looks like it's to the right
of the bright yellow one.
So there should be a shift in position.
And yet when he observed these double stars, he found no shift over the course of six months.
Now he suppressed this evidence that seemed to not be consistent with the heliocentric
hypothesis.
Perhaps he suppressed it because he realized that his crucial assumption that the faint
blue one is more distant than the bright one might be wrong.
If the two stars are at the same distance, you don't get a shift because you're observing
two objects at the same distance from two different vantage points, they both shift
by the same amount.
So that's maybe why he suppressed that evidence against the heliocentric or at least not consistent
with the heliocentric hypothesis.
Well he published his findings in two famous works.
In 1610, Ciderius Nuncius, the starry messenger, or really the starry message.
And then in 1629, he completed a major work, not published until 1632 because of the plague
and other things.
It was called The Dialogue on the Two Great World Systems, and it was written in popular
witty Italian, accessible to everyone.
He intentionally made it accessible to everyone.
And here's the frontispiece of the dialogue where supposedly Copernicus, but with Galileo's
face, is discussing the two great world systems, the Aristotelian system, modified by Ptolemy,
and the Copernican system, he's discussing this with Aristotle and with Ptolemy.
Now the Roman Catholic Church was pretty uptight about all this.
They didn't object to Galileo making models to try to explain observations.
What they objected to was the belief that these models represent truth, represent reality,
rather than the Aristotelian perfect reality or whatever.
And they said, look, you know, you can think about these things if you want to, though
we discourage that, but just don't go around talking about it as though it's really what's
going on out there.
And to them, to the Catholic Church and the Inquisition, it appeared that the dialogue
was really written to convince the public that the Copernican system is correct, though
at the end it says, oh, this is all just a hypothesis.
They read between the lines.
It wasn't hard to do.
And, you know, they saw that this really was just an attack on what the Bible was saying.
And in particular, the associates of Pope Urban VIII convinced him that he, the pope,
was Simplicio in this dialogue, who was sort of the naive guy who believed in the geocentric
hypothesis.
And the Inquisition was especially upset because in 1616, Roberto Bellarmine had warned Galileo,
specifically not to talk about these things as though they were truth.
And Galileo violated that.
And there was this famous trial where Galileo was found guilty of advocating Copernicanism
in his dialogue and did not present it as merely one of several competing hypotheses.
The beliefs were contrary to the scriptures.
And Galileo saw the writing on the wall to avoid being locked up in a dungeon or killed
as Bruno was.
He recanted his belief in the Copernican theory, though the legend goes that as he knelt before
the Inquisition, he said under his breath, and yet it moves, referring to the earth.
That may be apocryphal.
I mean, apparently, the trial was just among a small jury in Galileo, and no one really
knows what he did or said, but anyway.
He was not killed.
He was sentenced and placed under perpetual house arrest and told to basically shut up
about his views.
He got off lucky because Bruno was killed for similar ideas, although Giordano Bruno had
many other heretical ideas.
It wasn't just the belief of Copernicanism and other worlds that led to Giordano Bruno's
demise.
Here's one of the houses in which Galileo had lived.
In fact, this may be even the house in which he spent the last eight or nine years of his
life.
And he spent that time publishing earlier observations and experiments he had made when he was young
on the motion of falling bodies.
He had done all these experiments when he was young, and he just didn't get around to
publishing them.
So here, in his old age, he wrote the book and redid a few of the experiments, but really
just sort of wrote up what he had previously found.
And the most famous of his findings is that a light ball, say this apple and a heavy ball,
this lead one, make them the same size so that the air resistance is the same for both.
But the heavy one you would think should fall faster, but it doesn't.
Look at that.
See, they both fell and reached the floor at the same time to within the accuracy of
my releasing the balls simultaneously and all that.
So that was his famous experiment supposedly done from the Leaning Tower of Pisa, but that's
apocryphal.
We can see here a little demo showing the Leaning Tower of Pisa.
And if you drop a massive ball, it falls in 3.2 seconds.
If you drop a less massive ball, one that weighs less, it drops in 3.2 seconds.
And then a small one, which also drops in 3.2 seconds.
This is all a neglecting air resistance.
And suppose we drop a feather, well, neglecting air resistance, it too falls in 3.2 seconds.
Now of course, nature is much more complex than that.
There is the air.
So if we turn on the air resistance, it takes quite a while for the feather to fall.
There we go, 8.8 seconds.
The light ball drops in 3.28 seconds, a little bit more than the 3.2 that we would have had
had we neglected air resistance.
The bigger ball takes a bit longer, 3.36, and that's because it has a bigger cross-section
and there's more air resistance.
And then the bigger one still takes a little bit longer because it suffers more air resistance,
3.44 seconds.
But neglecting air resistance, they all drop at the same rate.
Now this has been beautifully verified on the moon, where Commander David Scott dropped
a hammer and a feather on the moon and saw that they fall at the same rate.
Let me play the NASA video.
Well, in my left hand I have a feather.
In my right hand, a hammer.
And I guess one of the reasons we got here today was because of a gentleman named Galileo
a long time ago who made a rather significant discovery about falling objects in gravity
fields.
And we thought that where would be a better place to confirm his findings and on the moon.
And so we thought we'd try it here for you.
The feather happens to be appropriately a Falcon feather for our Falcon.
And I'll drop the two of them here and hopefully they'll hit the ground at the same time.
How about that?
Okay, so that was the view from the astronauts who went to the moon aboard Apollo 15.
It turns out the result was already known.
You can evacuate a cylinder and have it free of air, have it a vacuum and drop a feather
and a hammer and they fall at the same rate.
So you don't have to go to the moon to do this experiment, but it was certainly fun
to do it at the moon.
Now the tower of the Leaning Tower of Pisa story is apocryphal as I said.
In fact it's hard to measure accurately the times of objects falling straight down.
So in fact Galileo used gently sloping inclined planes that greatly increases the time it
takes to fall and you can make the measurements more carefully.
And in fact my fourth grade son did this experiment actually in the third grade as part of a science
fair project.
He rolled balls down an inclined plane and timed how long they took to get there as
a function of the size or the mass of the ball and he saw that they reached the end
of the inclined plane at the same time basically regardless of anything other than friction.
And here's some of the balls he used of different masses, different weights, different sizes
and so on.
Galileo also found that a ball speeds up as it falls, it accelerates.
So if it travels one unit of distance in one second, after a total of two seconds it travels
four units of distance, after three seconds nine units and after four seconds a total
of sixteen units.
And all this then was the basis for Newton's subsequent development of the laws of motion.
Galileo is one of the giants on whose shoulders Newton had stood.
So Galileo is a real hero of mine, I think he was an amazing person.
I had the privilege of traveling to Italy after my senior year of college and I went
to Florence where Galileo had done much of his work and Florence of course is a wonderful
city with lots of great museums.
There's one museum that's little known, it's a museum of science and it has Galileo's
early telescopes and other people's microscopes and things like that.
But I was amazed to find that a preserved in a jar full of helium in one small corner
of the museum is the middle finger of Galileo's right hand, it's kind of weird you know.
So you go to churches and stuff and the vertebrae of saints and other important people are preserved
there and the more bones of famous people that a church has, the more prestigious the
church is but I didn't know that they preserved the bones of scientists in museums like this.
So anyway it's kind of fun that there's this finger there, you kind of shocked me you know.
But Galileo is great and it is good that in the end in 1992 Pope John Paul II officially
pardoned Galileo, he said that the church had been overly harsh when they had condemned
Galileo in 1633.
He commended Galileo's belief that the Bible teaches us how to go to heaven, not how the
heavens go and he said that theologians can err in their interpretation of the scriptures
even if the scriptures themselves are never erroneous.
So Galileo did get pardoned not quite as officially as I would have liked but in the end all
is good I'm just sorry that Galileo did not live to see his views vindicated and pardoned.
