Roughly 70 years after the publication of Copernicus' book concerning the revolutions,
Galileo's observations showed that the Ptolemaic system is incorrect and that the Copernican
system is probably correct as a description of physical reality. However, let's go back a few
decades to see what at least a few scientists were thinking even before Galileo's groundbreaking
observations and to see what kind of refinements had been made to the Copernican model. There was
one alternative that combined the features of both the heliocentric or sun-centered system
and the geocentric or earth-centered system. And this was suggested by the Danish nobleman
Tycho Brahe, sometimes pronounced Tycho. I'm told that in Danish it might be closer to Tycho.
Anyway, I'll say Tycho because that's what I'm used to. He thought that perhaps the moon orbits
the earth, but everything else orbits the sun. So Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn
orbit the sun. And then the sun, together with all of the planets that orbit it, in turn orbits the earth.
So basically, everything except the moon orbits the sun, and then the sun, along with its
orbiting planets, orbits the earth. This is essentially a change of perspective from the
Copernican system. Instead of everything orbiting the sun, including the earth, he has
everything orbiting the sun except the earth, but then all those things orbit the earth. So it's just
a change in perspective. And without actually knowing that the earth is moving, you actually
can't tell the difference between this and the Copernican system. Now, it turns out now we know
that the earth is moving. I'll show you ways that we know later on. But at that time, no one
really knew that the earth was moving. It was just conjectured by Copernicus that it's moving.
And this system was, in a sense, equivalent, just a shift in perspective. But this was not a very
attractive idea to either side. Neither the geocentric nor the heliocentric people were
particularly pleased with this combination of motions. Tycho had an interesting life.
At the age of 14, he saw a partial solar eclipse from Denmark, which happened to be total, as seen
from Portugal. And he was very impressed that astronomers had been able to predict this. So he
wanted to dedicate his life to making ever more accurate observations of the moon, sun, and
planets, especially the planets and mainly Mars, in order to refine the predictive power of
physics and of these models. He wanted to know exactly when eclipses and other things would occur.
He was quite bright, but also a rather argumentative fellow. He thought pretty highly of himself.
And at the age of 20, he had a duel with a fellow student, not over a woman, but over who was the better
mathematician of the two. He lost his nose during that duel and thereafter wore a gold and silver
amalgam. And indeed, on his tombstone, where there's a relief of Tycho's face, you can see a
line here, which is supposedly the demarcation between his metal nose and his flesh and bones.
Tycho discovered a supernova, an exploding star in the year 1572. Now, he didn't know the physical
nature of the star, that it was a star at the cataclysmic end of its life, going boom and creating
elements and all the great stuff I'll tell you about later. But he saw that the star had brightened
to naked eye visibility. In fact, it was visible during the day and it remained visible as it faded
for 18 months. And this was an astonishing thing because Europe was just emerging from the Middle Ages
and people thought that the heavens were immutable, even though the ancient Greeks had seen, you know,
exploding stars and other things. Nevertheless, the idea was that the heavens are immutable and
unchanging. And so Tycho's observation went a long way toward dispelling that belief. And he
gained favor with the king and was given a rather large amount of money with which to set up an
observatory, Uraniburg, on the island of Chvene, H-V-E-E-N. And he was given funds to conduct all
sorts of studies and stuff. So he became quite the guy and had these lavish parties and social
gatherings in his castle. Indeed, he was thought to have had something like 1% of Denmark's entire
wealth at one point in the 1580s. So he had these great parties and lots of social gatherings. But he
drank a lot and was egotistical and argumentative and actually kind of annoyed a lot of people. He had
some other interesting characteristics. He had a dwarf named Jepp, who was his court jester. And Tycho
actually thought that Jepp was clairvoyant. And he kept Jepp under the dinner table and fed him
scraps of food and stuff. So anyway, Tycho was kind of a weird guy. But at this observatory, he made
fantastic observations of the planets. He didn't have a telescope, but he had other instruments with
which he could measure the altitude of a planet above the horizon and its angular distance from other stars
and things like that. So he amassed this wide and broad body of observations, which later, I will discuss,
were analyzed by Kepler, a superb mathematician. Well, a new king came to power in 1588 and Tycho's influence
waned and eventually his funds were cut off. And finally, he decided to leave Denmark. I mean, he had basically
annoyed the king and was really an arrogant guy and everything. So he said, OK, I'm done with Denmark. And he
settled in 1599 in Prague at the invitation of the Holy Roman Emperor Rudolph II. In 1601, Tycho drank too much
at a dinner and neglected to go frequently enough to the bathroom. So he suffered from a urinary infection
and two weeks later died of it at a rather young age. More recent research suggests that his actual cause of death
was mercury poisoning, whether mercury he had taken himself to fight his urinary infection or deliberately poisoned,
perhaps even by his mathematician Kepler. And Kepler was rather annoyed with Tycho because Tycho had hired him to analyze
the data, yet only gave small parcels of data at a time. He wouldn't give Kepler this huge set of observations.
And so Kepler felt frustrated. He couldn't really discern what was going on from fragments of data. So Kepler, in a sense,
was happy when Tycho died because he was able to get his hands on the data after a bunch of battles with Tycho's relatives
who wanted to confiscate the data. But Kepler managed to get away with it. So he then analyzed the data.
So here's Kepler. He had a lot of interesting ideas. He thought that the planets are on these spheres that circumscribe
the five perfect platonic solids and stuff. And he spent years trying to prove this and it just didn't work out because,
turns out, it's not true. But in any case, he analyzed Tycho's data and he refined the Copernican model with three important
empirical laws. Now, they were empirical in that Kepler had no physical explanation for them. He just found that
quantitatively they appeared to be true, but he didn't know why they were true. That will come with Newton.
The first law that he figured out in the year 1604 is that the planetary orbits are ellipses, not circles.
And the sun is not at the center of the ellipse, but rather is at one focus of the ellipse. Now, there are two foci
and there's nothing at the other focus in Kepler's system. The sun is at one focus, nothing is at the other focus.
Here you can see in this diagram that an ellipse is defined to be the set of points such that the sum of the distances
from two other points, the foci, is a constant. So distance one, let's call it A, distance two is B, and ellipse is the
set of points such that A plus B is equal to a constant. And it's easy to draw an ellipse, using this in mind,
by taking a cardboard sheet like this, putting a loop of string around it, you pull the string tight with this pen,
and then draw the ellipse around the two tacks, keeping the pen in such a way that the string is tight, and the sum of the distances
is clearly a constant. There we go, there's an ellipse. Anyway, that gives you an ellipse. Kepler's first law then says that the sun
is at one focus, and the earth, and indeed other planets, orbit the sun along an elliptical, not a circular trajectory.
With the sun at one focus, nothing at the other focus, maybe Kepler's ghost or something like that. Let's discuss ellipses in a little bit more detail.
Here's an ellipse with the two foci marked. The long axis is known as the major axis. The short axis is the minor axis.
Half of the major axis is just the semi-major axis, and similarly for the semi-minor axis.
Here's a set of ellipses having different eccentricity, but the same major axis. Now the eccentricity is defined to be the distance
between the foci divided by the length of the major axis. So in all these cases, the major axis has the same length,
but as I put the foci farther and farther apart, the ellipse becomes more and more highly eccentric. Here it's a very highly eccentric
ellipse, here it's an eccentricity of only 0.3, so it looks more circular. It turns out that most of the planets have orbits that are nearly
circular, that ellipses have only a very small eccentricity. And this, as I briefly mentioned in lecture 13, is the reason that Copernicus's
system with circular orbits worked quite well. Recall that Copernicus had circular orbits like that of Mars, but whose center was a little bit
offset from the Sun. Well, a circle whose center is offset from the Sun looks almost identical to an ellipse with a small eccentricity.
The dark line is the circle, the dashed line is the ellipse. You see that? They are nearly the same. And so Copernicus's system worked
so well because though the planetary orbits really are elliptical, not circular, the ellipses are nearly circular. The eccentricities are very low.
The second law that Kepler came up with is that a line between the Sun and a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times. Let me show you what I mean.
Here's the Sun with the elliptical orbit of a planet surrounding it. What we're saying is that in going from position 1 to position 2 along its orbit,
the line between the planet and the Sun sweeps out a pie-shaped area like this. That area is the same as the area swept up elsewhere in the orbit
when the planet goes from position 3 to position 4 as long as the time interval it took to go from 3 to 4 was exactly the same as the time interval from 1 to 2.
Equal areas in equal times. Let's look at a whole bunch of sectors here. All of these sectors have equal areas.
And so if you make T1, which spans two of these sectors, equal to T2, Kepler's law, his second law, tells you that the planet travels a lot less of a distance way out here far from the Sun than it does close to the Sun.
Now here the elliptical orbit has been greatly exaggerated, but if the planet had such an eccentric orbit, it would travel more slowly out here far from the Sun than when it's close to the Sun
because the area it sweeps out is the same in each case, and when it's close to the Sun, it has to move more in order to sweep out an area equal to that swept out in this long, skinny triangle.
So I've set up here a planet whose orbit has an eccentricity of 0.6, and it's orbiting the Sun, and let's watch it move.
It moves slowly when it's far from the Sun and more quickly when it's near the Sun.
Slow, fast.
That kind of a thing, okay? It changes its speed, and quantitatively you can figure out by how much by using Kepler's second law.
If we go back and make the eccentricity 0, you will notice that the speed of the orbit is unchanging with time, but it changes the more eccentric the trajectory is.
This applies most visibly to comets, such as this one.
In particular, comets like Halley's Comet have periodic orbits, that is, they come around the Sun every once in a while, as is shown here.
Some comets come in from very far away and sweep past the Sun only once, but the so-called periodic comets sweep past the Sun every few decades or so,
and they spend most of their time way out here, far from the Sun, and then they zip past it, so they go zoom, zoom, zoom like that,
and they spend almost all their time way far from the Sun.
Here's the orbit of Comet Halley, in fact. In 1948, it was way out here. By 1977, it had come closer than 1983, then 85,
and then it swung past the Sun in 1986, zoomed past it very quickly, and then started slowing down and spending most of its time way out in the far reaches of the Solar System,
generally between Neptune's orbit and Pluto's orbit.
The third law that Kepler came up with was much later in time, in 1618, and that he called his harmonic law, and it says that the square of the orbital period of a planet around the Sun
is proportional to the cube of its average distance, or more precisely, the cube of the semi-major axis of the ellipse.
They turn out to be mathematically about the same thing.
So the planets farther out have longer orbital periods. That was already known before Kepler's time.
But quantitatively, Kepler showed that the square of the orbital period is proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis.
So you can write that p squared equals some constant k times r cubed, where r is the semi-major axis.
Kepler was ecstatic about this law. He called it his harmonic law, because he was looking for the music of the spheres.
He had a real musical talent, and he was trying to find harmony among the spheres and some sort of musical notes out there,
and this comes the closest to that, because musical notes are arranged in harmonic ways that are not precisely like this, but have some similarities.
So let's write down this equation p proportional to or p squared proportional to r cubed, or you can write it p squared equals k some constant times r cubed.
Now, it's convenient to use units based on the Earth's orbit.
For example, I can write that the square of the orbital period of some planet is equal to the constant k times the cube of the planet's semi-major axis.
I can write that same equation for the Earth. The square of the Earth's orbital period is some constant multiplied by the cube of Earth's distance from the Sun.
If I then divide one equation by the other, the constant k cancels out, because it's a constant.
And so we get that the orbital period of the planet divided by the Earth's orbital period, that quantity squared, is equal to, not just proportional to,
but now equal to the distance of the planet from the Sun divided by the distance of the Earth from the Sun, that quantity cubed.
So we know that the Earth's orbital period is one year. That's a familiar unit.
And the Earth's distance from the Sun is just some number. It happens to be 93 million miles, 150 million kilometers.
I'll talk in the next lecture on how that's determined.
We can write 150 million kilometers as 1.5 times 10 to the eighth kilometers.
The 10 to the eighth just tells you how many decimal points you should move over to get the number that you're trying to write down.
You should move over eight decimal points, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
If you write that out, you would get 150 million, but it's kind of cumbersome to keep track of all those zeros and write them all down.
You might miss some. So we use scientific or exponential notation of this kind.
If you're using a calculator, this would show up on your calculator as 1.5E8.
I think most people are familiar with this kind of notation because we all use calculators.
Anyway, that's called an astronomical unit. You can figure out what it is through measurements.
So we know that the Earth orbits in one year at a distance of one astronomical unit.
If we then say that, oh, I've measured the orbital period of Mars to be 1.88 years, one can do that.
Just look at Mars and see how long it takes to go all the way around the sun.
Turns out to be 1.88 years. If you plug in 1.88 here, take its square and then ask yourself what number when cubed gives you the same number,
that is the square of 1.88, you find that that number is 1.52 or 1.52 astronomical units.
That is 52% greater than the distance of the Earth from the sun.
So using ratios like this is very useful.
So Mars is about 52% farther from the sun than Earth is.
And you can figure that out using Kepler's third law only by measuring the orbital period of Mars.
Okay, well, let's set up another animation here where, for simplicity, I'll just have circular orbits initially.
This one is close to the sun. The planet is really zipping around quickly.
If I now stop the animation and I put the planet farther away, say 2.5 units from the sun instead of 1,
you can see that the orbital velocity is much slower.
And quantitatively, what Kepler said was that the square of the orbital period is proportional to the cube of the distance.
This also applies to objects orbiting the Earth.
And in particular, there are lots of satellites orbiting the Earth.
A satellite just above the Earth's surface goes about 230 degrees in one hour.
That is about two-thirds of a full circle, whereas the Earth itself rotates about 15 degrees per hour.
So the space shuttle and other near-Earth satellites orbit in about an hour and a half, it turns out.
A satellite orbit at three-and-a-quarter Earth radii traverses 42 degrees in one hour.
But if you put the satellite at six-and-a-half Earth radii, then it traverses 15 degrees in one hour.
In other words, it traverses the same angular distance as the Earth's rotating surface.
And that means that this satellite will appear stationary above a particular point on the Earth's surface.
This is the idea behind geostationary orbits. Here's one shown right here.
If you have a satellite above a communications tower, it will remain above that communications tower all the time
if it's orbiting at a distance of six-and-a-half Earth radii from the middle of the Earth.
If you put it too close to the Earth, it orbits more quickly than the rotating Earth,
and so the same satellite antenna won't always be in communication with the satellite.
That's okay, it just happens to be a different kind of communications satellite.
If you put the orbit too far from the Earth, then you notice that the Earth is rotating more quickly than the satellite is orbiting.
And once again, it does not remain hovering above one and only one communications station.
So geostationary satellites are important for a number of forms of communication
and whether, you know, monitoring the weather at any particular location or something like that.
Okay, well the stage was now set for Isaac Newton, later Sir Isaac Newton,
a brilliant but rather eccentric English physicist who made many magnificent contributions to the development of physics and astronomy,
and especially his three laws of motion and his law of universal gravitation.
Newton lived from 1642 to 1727, and he is what I would call not an ordinary genius.
I mean there are lots of ordinary geniuses wandering around on college campuses and businesses and wherever.
You get people who are very talented, they know what to do, they do it well, they do it efficiently, they're smart people.
But then there are some people who live on a completely different plane of existence,
and this happens in all fields, Mozart and Michelangelo and Da Vinci.
Well, for physics it was Newton.
Newton lived in a different plane of existence and thought in ways that most of us,
even those of us who happen to be ordinary geniuses, cannot comprehend.
Newton's life was interesting in 1661.
He went to Cambridge University, but in 1665 he had to flee Cambridge due to the plague,
and he went to the countryside, and that was his most fertile time.
He was just in his early twenties, and he developed the calculus, a form of mathematics.
He developed his laws of motion, the law of universal gravitation, everything.
It was just incredible what he did while away from college, you know, on his summer vacation, sort of, you know, his vacation from the plague.
In 1668 he invented a form of telescope, the Newtonian telescope,
and the next year became the exalted Lucasian professor of mathematics at Cambridge University.
He finally published his work in the Principia, being urged by his friend Edmund Halley to do so, and partially funded by Halley.
Just six years later, however, he had a nervous breakdown, but he got out of it and then became Warden of the Mint,
where he took extreme pleasure in punishing counterfeiters.
He apparently had sort of a cruel bent to him.
He published his work on optics in 1704, and then the next year was knighted,
not mostly for his scientific studies, but rather for his government service.
In the Principia, he described his three laws of motion.
The first is that if there are no forces acting on a body, then that body's speed and direction remain constant.
Now, usually we think of rest as being the natural state of things,
and indeed Aristotle thought that a force was needed to keep a body in motion.
When you throw something and you have it drag across the table, it comes to rest,
and so people thought that rest was the natural state of objects.
Newton said, no, motion is just as good as rest, and that motion is uniform along a straight line in a given direction,
as long as there are no forces acting upon the body.
But rest and motion are equally natural if there are no external forces.
So you could have a hockey puck, for example, going along some clean, very smooth ice.
Eventually we know it'll come to rest due to friction, but if you didn't have the friction, it would keep on going.
The second law, known as F equals MA, is just that the force is equal to the mass times the acceleration.
Now, acceleration is a change either in speed or in direction.
If I'm moving in a circle, but at a constant speed, I am accelerating.
You can tell that when you turn in a car around a curve, your body sort of knows that the turn is being made, you're being accelerated.
So Newton said that accelerations are due to forces.
And for a given force, the acceleration is less for a massive body than for a low mass body,
because after all, acceleration equals force over M.
So if the force is given, then a large body is accelerated by that force less than a small body.
So if I kick a small ball, I can get it to really go hauling, but if I try to kick a truck, you know, it won't really move very much,
because the mass of the truck is so much bigger than that of the ball.
The third law, often known as the law that says for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction,
well, what he was really saying was that when two bodies interact, they exert equal and opposite forces on each other.
The forces come in pairs.
If I push on the wall, it's pushing back on me.
Okay.
If I hop from this step down toward the earth, the earth is indeed pulling on me, but I'm pulling on the earth as well.
And my measly mass pulls on the earth just as much as the earth pulled on me.
The forces are equal and opposite.
So then why do I fall?
Why doesn't the earth come up toward me?
Ah, let's go back to the second law.
The earth's mass far exceeds my mass.
And so for a given force, the earth is accelerated much, much less than I am.
But the forces are equal and opposite.
A good example of this is in rocket propulsion.
When the fuel burns and a jet of gas comes shooting out of the end,
it's not that the gas is pushing on the earth and that somehow propels the rocket upward.
You can have a rocket way out in outer space and the gas propels the rocket forward
because the gas going outward has to be balanced by a force on the rocket pushing it forward.
Overall, the system has no net forces acting on it from outside,
but the internal forces have to be paired.
The outward push of the gas is balanced by the forward motion of the rocket.
These laws and the subsequent law of universal gravitation
unified many seemingly disparate areas of physics into one simple unified whole.
And this is one of the great goals of science,
to explain a lot of different phenomena through a small number of fundamental ideas.
Newton went a long way in achieving that goal.
