At the end of the last lecture, I introduced Sir Isaac Newton and his three laws of motion.
He also came up with a law of universal gravitation, of a force acting between objects, tending
to pull them together. And supposedly he came up with this while looking at an apple falling
from a tree. He wondered, why is it that the apple falls from the tree? What's causing
it to do that? Now, many say that the apple story is apocryphal and that it didn't really
happen this way. Almost certainly no apple hit him in the head or anything like that.
But one can find a part of an apple tree from Newton's garden at the Royal Astronomical
Society in London. Here's a photograph of this section of the famous apple tree. Newton
also looked at the moon and wondered what keeps it in its orbit. He realized that the
moon is falling toward the earth as the apple is falling toward the earth. We will see how
he came up with that later. And he wondered, well, why does it stay in an orbit? And is
the effect that's causing the moon to fall toward the earth the same as that which causes
the apple to fall toward the earth? And he had this brilliant insight that really it
may qualitatively be the same force, but quantitatively it's very different because of the differing
distances of the moon and the apple and the different amounts of matter they contain and
all that. But qualitatively maybe it's the same thing. Quantitatively it made sense when
he put it all together. He reasoned as follows. He thought, well, whatever the force is, whatever
the effect is, it may well be proportional to the total amount of stuff in an object,
the total amount of matter. So the more stuff you have, the greater is this tendency to
pull other things toward you. So the earth's gravitational force, as he came to call it,
would be proportional to the total mass or amount of matter in the earth. Conversely,
the apples pulled toward the earth would be proportional to the amount of matter in the
apple, how much stuff there is in it. Since Newton's third law said that the forces are equal
and opposite, that is, the force exerted by the apple on the earth is equal in magnitude to the
force exerted by the earth on the apple, the two forces must in a sense be proportional to the
product of both masses, that of the apple and that of the earth, because the forces are equal and each
one was proportional to the mass of the object that was doing the pulling, so the whole thing must be
proportional to the product of their masses. This was also consistent with Galileo's result that
two bodies of equal physical size but differing mass fall at the same rate. Here's the heavy lead
ball and the lighter apple, they hit the floor at the same time, meaning they fell or accelerated at
the same rate. This makes sense because if the force is proportional to the product of the mass of
the earth and the mass of either the apple or the lead ball, and yet force is also equal to mass
times acceleration, the mass of the apple or the mass of the lead ball, then if you equalize those
things, f equals ma equals something proportional to the product of the little mass m and the mass of
the earth, the little mass m cancels out. It's irrelevant because the acceleration is proportional
only to the earth's mass big m. Now Newton also guessed that perhaps whatever gravity is, it
spreads out like a sphere like this, kind of like a light bulb has light emanating in all directions
and the light dims down according to an inverse square law. We will consider that in more detail
later but this graphic shows light going through one square at a distance of one unit from its
source and going through four squares, two times two or four squares at a distance of two units
from its source and through nine squares, three units from its source. So each square in the case
of two units from the source gets only one quarter of the light and at three units away you get only
one ninth of the light so that the total sum overall squares is exactly the amount of light
that was going through the first square. So that's known as an inverse square law of light and
Newton guessed that maybe gravity does the same thing. It diminishes in size according to the
inverse square of distance. In that case, putting it all together, he came up with his famous formula.
F is some proportionality constant now named in honor of Newton, Newton's constant of universal
gravitation times the mass of one object m sub one and the mass of the other object m sub two
divided by the square of the distance between them. So we have two masses, m one and m two,
the force is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to
the square of the distance between them. That's his famous law of gravitation and you know what,
it worked out perfectly. First, Newton used his newly invented form of mathematics called the
calculus to show that the gravitational force of the earth acts as though all of the earth's mass
were concentrated in the center of the earth. So really what Newton said was that okay,
every little bit of the earth pulls on the person and the person conversely pulls on every little
bit of the earth, but when you add all those little bits together, it's equivalent to putting
the total mass of the earth at the center and considering the pull of that mass on the mass
of the human, whose mass you can put at his or her center as well. And he had to develop calculus
in order to figure this out. Now, incidentally, Gottfried Leibniz independently developed calculus
and indeed we use Leibniz's notation or something closer to Leibniz's notation right now these days.
He did it in around 1675 and Newton did his work around 1665 to 1667.
So Newton really did do it first, but he didn't publish his work. He didn't publish it until the
Principia in 1687. And this reluctance to publish allowed Leibniz to come up with the idea independently
and they had some bitter disputes on who actually had the ideas first and Newton did not like to
have people telling him that they were first in anything. Anyway, Publisher Parish apparently
wasn't the name of the game back then, but it did lead to some disputes if you don't publish your
work for several decades. So here we have the earth then pulling on the person or the apple or
whatever. So in the case of the apple falling near the surface of the earth, the relevant distance
between the apple and the earth is the distance between the center of the apple and the center of
the earth, not the earth's surface. The radius of the earth is 6,400 kilometers roughly, so that's
the relevant distance in the law of gravitation for the case of the apple and the earth attracting
each other. The relevant distance in the case of the moon is the distance between the center of
the moon and the center of the earth and that's about 384,000 kilometers, roughly 60 times earth's
radius. So if Newton is correct, the acceleration felt by the moon should be 160th squared of that
felt by the apple because it's an inverse square law and one over 60 squared is one 3,600th. Well,
the acceleration of an apple at the surface of the earth is about 32 feet per second per second.
The apple is going at the end of the first second 32 feet per second. After another second,
it's going at a speed of 64 feet per second and then 96 and so on. It accelerates at 32 feet per
second per second, 9.8 meters per second per second. Okay, that's the acceleration at the earth's
surface. So one 3,600th of that is 0.27 centimeters per second per second and in fact that turns out
to be the known acceleration of the moon. It has to be accelerating at that value in order to maintain
the orbit that it has. So this was a great quantitative triumph. Looking at the law of
gravitation, Newton reasoned that it might be universal. In other words, why just apply to apples
and moons and things like that? He thought, well gee, there are moons orbiting Jupiter so maybe
Jupiter attracts them in the same way that the earth attracts its moon and he by this time knew
about double stars that he thought are probably gravitationally bound together or they're bound
by something so he reasoned that maybe they're bound by the same sort of force and he knew about
clusters of stars that appeared to be bound not just randomly together along the same line of
sight. So he guessed that this law might indeed be universal. Well, so how does gravity produce an
orbit according to the law of universal gravitation and the laws of motion? Let's break it down into
several stages. Suppose you had an object moving in a straight line with no forces acting upon it.
Newton's first law says that with no gravity and no other forces, that object will just keep on moving
in a straight line with a constant speed v, not accelerating at all. Now suppose you have an object
dropped from rest near something that exerts gravity like the earth. It will accelerate and
after some time t, it will achieve a speed v equals the acceleration times the time t. It just,
it speeds up like an apple falling at the surface of the earth. Now suppose you put these two things
together. You have both the object moving at a speed that's constant in a direction perpendicular
to the direction toward the earth and you don't ignore the earth's gravity. In other words, you
include the earth's gravity. The earth's gravity will pull the object down, but that force is acting
in a direction that is perpendicular to the initial direction of motion of the object. So it does not
either slow down or speed up the object because the force is acting in a perpendicular direction.
But that force acting in a perpendicular direction will speed up the object towards the earth causing
it to move down toward the earth a little bit at the same time that it has continued its motion
along a direction tangent or perpendicular to the direction toward the earth. So after a brief
instant of time it will have moved both down and across. Its new position will be over here.
In the next instant of time it'll again move down toward the earth but a little bit across in the
direction that it was instantaneously moving at that moment. The net result will be that it will
have moved over to here. At that instant it'll once again move a little bit toward the earth and a
little bit across making its new position down here. And you can see I'm tracing out a polygon here,
but if you imagine many tiny, tiny, tiny steps, and this is where calculus comes in,
each of those pretty long line segments that I drew becomes an infinitesimal step,
and infinitesimal is the inverse of infinity. It's just the tiniest quantity that you can think of,
but not zero, okay? It's sort of like the biggest quantity you can think of,
which is inverted, all right? So if you make a bunch of infinitesimal steps, that polygon will
turn into a smooth orbit, and that is the insight that Newton had. That is what produces an orbit.
Notice that if gravity were to get cut off at some point, suppose we just cut off gravity at this
point, Newton would say that the moon or the apple, whatever is orbiting, should at that point continue
along the direction in which it was going at that moment. It shouldn't do this segment here,
it shouldn't go off radially away from the earth, it should just go in the direction it was instantaneously
going at that moment. And I have a nice little demo here which can illustrate this concept.
Here's a donut that's like the moon, and I'm the earth pulling on the moon, but my gravitational
influence on the moon will be exerted by this string rather than by true gravity emanating from me,
whatever that may be. So I'm gonna whirl the donut around my head like this, it's going in an orbit
because it's going tangentially, that is perpendicular to the direction of the string,
but I'm also pulling on it causing it to change its direction. Now at some point,
the string will break through the donut. That'll be analogous to gravity suddenly being cut off.
And what I want you to look at is the trajectory of the donut at the moment that the string breaks
through and gravity gets cut off. I claim it will go off in a straight line in the direction in which
it was instantaneously going at that time. That is tangent to the orbit at that position.
So here we are, the thing is going along, watch carefully to see the trajectory of the donut
when gravity gets cut off.
Oh, look at that! If you pick it up and eat it, that's okay.
So did you notice the direction it was going? Yeah, Joan, you could have grabbed that donut
and eaten it now. Anyway, it went off along the tangent there and that's supposed to illustrate
what is happening when the force gets cut off. All right, well so if we look at this more carefully
then, an orbit really is falling and missing. The moon is falling toward the earth at each
instant of time, but it doesn't hit the earth because correspondingly at that instant of time,
it also moves perpendicular to the direction of the earth. And so though it has fallen a little
bit toward earth, it's also moved away a little bit in this perpendicular direction, thus maintaining
roughly a constant distance away from the earth. So the moon is constantly falling toward the earth,
it just keeps missing because it also has this tangential motion for whatever reason. We'll
discuss the origin of the moon later. We think it occurred because something hit the earth and
splattered junk out of the earth and then that junk assimilated into a disk which then
coalesced into the moon. But the point is it had that initial tangential motion and that's what
keeps it from hitting the earth. So the moon, you look at it, don't be afraid, it is falling toward
the earth but it's not going to hit. In fact, Newton had a famous thought experiment that
illustrated this. He had a cannon on top of a mountain and he said, suppose I fire a cannonball
out of this cannon, but I fire it at a small speed. It'll go forward a little bit but the earth's
gravity will try to bring it down so it'll fall just a little bit ahead of where I shot it.
If we fire it faster, it'll have more chance to go along the direction of initial motion
during the time that the earth is trying to bring it down. So it'll go along a farther arc like that.
If we fire it even faster, it'll go along this direction and reach a greater distance
in the time that it takes for the earth to bring it down. So it'll have an even bigger arc like
this and then Newton reasoned, if I fire it sufficiently fast, then it'll fall at precisely
the rate that makes it curve around the earth creating an orbit of this sort. So let's look
at an actual animation of this. We're going to fire a cannon here and initially I'll give it a
speed of 7.4 kilometers per second and I'll fire it and it comes to a crash landing on earth,
somewhere over there. Now let's suppose I speed it up to 7.7 kilometers per second.
It comes to a crash landing but somewhat farther away. Now let's go to 7.9 kilometers per second
and lo and behold, it makes it all the way around the earth and comes back again and it would hit
the cannon of course but in this animation it's not doing that. Now if I were to increase the
speed even more, then the cannonball would go out further on the opposite side of the earth
than the distance from which it started because it was given in a sense too much speed for a
circular orbit. That sends it into an elliptical orbit. If I then increase the speed even more
and fire it, it goes out to an even more eccentric ellipse where it's close to the earth at the
place where it was fired and it's quite far from the earth at the opposite point of its trajectory.
If I then go to an even bigger speed, something like 11 kilometers per second and I fire it,
the thing will escape completely. In fact you can figure out using this thing at what speed it
escapes. 11.5, gee it still escapes. How about 11.2? It escapes. How about 11.1? Aha! 11.1
is the last stable orbit. You see you don't see the cannonball anymore because it's way out away
from the earth somewhere but it will eventually come back but if you fire it at 11.2 kilometers per
second it won't come back. It'll escape from the earth. So there's a certain speed known as the
escape velocity from the earth. Notice as well that true to what Galileo found, the acceleration
of the moon is independent of its mass. The force between the earth M1 and the moon M2
is given by g M1 M2 over d squared. That force causes an acceleration of the moon
given by its mass times the acceleration. So force is M2A. You notice that the M2, the mass of the
moon cancels out. The acceleration is only proportional to M1, the mass of the earth,
and the square or the inverse square of the distance between them. So indeed acceleration
is independent of the mass of the object that is being accelerated. Newton was able to derive
Kepler's laws using his law of universal gravitation and his laws of motion. He also generalized them.
He saw how they could be made to apply in many other situations such as for example the moons
orbiting Jupiter. Here are those moons. They were well known by this time to orbit Jupiter
and Newton could explain this very well with the physics that he had developed.
The generalization of Kepler's first law where Kepler said that the orbits are ellipses with
the Sun at one focus. Well, Newton was able to prove that but he generalized it and he said that
really the trajectories of particles are conic sections. They're sections of cones and that
includes circles, ellipses, parabolas, and hyperbolas. Let me illustrate let me illustrate them here.
If you have two cones stacked up end to end and you intersect them with a plane perpendicular
to the axis of the cone, you get a circle. If you tilt that plane somewhat, you get an ellipse.
In fact for different tilts you get different ellipses, different eccentricities. If you tilt it
so that the plane is parallel to one of the sides of the cone, then you get a parabola and there's
only one such plane. There can be only one plane that's parallel to the side of a cone,
just like there's only one way to make a circle for a given cone. So anyway, you get a parabola
there and if you then keep on tilting it at a sharper angle, here we show it perpendicular to
the base of the cone but it need not be perpendicular. It's simply at a sharper angle than the side of
the cone. In any case that gives you a family of curves known as hyperbolas. So for a given cone
there's a whole class of hyperbolas, there's a whole class of ellipses, there's only one kind of a
circle and one kind of a parabola. In any case these are the conic sections studied by Greek
mathematicians and so he said that okay the orbits can be ellipses or in a very special case with a
special velocity, they can be a circle, you recall a cannonball simulation that I did,
and right at the escape velocity that's the parabolic trajectory. So if you fire something
right at the escape speed, its trajectory is a parabola. If you fire it at more than the escape
speed, it's a hyperbola, the exact shape of the hyperbola depending on the exact speed with which
you fired the object. So there are lots of ways you can get the thing to escape, those are all
the hyperbolas, there's lots of ways that it can be bound, those are all the ellipses, there's one
special speed at which the thing escapes, that's the parabolic trajectory, and there's one special
speed at which you would get a circle. All the others more generally are ellipses and hyperbolas.
The second law, that of Kepler saying that a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times,
was something that Newton was able to derive with no great difficulty using calculus,
it just happens to be a property of an elliptical orbit. More interestingly, Newton derived Kepler's
third law, that the square of the orbital period is proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis,
and he actually derived the constant of proportionality, it's given by 4 pi squared divided by G,
Newton's constant, and also divided by the sum of the masses of the two objects involved,
Earth and Moon, or Sun and Earth, or Sun and Jupiter, or whatever. Now you'll notice that if
you're considering the Sun, whose mass let's say is M1, and a planet whose mass is M2, this supposed
constant will actually differ a little bit depending on which planet you're talking about.
The Earth has a different mass, M2, than Jupiter does, it's about one three hundredth of the mass
of Jupiter. Uranus, Neptune, Pluto, Mars, they all have slightly different masses,
but the point is, is that all of those masses are small compared to the mass of the Sun.
The mass of the Sun is big, all the other ones are small, so to a good first approximation,
the sum of the masses is just the mass of the Sun, the Sun so overwhelms everything,
it's a thousand times the mass of Jupiter for example, that it doesn't really matter which
planet you're talking about, the sum of the masses is always about the same. So that's why Kepler
thought that the constant was truly a constant, but Newton said no, it is not exactly a constant,
it depends a little bit on the mass of the planet. So Newton predicted that with better
observations than those made by Tycho, people would see that Kepler's third law actually does
depend on which planet is being considered. Subsequent observations showed that Newton was
in fact correct. So Newton was a great guy who figured out a lot of things, but from his
discoveries you can get a lot of interesting practical quantities. For example, we can determine
the Sun's mass from Newton's generalized version of Kepler's third law. If the mass of the planet,
M2, is much, much smaller than the mass of the Sun, M1, and these two less than signs denote
much, much smaller. Then in the sum M1 plus M2, you can ignore the mass of the planet. What does
it matter what M2 is if the Sun dominates everything? So let's just ignore the mass of the planet.
In that case, the square of the orbital period will be proportional to the cube of the semi-major
axis, and the constant of proportionality will only depend on M1, the mass of the Sun. So let's
ask, well, what is the mass of the Sun? Suppose the Earth's mass is a lot less than that of the Sun.
That's true. It's about 1,330,000th the mass of the Sun. This little circle with a dot in it
denotes Sun, mass of the Sun. Then we know that the orbital period of the Earth's squared
is proportional to the cube of the Earth's distance from the Sun, with the constant of
proportionality being 4 pi squared over g M sub Sun. Well, we know the orbital period of the Earth,
and we know its distance from the Sun. We also know the values of 4 and pi and g.
G is hard to measure, and in fact, Newton didn't know what the value of g was, but it has
subsequently been measured. So the only variable then, the only unknown, is the mass of the Sun.
And you find out that the mass of the Sun is 2 times 10 to the 33 grams, a phenomenally large
mass, roughly 330,000 times the mass of the Earth. By the way, thus justifying the assumption that
the mass of the Earth was essentially irrelevant in this calculation. So that's how we know the
mass of the Sun. We can also determine the mass of the Moon by placing an object in orbit around
it, like a satellite, like a rocket, okay? Indeed, you don't even need a full orbit.
You just need to measure the acceleration during part of the orbit, and you can do the math and
figure out the mass of the Moon. So we know the mass of the Moon from objects that we have sent
up there and watched them in their trajectories. You can measure the mass of anything this way
as long as it dominates over the mass of the little object that is near it and being deflected.
The other interesting thing is that if you look at this equation, p squared is some constant
involving the mass of the Sun times the cube of the distance of the planet. You can figure out that
indeed, not only should distant planets move more slowly than planets that are close to the Sun,
move more slowly in a quantitative way, in a way that's proportional to 1 over
the square root of their distance from the Sun. And that's something that can be measured, okay?
Is it true? Well, it is true, but Newton could derive that. So for those of you who like math,
here's how it goes, and if you don't like math, that's okay, just get the gist of what I'm saying.
If the orbit is roughly circular, then the circumference of the orbit, 2 pi r,
is equal to the speed v of the planet multiplied by its orbital period, p. That is, distance,
the circumference of the orbit is equal to speed times time, and you get this relationship, 2 pi r
equals v times p. You can then solve for p, p is just 2 pi r over v. If you then plug that quantity
for p in this equation here, Kepler's third law, and just play around with the algebra a little bit,
then you get that the mass of the Sun is equal to rv squared over g, that is, the distance of the
planet from the Sun times its speed squared divided by Newton's constant g. And manipulating that a
little bit, you find then that v is proportional to 1 over the square root of the distance. That is,
distant planets move more slowly than nearby ones. Now, it turns out that if you apply the physics
that Newton developed for studies of the solar system to stars orbiting around in entire galaxies,
you find something really amazing. The stars are moving around more quickly than you would expect,
given the gravitational attraction of all the visible stars in galaxies. It's as though there's
extra matter there, creating an extra pull to make the stars move more quickly than expected.
This indicates that on the scale of galaxies, especially far out in the outer parts of galaxies,
most of the material is dark. It's not the same kind of stuff of which the Sun and planets and
you and I are made. It is dark matter of an unknown nature, and we will study that later in this course.
