At the end of the last lecture, I scaled the entire time the universe has existed, 14 billion
years since the Big Bang, down to one 24 hour day, and on this relative scale, a long human
lifetime of 100 years is less than the blink of an eye. That's how long we exist on a
universal time of 24 hours. Wow, not very long. I also discussed various size scales,
and in this lecture we will gain a deeper perspective on sizes by using once again scale models.
Let's suppose that the Sun, which is 109 times the diameter of the Earth in true physical
size, it's 1.4 million kilometers in diameter, is scaled down to the size of a period at
the end of a written sentence, so the Sun is scaled down to a period. On this relative
scale, the nearest star shown here, Alpha Centauri, whose true distance is 4.2 light-years
from Earth, would be about 14 kilometers away, 9 miles away, on a scale where the Sun is
the size of a period. That shows how empty space is. Yet the Milky Way Galaxy, our galaxy
consisting of hundreds of billions of stars, perhaps 100,000 light-years in diameter, would
be about 320,000 kilometers across. So our galaxy, which would look something like this
one here, 100,000 light-years across in real size, would be about 320,000 kilometers across,
not quite the true distance to the Moon of 384,000 kilometers, but almost at the distance
of the Moon. So the galaxy is a big thing, even on a scale where a star is the size of
a period. Now let's take an atom. Here's an atom, the hydrogen atom, where the proton
is this little tiny thing, 10 to the minus 15 meters in radius, and the electron is,
say, 5 times 10 to the minus 11 meters away in radius. Let's scale an atom up to the size
of an apple. So here's an apple, it's perhaps 8 centimeters in diameter. Let's say an atom
is scaled up to the size of an apple. Then a human, a human is about 20 billion times
bigger than a single atom. It would be 1.6 million kilometers high. A human would be
that high, over four times the true distance to the Moon. So take an atom, make it as big
as an apple, and a human becomes as large as four times the distance of the Moon. Yet
on this expanded scale, the atomic nucleus takes up a tiny, tiny space. An atomic nucleus
is 0.0016 millimeters, or 1.6 millionths of a meter, 1.6 microns in diameter. So even though
you've scaled the atom up to the size of the apple, the nucleus of the atom is 1.6
millionths of a meter in diameter. That just tells you how empty an atom is. Indeed, hydrogen
atoms are 99.9999999% empty space. Yep, there should have been 14 nines there. 99.999% empty
space. And this is because of quantum physics. In particular, there's a principle called
the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, which effectively dictates how small an atom can
be. It can't be any smaller than a certain size, because it's energetically not feasible
for it to do that. And so that dictates the minimum size of an atom. And then another
effect called the Pauli Exclusion Principle tells you that you can't just keep on piling
electrons up in the same place. You have to keep on piling them in progressively bigger
spheres, but they also crunch in a little bit because of the electrical attraction of
the positive nucleus pulls on them more as well in heavier atoms. So all the atoms are
about the same size as hydrogen, but that size is dictated by deep principles of quantum
physics. So atoms are incredibly empty. The hydrogen atom is the most empty one. These
other ones might be only 10 or 11 nines, 99.999% empty space, but that's still pretty darn
empty. So we are very empty creatures, not to say that any of us is dumb or anything
like that, but most matter is mostly empty space because of the great emptiness of atoms.
It's interesting to ask yourself, what is emptier in the universe? Are atoms emptier
than planetary systems? Are they emptier than galaxies? Is the universe as a whole the
emptiest thing? So let's consider relative scales of emptiness. For the hydrogen atom,
the ratio of the electron cloud radius to the proton radius is about 5 times 10 to the
4, 50,000. So in hydrogen it's about 50,000. In somewhat heavier elements it's a slightly
smaller ratio because the electrons, at least the inner electrons get pulled in to some degree.
But 50,000 is a reasonable ratio for the radius of the electron cloud to the radius of the
proton, 50,000. Now let's consider our galaxy, much as this one looks like, that's probably
what our galaxy looks like if we could see it from the outside, and look at even the
nearest stars in our own galaxy. So here's Alpha Centauri, 4.2 light years away, and
we can ask ourselves, what is the distance, what is the ratio of the distance of the nearest
star to the radius of the sun? That's analogous to the radius of the electron cloud to the
radius of the proton, okay, this is the analogous ratio. And when you take the ratio of 4.2
light years, the distance to the nearest star divided by 700,000 kilometers, the radius
of the sun, you find that that ratio is about 6 times 10 to the 7th, 60 million or so, and
60 million is much greater than 50,000. So our galaxy is much emptier than an atom looked
at from this perspective. Now let's take a look at our solar system and other planetary
systems. You can say, well, what is the ratio of the Earth's distance from the sun to the
sun's radius? The Earth's distance from the sun is one astronomical unit, about 150 million
kilometers. The sun's radius is 700,000 kilometers, so that ratio, one astronomical unit to 700,000
kilometers, is about 200. Now 200 is much less than 5 times 10 to the 4. It's much less
than 50,000. So in that sense, the atom is much emptier than our solar system, because
our solar system has a spacing between the planets and the sun, which in a relative way
is not as great as the spacing between electrons and protons and an atom. So an atom is actually
emptier than our solar system, despite the vast distances in our solar system. And finally,
you can ask yourself, well, how empty is the universe as a whole? Well, a measure of that
might be the ratio of the Andromeda galaxy's distance to the radius of our Milky Way galaxy.
The Andromeda galaxy is the next big galaxy to our own, about 2.4 million light years
away. And if you take the ratio of the distance of Andromeda galaxy to the radius of our galaxy,
which is about 50,000 light years, that ratio, 2.4 million light years to 50,000 light years,
is 48 or about 50, and 50 is much less than 50,000. So looking at it from this perspective,
the universe is much less empty than an atom. Despite the vast distances between galaxies,
the ratio of the distances between galaxies to the radii of galaxies is a smaller ratio
than the radius of the electron cloud is to the radius of a proton. So in a sense,
the universe is a lot more full, or an atom is much emptier than the universe. So you can play
around with these numbers. And of course, you could have taken other galaxies or other
stars or whatever and gotten slightly different exact numbers, but the spirit of the calculation
would nevertheless be the same. It would show that atoms are quite empty, the galaxy is
even emptier. The universe is really not all that empty, and solar systems are somewhere
in between. A great way to gain an appreciation for the different size scales in the universe
and to see how there are vast empty regions, followed by regions of quite a lot of activity,
is to consider all the size scales in a progression covering successive factors of 10, or powers
of 10. There will be 43 such steps, where we each time either increase the range of
our perspective by a factor of 10, or decrease the range of our perspective by a factor of
10, going down to atomic and subatomic scales. This idea is based on a video originally produced
by Charles and Ray Eames, and I'm going to show you a version of that that I've produced,
and it'll contain 43 steps, and it'll sort of run through the entire universe, showing
you all of the physical scales. Starting with a very familiar physical scale, that
of, for example, an array of telescopes, the very large array near Socorro, New Mexico.
So that's a familiar human-like scale, and we can put ourselves 100 meters above the
ground surrounding the VLA, and there's one of the radio dishes of the VLA. They're each
about 25 meters in diameter. So if we now go down by a factor of 10, closer to the ground,
so that we're now 10 meters from the ground, you can see little shrubs and bushes growing
out of the plains there. And if we zoom in once again by a factor of 10, each step is
going to be a factor of 10, we're now about one meter from the ground, and we see details
of the brush and, in fact, a little kangaroo rat sitting there. If we now zoom in by another
factor of 10, we're at 10 to the minus 1 meters, or 10 centimeters from the kangaroo rat,
and you can see details in its face, and you can begin to see the hair, scaling in by another
factor of 10, so that we're one centimeter from the kangaroo rat, you can see the individual
bits of hair. Now things get really fun. If you go down and zoom yourself in by another
factor of 10, you're one millimeter from the kangaroo rat hair, and you can see some structure
in the hair, but we're actually going to go through a space between the hair into the
innards of the kangaroo rat, and look at some kidney cells. So zooming in by another
factor of 10, we're now at a scale of 10 to the minus 4 meters, or 0.1 millimeters, that's
in a sense the size of the box that we're looking at, and we can see a bunch of kidney
cells in the rat. Zooming in by another factor of 10, we're now at 10 to the minus 5 meters,
or 10 millionths of a meter, and we can see one kidney cell and its central nucleus.
Zooming in by another factor of 10, we are now essentially examining a box that's only
one millionth of a meter on a side, that's like 10,000 angstroms. In the case of light,
this would be a near infrared wavelength, somewhat longer than visible light, and you
can see now the nucleus of a single kidney cell, nuclei of cells are roughly a millionth
of a meter, or 10,000 angstroms in diameter. Now we'll zoom in by another factor of 10,
and we're going to look at the chromatin, the complex of DNA and protein found inside
the nuclei of cells. So here we are looking at a scale of 10 to the minus 7 meters, or
100 nanometers, or 1,000 angstroms, which is like the wavelength of ultraviolet light,
and we're seeing the chromatin of the cell, these clusters of DNA and proteins, and if
we zoom in even further to a scale of 10 to the minus 8 meters, or 10 nanometers, or 100
angstroms, we can see a single strand of DNA increasing our view by yet another factor
of 10 in precision in a sense, in closeness to the object that we're looking at. We're
now looking at a box that's a billionth of a meter in size, one nanometer, and there
you can see the double helix structure of the DNA, the sort of the beads on a string
structure with parallel bars between them. Now we're going to zoom in by another factor
of 10, looking at a scale of 10 to the minus 10 meters, a tenth of a nanometer, about one
angstrom, and here you can see the outer electron shell of a single carbon atom, so atoms are
about an angstrom in size. Going in another factor of 10 to 10 to the minus 11 meters,
or 10 picometers as they're called, you can see the inner cloud of electrons, and another
factor of 10 farther in, one picometer, or 10 to the minus 12 meters, shows the nucleus,
but the nucleus on a relative scale is still far away, relative to its size, it still looks
very far away. Scaling in by another factor of 10 to 100 femtometers, or 10 to the minus
13 meters, we can see the nucleus closer, and then another factor of 10 farther in shows
a nice view of the nucleus. We are now on a scale of 10 to the minus 14 meters, or 10
femtometers, and we can see the individual protons and neutrons in the nucleus of the
carbon atom. Now we're going to go down to one femtometer, 10 to the minus 15 meters,
and we zoom in on a single proton, so a proton is about 10 to the minus 15 meters in diameter,
and scaling down by another factor of 10 to 10 to the minus 16 meters, or 100 atom meters,
and we are now looking at individual quarks bound together, forming protons. Protons are
two up quarks and a down quark, these are weird terms, but they're quantum mechanical descriptions
of fundamental particles which we think make up the protons and the neutrons. Now let's
go back to the VLA and start exploring progressively larger scales, that is increasing our view
by a factor of 10 each time. There's the VLA, and we start with the view once again
of 100 meters above the VLA. Expanding now by a factor of 10, we see a box one kilometer
in size on the side, and you can see essentially the whole VLA, or much of the VLA, on this
scale, and if we now go up by another factor of 10, we can see in fact the desert plains
of New Mexico, near Sacoro, where the VLA is located. Going up to a view 100 kilometers
from the VLA, we see part of New Mexico, and we're starting to see not just the desert
plains, but some of the mountainous regions, and up again a factor of 10 to a view 1000
kilometers from the surface of the earth, we now see not only all of New Mexico, but
a good fraction of Arizona as well. Going up by another factor of 10, we are now 10,000
kilometers from the VLA, and we see the entire, much of the North American continent. So we're
seeing a good fraction of the earth, and another factor of 10 farther out, 100,000 kilometers
from the earth, or 10 to the 8 meters from the earth, we now see the earth as a ball
in space, from which we go progressively farther, increasing our view by a factor of 10 each
time. So here we are, 10 to the 9 meters, or 1 million kilometers from the earth, and
the earth is now quite a small ball, you can see the orbit of the moon, and going up by
another factor of 10 to 10 to the 10 meters, or a tenth of an astronomical unit, you can
see that the moon's orbit is now pretty small, and you can see part of the arc of earth's
orbit. And now going out to about one astronomical unit from the earth, 1 AU, and note by the
way that 10 to the 11 meters is only approximately 1 AU, we begin to see parts of the orbits
of Venus and Mars, and a bigger fraction of the orbit of the earth, and now the earth
itself is this puny little dot in the middle, and if we go up by another factor of 10 to
10 AU from the earth, we can see the orbits of the inner four terrestrial planets plus
part of the orbit of Jupiter. Going farther out still to 100 AU from the sun, or 10 to
the 13 meters, we see essentially all the planets in the solar system, and if we go
out 1,000 AU from the sun, or 10 to the 14 meters, then the solar system gets smaller
as we increase our distance from it. And here at 10,000 AU, or 10 to the 15 meters,
the solar system is now beginning to be quite small in size, but we still don't see any
other stars. This box, 10,000 astronomical units in size, still does not contain any
other stars. Now going out to 10 to the 16 meters from the sun, which is about one light
year, our own sun is now becoming pretty faint, and yet there's still no other stars visible.
Finally, at 10 light years from the sun, or 10 to the 17 meters, we begin to see some
other stars in the box surrounding our sun that's about 10 light years in size. At 100
light years from the sun, 10 to the 18 meters, the sun is now very faint, but we start seeing
many other stars because within 100 light years from the sun, there are quite a few
stars. And up again, a factor of 10, 1,000 light years from the sun, we can see quite
a few stars in the Milky Way. This is now, from a view, 10 to the 19 meters from the
sun. Going out to 10 to the 20th meters, or 10,000 light years from the sun, you begin
to see a spiral arm of our Milky Way galaxy. And a factor of 10 farther still, 100,000
light years from the sun, we can see the Milky Way galaxy and one of its companions, the large
Magellanic Cloud. At a distance of 10 to the 22 meters from the sun, or 1,000,000 light
years from the sun, you can see the Milky Way galaxy and its two companions, the Magellanic
Clouds. And from a factor of 10 farther out still, at 10,000,000 light years, you can
see the other galaxies of our so-called local group of galaxies, a group of a few dozen
galaxies of which our own Milky Way is a member. Now, if we view the universe or the sun from
a distance of 100 million light years, we might see something like this, a cluster, a
giant collection of galaxies, actually a super cluster. And our own galaxy, our Milky Way
is just one little speck in this field. It might be this one here, although we're not
seeing our own Milky Way from the outside, of course. This is just another view of the
universe. If we go out farther still to 1 billion light years from the sun, then you
can see this vast network of galaxies that form these chains and super clusters and in
between them voids, vast, relatively empty regions. So this is the universe on the largest
scales. And then if we go to the biggest scale of all, to 10 billion light years, you can
see the variations in the density of the early universe from which our galaxy and other
similar galaxies and clusters and super clusters of galaxies formed. We're actually looking
to a distance of 13.7 billion light years now, but that's roughly 10 billion light years
in order of magnitude. And we are seeing essentially the universe as it was when it was an infant.
And these are tiny little variations in density from which galaxies and clusters of galaxies
eventually contracted due to gravity. Okay? So this is a marvelous tour of the universe
over 43 factors of 10 in scale. I hope it gives you some idea of the richness of the
universe on a variety of scales. Now, it's useful sometimes to come up with analogies.
And for the power of 10 analogies, for the power of 10 analogies, I tried to say that,
well, suppose one meter is $1, then one centimeter would be one cent. And the radius of an atom
on this scale would be 10 to the minus eight centimeters, which is one, which is 100 millionth
of a cent. Well, not many of us are used to thinking about 100 millionth of a cent, right?
So that's not too useful. The radius of a proton is 100,000 times smaller still. So
that's one, you know, one 100,000th of one 100 millionth of a cent. So that's not terribly
useful. If, on the other hand, you go up to high scales and you say, well, all right,
one light year is 10 trillion kilometers, it's about 10 quadrillion meters or 10 million
billion meters, that would be equivalent to 10 million billion dollars. Well, who's used
to thinking about numbers like that? A galaxy is 100,000 times bigger. So that would be
even even even larger. And, and our universe is another factor of 100,000 bigger than that.
You would need 100 million billion billion dollars to describe the size of our universe
if each meter is $1. Now 100 million billion billion dollars even dwarfs our own national
debt and is in fact much, much more money than in the entire world. So the one meter equals
$1 analogy, I conclude, is not very useful because it doesn't give you scales that you
can appreciate. All right, it's hard to think of something that encompasses all of the scales
of the universe. Even saying like, well, let's, let's make a meter equal to one second and
and look at the number of seconds the universe has been around. It turns out the universe
has been around for about five times 10 to the 17 seconds. That still falls short of
describing the full size of the universe if, if you were to use that analogy. So analogies
can be useful, but you need to find good ones. Okay, so let's try to find a good one. People
often say that there are far more stars in our Milky Way galaxy than there are grains of
sand on the beach. That's an analogy you often hear. Let's see if that's really true. Let's
estimate the number of grains of sand on a beach. It's often said that a good physicist
should be able to estimate essentially anything to within a factor of 10 or 100. Okay, so
here's a galaxy. It has about 100 billion or let's say 300 billion stars. It's like our
own Milky Way galaxy. And here's a beach in Hawaii that has fine grain sand. So let's zoom
in and take a closer look at the sand. There it is, closer still. And in fact, I can take
a little bit of sand here in a canister. And just to show you how fine it is, let me pour
it like this. Look at that fine sand. You might think surely there are about as many
grains of sand as there are stars in our galaxy. Look at all those grains of sand. Over the
whole beach, there's a lot of them. But people say there's a lot of stars as well. So maybe
there are more stars or just as many stars as grains of sand on a beach. Well, suppose
for quantitative purposes, we say that there are three grains of sand per millimeter. You
can measure them out, put them out on a line, and you can see that there's about three
grains of this particular sand per millimeter. So there's 30 grains per centimeter. If you
cube that, you find that there's 30,000 grains per cubic centimeter. Now suppose a beach is
one meter deep and 10 meters wide and one kilometer long. Those are 10 to the 2 centimeters
deep, 10 to the 3 centimeters wide, and 10 to the 5 centimeters long. The volume of that
beach would be 10 to the 2 times 10 to the 3 times 10 to the 5, or 10 to the 10 cubic
centimeters. Multiplying by the number of grains per cubic centimeter, one would find
that there are 3 times 10 to the 14 grains of sand on that beach. That's a factor of
1,000 more than the 3 times 10 to the 11 or 300 billion stars in a typical big galaxy.
So in fact, you would need about 1,000 galaxies, a nice, rich cluster like this one, to get
about as many stars as there are grains of sand on a large, fine-grained beach. So there
are lots of stars in galaxies, but let's not take anything away from the universe, but
there's also an awful lot of grains of sand on a long beach. So when they say that there
are more stars in our Milky Way galaxy than there are grains of sand on a fine-grained,
large beach, that's actually not true. You need about 1,000 galaxies to get as many grains
of sand. However, there are variables, of course. You could look at the sand and you could say,
well, some beaches have more finely-grained sand and others have coarser grains, and not
all beaches are the same size. So let's see what happens when you vary these different
parameters, the coarseness of the sand on the beach, the length, width, and depth of the
beach, and see if we can find some sort of a closer correspondence between the number of
grains and the number of stars. So suppose, for example, there's only one grain of sand
per millimeter, so they're bigger grains. And in that case, you'd have 1,000 grains of sand
per cubic centimeter. And now let's suppose that our beach is still one meter deep, but
now let's say it's only three meters instead of ten meters wide, and let's say it's 100
meters instead of a kilometer, 1,000 meters long. In that case, the volume of sand is 100
times 300 times 10,000, and you get 3 times 10 to the 8 cubic centimeters, or 300 million
cubic centimeters. Multiplying by the number of grains, which is 1,000 per cubic centimeter,
you find that there are about 3 times 10 to the 11 grains, or 300 billion grains. Now that,
in fact, is comparable to the number of stars in our galaxy or another galaxy of a similar
size and shape, like this one. So if you have a coarse-grained beach with not that extensive
an amount of sand, then, in fact, the number of grains of sand is comparable to the number
of stars in a big galaxy. So that's a useful analogy. So how big is our galaxy? Well, we
think it's about the same size as the Andromeda galaxy, our nearest big neighbor, shown here,
and there's a cute way of estimating its physical size. If you take a long exposure photograph
of the Andromeda galaxy, you find that out in its outermost faint parts, if you take that
entire extent, that whole diameter is about five times the apparent angular size of the
full moon. So in a sense, the Andromeda galaxy is five or six full moons across, depending
on how deep your photograph is. You can measure a slightly different angular extent for the
Andromeda galaxy. So if you say that, OK, it's five times the moon's apparent size, but it's also
a lot farther away. You can figure out the Andromeda galaxy's physical size. In fact, its physical
size would be five times the moon's physical size multiplied by the ratio of the distance to
Andromeda to the distance to the moon. That ratio, distance of Andromeda to distance to moon has to be
multiplied by five times the moon's physical size. And you find out when you do this calculation
that the Andromeda galaxy is about 110,000 light years in diameter. 110,000 light years in diameter.
And that's comparable, we think, to our own galaxy. So it would take 110,000 years for light traveling
at the speed of light to traverse the Andromeda galaxy, or roughly speaking, our galaxy.
I mean, ours might be more like 80,000 or 90,000 light years across, but hey, you know, they're
both around 100,000 light years across, and that's a vast, vast number. So this lecture has
illustrated the vast range of size scales over which physical processes have been studied in the
universe. And what I find truly amazing, and I'll discuss it later on, is that we have discovered
that the properties of matter on the smallest conceivable scales, atomic and subatomic scales,
end up dictating or determining the properties of the universe on the very largest scales imaginable.
So there's this deep, marvelous connection between the microcosm and the macrocosm.
It's a wonderful physical insight that we have come to, that the laws of physics and the behavior
of matter on the smallest scales ends up determining the large-scale structure of the universe
and the behavior of stars and galaxies.
