In
the previous lecture, we saw that galaxies
and stars are incredibly far away, light years, thousands of light years, millions
of light years, distances that are very difficult to comprehend.
Now this makes astronomy very different from the other sciences.
In the other sciences, you can typically pick up the thing that you're studying, like
a rock or an apple, weigh it, immerse it in water to figure out its volume, chip away
parts of it to find what's inside, mix it with acid to get all sorts of chemical reactions
You can do real experiments to figure out what the structure of the object is.
But that's not the case in astronomy.
We can't go out to ace hardware and buy, you know, a typical sun or star or galaxy.
We can only study these things through the light that they emit and which reaches us.
With very few exceptions, we only study the light.
Now of course there are a few exceptions.
We can pick up moon rocks from the moon or sometimes little bits of rock called meteorites
come in and land on the earth or there are charged particles called cosmic rays from
the sun and from outer space.
So we do get some things from afar, but most astronomical objects are studied through
the light that they emit.
So it behooves us to understand just what light is and how to make the most of it.
They're all these stars.
What clues can we gain regarding their physical composition and their structure from the small
amounts of light that we get from them thousands of light years away?
What is light?
Seems like a simple question, but in fact it's very complex and it occupied physicists
for hundreds of years.
A clue can be obtained by passing what we call white light, sunlight, through a prism
and getting a spectrum or a rainbow.
Here we see a diagram of it going from red through violet.
You can remember the colors of the rainbow by remembering the name of the friendly fellow
Roy G. Biv.
Red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet.
Indigo is now sort of obsolete.
So here's a rainbow that you get from passing light through a prism.
A prism is just a piece of glass with angled edges like this, angled sides, and if you
pass the light through the prism, out comes the rainbow.
Now here you can't see it very well because there's light coming in from all directions,
but if you do this with a flashlight or something like that, you can get a rainbow coming out.
You can also do this with a CD.
A CD has all sorts of little grooves on the surface.
They're very hard to see, but it's a groovy surface, and when the white light bounces
off the grooves, it produces a rainbow of colors like this, very much like the colors
that you see coming out of a prism or the colors that are formed from raindrops when
you see a rainbow.
We studied rainbows already.
So Isaac Newton was the first to systematically decompose white light into its spectrum of
colors.
Besides famously contemplating apples and the nature of gravitation, he also played around
a lot with light and prisms, and in particular, he sent light through a prism and saw that
it has this rainbow of colors, and he thought, well gee, maybe the glass does something to
the light.
It changes it to give the light these colors, but he noticed that if you isolate, say, the
blue light or the green light and send it through a prism, it remains blue or green
or whatever color it was, so that suggests that it's not the glass that somehow changes
the properties of the light, but rather the glass somehow takes white light and spreads
it out into its intrinsic component colors.
So Newton realized that white light is this spectrum of colors.
He verified this by passing the light not through one prism, but through two.
If you appropriately arrange two prisms like this and have a lens in between that bends
the light in such a way as to make the beams parallel again, you can combine the rainbow
of colors with this second prism and get white light back out again.
So he could spread white light out and he could combine the rainbow and make white light come
back.
All right, well, Newton had a particle or a corpuscular theory of light.
Preceding that, there were a number of physicists, including Rene Descartes, who had a wave theory
of light.
Robert Hook, a contemporary of Newton's, also had a wave theory of light, and I think
it's fair to say that all of these were just hypotheses.
None of them was really very close to what we now consider to be the true nature of light.
I might add that Robert Hook was not just a contemporary of Newton's, but also a brilliant
man who had many of the same ideas.
Indeed, some say that he first had the idea that gravitation is an inverse square law,
and yet that idea is usually credited to Newton.
Newton was kind of a mean guy, and he didn't like it when other people thought the same
things he did or discovered them at the same time or even earlier.
And in some ways, he even tried to minimize the research of other physicists.
He tried to say that it's sort of not as good as it really is.
He downplayed it.
And Robert Hook was a man of considerably small stature.
He was kind of a short guy and somewhat disfigured.
So when Newton wrote him a letter, he said once, if I have seen further than others or
perhaps than you, it is by standing on the shoulders of giants.
And although that phrase is often credited to Newton, it was apparently in common use
at the time.
But here, Newton may have been taking a cheap shot at Hook by saying that, well, yes, he
stood on the shoulders of Copernicus and Galileo and people like that, but none of Hook's
work was of any relevance to his Newton's great discoveries.
And that's really not fair, because Hook did a lot of important stuff.
Let's come back to light and this rainbow we produced by passing the white light through
a glass prism.
If you measure the amount of light at each color, red through violet, and you plot that
amount of light or the brightness or the intensity along a vertical axis and the color of the
light from violet through red along the horizontal axis, that plot of brightness versus color
is what we call a spectrum.
And physicists, chemists, astronomers, and other scientists analyze spectra all the time.
The spectra are what give us really quantitative information about the physical nature of the
objects that we are studying.
Pictures are fine, that's great, but the pictures with spectra really tell you a lot.
So we'll be discussing spectra throughout this course many, many, many times.
So what is this visible light whose spectrum I've plotted?
Well, I'll go through this carefully, but let me just first say that visible light is
what we call one form of electromagnetic radiation.
And different kinds of electromagnetic radiation are fundamentally the same thing, but they
have different wavelengths, different frequencies, they're seen in different ways using different
detectors, but they're all fundamentally the same thing, they are electromagnetic waves.
Let's discuss what I mean by that.
Here is the electric field of a stationary positive charge.
By that I mean if you have a proton sitting on your lab table and you put another proton
next to it at rest, the other proton will go away from the stationary one along these
radial lines like this, as though there's a force field surrounding the stationary proton
pushing the other one away.
Conversely, if you had an electron next to the stationary proton, the electron would
be attracted along these radial lines.
So we say that an electric charge has a radial set of lines of force surrounding it.
Now a magnet is different.
A magnet also has lines of force, as are shown here, but the lines of force go from a north
pole to a south pole.
In other words, there's always two places where the lines of force come out.
They come out of the north pole and they also come out of the south pole, and in a sense
they point from the north pole to the south pole if you line up a compass needle, for example.
Now the stationary electric charge, you could have just one with lines of force radially
coming out from it.
With a magnet, you always have these two poles, the north pole and the south pole, and indeed
if you break a magnet in half, here you always have a north pole and a south pole for every
half that you broke it into, and if you break it into half again, there will be a north
pole and a south pole and so on.
And you can see these lines of force nicely if you put a magnet underneath a sheet of
paper and sprinkle some iron filings on top and then sort of jiggle it around.
They'll line themselves up along the lines of force.
I won't do that here because it's kind of messy.
Now I love magnets.
You can play around with them and they're just an infinite source of amusement.
I can feel, I can feel the force between these two magnets.
You can't see it, but I can feel it and it's different from gravity.
In fact, I can make the force oppose that of gravity by putting magnets on top of each
other like this on a pen.
Look at that.
They jiggle around like that and there's something holding them up and it's not the
air, you know.
It's something else.
I can feel it and if I can switch them around like this, well, then they attract one another.
It's just great.
I mean, there they are, these magnets and I can play with bar magnets like this and
unlike poles attract, like north and south, they attract each other and like poles repel
and indeed if I change the configuration with the right frequency, I can make a motor, right?
I can make this thing spin.
You can make tools out of magnets.
You can generate electricity and things.
They're just fun to play with.
They're great and in the first and second grades, I was obsessed with magnets.
I would drag a magnet around in the sand and I would find much to my delight that the
sand had these iron filings in it and the magnet would pick them up.
See that?
There's this hairy beard on this magnet now and among the grains of sand, there were
clearly these little black things that got attracted by a magnet.
What was this?
What is this force that is so different from gravity?
It was just great and occasionally I'd find a BB.
That was kind of fun, you know, BBs in the sand.
People shoot them into the sand or whatever, but I had so much fun with these magnets and
I dragged them around in the sand and it was great.
Now at the school I was at at the time, you know, they were intent on rote memorization
of facts, but they did not encourage exploration of nature in this way and they actually thought
I was kind of weird.
They also thought I was weird because apparently at that time in the first and second grades,
I only ate peanut butter and jelly sandwiches, but they suggested to my parents that they
send me to a child psychologist because, you know, I was anti-social and played with magnets
and stuff and I remember being quite social and playing all these games, Red Rover and
all that, but I thought it was cool that there are these things, magnets, that you could
play around with.
So my parents didn't like that attitude.
They switched me from that school and at my new school they said, ah, you're interested
in magnets.
Well, go to the library and you will find a book that tells you how to make and control
magnetism by wrapping a wire around a nail like this, wrap a wire around a nail and initially
the nail doesn't pick up a paper clip.
And if you send a current through that wire, then the paper clip is picked up.
So suddenly I was sort of master of the universe.
I could control this mysterious thing, magnetism, though I still did not know what it is and
did not find out until well into college.
It's actually pretty complex, but I'll give you some idea of how electricity and magnetism
combined form light.
Indeed, you can already tell sort of a deep connection between electricity and magnetism
because sending a current through a wire produced a magnetic field.
Christian Ersted first noticed this by sending a current through wire and noticing that the
hand of a compass, that the needle of a compass was deflected.
That indicates that something having to do with the electricity flowing through a wire
affects objects that normally are affected only by magnetic fields, a deep connection
between a current carrying wire and a magnet.
Well, in 1831, Michael Faraday found that a changing magnetic field, if you don't just
make it stationary like that of a magnet sitting there, but if you change it, that induces,
that causes a current to go through a wire.
So not only does a wire carrying a current produce something like a magnetic field, in
fact it is a magnetic field, I just picked up the paper clip, but conversely a changing
magnetic field causes a current to go through a wire.
How great is that?
And Maxwell suggested, based on this deep connection between electricity and magnetism,
that maybe light is a form of vibrations of these electric and magnetic fields.
Faraday invented the concept of field lines and he said, if you jiggle these things around
and cause them to oscillate and vibrate, maybe that's what light is.
But Faraday was very much an experimentalist with almost no formal mathematical training.
He did not have the mathematical expertise to prove this suggestion.
But later, James Clark Maxwell, a brilliant mathematician, was able to show that Faraday
was right.
Maxwell took the four equations governing electricity and magnetism that were known at that time.
He modified one of them in an important way and then he combined them all and when he
combined them and fiddled around with the equations, out plopped an equation that described
the propagation of electric and magnetic fields, vibrating, oscillating, propagating and self-generating.
And when Maxwell calculated the speed of these waves, lo and behold it turned out to be none
other than the speed of light.
Maxwell said, whoa, Faraday, you were right.
Light is a vibration of electric and magnetic fields.
It is an electromagnetic wave traveling at 300,000 kilometers per second.
So I have this wonderful t-shirt.
It says, God said, and then there are the four equations of electromagnetism.
And it says, and then there was light.
Merds like to wear these kinds of shirts and I love them.
So I have several forms of this shirt.
There are various ways you can write the equations in so-called integral form, like these and
in so-called differential form.
It's just different mathematical ways of writing down this beautiful set of equations which,
when properly manipulated, predicts the existence of electromagnetic waves traveling at the
known speed of light.
One of the great, great triumphs of 19th century physics, for sure.
So here is a diagram of an electromagnetic wave.
You have these magnetic fields that are oscillating.
So it's strong here, then it gets weaker, weaker, weaker, weaker.
Then it reverses direction, becomes stronger, stronger, stronger, then weaker, and so on.
In other words, it's changing in strength as it goes along.
That changing magnetic field produces an electric field.
Here it is right there, perpendicular to it, getting stronger and weaker.
Then it reverses direction, stronger and weaker, reverses direction again, stronger and weaker.
That changing electric field then induces a magnetic field which itself changes, stronger
and weaker, stronger and weaker.
That changing magnetic field reproduces an electric field, stronger and weaker.
They are oscillating, they are vibrating, and it is their vibrations that leads to the
production of the subsequent electric or magnetic field.
In other words, a changing magnetic field produces an electric field, a changing electric
field produces a magnetic field, and the two fields together propagate perpendicular to
their direction of oscillation.
So here is my simplistic version of what an electromagnetic wave might be, light.
The electric field is up and down, the magnetic field is horizontal, they're changing in intensity,
and they're propagating at the speed of light, C, in a direction perpendicular to their direction
of vibration or oscillation.
So that's what's going on.
Now an electromagnetic wave is produced whenever a magnetic field is changing or whenever an
electric field is changing.
So by taking this magnet and taking it back and forth like this, I'm creating a changing
magnetic field that produces a changing electric field which then produces a changing magnetic
field.
So I'm sending electromagnetic radiation out, but you can't see it because I'm oscillating
this so slowly and the associated wavelength is so long that this is what's called a radio
wave and our eyes are not sensitive to radio waves.
But if I were to jiggle this thing around about a hundred trillion times a second you
would see optical visible light emanating from the magnet.
So let's look at this wave and discuss some of its properties.
Here is a wave oscillating up and down.
We can define the distance between any two successive wave crests to be lambda, the
wavelength, usually denoted by the Greek lower case lambda.
So the distance between two successive crests or the distance between two successive troughs
is called a wavelength.
Now pick a point, call it Q, and let this wave go past.
Not the number of times that a crest moves past the point Q, that is the wave's frequency.
If ten crests go by, that's a frequency of ten waves or ten cycles per second.
Going back to this, most generally speed is denoted by V for velocity.
But be sure not to confuse V, the speed or velocity of a wave, with the Greek lower case
letter new, the wave's frequency.
The symbols really do look very similar.
Notice trivially that the inverse of the frequency must be the period.
If there are ten waves per second each of them must be one over ten or one tenth of
a second long.
If we now multiply the wavelength, the length per wave, by the frequency, the number of
waves per second.
You notice that the waves cancel out and you get a length per second.
Well what's a length per second?
It's just the speed.
Length per second is a speed.
If I'm running or if I'm making waves in a slinky or water waves or whatever, this is
a general result that wavelength times frequency is the speed of the wave.
And if the speed is equal to the speed of light, then we get the simpler relation, wavelength
multiplied by frequency equals C, the speed of light.
Now the typical units of measurement of wavelength, at least for visible light, are the so-called
angstrom units where an angstrom is ten to the minus ten meters, one ten billionth of
a meter.
It's also a tenth of a nanometer, a tenth of a billionth of a meter.
And red, yellow, green, and blue are about 6,500 of these, 5,500, 5,000, and 4,500 angstroms
respectively, roughly five times ten to the minus seven meters.
So I can't show you how small a visible light wave is because I can't make such a small
structure with my fingers, but it's comparable to or smaller than the nucleus of a cell as
we saw in the powers of ten video in the last lecture.
Now since lambda nu equals C and the speed of light C is 300 million meters per second,
you can calculate that for green light, which has a wavelength of around 5,000 angstroms,
the frequency is six times ten to the 14 waves per second.
That's 600 trillion waves per second.
It's comparable to what I said I'd have to oscillate this magnet at a couple of hundred
trillion times per second to generate a wave of visible radiation.
If I do it more slowly, that ends up being radio waves, or if I do it in between, that's
infrared or whatever, but these oscillations for visible light are very fast indeed.
If we look at the spectrum of visible light and we ask ourselves, well, does it extend
beyond that?
Indeed, it does.
The infrared or beyond red was discovered by Sir Frederick William Herschel in the
year 1800.
He put a thermometer beyond the red part of the spectrum here, and to his surprise, he
found that the thermometer heats up beyond the red light, beyond the place where the
rainbow ends, you know, where the spectrum ends, it still affects the thermometer.
So he called these calorific rays after calories for heat or energy, and later it was found
that they're subject to the same laws or rules as visible light is.
They are bent by glass, they get absorbed and reflected, they do all the sorts of things
that visible light does, but you can't see them.
Similarly, below the violet part of the spectrum is a region known as the ultraviolet.
It was discovered in 1801 by Johann Ritter when he found that normal light, when exposed
to a photographic emulsion, causes that emulsion to darken because the silver grains form and
they darken, initially they are silver chloride and they react chemically with the light and
they darken.
Well, he found that ultraviolet light beyond the violet, though you can't see it, is even
better at darkening silver chloride, that is at causing a chemical reaction in the photographic
emulsion, and he called these chemical rays in 1801.
So if we look at the full electromagnetic spectrum, I give here a table that roughly
indicates the wavelengths involved.
Visible light is from about 4,000 to 7,000 angstroms, above that is infrared, it starts
at about 7,000 and goes up to about one millimeter long waves.
And by the way, all these boundaries are fuzzy.
There's no set number that physicists agree upon that clearly delineates a visible from
an infrared wave, but these are the approximate boundaries.
Above one millimeter, you get the radio waves from one millimeter to a centimeter to a meter
to 10 meters to a kilometer to 10 kilometers and beyond, they're all radio waves.
The radio waves have no boundary at the long end of the spectrum.
Going back to visible light, if we go short word of it, we get to what's called the ultraviolet,
what Ritter discovered, that's from about 100 to 4,000 angstroms.
Below about that we get x-rays, x-rays are about 0.1 to 100 angstroms, and atom is about
an angstrom in size, so they're comparable to the size of an x-ray, and these are the
things that doctors and dentists use to examine the bones in your body.
Below a tenth of an angstrom are what we call gamma rays, and anything whose wavelength is
below a tenth of an angstrom, any electromagnetic wave is then called a gamma ray.
Gamma rays have no boundary at the short end of the electromagnetic spectrum, just as radio
waves have no boundary at the long end.
And if we look at this whole thing on a scale that has nearly everything from gamma rays
to x-rays to ultraviolet, each of these tick marks is an increase by a factor of 10 in
wavelength.
So I go 0.01 angstroms to a tenth, to one, to ten, to a hundred, to a thousand.
This is like the powers of ten video.
Each tick mark is a factor of ten.
We see just this tiny little part between four and seven thousand angstroms.
There's a vast range of shorter wavelengths we do not see.
Similarly, there's a vast range of longer wavelengths, the infrared and the radio, that
we do not see.
Out of the huge electromagnetic spectrum, all we are privileged to see is the tiny interval
between four thousand and seven thousand angstroms of light that's about the size of
the nucleus of a cell.
There are no qualitative differences between these different types of electromagnetic radiation.
They are all oscillating electric and magnetic fields.
They're all the same phenomenon.
They travel with the same speed.
However, the sizes of the waves and their frequencies are so different that very different
forms of detection are needed.
Our human eye is sensitive to a very small sliver in the electromagnetic spectrum.
Your radio or your television set is sensitive to radio waves.
Photographic emulsions might be sensitive to optical or visible and ultraviolet and
in some cases even x-ray light.
Doctors and dentists use it.
So we detect these things in different ways, but they're all qualitatively the same kind
of wave.
They all travel with the same speed, the speed of light through a vacuum, regardless of wavelength.
And they all slow down when entering a certain type of medium, like glass or water or air.
And indeed, this is what causes the dispersion of light into its colors.
Microscopically, the waves slow down.
Here are wave fronts connecting crests of these waves oscillating along.
So here are the wave fronts.
When they enter glass, the wave fronts slow down.
So the initial direction of the wave was this way, but after the waves slow down, you see
that the wave has bent.
Now the waves are going this way.
And the amount of bending quantitatively depends on the wavelength of light, and this is what
gives rise to the spreading out or dispersion of light by glass.
It's because the glass slows down blue light more than red light and bends the blue light
more.
Finally, an interesting aspect of light is that its measured speed in a vacuum is independent
of the motion of either the source of the light or the observer.
It's always measured to be see the speed of light.
Now that's really weird, because if I'm in a car, I'm stationary relative to myself.
But if I'm moving toward you at 60 miles an hour, you see me moving with that speed.
And if you're moving relative to the ground in the opposite direction at 60 miles an hour,
then our relative speeds, hoping we don't crash into each other, are 60 plus 60 or 120
miles per hour.
Well, that's true for rocks and automobiles and things and balls, but for light, that's
not the case.
If I shine a laser beam and measure the speed of light, it's 300,000 kilometers per second.
If I move this laser beam or this laser at, say, even half the speed of light, I will
still measure the speed to equal light.
That is, light always goes at the speed of light, never as some combination of the speed
of light and the speed of the source or the observer.
And that is a fact, which ends up being a fundamental aspect to Einstein's special theory
of relativity, as we will see later in the course.
