In the previous lecture, I discussed the wave nature of light.
That light is electromagnetic radiation, that is, changing electric and magnetic fields
that reinforce, support, and indeed create one another as they together propagate through space.
It's a wave.
And there's abundant evidence in nature that light is a wave.
For example, I had mentioned in lecture two that the supernumerary bows on the inner part of a rainbow
can be understood through a wave description of light, not a particle description.
Similarly, I discussed the corona around the sun and the moon.
When you look at it through fog or haze, you can see these multi-colored rings around the sun and the moon.
Those are explained through the wave nature.
Here's the corona around the moon, the previous one was around the sun.
And also, soap bubbles and the colors that you see within them are beautifully explained by the wave nature of light.
To understand these phenomena, we have to look at how waves interfere with one another, both constructively and destructively.
Now, if you look at water waves, if you take two little needles and jab the water a few times a second,
you'll see these waves coming out in circular patterns, wave crests and troughs.
And where the crests of two waves meet and where the troughs of the two waves meet,
they reinforce each other constructively, creating a higher amplitude.
Where a crest and a trough meet, they combine destructively and you get no variation in the height of the surface of the water.
Here, with light shining on it, you can kind of see the crests and the troughs.
If you put a screen at one end of the water tank and measure the patterns,
you find that regions of high wave amplitude are separated by regions of zero amplitude.
In regions of high amplitude, the waves have reinforced each other,
and in the regions between them, there's actually no water amplitude.
That is, the water wave is zero at this particular point because the crests and troughs of the water waves cancelled each other out.
Light does a similar sort of thing.
If you have two light waves that are in phase whose crests and troughs are together in space,
then they add together to make even bigger crests and even bigger troughs.
That is a higher amplitude for the wave.
If instead the waves are out of phase so that one crest is lined up with another wave's trough,
they add destructively and you get zero light.
That's called destructive interference to contrast it with constructive interference.
So here's what happens if you send a plane wave where with these lines,
I'm indicating places where you have wave crests.
There's a wave crest and here's the next wave crest and here's the next one.
And in between are the wave troughs.
Anyway, so here's a plane wave coming in from the left going through two small holes in a screen.
What happens is that the holes lead to a bending of the light.
It comes out in these semi-circular patterns and in some places the crests of one wave
reinforce or combine with the crests of the other wave having come through the other hole
and you get sort of super crests.
You get a bigger amplitude there and similarly troughs can combine with troughs to form an even
deeper trough, one of bigger amplitude.
But where a crest combines with a trough, there you have destructive interference and zero light.
So if you were to place a screen on the right here and measure the pattern of light,
it would look a lot like the wave pattern that I showed a few minutes ago here.
You tend to get constructive interference at a given point if the length that that wave has
to traverse from the second hole is equal to one wavelength or a multiple of one wavelength
more than the distance that the light had to travel from the first hole.
So here's light traveling from the first hole, it ends up over here.
Light traveling from the second hole ends up over there as well.
If the extra path difference is an integer multiple of one wavelength,
then you will have constructive interference at that point.
If instead the extra path difference is an integer plus one half multiple of a wavelength,
then a crest will combine with a trough and you will get destructive interference.
So here are the regions of constructive interference where the light is bright
and there are the regions of destructive interference where there's no light at all.
That's what gives rise to this pattern.
So now let's look at light waves bending around water droplets.
They go through holes or spaces between these water droplets in the case of light
streaming its way through fog, but in a similar way they bend around the individual droplets.
So even if the spacing between the droplets is very large compared to the droplets,
much larger than in this diagram, you still get these semicircular wavelengths of light
coming off from having bent around the individual droplets.
It's just that the experiment I showed with two holes made it abundantly clear what's going on.
Here it's just a little bit more complicated, but the result is the same.
The waves bend around the little droplets and they then have a chance to constructively and
destructively interfere. Here's a wave crest denoted by a solid line interfering with a wave
trough denoted by the dashed line giving you zero light. Here's a trough constructively
interfering with a trough giving you sort of a super or a deeper trough or a constructive
interference. So that kind of thing is what leads to the corona around the moon or the sun.
The soft glow of rings of light hugging close to the sun and the moon that you sometimes see
through fog, or if you look at a bright headlight through fog you'll see this corona.
A related effect occurs when light bounces off of a soap film. It's going through the air.
Some light bounces off and it goes on like that. Other light traverses the soap film and bounces
from the opposite edge. It bounces back and in this particular figure the way it's drawn,
the light ray that bounced directly off the front edge of the soap film is interfering
destructively with the light that bounced off the back end of the soap film. So that's
destructive interference. For a thicker layer of soap the bounced off wave, the wave that
bounced from the first interface might be in phase with the wave that bounced off the
second soap air interface and in that case you'll have constructive rather than destructive
interference. And these patterns shift for different wavelengths and different angles
of incidence and different thicknesses of the soap film. So you can get very complex looking
patterns. Here's an example of a soap film where here are blue rays that were constructively
interfering. There are some purplish waves that were constructively interfering and then there
are regions where it's kind of black where no waves were interfering or maybe yellow waves
were interfering. So you change the soap bubble a little bit you know the thickness of the soap
or the angle of illumination or whatever and you can get just an infinite variety of these
soap bubble patterns from this interference of light. And finally as I mentioned near the beginning
of the course the supernumerary bows are also understood in terms of interference of light.
You have two paths of two different rays going through a water droplet and they emerge having
traversed slightly different path lengths and if they emerge out of phase as is drawn here
you get destructive interference and hence a dark region in the bow and if they emerge in phase you
get constructive interference and hence a bright part of the bow. So you can see bright parts of
the bow where there's constructive interference and dark parts of the bow where there's destructive
interference and that's what explains the supernumerary bands. So there's lots of evidence for the
wave nature of light. On the other hand it turns out that light also has a fundamentally different
nature that of particles. Light comes in little packets of energy that we now call photons.
Here's a simplistic representation of what they might look like. Little footballs with a package
of energy and electromagnetic waves sitting around inside having different colors or wavelengths or
frequencies and what we call white light is a bunch of these little packages or photons as we call
them having a range of wavelengths and frequencies but all together collectively we call them white
light whereas if you look at a green laser beam for example you just have a bunch of the green
photons all cruising along together collectively making what we in some cases see as an electromagnetic
wave that is able to constructively and destructively interfere but if you look carefully and you try
to detect what's going on in that wave and you do it in the right way you will see particles,
particles. Particles in some cases waves in other cases. Experiments can distinguish the particle
nature of light or the wave nature of light as I will show but never both simultaneously.
Now a photon has no mass but its energy is given by e equals a little tiny number called the
Planck constant multiplied by the frequency. Now Planck's constant is a very very small number
so the energy in any given photon is usually very small so you don't usually notice the energy of a
single photon unless it's a gamma ray and it kind of hits you in the head like a baseball.
So photons have energy but it is incorrect to say that they have mass. Now you may have
learned on your mother's knee Einstein's famous equation e equals mc squared so could you then
say that the mass of a photon is its energy divided by the speed of light squared? No you cannot
say that you should not say that. The energy of a photon is Planck's constant h multiplied by its
frequency. It does not have a corresponding mass. A photon is a massless particle. If you stopped it
you would destroy it. It would no longer exist. It only has energy as it's traveling. It has no
mass if you stop it. It ceases to exist and it is unfair to talk about a photon as though it had mass.
So photons of higher energy denoted by the vertical axis here have higher frequency going from red
through green to violet but shorter wavelength so high frequency waves have or high frequency
photons have shorter wavelengths. Low frequency photons have longer wavelengths so the red guys
have the longer wavelengths the violet guys have the shorter ones and always e equals h Planck's
constant times the frequency but since the speed of light is equal to the wavelength multiplied by
the frequency the frequency is the same thing as the speed of light divided by the wavelength
so I could substitute that into this formula and find that e equals hc over lambda so the energy of
a photon is directly proportional to its frequency or inversely proportional to its wavelength.
High frequencies short wavelengths low frequencies long wavelengths that's the
kind of thing. So why would we think that light is quantized in any way? The first indication
came to Max Planck. He was considering for example the energy in an oven and a hot oven
and according to the classical theory of waves a hot oven should have progressively more and
more and more waves of shorter and shorter and shorter wavelength. Indeed it should have
infinitely many waves of the shortest wavelength in a sense you can call those ultraviolet wavelengths
because they're shorter than than visible wavelengths and this overabundance of short
wavelength waves was called the ultraviolet catastrophe. The energy in an oven should
technically be infinite and that was what was called the ultraviolet catastrophe. Clearly
you turn on an oven and you haven't you know spent your life savings heating it up you haven't
spent an infinite amount of energy but you would according to the classical theory okay.
So Planck said well let me quantize the energy of light in a way like this e equals h nu when he
did that without specifically talking about photons but when he just said let me quantize the energy
of the wave in this way he got rid of the problem you you don't get an ultraviolet catastrophe.
So that was the first indication that at least the energy is quantized. Now Albert Einstein
thought of the idea of actual packages of energy photons and he came up with this when
considering something called the photoelectric effect. If you take a metal and you shine long
wavelength light like red light or green light at it no electrons come off of the metal. The
metal might heat up a little bit because it's absorbing light but no electrons go flying off.
If instead you shine blue light or violet light on the metal then electrons come popping off
every once in a while and indeed if you shine violet light the electrons come popping off with
more speed than they do when you shine blue light at the metal. And this happens even if you shine
light that's very dim on the metal. Every once in a while the blue light will pop off an electron
going with some speed. The violet light every once in a while will pop off an electron going
with an even greater speed. But shine arbitrarily large amounts of red light and green light on
that metal and no electrons come off ever. Now why is that? I mean if they're storing up the energy
if light is a wave can't they store it up until there's enough energy to pop off an electron?
Apparently they can't. And what Einstein proposed was that light comes with these energy packages
that he called photons and the photons hit the metal one at a time and the blue and violet photons
individually have enough energy to kick off an electron and they do so and the violet photons
have more energy than the blue so they kick it off with a greater speed. But the green and red
photons individually do not have enough energy so they never kick off the electron.
It is for this explanation that Einstein actually won the Nobel Prize, not for relativity.
Another indication of photons comes from the Compton effect. If you take electromagnetic
radiation and shine it on at an electron that's stationary what you find is that the wave that
comes off has a longer wavelength than the incident wave, for example red instead of blue,
and the electron goes zooming off in some diagonal direction. Now according to the classical wave
only picture the electromagnetic wave interacting with the electron should cause it to oscillate,
that's what the electric field in the wave does, and the electron oscillates at exactly the same
frequency as that of the incoming wave, and so the electron should emit a wave of exactly the
same frequency, hence exactly the same wavelength as the incoming wave. Yet the experimental result
is that the wave that's emitted by the electron is of a longer wavelength. Weird. Well if a ball hits
another ball and causes that other ball to go careening off in some direction the incident ball
loses some energy. And so in a sense a photon hitting an electron and causing that electron to move
has to lose some energy and it turns into say a red photon having started as a blue photon,
that's the explanation for the Compton effect. So all these bits and pieces of evidence suggested
that we have this picture here, that light is a bunch of photons, and each photon has an amount
of energy equal to Planck's constant times the frequency. Okay so I've just given you evidence
that light is a particle, yet at the beginning of the lecture I said that it's a wave, emphatically
a wave, it can shows all these interference effects. So which is it? Is it a particle or a wave?
It's both. It's really both at the same time and this is the essence of quantum physics. In a single
experiment dealing with light we can show you the fundamentals of a very complex theory of physics
quantum theory. Suppose I have a screen with two holes in it and I send particles through those
holes. I will get a clumping of particles on a screen opposite to the location of the two holes,
that's just where they bunch up because they went through the holes. If instead I send a wave
through two holes, well we've already seen many times this pattern that's produced, you get
constructive interference in a bright spot and destructive interference where there's no light.
So it's clear that when you send something with a wave-like property through two holes
you get an interference pattern whereas when you send particles through two holes you get two clumps.
Well when you send light waves through the two holes in the screen you get the interference
pattern shown here. The light is definitely a wave. Okay but now suppose you try to measure
which hole the light actually went through. Since I just told you that the light is actually
photons, particles, shouldn't each of them travel through one and only one hole and you know measure
which one each photon went through, what do you get when you do that? The interference pattern
disappears. You get a clumping up of light diametrically opposite each of the two holes as we
had here in this pattern right there. When you measure which hole the light went through you get
the pattern that's associated with particles and you can measure which hole it went through by
attaching little contraptions to your screen like these little rollers and if the photon went through
this hole then it'll it'll hit the screen here and these rollers will measure the screen recoiling
and so you can tell that it's this hole that it went through not this one because this roller
didn't move for example. So there are various gadgets you can attach these screens and measure
which hole it went through and when you measure which hole it went through you destroy the interference
pattern and you produce the pattern that you get when bullets, when particles go through a hole in a
wall. When you don't measure which hole they went through you get the interference pattern typical
of waves. Is that bizarre or what? Now you might say okay well maybe the photons individually go
through the holes but you need a lot of them and collectively they interfere with one another
and that's how you get you know a wave pattern but you somehow by measuring which hole they went
through you've messed them up you didn't let them interfere with their friends or whatever and so
that's how you messed up the wave pattern you could concoct some scheme. Well if I send photons
through the holes one by one I have a very low intensity source of light and the photons are
going through one by one and takes me months to gather up enough photons on my photographic film
to see you know the result and I develop the film if I don't measure which hole they went through
I get a wave pattern if I measure which hole they went through I get the particle pattern
but the wave pattern is still there even when the photons were sent one by one which means
that every single photon went through both holes at least when it wasn't being measured when you
try to measure it you force a given photon to choose one hole or another and then the pattern
that you get is particles the pattern of particles but when you don't force it to choose that particle
with its wave nature goes through both holes. This is really weird stuff okay
none of us is very comfortable with quantum mechanics but this is just the way it works
and it works this way in part because of something that Werner Heisenberg came up with the so
called Heisenberg uncertainty principle he said that by measuring which hole the photon went through
you forced it to decide and you gave it enough of a disturbance you disturbed its trajectory enough
that it shifted it a little bit it shifted the wave pattern in such a way that everything
kind of gets smeared out and you don't get the beautiful constructive and destructive interference
of waves and you get this because by allowing the light to go through a hole and by knowing that
it went through that hole you are restricting your attention to exactly where the photon is
that is you know exactly where it is in x let's say the screen is x direction so you know oh there
it is right there but Heisenberg's uncertainty principle says that if you know x if you know the
position then you don't know the momentum very well now momentum is usually mass times velocity
for light it's a related quantity but suffice it to say that photons have momentum as well as
position and when you measure the position you mess up the momentum in particular the uncertainty
in the position delta means uncertainty in sort of Greek physics speak so delta x the uncertainty
in the position if that's small multiplied by the uncertainty in the momentum well that will have to
be big for the product to be bigger than Planck's constant divided by 2 pi so if you know the position
the momentum uncertainty has to be big for the product to exceed this number
if you don't know the position very much if you don't know where it is in x
then you know what its momentum is pretty well you know the product of uncertainties has to
always exceed a certain number and I won't go into this more but this is the instance of quantum
physics this uncertainty principle and when you force the photon to choose a hole you also disturb
it enough to destroy the pattern that's what happens so I have this t-shirt it says Heisenberg
says delta x delta p is at least as big as Planck's constant divided by 2 pi h bar that's what that
little bar means the equation knows best well that's the fundamental equation of of quantum physics
is this uncertainty principle so what is the wave of every particle the wave really is what's called
a probability distribution or a wave function you don't know where the particle is it doesn't
even know where it is nature doesn't know where it is until a measurement is made and and the
measurement itself forces the particle to choose some part of that probability distribution some
part of that wave function now it turns out that not only light but particles have this property I
said photons are particles and they have this wave particle duality well electrons have this
property as well and I have this property everything has this property everything has a wave like
property where the wavelength is Planck's constant divided by the momentum for a classical particle
mv and usually the wavelength is exceedingly small because Planck's constant is a tiny tiny tiny
number but fundamentally everything has both a particle and a wave like property so for example
I could try to go through this wall here by bouncing against it normally I would hurt myself and I
thought bounced harder trying to get through the wall maybe I'd eventually be able to break it down
if I had the strength of a bulldozer but it would hurt me and it would hurt the wall or I can just
wait for quantum mechanics to do its trick my probability distribution is mostly here but it
extends a little bit beyond the wall so if we wait a long time a very long time I will occasionally
be found on the other side of the wall without having hurt myself or the wall at all weird huh
and if you send like photons or light out of a light bulb like this you don't know initially
where they are so a given photon could be anywhere in a circle or a sphere surrounding this
light bulb but when that probability distribution hits this wall here where there's some detectors
in every case one and only one detector on this spherical cavity will detect the photon even though
its probability distribution was equal everywhere when a detection is made it'll be made once and
only once that means that the probability distribution elsewhere has to instantaneously
vanish this is called the collapse of the wave function and quantum physicists are quite bothered
by it because it suggests that information traveled faster than the speed of light if the
detection of the photon at one location prevents the detection everywhere else that means the wave
function has to vanish everywhere else instantaneously and that seems to be information traveling
faster than the speed of light a violation of relativity but in quantum mechanics you can have
such violations of classical physics quantum mechanics is its own weird new not now not so new
century old form of physics it works is all we can say when you make predictions based on quantum
calculations and you compare with the results of experiments you get the right answer you can
explain every experiment that's ever been done at the subatomic level using quantum mechanics
yet we don't have a good intuitive feeling for quantum mechanics for how it works for why
it's the case if you're having trouble with this lecture you're in good company the greatest minds
of physics have struggled with this for a century most of us agree that quantum mechanics works
few of us if any have any intuitive feeling for how it works and Richard Feynman one of the greatest
most intuitively thinking physicists ever to have lived said this about quantum mechanics
if you are not bothered and puzzled by it you haven't thought about it enough
