In the previous lecture, I discussed how opaque bodies emit radiation of their own due to
the jiggling motions of charged particles inside them.
They jiggle around and they accelerate and they emit this radiation.
And in the ideal case where a body only emits light of its own, it doesn't reflect any light
from outside, it doesn't transmit any light like a window, but only emits light of its
own, you get a curve known as the Planck curve that is dependent only on the temperature
of the body, not on its chemical composition or shape or anything else.
It's an ideal thermal radiator.
However, very few things are ideal and that's good because it's the deviations from this
very simple mathematical form for the spectrum that actually ends up giving us information
on the chemical composition of the object, its pressure, its density and other aspects
of its physical nature.
In particular, in this lecture, I will discuss with you how individual photons interact with
atoms and get absorbed and re-emitted in such a way as to be able to tell us the chemical
composition of stars and other objects in the universe.
If we look at an idealized star that only emits this continuum, this Planck curve, you get
a very simple spectrum.
It drops off at short wavelengths, peaks somewhere in the middle, and then drops off
again at long wavelengths.
That's the continuum, the thermal continuum.
And if a star were an ideal, a perfectly ideal radiator, that's what it would emit.
However, in addition to the hot opaque outer layers, stars also have a cooler, thinner
atmosphere, and there the atoms can interact with the photons, with the particles of light,
in such a way as to produce deviations from this ideal Planck spectrum.
Typically, the deviations appear as absorption lines, parts of the spectrum where the spectrum
is less bright than in adjacent regions, these absorption lines like so, which if you were
to plot just the rainbow, the continuous spectrum here down below, you would see as dark lines
or depressions within the spectrum.
They are regions where there are fewer photons, there's less energy coming out at these locations
than at adjacent locations.
So from the pattern of these various absorption lines, we can determine the chemical composition
of the outer parts of the star, and presumably that's a good approximation to the chemical
composition of the entire star.
And we find that the stars are made of the same sorts of materials as those that exist
here on Earth.
Here's the rich periodic table of the elements, going from hydrogen, the lightest and most
abundant element, to helium, the second lightest, and it turns out second most abundant element,
and then all the other elements that we know and love, carbon that our cells are made of,
oxygen that we breathe, iron in our red blood cells, silver, platinum, and gold which are
in jewelry.
The rich periodic table is represented not only here on Earth, but out in space, and
we can tell that these elements exist in stars and elsewhere from the fingerprints that their
atoms put on the spectrum of radiation coming from stars.
The key point of this lecture is that every element, every neutral and ionized form of
a given element all produce a unique fingerprint in their set of absorption or relatedly emission
lines that I'll talk about in a few minutes.
So I have all these t-shirts that have various elements on them, and one of my favorites
is Burkelium because it has the symbol of Berkeley, the university that I teach at and
where this element was discovered, but since hydrogen is the most abundant element in the
universe and has the simplest electronic structure, in this lecture I will illustrate the physical
principles by concentrating most on hydrogen.
So let's look at atoms in general.
They have a nucleus down on the inside here consisting of protons and neutrons, and then
a cloud of electrons surrounding the nucleus.
The whole structure is about an angstrom in size, 10 to the minus 8 centimeters, although
the nucleus is much, much smaller.
Each individual proton and neutron is only about 10 to the minus 13 centimeters in size.
You will recall the powers of 10 movie that I showed.
The electrons are not very massive, each of them is only about one-two-thousandth the
mass of a proton or a neutron.
The neutrons are neutral, the protons are positively charged, and the electrons are negatively
charged, and the electrons and protons attract one another, and that's what keeps atoms stable.
Now the key thing to note is that the electrons in an atom have discrete sets of energy levels,
sometimes called orbits, that they can occupy.
The term orbit is misleading.
These electrons are not really orbiting the nucleus the way a planet orbits the sun.
They're really a probability distribution in quantum mumbo-jumbo.
It's all worked out in detail quantitatively with the mathematics, but the verbal description
sounds like mumbo-jumbo, but it's this probability distribution, and you don't really know where
the electron is.
But the point is that each electron has only certain energy levels that it can be at.
So let's look at the energy levels of a hydrogen atom.
I've drawn them schematically here.
A hydrogen atom has a lone proton in the nucleus and a single electron, at least in the neutral
state, and that electron can be in its lowest energy level, or the second one, or the third
one, or the fourth one.
The way I've drawn it here, the farther ones out have higher energy, and that's in general
the case.
The electrons farther from the nucleus have a greater amount of energy than those close
to the nucleus, but the exact spacing I've drawn here is merely illustrative.
If we look at how photons or individual particles of light can interact with the electrons,
we see in this diagram that a photon can be absorbed or taken up by an electron, and
in so doing, the electron has to jump to another energy level.
In fact, if it absorbed a package of energy, a photon, it has to jump from a lower energy
level to a higher energy level.
And here I've illustrated the transition from the first energy level, the so-called
ground state of hydrogen, to the third energy level.
The photon gets absorbed in the process.
It gets destroyed.
The photon no longer exists after the electron has captured it and been pumped up to a higher
energy level, or a higher orbital, although I don't really like that term.
You can't just absorb any old photon.
Only the photons whose energies are equal to the difference in energy between two energy
levels, only those can be absorbed.
So for example, this violet photon can be absorbed by the electron and cause it to jump
to the third energy level.
Or maybe another color photon will cause the electron to jump from the first to the second
energy level.
That would be a slightly less violet, less energetic photon.
A more energetic photon could make the electron jump from the first level to the fourth level,
an even higher state.
But you can't absorb photons having the wrong energies, all right, wrong for the purpose
of causing this electron to jump to a higher energy level.
In other words, if a photon comes along that does not equal the energy difference between
the ground state or whatever state the electron is in, and one of the allowed higher states,
the photon will just go right through the atom.
The atom will be transparent to such a photon, because it does not correspond to one of the
allowed transitions.
This is very much like a parking meter.
When you look at a parking meter, you know that you can put in a nickel, a dime, or a
quarter.
You can't put in 17 cents, okay?
It's not allowed.
It's forbidden.
Because the parking meter does not accept such units of money, 17 cents or 21 cents.
You can only put in 5, 10, or 25, or multiples thereof.
So suppose we've got a hydrogen atom that starts within its electron in the second energy
level, all right?
It turns out that to get to the fourth energy level requires a green photon, a particular
variety of a green photon, but it's green nonetheless.
So let's say we've got lots and lots of photons coming in.
There's white light, sunlight shining on this hydrogen.
The green photon can get absorbed by this electron, causing it to jump to the fourth
energy level.
The other ones go through unscathed.
So before absorption, you have these four photons coming in.
After absorption, the electron is now in the fourth energy level, rather than in the second
energy level, and you notice that the green photon is now gone.
It's been eaten.
It's been absorbed by the electron.
The energy of the photon absorbed is equal to the difference in energy, delta E, between
the fourth energy level, E sub 4, the higher energy level, and the second energy level,
E sub 2, the lower energy level.
That difference, delta E, is equal to the energy of the photon, which in turn must be
Planck's constant multiplied by the frequency of the photon, or Planck's constant multiplied
by the speed of light divided by the wavelength of the photon.
Those are all equivalent ways of saying the same thing.
Once the electron is in the excited state, say in this fourth energy level, the electron
generally likes to jump back to a lower energy level.
Electrons are kind of lazy things.
They want to jump back down to low energy levels.
So the electron can jump down to the first one, or down to the third, and then the second,
or the first, or down to the third, and then to the first.
There can be many transitions that can occur, but in any case, it jumps from the fourth energy
level down to a lower energy level.
In that case, the atom emits a photon, because the electron has jumped from a higher energy
level to a lower energy level.
It's the opposite of absorption, so that's called emission.
And the emission of a photon can go in any direction.
It doesn't have to be in the direction in which the initially absorbed photon was going.
In other words, once the photon is absorbed, the electron is in some higher energy level,
now it can re-emit in any direction, not necessarily the direction in which the original photon
was first going.
So it can emit to any direction, and it can re-emit in a series of steps, from 4 to 1,
or from 4 to 3 to 2 to 1, or from 4 to 2 to 1, or from 4 to 3 to 1.
Pretty much exhausts those possibilities.
So there again is the diagram illustrating that.
Now to make this a little bit more tangible, I'm going to be an electron that is in one
of three possible energy levels.
The ground state is the lowest level, the second level is here, somewhat above it, and
then the third level is there.
Down here, this big ball is the nucleus of the atom to which I am bound.
Now notice that in going from the ground state to the next energy level, there's a certain
height difference, that, let's say, corresponds to a green photon, that's the energy of a
green photon.
Then in going from the second level to the third level, that height difference is a little
bit less than the first one was, so let's say that corresponds to a red photon, alright?
So I'm going to start out down here, and let's suppose the total difference from the ground
level to this third one corresponds to a blue photon.
A blue photon's energy in this hypothetical example would be exactly equal to the sum
of the energies of the red photon and the green photon, okay?
So let's start out with me in the first level here, and I'm going to be thrown a blue photon.
So there's a blue photon, I absorb it, and I jump up to the third energy level, okay?
So now I'm this electron, I'm sitting around, but I'm kind of bored, and I like to jump
down to lower energy levels, because the electrons are lazy.
I will first jump down to the second energy level, in so doing I will emit a red photon,
and I could do it in any direction, but I choose to do it in that direction there.
Now I'm in this level, and I'm going to jump down to the ground level, the first level,
that requires me to emit a green photon.
So there I go, I emitted the green photon, and jumped down to the lowest energy level.
I could have been in the top level here, and jumped directly down to the lowest energy
level by emitting a blue photon, like that, okay?
So I could have done that as well.
Now suppose I'm at this lowest level, and a yellow photon happens to come my way.
Here's a yellow photon, but nothing happened.
I was transparent to that yellow photon, see it just went past me, because the yellow photon
did not have an energy that corresponds to one of the allowed jumps in this hypothetical
atom, okay?
So let's now go back to this drawing here, and we see in the case of the drawing that
a green photon got absorbed, and that made the electron go from the second energy level
to the fourth energy level.
At that point the electron can jump back down to lower energy levels by re-emitting either
that photon or photons of different colors, it could jump down to the first level or whatever.
In any case, if you take a spectrum of that light, that initial white light which passed
through hydrogen atoms, and let's say a bunch of them did the same thing, you would have
a deficit of green photons in the spectrum.
So if you plot the brightness versus color or wavelength from violet through red, there
would be a continuum and then a deficit of green photons, because some of them were absorbed
by the hydrogen atoms, and then re-emitted in random other directions, not in the direction
in which I was looking and taking a spectrum of that cloud of gas or that star or whatever.
You see, some of the green photons are missing, because they got absorbed.
Alright, that's what's called an absorption line.
Atoms are complicated, they have many energy levels, there are many possible absorption
lines, and the point that I will emphasize several times in this lecture is that every
element and every ionized form of each element emits its own or absorbs its own pattern of
lines.
So if we look at white light, sunlight, passed through a prism, you get not only the familiar
rainbow about which I've already said quite a bit, but you have these dark streaks, the
absorption lines caused by absorption of light by elements, by atoms of elements in the outer
atmospheres of stars, and the darkest, most prominent lines were discovered by Josef
Fraunhofer in the early 1800s, and they are now known as Fraunhofer lines.
So here is in fact one of Fraunhofer's original diagrams, where he shows the rainbow of colors
emitted by the sun, but in addition there are these dark streaks, the Fraunhofer lines,
which we now can identify with many of the chemical elements that we know and love.
Indeed, it turns out that the element helium was first identified in a spectrum of the
sun.
It was not known here on Earth.
The name helium comes from Helios for sun.
Now let's look at this diagram where you might have a hot star and a thin cloud of cool gas
between us over here and the star.
Let's say the star only emits a continuum of radiation, no lines.
So here's the continuous spectrum emitted by the star.
Viewing that light of the star through a thin cloud of gas will cause certain absorption
lines to be imprinted upon the spectrum because elements or atoms in that gas absorbed selectively
some of the photons.
So you might get a line in the yellow part of the spectrum, let's say.
But the excited atoms, which had absorbed these yellow photons and are now in higher
energy levels, they have to do something with that energy.
The electrons don't like to sit around with that energy.
After a hundred millionth of a second or so, they tend to hop back down.
Re-emitting in random directions.
So going back to the diagram, you can see that these atoms then re-emit those photons,
in random directions.
So if we were an observer viewing from this angle here, the spectrum of the cloud, we
would get, in this case, a single emission line.
No continuum, because we're not viewing the hot star from this direction, we're only
looking at the cloud of cool gas.
So we just get this one single emission line in this simplistic representation.
Similarly from other directions, we would see that the spectrum is just the single emission
line representing the transition of the electron from the higher energy level back down to the
lower energy level.
Now of course, as I said, the electron could cascade down through several energy levels
and produce several emission lines whose energies add up to that of a single yellow one.
So you might have a few other emission lines here too, but the point here is that looking
at a thin cloud of cool gas without a star in the background, you just see the emission
from that cloud.
If instead you look through the cool cloud of gas at a bright continuum emitting object
like a hot star, then you get absorption lines because some of the photons were eaten by
the cloud of gas.
Some of the photons from the hot star were eaten by the cloud of cool gas.
Now it turns out stars are more complicated than just clouds of cool gas because the stars
are opaque and high density and hot and everything's jiggling around and electron energy levels
get disturbed because of the interference from other atoms and all that.
So in real life it's a bit more complicated, but there are many cases where there are thin
clouds of cool gas between us and hot stars and in that case it's really about as simple
as what I've made it here and this is still pretty tough physics, so you have to think
about this several times to really get a good grasp of it, but at least with thin clouds
of gas it's simpler than it is with stars which are much sort of more complicated structures.
Now there are cases such as shown here where an electron can absorb a photon having a pretty
large energy, large enough to completely kick the electron away from the proton, so it is
no longer bound to the proton.
That is what we call ionization and ionization can occur as long as the incoming photon has
at least as much energy as is needed to kick away the electron.
If it's got at least the right amount then it'll kick the electron away.
It can have more than the minimum possible and then that electron goes off with even
higher speed, but in this case the absorption can be of a broad spectrum, a broad range
of energies of photons rather than the discrete single energies that are absorbed when electrons
go from one distinct level to another.
So suppose I'm down here in the lowest energy state and an ultraviolet photon gets thrown
toward me, I the electron absorb it and I go wandering around not in any particular
well defined orbital around the nucleus.
I'm no longer in a specific energy level bound to the nucleus.
I'm a free electron, welcome to do as I please wandering around until I come close to a lone
proton, latch on to it, get bound to a specific energy level and in so doing I have to re-emit
my photon because I have to get rid of the energy that I had previously absorbed.
So that's known as ionization and then recombination and there's this joke one atom says to another
I'm an ion and the other says are you sure and the first one says yes I'm positive because
you know it lost an electron and now it's positively charged, it's no longer neutral,
I know geek jokes but anyway they're kind of fun.
Now there's another way that an atom can get ionized and that is that if another atom or
an energetic electron hits it, kicks it, it can kick the electron away from the atom and
cause it to wander around in no specific energy state.
So if an audience member were to kick me the electron I could go wandering around and
be ionized in that way as well.
So now let's re-emphasize what I'm talking about.
Each neutral element and every ionization stage of any particular element whether you've
lost one electron or two or three or more, hydrogen can only lose one because it's only
got one, helium can lose up to two but carbon could lose up to five for example or six even
all of them because carbon has six electrons.
The point is every element and every ionization stage of an element has a unique fingerprint
of patterns that appears in its spectrum.
And let me show you hydrogen which is the simplest one, don't memorize this just get
the general idea.
If the electron is in the first energy level it can go up to the second or third or fourth
or fifth or sixth or beyond.
Those produce absorption lines called Lyman, alpha, beta, gamma, delta, epsilon and so
on.
If it starts in the second energy level it can go to the third, fourth, fifth, sixth
and so on.
Those are called the Balmer or simply hydrogen, alpha, beta, gamma, delta.
Those are the ones that are in the visible part of the spectrum.
They're just sometimes just called the hydrogen, alpha, beta, gamma, delta lines more formally.
They are the Balmer lines.
These ones from the first energy level require ultraviolet photons to make these transitions
so you don't see these in the visible spectrum, you see them in the ultraviolet spectrum.
And then suppose the electron starts out in the third energy level, it can go to the fourth
or fifth or sixth.
Those are the so-called passion, alpha, beta, gamma and those are seen in the infrared.
Those looks complicated, but the point is that if you look at the spectrum of light
going through hydrogen from the ultraviolet all the way to the infrared, you see a continuum
and superposed on that continuum are these absorption lines in the visible part of the
spectrum, the Balmer or hydrogen, alpha, beta, gamma, delta and so on.
In the infrared, the passion, gamma, alpha, beta, whatever.
And in the ultraviolet, the Lyman, alpha, beta, gamma and so on.
And the point is that a trained spectroscopist, someone who looks at spectra, sees the spectrum
and knows that that is hydrogen because only hydrogen produces that particular pattern.
Only hydrogen.
No other element does.
So when we look at stars and we examine their spectra, lo and behold, we see the patterns
produced by hydrogen and only by hydrogen, therefore we know.
We know that the hydrogen is present in the stars.
Now you might say, how do we know that the hydrogen absorption lines weren't produced
by some cloud in between us and the stars?
If that's what you were thinking, good, the gears were turning in your head and suffice
it to say for now that there are ways we can tell whether it's coming from the star or
from a thin cold cloud of gas between us and the stars.
Now you look at a high resolution spectrum.
By that I mean I've spread out the light a lot.
And you see all these absorption lines and you might say, wow, look at them all.
How can I tell what's in there?
Well you can tell what's in there by looking at what the spectra of individual elements
look like in laboratory gases.
So here's the continuum, white light, and here are various elements, hydrogen, helium,
carbon, calcium, oxygen, magnesium, and iron.
I'll turn on the hydrogen and see that a specific pattern of lines appeared.
Now I turn off the hydrogen and I turn on helium.
There is a different pattern of lines.
There's more lines because helium has more electrons and it tends to produce more lines.
Carbon has even more electrons.
It happens to have only a few prominent transitions in the visible part of the spectrum.
The other transitions are in other parts of the spectrum.
Turn off carbon, turn on calcium.
Again a different pattern, several dark lines down here in the violet part.
Turn off calcium, turn on oxygen.
A different pattern still.
Turn off oxygen, turn on magnesium.
A few lines down here.
Turn off magnesium, turn on iron.
Oh a bunch of lines, look at all those lines.
Now let's suppose we turn on iron and magnesium and oxygen and calcium and carbon and helium
and hydrogen.
There were progressively more and more and more lines in that spectrum.
But if you know the pattern of any individual element and if you know a bunch of them then
you can superpose them and figure out which of those elements are present in each of the
spectra of stars that you take.
So it's a complicated process and that's what spectroscopists do.
They analyze the spectra of stars in order to tell what's inside.
And we also analyze the spectra of thin clouds of gas like the Orion Nebula shown here.
Here's thin gas that has been ionized and excited by radiation coming from these hot
stars in the middle.
And that gas is now glowing, it's sort of like fluorescing.
And if you examine its spectrum it would be a spectrum consisting of emission lines, not
absorption lines because you're seeing the thin cloud of gas glow because it's been
excited by radiation from nearby hot stars.
And the emission spectra of elements are shown here.
Hydrogen at the top, helium a different pattern, sodium a different pattern still, mercury
yet another distinct pattern.
All the elements and all of their ionization stages have distinct patterns and through analysis
of those patterns in laboratories we can then make a comparison with the spectra of stars
and clouds of gas that we see in the sky through telescopes.
And that detailed analysis tells us the composition of the stars and of the clouds of gas.
And you know what, they're made out of the same type of stuff as that which exists here
on Earth.
This is how we know the composition of stars.
It's through spectroscopy.
