We've spent the past few lectures discussing light and its properties and how it interacts
with matter and is emitted by matter.
That's very important because as I mentioned before, it is through the studies of light
that astronomers find out about the universe.
With very few exceptions, the only information we get is that which is conveyed by the light
that objects emit.
Now let's discuss how we collect and analyze that light.
We collect it with telescopes and you will recall in lecture 6 that I discussed how small
telescopes used by people in the everyday world are used mostly to magnify objects,
birds and things, or looking at say planets through a backyard telescope.
The magnification is important.
Now the magnification depends on the properties of both the primary lens and the eyepiece.
In particular, it depends on the focal lengths of those two lenses.
Here's the primary lens, here's the eyepiece lens, and if I change the focal length of
the primary or the objective lens in a refractor, you can see how the image is magnified more
or less.
Or if I change the eyepiece focal length, the object is magnified more or less.
And this is true for a reflecting telescope as well, where instead of the primary objective
lens you have a primary mirror that collects the light.
But most astronomers who do work at the professional level don't look through eyepieces of telescopes
anymore.
We don't look through telescopes.
This may come as a shock, but I rarely look through a telescope.
Here's a rare photo of me looking through the large 36-inch refracting telescope at
Lake Observatory.
This is on a public stargazing night where we were showing the public some objects, but
if I were to really gather data, there would be an electronic detector at the focal plane
and no eyepiece is needed to magnify the image.
You just get the image at the focal plane with whatever detector you've put there.
So in that case, the magnification becomes largely irrelevant.
And indeed, professional astronomers almost never even know what the magnification of
the telescope is, or using some big telescope, and someone will say, hey, what's its magnification?
I don't know.
I just put a detector at the focal plane and I get a certain clarity, a resolution that
I'll talk about later.
And I get a certain brightness, but the magnification depends on having an eyepiece there, and we
don't have that in this case.
So really, when you use large telescopes to study the universe, it turns out that nowadays
the primary purpose of telescopes is to gather light and to make faint objects look brighter.
So light from a faint object or from a bright object is raining down upon us everywhere.
It doesn't care exactly where it's going, it's going everywhere.
Some small fraction of that light enters our pupil, the small hole in your eye, and that's
what ends up getting imaged on your retina, and you see it as an image.
But there's all this other light being wasted, right?
It's just hitting the table or the floor.
What if we were to capture it and bring it all to the same focus?
Then we would get a brighter image.
So the bigger you're collecting area for the mirror or the lens, the more light you're
getting of all that is raining down upon us, and the brighter a given object will appear.
Let's look at the diameter of a typical large telescope these days, six meters in diameter.
The dilated human eye is about six millimeters or six thousandths of a meter in diameter.
The area of a circle is given by pi times its radius squared, and since the radius is
the diameter divided by two, that's equal to area equals pi times the diameter squared
over four.
So let's look at the ratio of collecting areas of two telescopes or mirrors or an eye,
two collecting lenses, whose diameters are d2 and d1.
The area of number two divided by the area of number one is simply d2 squared over d1
squared, because the pi's and the four's cancel out.
So that's just the ratio of the diameters squared.
So here you have the two diameters, d2 and d1.
The ratio of areas is simply d2 over d1 squared.
So now let's go back to our example where the mirror of a large telescope might be six
meters in diameter, so d2 is six meters, and your dilated human eye is six millimeters
in diameter, or six times ten to the minus three meters.
That ratio, six over six times ten to the minus three, is a thousand.
It's ten to the three.
And when you square that ratio, it's a million.
So all other things being equal, if I'm looking through the eyepiece of a telescope whose
mirror is six meters in diameter, I will see stars that are a million times fainter than
those which I can see with my single unaided eye alone, because I've collected the light
over an area six meters in diameter rather than a mere six millimeters.
This shows you the tremendous so-called light gathering power of a telescope.
Now if you use a detector, you can detect even more light.
You can store it up.
You can expose for a long time.
You know, your eye sees a new image roughly every 30th of a second.
It refreshes your image in your brain 30 times a second, it turns out.
Every 30th of a second, you get a new image.
Well if you were exposing on an emulsion, you could collect all that light and register
more of it, and cumulatively you would be able to see fainter stars in that way.
So for example, using this telescope here, the Palomar 48-inch Schmidt telescope, Ocean
Schmidt telescope, it's called, I in my graduate student days took photographic plates of certain
regions in the sky.
This one happens to be toward the Virgo cluster of galaxies.
And here with this tape, I've marked an interesting region of this photographic plate.
It's a glass plate with a photographic emulsion on it, and I studied that galaxy.
Okay, it would happen to be an interesting galaxy for reasons I'll tell you about later.
Or maybe I studied the Andromeda galaxy shown here.
Now this is a negative photograph, so bright regions look dark on this emulsion because
the silver grains have become darkened, and the black background sky looks white.
So here's the Andromeda galaxy and two of its neighbors on a photographic plate that
I took with this 48-inch 1.2-meter Schmidt telescope.
Well photographic plates have the advantage that they store a lot of information over a
wide area of the sky, but they also have some disadvantages.
Like the human eye, they actually only detect about one or two percent of the incoming light.
The remaining 98 or 99 percent is wasted, it doesn't register, that's too bad.
They also have what's called limited dynamic range.
You can't record both bright objects and faint objects simultaneously on a photographic
emulsion.
You know that when you take a photograph of someone toward the sun, it doesn't work out
too well usually.
They're also non-linear.
So if you expose 10 times as long, the star doesn't look 10 times brighter, or stars that
are 10 times brighter than other stars don't look 10 times brighter in a quantitative way.
It's non-linear.
And it's hard to make quantitative measurements because all you've done is you've exposed
silver grains on an emulsion, and to measure how much you've exposed them, you have to
scan these photographic emulsions and turn them into some sort of digital data, and that's
time consuming, and not as quantitative as what we would like.
And finally, photographic plates can break, and my plate of the Andromeda galaxy has broken
now about 25 years after I first took it.
I didn't protect it carefully enough and it broke, so that's the way it goes.
Now modern detectors tend to be these electronic gadgets based on the whole silicon revolution,
and they are extremely sensitive and can store a lot of light.
They can detect most of the incoming photons, like 80% of the incoming photons, and store
them, and it's digital data, and they're very linear, and they have a large dynamic range,
and so they're really wonderful.
I mean, the electronics revolution has just revolutionized astronomy.
We do things now that we couldn't dream of doing even 20 or 30 years ago.
And at optical wavelengths, a typical device is known as a CCD, a charge coupled device,
as is shown here, and cheap versions of these are what you have in your digital cameras and
in your camcorders, and they're very nice.
You can see them there, and up close they have a lot of pixels or picture elements.
So a star's image might fall on a bunch of the pixels, and they will register certain
amounts of light.
The central pixels will register the most light, and then as you go farther out, they
register less and less.
So you get this pixelated pattern, and those of you who use digital cameras know that you
can adjust the effective resolution of your digital camera by increasing or decreasing
the number of pixels per picture.
Of course, the more pixels you use per picture, the more rapidly the memory chip gets used
up, so you have to make some compromise.
But these CCDs are wonderful devices, and they've been a great boom for the whole digital
camera industry as well.
Their disadvantage is that they have very small fields of view.
You can't make very big pieces of these little silicon chips, or at least they're expensive.
So what astronomers are doing now is budding together a bunch of these things.
So here's four of them in a two by two grid, and you can now put many of these things next
to each other.
And each of them individually is not that expensive to fabricate, and then if you put
them all together, you slowly build up the area.
But it's still kind of expensive to get as much area as is covered by a big photographic
plate.
So that is still one of the disadvantages of these electronic detectors.
The next important use of telescopes, or the advantage that they provide, is that they
give you higher resolution, or clarity, the ability to detect fine detail.
So here we can see an image of two stars close together, imaged in both red light and
blue light.
And here's through a small telescope.
You can see that the two images are blurred together, less so in blue light than in red
light, but still they're kind of blurred.
If you increase the size of your mirror, or the lens collecting the light, you can see
that though the spacing between the two stars has not changed, the size of the individual
blur circles has decreased, making the stars more cleanly separated from one another, better
in the blue than in the red, but even in the red you can see them clearly separated from
one another.
If you increase the diameter of the mirror still more, again the separation does not
change in a sense the magnification hasn't changed, but the clarity has changed because
the blur circle has gotten smaller.
Now how small does it get?
Well we can get the blur circles down to less than a second of arc.
Now recall that a full circle is 360 degrees, from the horizon to the zenith is 90 degrees.
The full moon is about half a degree in angular size, that's 30 arc minutes, there's 60 minutes
per degree, so half a degree is 30 arc minutes.
Each arc minute is divided into 60 seconds of arc.
So a second of arc is a pretty small angle in the sky, in fact if you take a dime and
hold it at a distance of 3.7 kilometers, or 2.3 miles, that is about one arc second.
So we can make telescopes that have an intrinsic resolution easily below one arc second.
In fact the resolution turns out to be about two thousandths of an arc second multiplied
by the wavelength that you are looking at in angstroms divided by the diameter of the
telescope that you're using in centimeters.
So in fact for a 10 centimeter wide telescope you already get a resolution of one arc second,
a dime at 3.7 kilometers if you view in the middle of the optical window 5,000 angstroms.
So that's a small telescope, a 10 centimeter mirror is a small telescope, you can get them
at telescope stores and use them in your backyard and you get good resolution.
If you build a one meter telescope, a 100 centimeter telescope, you could in principle
see details down to a tenth of an arc second because that's how small the blur circle becomes
and if you build a 10 meter telescope like the Keck telescopes, you should be able to
see details down to one one hundredth of a second of arc.
Problem is our turbulent atmosphere gets in the way, our atmosphere has many layers that
are moving to and fro and causing twinkling of light, that also causes a blurring out
of the light.
So instead of having a one hundredth of an arc second pinpoint for a star, it gets blurred
out to a whole second of arc or something like that.
So there are ways now it turns out of overcoming this problem at least partially by going up
into space or even from the ground and I'll discuss that shortly.
But for a long time there was no way to overcome this problem.
The limitation was that above about 10 centimeters in diameter, a telescope didn't give you any
additional clarity because although theoretically it could, the atmosphere got in the way and
so in practice it did not.
So for many decades the real purpose of building bigger telescopes was to gather more light
and not so much to improve the clarity because you got pretty much the best clarity that
you could hope for with a 10 centimeter or a 20 centimeter size telescope.
So if we look at refracting telescopes, we go back and see that if we let the light pass
through a refracting telescope, it goes through a lens down to a focus here and then through
an eyepiece if you were to look at one through an eyepiece.
But nowadays we would put a photographic emulsion or a CCD at the focal plane here.
And if you look at the refracting telescopes that were built up until about 1900 or so
they made bigger and bigger telescopes culminating with this one here, the Lick Observatory 36
inch diameter refracting telescope and the Yerkes Observatory 1 meter diameter refracting
telescope.
Those were the biggest telescopes made up until about 1900 or so.
And you can see they've got this long tube and there's a guy at the end looking through
an eyepiece and the whole structure is bulky and huge and the lenses were hard to grind.
You know, you have all these surfaces and stuff and you have to support them around
their edges and then they sag and stuff.
So these were the biggest telescopes built up until that time and this was the end of
the line for refractors because you couldn't build the lenses much, much bigger than that.
Here I am looking through the old 36 inch refractor and it's a great telescope.
It was completed in the 1880s and it was the world's largest telescope at the time
and it was used to make a number of discoveries like the moons of Mars and a moon of Jupiter
and things like that.
It was built as a result of the funding from James Lick who was a philanthropist and gave
lots of money for many good causes, one of which was $700,000 in 1870 for the construction
of what was then the world's largest telescope.
And we are very grateful to him and to others who give us the money with which to build
these telescopes.
He wanted to be buried at the base of the telescope so in fact there's down below the
base of the telescope his tomb, here lies the body of James Lick and occasionally at
night you even see his ghost lying there and so anyway.
So but this was the end of the line for refractors because they are just so unwieldy to build
and moreover they suffer from this effect of chromatic aberration where light coming
in gets brought to a different focus depending on the color of the light.
So violet light is closer in than green light and green light is closer in than red so if
you had your CCD or your photographic emulsion here focused for green then violet and red
would be out of focus and that's a problem.
Well you can correct for that if you have additional lenses and stuff and you can partially
correct for that effect but it just became too hard to build refracting telescopes.
So a new type was invented the reflecting telescope and there you use a mirror which
can be supported at the back end so it doesn't sag and you don't have to support it along
the edges and the light doesn't have to go through the lens it just bounces off the mirror
so you don't have to worry about bubbles in the glass as much as long as there aren't
bubbles and irregularities on the surface that you've carved well that's great you know
then you just put a nice reflective coating of aluminum or silver on that surface and
you get a nice image.
But the problem with reflectors at least the simplest kind is that the simplest sort of
surface to grind is the surface of a sphere or part of a sphere and incoming parallel
light rays hitting a spherical mirror unfortunately do not get brought to a common focus.
The ones that are coming in farther out from the center of the mirror get brought to a focus
closer to the mirror than those rays that came in closer to the center of the mirror
so this is known as spherical aberration.
Now this is fairly easily solved by modifying the surface a little bit and making it in
the shape of a parabola or a hyperbola you will recall that those are conic sections
and if you take a parabola and you spin it around you get what's called a paraboloid
or you take a hyperbola and you spin it around you get a surface called a hyperboloid and
those surfaces do bring the light to a common focus I've exaggerated the shape here it's
a little bit off from that but you know it gives you the basic idea and so it made the
mirrors a little bit harder to grind but this wasn't an overwhelming difficulty you just
had to shape the mirror a little bit in such a way that it was a paraboloid and not a sphere
so you could make these mirrors really big and there was a long line of ever bigger telescopes
built for example here is the 100 inch telescope at Mount Wilson Observatory with which Edwin
Hubble discovered the nature of galaxies and the expansion of the universe so wonderful
telescope it has a Newtonian platform near the top up here where you can observe the
image as it comes out through the side of the telescope but you're elevated on a platform
really high up and so that can be kind of dangerous that telescope is big enough that
you could actually put a cage in the prime focus area right here and sit there and take
a photograph of your object while you are suspended in a cage way above the mirror and
in that case with such a big mirror if the cage is pretty small and claustrophobic you
don't block all that much of the incoming light so with the Mount Wilson telescope or
the Lick Observatory 3 meter diameter telescope you could put a cage near the top there and
image an object from the top of the telescope while sitting in this cage and here is a photograph
of the cage that is put on top of the 3 meter telescope sometimes you can see it's pretty
claustrophobic there's barely enough room to sit there and you know and they put that
cage with cranes up at the top of the telescope you know it's romantic for a little while
because you're closer to the stars and all that but you know you can't easily go to the
bathroom you know or have a snack and it's cold up there and you can't turn on all these
heaters because the heaters would cause turbulence in the air and that would mess up your images
so it quickly loses its romance it's much nicer to sit in a warm room controlling electronic
gadgets so now what we usually do is put a mirror at the top end and send the light back
down through a hole in the mirror and that sends the light to what's called the casegrain
focus where you can mount all sorts of heavy-duty equipment and like spectrographs like the
spectrograph mounted here and you will recall that in a casegrain telescope the light comes
in from the stars hits the primary mirror goes back to a secondary mirror and then goes through
a hole in the primary mirror either to your eyepiece or nowadays to your heavy equipment with
which you can analyze the light so that's the way many telescopes are now they are casegrain
reflecting telescopes and we can mount all sorts of heavy equipment at their back end and analyze
the light well for many decades the world's largest telescope was the palomar 200 inch or
five meter hail telescope it was a it still is a wonderful telescope I did part of my thesis
with it and also with the Mount Wilson 100 inch telescope it's hard to get a true feeling for
the size in this photograph because you need a really wide angle lens to get both the telescope
and its massive mount a person is maybe as big as this little piece of equipment down here so
it's a it's a fantastic telescope and it's in a large dome that rotates around and points to
wherever you want in the night sky and I loved using that telescope when I was a graduate student
I haven't used it for many years but when the palomar 200 inch telescope was completed in 1948
it was the largest telescope in the world and remained the largest for several decades people
didn't really need to build bigger telescopes at that point because they were busy improving the
detectors and if you improve the detectors so that they detect not just one or 2% of the light
but 10% 30% 50% 80% then you're getting more and more bang for the buck you're getting more and
more light without having built a bigger telescope big telescopes are expensive to build so by the
1990s or so the CCDs became so efficient that they were detecting 80 even 90% of the light at that
point to get more light you would need to start building bigger telescopes again and so people
started building bigger telescopes in the 1990s and on Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii is a collection of
some of the world's biggest telescopes including the twin Keck telescopes 10 meters in diameter I
love to use those telescopes that here's one of the massive domes for one of these telescopes and
there I am happy to use this huge eye this big eye this is even bigger than the big eye that was the
hail 200 inch telescope it was called big eye for many years and this is an even bigger eye but it
consists of many individual hexagonal segments aligned in a honeycomb structure like this 36
of them and it's cheaper to build these individual segments and keep them aligned actively than it
is to build a single monolithic mirror 10 meters across that's more expensive than building all
these segments and you can see here Fred Shaffey the former director of the Keck Observatory sitting
in the middle of this structure and you can tell that each of the segments 1.8 meters in diameter
is about the size of a human but together they span a diameter of 10 meters making this the world's
largest telescope and here are the segments in a storage room there are some spares that are being
coated with fresh coats of aluminum and then they replace other ones that are in the telescope and
those go into this storage chamber then and you can see my reflection as I'm looking at one of these
things and in the back there are all these gizmos actuators and pressure gauges and things like
that that automatically align each of all the each of these segments so that all of them together
have the correct parabolic shape no matter where in the sky you're pointing so this is a very
complex contraption with all these crazy things sensing exactly where each segment is pointing
and what its tilt is relative to the adjacent segment this is a very complex thing and it was
invented by Jerry Nelson who is a mastermind of this sort of thing of optics and mechanical
gizmos and many astronomers thought that this thing simply wouldn't work but he was convinced that
it would and in fact it works beautifully and all of these little segments are adjusted roughly
once every two seconds and they're all if you look at them in detail they're all moving around
like this quivering once every two seconds and the whole thing is like like some sort of an animal
working together to keep the shape exactly the way it is but if you looked at it microscopically it
would be almost as though it's alive and this technique of actively shaping the mirror in real
time is called active optics and it and it really works the telescope is fantastic and now there
are two of them and the modern-day James Licks are the W.M. Keck Foundation and we're very
grateful to them for having supplied the generous funding needed to build these enormously large
telescopes the Keck telescopes are particularly special to me not only because I've done some
of my best research with them but also because Noel and I got married right next to them in
August of 2005 and to our knowledge we are the only people to get married next to the Keck
telescopes. Now it turns out there's a way of making thin monolithic mirrors eight meters in
diameter now without resorting to all of these segments you can take molten glass and spin it
and it'll form just about the right shape and then you polish it ever so slightly to get the
right shape and by being thin these mirrors are fairly lightweight and hence not that expensive
to support you don't need extremely massive structures to support them. So this is an
alternative way of making big mirrors now and they've been made up to eight meters in diameter
almost as big as Keck in this way and indeed next to the Keck telescopes is a Japanese telescope
named Subaru which is an eight meter monolithic mirror of this sort and also on that same mountain
is one of the two Gemini telescopes which are operated by an international consortium
including the United States. The other telescope of the Gemini twins is in the Southern Hemisphere
in Chile. Now you will recall that the size of the blur circle the the clarity in a sense
is proportional to the wavelength of light you were looking at divided by the diameter of the
mirror that you are using. So at radio wavelengths where the wavelength is long
the the blur circle is huge the resolution is very poor you get a very fuzzy image if you were to use
a radio telescope that's as small as optical telescopes. So radio telescopes tend to be
very large so that the ratio of the wavelength divided by the diameter is a relatively small
number if you have a large diameter then the ratio of wavelength to diameter is small and so you get
high resolution good clarity a small blur circle and here you can see the size of a typical radio
telescope it might be tens of meters in diameter or even a hundred meters and here is the Aeroscebo
radio telescope in Puerto Rico which I believe is something like 300 meters in diameter and it is
able to get fine images of the sky at radio wavelengths. We will see that by combining
radio telescopes in pairs or in triplets or quadruplets we will be able to improve the resolution
even more using a technique known as interferometry. Astronomers are ever trying to get
more and more clear views of the universe and in the next lecture I'll describe the ways
in which we've been able to improve the clarity over that afforded to us by our atmosphere using
single dishes.
