In the previous lecture, I discussed telescopes concentrating on optical ground-based and
radio ground-based telescopes.
And I mentioned some of the great things they've done and also some of their limitations.
Now in this lecture, I'll describe how to get around some of those limitations and also
telescopes that are used at other wavelengths and also telescopes up in space.
Now you'll recall that the size of a blur circle of a telescope, that is the clarity
with which a star is viewed, depends on both the wavelength at which it's viewed and the
diameter of the telescope.
The blur grows as in proportion to wavelength divided by the diameter of the telescope.
So in particular, at radio wavelengths, which are centimeters or meters or even kilometers,
lambda the wavelength is huge.
So lambda divided by the diameter is a big number, it's a big blur circle and things
look very blurry.
Even with large telescopes on the ground, radio telescopes like this one, which are
several tens of meters in diameter, or even telescopes like this one here, which is 330
meters in diameter, you get fairly large blur circles, maybe a degree in some cases, or
a few arc minutes if you're lucky, depending on wavelength.
But you can't get to the kind of resolution that you have with a ground-based optical
telescope, which might be just a second of arc, one sixtieth of a minute, which is itself
one sixtieth of a degree.
So with radio telescopes, you really have a problem with blurry images, huge problem.
So you'd like to have a radio telescope that's maybe a kilometer in size, or ten kilometers,
or a hundred, or a thousand, have one as big as the country, but you're obviously not going
to make a telescope that large, so you have to be clever.
Maybe you can make a telescope that spans a very large distance, a large separation,
but is not filled in everywhere.
So if you have smaller telescopes all over the place, maybe you can get them to act as
though they are a single large telescope, at least in terms of the clarity they achieve,
if not the light-gathering power.
And this is exactly what has been designed for radio telescopes.
They are used in what's called an interferometric technique, or radio interferometry, where
you have two or more radio telescopes separated by empty space, just air, and you can combine
the signals from those radio telescopes in such a way as to give you the clarity or resolution
or size of a blur circle equivalent to that of a single telescope that large, that far
in diameter, but of course with a much smaller collecting area, just the collecting area
of the individual dishes.
And what you do is you use the property of light that it constructively and destructively
interferes with itself.
So I'll recall from lecture 20 where we discussed light waves that were in phase, here are two
light waves that are in phase, and they add up to give you a larger amplitude wave, okay,
so that's constructive interference, versus destructive interference where two waves are
out of phase, their crests and troughs are aligned giving you zero, so you get no light.
Well if you look at, say, two holes in a screen and you watch light going through, you can
figure out the interference pattern on another screen onto which the light projects by noting
whether the path lengths are an integer multiple of a wavelength, in which case you have constructive
interference, or an integer plus one half multiple of a wavelength, in which case you
have destructive interference, and you will recall from lecture 20 that I showed a pattern
that looked like this.
You have these alternating bands of constructive and destructive interference for light that
has gone through two holes.
Well in a similar way, you can think of the light hitting two radio telescopes as in
a sense hitting two holes, you look at the light waves coming in, they are these plain
parallel waves, and if you have two telescopes separated from one another, then the waves
hitting one telescope, the one at the left here, well those might be crests hitting it
at this particular moment of time, whereas the waves hitting the other telescope might
be in their trough phase, you see they're sort of in between the wave crests for this
telescope, whereas we're on a wave crest for that telescope.
So those two things combined would give you destructive interference, at least for light
coming from that particular angle.
Light coming from a different angle would have a different phase shift, in other words,
if you imagined light coming down from overhead with plain parallel waves, they would hit
the two radio telescopes in the same way.
Crests would hit both telescopes at the same time, or troughs would hit both telescopes
at the same time, so you would get constructive interference in that case, but for a slightly
different angle like this one, you'd get destructive interference, and by looking at the interference
pattern with this pair or more of radio telescopes as a function of exactly where you're looking
in the sky, you can get a very detailed picture of the object that you are observing because
of the alternating patterns of constructive and destructive interference.
So this is the technique of radio interferometry, you're using the interfering properties of
the light waves to reconstruct the shape of the image that you're looking at.
And you can do this with whole arrays of telescopes, here's a photograph of the so-called very
large array, a set of 27 dishes in New Mexico, near Socorro, New Mexico, and they have many,
many different baselines, like the separation between all these various dishes is different,
and so you can probe structure of the object that you are imaging on a variety of scales,
on a variety of different angular resolutions with all these different pairs of radio dishes
or telescopes, and it's a complicated technique in detail, but I'm just describing the basic
idea right here.
Here on the top of Monacaia Mountain is a set of radio telescopes that observes millimeter
wavelength radio waves.
So there are lots of arrays like this nowadays, and the University of California at Berkeley,
in conjunction with the SETI Institute, the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence Institute,
is currently building an array of 350 radio telescopes that will be used in this way,
building in great detail at the sky, in part to search for possible signals from extraterrestrial
beings, but we will also use the telescope for more conventional radio astronomy that
is looking at stars and galaxies and things like that as well, but it's being partly funded
by Paul Allen, who is interested in having humans find possible signals from extraterrestrial
intelligence.
You can also put these telescopes on across a whole continent like North America and get
the clarity or resolution that you would have with say a two and a half thousand or three
thousand mile baseline, you know, and you would never build a telescope that big that's
completely filled, of course, and you can even put these telescopes on different continents
and thus increase the effective diameter of the telescope even more and give you an even
smaller blur circle, remember lambda over D. So that's a huge telescope, a telescope
with a clarity given by the size of the Earth, really, and in fact, since the interference
pattern that you get depends precisely on the separation of the different telescopes,
you can measure changes in the separation very accurately, and that gives us our best
measurements of continental drift, the slow drifting apart of or together of continents
at a rate of a few centimeters per year, we measure that with these radio telescopes
and you can get resolutions of less than one one thousandth of a second of arc. So they're
really fantastic things. Okay, well, this technique of interferometry
of interferometry works quite well at radio wave lengths, because the atmosphere is pretty
stable and distorts them in a in a way that we can compensate. But recently, we've extended
this technique to infrared wavelengths on ground based optical infrared telescopes,
like the pair of Keck telescopes on Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii, and also a set of four
eight meter telescopes on a mountain top in Chile. It's called the very large telescope
and it's run by a consortium of European countries. So here are the Kecks and you can
imagine pointing them toward a star and measuring the interference of the waves reaching the
two telescopes simultaneously from that one star. And you can improve your overall image
if you build a whole bunch of smaller outrigger telescopes around the two main telescopes.
That gives you more baselines. And NASA was very interested in doing this in order to get
very clear images of planets around other stars. But their funding situation in 2006 was not so
great. So they had to cancel that aspect of the of the project. And we hope that someday funds
will be found to build the outrigger or so called side Kecks. All right, well, it can be
expensive to link several telescopes like this over a very large baseline. And sometimes you
don't even need such ultra high resolution, you might not need one 1000th of an arc second,
you might suffice with just the theoretical resolution of a single telescope from the
ground. But you know, you want to get rid of the atmospheric blurring by the by the turbulent
layers of air in the atmosphere. If we could get rid of that, then even with a single 10 meter
telescope on the ground, we could get one 100th of an arc second resolution. And that would be
something to write home about, you know. So let's consider the atmospheric turbulence. We've already
discussed how it produces twinkling of stars. And in a related way, if you look at stars through a
telescope, it makes them look blurry. So instead of nice point like images, you get these blur
circles, and they merge together. And you can't tell whether there's three or four stars there,
just one or what, you know. So astronomers have developed a very interesting technique. And
several groups have done this throughout the world. But one of the leading groups is at the
Center for Adaptive Optics at the University of California at Santa Cruz. And they've developed
a way in the near infrared to correct the distorted wave fronts, distorted by turbulence in our
atmosphere, and make plane parallel wave fronts that give you a nice clear image. If you have a
small mirror whose shape you can change quickly with time to negate the distortions introduced by
air in the atmosphere, you can produce plane parallel waves, waves that were plane parallel when
they hit the atmosphere get distorted. And you can undo the distortion and get those plane parallel
waves back again, if you're sufficiently clever. So here's a result of what you get. At the left is
the image of the star uncorrected, and you see it's twinkling and moving around and generally
blurred. Whereas if you properly correct it, as shown on the right, you get a very nice, sharp
image. So how that's done is the following. If you have a galaxy like this one, and there's a bright
star next to it, and if you monitor the light from that bright star, you can tell just how much
it's been distorted, because you can monitor it many times per second, and you know the star should
appear point like, but you see how it's blurred out at any given moment of time. All right? Now you
can correct for those distortions by using an appropriate mirror, and that will make the star
look like a point again. And interestingly enough, any object very close to that star will be adequately
corrected in the same way, because over small patches of the sky, the atmosphere is coherent. It
behaves the same way. So a correction determined at one particular point nearly equally well applies
in a small patch of sky around it. So by making a bright star look point like, you have corrected the
distorted wave fronts, and that correction applied in the surrounding patch of sky gives you clear
images like this one, in this case taken with the Hubble Space Telescope, but you can get similar
clarity from the ground if you apply these corrections. Here's how it's done schematically. The
distorted wave fronts that went through the air hit a deformable adaptive mirror, okay, and we'll see how
that happens in a minute, but they hit it, and they reflect, they get reflected, and some of the light goes
through a beam splitter to your detector, a high resolution camera, let's say, and some gets reflected
off to what's called a wavefront sensor, and it's this wavefront sensor that measures the shapes of
these incoming wave fronts. It sends that information into a control system that figures out how to distort
this adaptive mirror so that upon reflection, the distorted wave fronts become undistorted, okay. The
wave fronts are coherent, that is, they remain about the same for small amounts of time. So if you measure
them at this instant, figure out exactly what they look like, and then at the next instant of time, deform
this little tiny adaptive mirror, that deformation will cancel the deformation or the corrupted wave fronts,
the distorted wave fronts coming through the atmosphere, making them plain parallel again. Now, just as a
picture is worth a thousand words, so is an animation worth a thousand pictures sometimes. So here's an
animation of the Gemini 8 meter telescope on Mauna Kea Mountain in Hawaii with adaptive optics. So light has
come in, hit the primary mirror, bounced off the secondary mirror, and it went through a hole in the primary
mirror to the so-called casagrain focus, where there are four ports with four different instruments. One of
the ports has this adaptive optics system within it. If we cut away the side of the port so that we can
see inside, we'll see that in addition to just being attached to a computer, the whole system has a bunch of
mirrors, and light hits this adaptive mirror, comes down, hits the beam splitter, part of it goes to your
detector, part goes to a wave front sensor. Normally, the image is all jiggly and blurry. But if you look at the
wave fronts coming in, you see that they have this distorted shape. They're coming in from the left, and they've got all
these distortions, and the distorted waves bounce off. But some of them also go through to the sensor. If you then let the
sensor tell the adaptive optics mirror what to do, the distortions can be exactly canceled, producing plain parallel
waves that then go to your detector and are registered as a nice, sharp image. And you can see that nicely on your
computer. So what used to be a fuzzy jiggly image becomes a nice, sharp, steady image. And that's the technique of
adaptive optics. Here's an example of its utility. This is a picture of one of Jupiter's Galilean moons, Io, without
adaptive optics turned on. Then you turn on adaptive optics and look at the wonderful increase in clarity with which you
are viewing this moon. In fact, this moon has all sorts of volcanoes, dozens of volcanoes going off simultaneously. It's
the most volcanically active body in the solar system. We'll discuss it later. So adaptive optics is fantastic. But you
might say, well, not all parts of the sky have a bright star next to them. You know, what if you're studying some galaxy that
doesn't have a bright star next to it? Well, you can actually create a fake star like this one here. This is a real star, but
you could create a fake star near this galaxy by sending a laser beam out of the dome. This laser beam can excite a layer of
sodium atoms about 90 or 100 kilometers above the Earth's surface. There happens to be a layer of sodium atoms up there coming
in from meteorites and things like that, meteors. And that produces a spot in the air 90 or 100 kilometers up above essentially all of
the atmosphere. And this laser beam then, this laser spot, you can see it here looking out of the Keck Dome, produces a fake star
right next to the object that you were trying to image. And by looking at the distortions induced by the atmosphere in the image of
the fake star, and making a correction for those distortions, that correction then applies to the object that you're trying to view. The main
limitation of this technique is that it gives you a clear view of only about 30 arc seconds in radius around either your natural guide
star or your fake laser guide star. So that's a pretty small field of view. But now people at the Center for Adaptive Optics are
beginning to develop technology for sending up several laser beams and correcting several adjacent patches of sky so that you get a clear view over a more
extended area of the sky. So this idea of adaptive optics, and here's their logo for the Center for Adaptive Optics is a wonderful thing, and allows you to overcome at
least some of the limitations of our Earth's atmosphere. That is, with even a single telescope, you can begin to approach the theoretical clarity limit given by the wavelength
divided by the diameter, and you are not limited by the atmosphere. So that's fantastic. On the other hand, you know, there still are some limitations from the ground. You
can't get a very wide angle picture of the sky using adaptive optics because it corrects only over these little tiny patches. And you still can't correct that optical wavelengths
because though this technique works really well in the infrared, the technology still isn't good enough for the optical. And moreover, you still have the problem that the sky can be pretty bright from the ground,
especially near a city. This is a view from Lick Observatory near San Jose in the San Francisco Bay Area in California. And there's all these reflections from city lights and there's reflections from
moonlight and there's auroras. And in the infrared, the sky intrinsically glows because the atmosphere is warm. And we discussed a few lectures ago how warm bodies intrinsically glow. So the sky isn't perfectly dark as viewed from
the ground. So that's another limitation. And finally, you can't see much beyond the optical window and the radio window from the ground. You can't see much of the ultraviolet, you can't see all of the
infrared, you can't see x-rays or gamma rays, because all of these other parts of the vast electromagnetic spectrum from gamma rays through radio, these other parts, the x-rays and gamma rays and
things get blocked by certain molecules in the Earth's atmosphere. For example, most ultraviolet radiation, although not all, gets blocked by the ozone layer. Ozone is a molecule consisting of three oxygen atoms. And the ozone layer is 20 to 40
kilometers above the ground and it blocks our view of most, but not all ultraviolet radiation. Gamma rays and x-rays are blocked by various other molecules in the atmosphere. The infrared is blocked partially by water vapor at altitudes of two to 10
kilometers. And moreover, the sky, especially at some infrared wavelengths, is quite bright. So it doesn't even really matter whether you're observing at night. The sky still looks bright. So you want to somehow avoid the atmosphere, if you can, for observations at some of these
wavelengths. Now, the way you do that is in the infrared by sending up some airplanes to above the two to 10 kilometer water layer in the atmosphere of the Earth. So you can send an airplane pretty high up like this now defunct Kuiper Airborne Observatory. It made some very nice infrared
measurements a decade or two ago. A successor, Sophia, is in the last stages of construction. So with these airplanes, you can fly above at least some of the water vapor and get a clear view of the infrared sky. But to get above most of the molecules so that you can detect gamma rays and x-rays, you actually have to build spacecraft that go well above the atmosphere. So here's the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, one of NASA's great
observatories that no longer operates. But for a number of years, it provided great data at gamma ray wavelengths from high above the atmosphere. And there are also telescopes like the Hubble Space Telescope that can observe the ultraviolet and get clear pictures in the optical. So there are many advantages to going up in space. The problem, of course, is that it's expensive to go up in space. It's expensive to build these giant telescopes and to launch them up there. So the
general idea is to do from space only those observations that can't be done from the ground. You know, if you can do them from the ground, then you shouldn't waste telescope time in space on those projects because the telescope time in space is very precious. And I want to focus now for a few minutes on the great Hubble Space Telescope, which has had a lot of publicity the past decade and a half. And as a result of which we've essentially rewritten the textbooks in some areas of astronomy.
So the Hubble Space Telescope is named after Edwin Hubble, who discovered the expansion of the universe. We'll have more to say about him later. And it's a 2.4 meter diameter mirror that is exquisitely polished. It is a very, very smooth surface. Unfortunately, it's slightly the wrong global shape. It suffers from a little bit of this aberration that I called spherical aberration, where light coming along different rays, along different paths.
Comes to a slightly different focus. And this was an error that was made in the fabrication and testing of the mirror. And it was not noticed until after the telescope was launched in 1990. So instead of getting beautifully sharp, point like images of stars, there were these fuzzy things. And this was really bad news.
Big headlines in Newsweek. NASA's $1.5 billion blunder. This is not the kind of publicity science and astronomy in particular wants to have. We want great discovery made by Hubble. Anyway, that's just the way it goes.
And so we had to do something about it. And fortunately, the Hubble is in an orbit that is accessible by the space shuttle. And shuttle astronauts could go up there. And in December of 1993, they put in new cameras with new optics and they put in some corrective reflecting mirrors.
And the images after this refurbishment mission were fantastic. So here is an image of the central part of a galaxy with the blurry eye view of Hubble. And then after refurbishment, things became much, much better. And it performed up to its original expectations.
And lots of great photographs were taken. In particular, I like this one, which shows a region in space where new stars are being formed right before our very eyes. And this so grabbed the attention of the public and the imagination of people that in one magazine at least, Weekly World News, there was a headline,
Heaven Photographed by Hubble Telescope. We've found where God lives. Well, look, okay, we've discovered some interesting things, but we haven't quite found where heaven is or where God lives. This headline was a little bit, a bit, a little bit over the top. But anyway, the Hubble has been performing marvelously since 1993. And we hope it keeps going for many, many more years.
Besides the Hubble, however, which has gotten the most attention, there have been other great space telescopes, and we have plans to make additional wonderful space telescopes. One that has really paved the way for X-ray astronomy is the so-called Chandra X-ray Observatory. And here is a drawing of it, floating around above the Earth's atmosphere, above the atoms and molecules that block the Earth.
And it's really a fantastic thing. It's given very clear views of the universe at X-ray wavelengths. And at X-rays, you probe the most energetic processes in the universe. X-rays and gamma rays tend to get produced by very hot objects, very energetic objects, exploding stars, colliding galaxies, things like that.
So with an X-ray telescope, however, you have some difficulties because the traditional mirrors don't focus the light if you bounce the light off of them in a nearly perpendicular way. Instead, you have to bounce the light off at a glancing angle.
Kind of like when you're skipping a stone across the water. You know, if you throw it right down, it'll just go clunk and it'll go to the bottom of your pool. But if you throw it at a glancing angle, the pebble will skip off.
And X-rays do the same thing. If they come in at a glancing angle, they can get focused by a nested set of paraboloids and hyperboloids to a focus like this.
And the Chandra X-ray Observatory was able to achieve a clarity, a resolution of about one arc second comparable to the resolution of ground-based optical telescopes without adaptive optics.
And that was really quite an achievement because most telescopes at X-ray wavelengths prior to that gave much blurrier images of the sky.
So Chandra has given us a lot of great information. Another one of NASA's great observatories is the Spitzer Space Telescope. It observes at infrared wavelengths.
So it is sensitive to warm dust and gases and particles heated to a modest temperature by nearby stars. And indeed, in this animation, you can see the plane of our Milky Way galaxy glowing because it has been heated by stars nearby.
And that warm gas and dust is now glowing at infrared wavelengths as opposed to hot things which glow at optical wavelengths and really hot things that glow in the ultraviolet X-rays and gamma rays.
So Spitzer allows us to probe the universe at infrared wavelengths. And a lot of the clouds of gas and dust from which stars form are very opaque at ultraviolet and optical wavelengths.
The only way we can peer down and see the newly forming stars is through infrared radiation and radio waves.
The Swift gamma ray observatory has been fantastic. It has detected so-called gamma ray bursts, which are explosions of stars that give rise to a lot of electromagnetic radiation, but in particular these sharp bursts of gamma rays lasting from a few seconds to a few minutes.
And it's been really fantastic. And in the pipeline is a telescope called the James Webb Space Telescope. It will be sort of a successor to the Hubble Space Telescope, but optimized for infrared wavelengths.
And we hope it will be done around 2012-2013. So the past 10 or 15 years have been a rather golden age for astronomy because of the fleet of space telescopes that we've had out there observing at all kinds of wavelengths throughout the electromagnetic spectrum.
It's been fantastic. Just great. Unfortunately, the prognosis for the next 10 or 20 years, at least right now, is not so great. And NASA's kind of low on funding. We hope that the climate will change and that we will continue to plan and build wonderful space telescopes to complement the kind of information that we can gain using telescopes from the ground.
