We
now enter the second major part of this course, studies of objects in the universe, the contents
of the universe. And in the first unit, consisting of about a dozen lectures, I will describe
objects in our solar system, planets, comets, the sun, things like that. We'll start naturally
with our sun, the center of our solar system. And we already had an introduction to the
sun when discussing eclipses and also when discussing the sun sets and phenomena like
rainbows and halos and things like that. Now when you look at the sun, you see this
disk, and of course you look at it through shade 14 glass if you were to do it by eye.
Don't forget that. You see this surface with a pretty well-defined edge and some dark spots
that we call sunspots. If you were to observe with additional equipment, you would be able
to see little loops of gas called prominences coming out and also energetic eruptions called
flares. And then also during an eclipse, you can see the tenuous beautiful corona, which
then extends out into what we call the solar wind, which is a stream of charged particles
coming out from the sun. It's sort of an extension of the solar corona. So these are
the visible features of the sun and I'd like to describe those features in today's lecture.
Now when you take spectra of the sun, of these visible features, you can get the composition
of the outermost parts of the sun. And you find that the composition of the sun is quite
representative of the composition of the universe as a whole, whereas the composition of our
earth is not representative. The sun is mostly hydrogen. For every million atoms of hydrogen,
there's about 85,000 atoms of helium, 850 atoms of oxygen, 400 atoms of carbon, 120 of
neon, 100 of nitrogen, and 47 of iron. And the other elements are just sort of trace
elements in the sun. Now on earth here we have, you know, silicon and oxygen and carbon
and things like that. Not that much hydrogen except that which is in water. So we're not
very representative of the contents of the universe, but the sun is. The universe is
mostly hydrogen. Indeed by mass the sun is 73% hydrogen, 25% helium, and only 2% consists
of elements that are heavier than helium. Interestingly as I mentioned in lecture 22,
helium was first discovered in spectra of the sun. It was not known here on earth before
the sun had been studied. If you look at a cross section of the sun, it has a very hot
core about 15 million degrees on the absolute Kelvin temperature scale. And that's where
the nuclear reactions generate the energy that comes out of the sun. We'll discuss that
later so I'll ignore the core for right now. Surrounding the core are two zones, the radiative
zone and the convective zone. And these describe how the radiation, how the energy gets out
from the core to the surface. Let's consider how energy gets out from the core to the outer
surface, the photosphere of the sun. There are several different ways. The first called
radiation is illustrated here where you have a candle emitting light and heat infrared rays
which warm up this thermometer. This is transport of energy through radiation. But in the case
of the sun, the gases are so opaque, they're so dense, there's so many electrons and atomic
nuclei flying around that they impede the progress of the light of the photons. So instead of
going straight from one place to another place at a great distance, the light has to bounce
around a lot. It scatters or reflects off of the electrons and atomic nuclei, mostly off
of the electrons. And so it's sort of a random walk from one place to another, kind of like
a drunk walking toward a light in the fog. The drunk generally wanders around and sort
of makes his way to the light but more slowly than if he were to go there directly. And
in a similar way, the photons bounce around and generally go from the hot interior to
the cooler outer regions, but they take a long time to do it. It's kind of like the
process called conduction where you have a spoon being heated by a candle and the atoms
are bouncing into one another, hitting one another, conducting the heat from one end
of the spoon to the other. So gradually with time, the other end of the spoon heats up.
So that's because the atoms are colliding with one another, conducting their heat from
one place to another. In the case of the sun, it's the photons that are hitting various
particles, conducting heat through radiation. So it's a combination of radiation and conduction.
It is called radiative diffusion. So in this central layer surrounding the core, you have
the radiative zone and through that zone, light goes through by undergoing radiative
diffusion. Surrounding the radiative zone is another zone called the convective zone.
And convection is the process by which you heat a bubble of gas or liquid and it expands
and becomes less dense and more buoyant. And that causes it to rise and it can deposit
its heat to the surroundings higher up. That makes it cooler and more dense, which makes
it come back down again, where it heats up again, becomes buoyant and comes back up.
That's a process called convection. And you can see convection operating, for example,
in a boiling pot of water. You heat the water from below at the bottom of the pot. It heats
up, becomes less dense and more buoyant. Blobs of water rise, deposit their energy near
the top where you might be cooking something and then they come back down and get heated
down near the bottom. So that's called convection and that's a very efficient process of transporting
energy. We know that the outer part of the sun is going through convection because when
we look at the sun, we can see all these little granules at the surface and you can tell through
detailed measurements that the bright little specks are hot pockets of gas that have risen
up from below and then they radiate their energy to the surroundings, cool down and
then fall back down into the interior where they can heat up again. And so the hot rising
gas is bright in this photograph and the cool falling gas is dark and you have all these
little granules there. Okay, well, so now let's go back and look at the sun and we have some
idea of how the energy makes its way from the interior to the surface. So now let's
look at the surface phenomena. The photosphere is this visible surface of the sun, but it
is not a hard surface like a floor or the ground. It's just gas. The sun is gaseous
throughout, but the apparent surface is that place where the gases become sufficiently
hot and dense that they become opaque rather than transparent like the atmosphere of the
sun. They're opaque, so that's where the photons can bounce around and convect in gases and
stuff like that. In other words, the energy doesn't travel freely unimpeded through the
opaque regions. It bounces around and has to get out some other way. Whereas in the
transparent regions, the light just goes from one place to another without bouncing off
of anything, without scattering. It travels unimpeded. So the photosphere is the place
where the gas becomes opaque and beyond which you can't see. Surrounding the photosphere,
you can see a thin layer called the chromosphere. Now it's only about 10,000 kilometers thick
and interestingly it's a little bit hotter than the photosphere. The photosphere temperature
is 5,800 degrees and the chromosphere is at a temperature of around 10,000 degrees, so
maybe one and a half times to two times as hot as the photosphere. Here's a nice photograph
of the chromosphere during an eclipse where the moon just barely covered the photosphere
but allowed the chromosphere to shine through. We don't exactly know why the chromosphere
is a little bit hotter than the photosphere. We think that there's mechanical heating because
of all these granules, all these convective cells coming up and down and also we think
there's some heating from magnetic fields in the sun. The chromosphere looks pink because
there are hydrogen atoms whose electrons are going from the third to the second energy
level and that creates a reddish or a pinkish glow and at a temperature of 10,000 degrees,
that's what hydrogen atoms like to do. There are electrons like to go from the third to
the second energy level. Surrounding the chromosphere is the corona, a hot, tenuous region whose
inner parts are shown here and whose outer parts are visible during a solar eclipse as
well. The corona is shaped by having charged particles go along magnetic fields and the
magnetic fields of the sun change with time, so the corona's shape changes with time as
well. It's never the same from one eclipse to another. It's very hot. It has a temperature
of about two million degrees in some parts and a little bit cooler in other parts and
we can tell that it's hot because it emits a lot of x-rays and also because it has highly
ionized atoms like iron that has been ionized 13 times. It's lost 13 of its electrons because
the particles are colliding with each other with such great vigor. They collide with each
other and they knock electrons off. I discussed a few lectures ago how electrons can be knocked
off when things collide with atoms. To get iron to be 13 times ionized, you have to collide
with very high speeds and that's what a high temperature means. It means that particles
are moving with a very high speed. Interestingly, however, though the particles have high speeds,
the corona has such a low density that is there are so few particles there that if you
were to immerse yourself in the corona and forget about the photosphere, you would freeze
because your body would be radiating to outer space energy at a faster rate than it is receiving
energy from all these particles colliding with you. You're immersed in a one or two million
degree gas yet you freeze to death because you're radiating faster. Of course, if you're
within the sun's corona, you'd have to worry about the photosphere. You'd be very close
to the sun, so you would of course fry. Don't try this. Don't try it either way. You would
freeze if you were in a gas as hot and tenuous as that of the corona. The corona then merges
with the solar wind. The solar wind is just the outer extension of the corona where the
particles escape into space. They do so with a variety of speeds, typically less than 1,000
kilometers per second, but sometimes they can approach speeds up to close to something
like the 5% of the speed of light during energetic processes called flares and coronal mass ejections
that I'll talk about in a few minutes. Gentle eruptions on the sun's surface are called
prominences and they are just essentially extensions of the chromosphere. They are chromospheric
gas that has been sort of gently ejected or burped out from the sun. And these prominences
glow pinkish red for the same reason that the chromosphere does. They have a temperature
of around 10,000 degrees and the atoms like to have electrons that are jumping from the
third to the second energy level in gas of such a temperature. To see these, you just
need the proper kind of filter on a fairly standard telescope. Amateur astronomers took
these movies of solar prominences and with really great equipment that NASA has built,
you can study prominences in great detail. And two of my favorite spacecraft are TRACE,
which stands for the transition region and coronal explorer. The chromosphere and the
prominences are this transition region. And then there's SOHO, the solar and heliospheric
observatory, which is positioned in such a way that it gets a continuous view of the
sun. It is between the earth and the sun stationed at one of the so-called Lagrange points.
And a satellite can remain at one of these Lagrange points in a stable way by undergoing
little circular motions like this. And you can see that it gets a long term view of the
sun. And so by observing the sun over many months, you can monitor the activity of the
chromosphere, the corona, the prominences, and various active regions of the sun. And
you don't have to worry about the day and night cycle of the earth because you have
this continuous uninterrupted view of the sun over the course of months or even years.
And in this movie, we see how the sun's behavior changes over the course of many months. Look,
some parts are more active, others are less active. It's always changing. The sun is almost
like a living creature. It's really great. Well, with Trace, you could get superb, detailed
images of prominences. And here we see these loops of gas glowing and growing as gases
get ejected or burped from the surface of the sun and they flow along magnetic field
lines going along these loops. And here was a particularly energetic prominence. So prominences
are fairly gentle eruptions, but some of them can be relatively energetic. And when you
get very energetic ones, then we call it a solar flare. Now, solar flares are even sort
of a different breed of phenomenon. They're not just a pretty energetic prominence. They
are so incredibly energetic that they emit huge numbers of particles at speeds that are
like 5% of the speed of light and they come streaming out of the sun. And the temperatures
can be several million degrees in a flare. So it's a violent release of particles from
the sun. Here's a still picture of a flare and here is a movie from Soho of a flare
that occurred near the visible edge of the sun. Let's look at that again. Boom, look
at that. Just a rapid burst of energetic particles which then contribute to the solar wind and
come streaming out to the earth. Here, Trace measured a solar flare. Wham! See, a lot of
particles came out there in a short amount of time. And here is the earth, by the way,
to scale. So you can see the sun is much bigger than the earth. And all these prominences
and flares and stuff take up regions of space on the sun's surface that are easily bigger
than the size of the earth itself. Now, related to flares are the so-called coronal mass
ejections. They are related in the sense that a large amount of material comes flowing
out of the sun in a burst. But only some of the coronal mass ejections appear to be associated
with specific solar flares that were seen at about the same time. Other coronal mass
ejections just seem to occur in a way that's unrelated to the flares. And here, Soho has
blocked the photosphere of the sun with a disc allowing the outer corona to be seen. So in
a sense, this is produced in artificial eclipse. And you can see occasionally these boom, ejections
of material. Boom, there goes another one. I mean, it's fantastic. The sun somehow decides
to just spew out all these particles. Boom, boom, in bursts. And this phenomenon still
is really not understood. Indeed, we don't even really know why the corona is as hot
as it is. We think it's due to magnetic fields sort of dissipating their energy and stuff.
But why do you get these coronal mass ejections? Well, who knows? Maybe it's when large pockets
of especially strong magnetic fields get tangled up together and release their magnetic energy
in one burst, thereby accelerating the particles and causing them to stream away from the sun.
And as I said, some of the coronal mass ejections seem to be pumped by flares. Let's turn now
to sunspots, which are dark blotches on the sun's photosphere. You can see some of them
here. And it's useful to remember that the sun's diameter is around 109 earth diameters.
So when you use your shade 14 glass and you look at some of the bigger sunspots, you are
seeing dark regions on the sun that are several times the physical size of the earth. The
sun is really quite a big thing. Hundred earths or 109 earths across a million earths could
fit inside the sun. So the sun is big. So what are these sunspots? Well, when we take
a closer look at them, we see that they consist of a central very dark region called the umbra
and a lighter region called the penumbra. And their shapes change with time and from
one sunspot to another, the shapes change. So they're quite variable. Sometimes they
appear in big groups like this and sometimes they appear more or less singly. Now they appear
black or gray because they are cooler regions of the solar photosphere. And cooler regions
that are emitting light of their own don't emit as much light as hotter regions do. Recall
in lecture 21, I discussed ideal thermal radiation. That is where an object has atoms jiggling
around inside because they're hot. And those jiggling motions lead to the emission of radiation.
In an idealized case, that spectrum of radiation follows what we called the Planck curve. In
an idealized case, you have a perfect emitter. And it's not dependent on anything but the
temperature of the substance. It's not dependent on its chemical composition or shape or anything.
You just have this perfect emitter that's emitting this perfect Planck curve. Now most things
aren't perfect emitters, but that's a pretty good approximation. And physicists sometimes
call such a perfect emitter a black body. They call it a black body because it doesn't
reflect any light. And it's not transparent to light. It absorbs any incident radiation
upon it. And that incident radiation causes it to heat up. And it might be hot internally
due to nuclear reactions or whatever like the sun. But the point is the radiation that
it emits is entirely emitted because of the thermal or random motions of the particle
within it. And it's black because it doesn't reflect any light. So the technical term is
sometimes a black body. But I prefer just to call it a thermal emitter. Anyway, the sunspots
are cooler regions on the sun. They are about 2,000 degrees cooler than the surrounding
photosphere. So suppose a sunspot has a region of 4,000 degrees Kelvin and the surrounding
photosphere has a temperature of 6,000 degrees. The ratio of 4,000 to 6,000 is two-thirds.
But the Stefan Boltzmann law that we discussed in lecture 22 said that the amount of energy
emitted per second is proportional to the fourth power of the temperature. So if you
raise two-thirds to the fourth power, you get 16 over 81, which is about 0.2. So a sunspot
emits per unit time about 20 percent as much energy as the surrounding photosphere does.
And so it looks dimmer and hence darker relative to the surrounding photosphere. Now it's still
pretty hot. It's 4,000 degrees. If you plucked the gas of a sunspot out of the sun and put
it up against the dark sky, it would glow brightly. Indeed, sunspots are hotter than
some of the coolest stars we know of. But relative to the surrounding photosphere, they
are cooler and hence appear darker. Why are they cooler? Well, because we know that sunspots
are regions of strong magnetic fields. And here is the field of a stationary magnet.
Our sun's magnetic field looks roughly like that. And we find that sunspots themselves
have magnetic fields that look like sort of like a bar magnet like this, but often you
have sort of the superposition of several bar magnets. And you might have a tangled
magnetic field and it's stronger than average. So here in a sunspot, you have these strong
magnetic fields and strong magnetic fields inhibit or restrain the flow of hot charged
particles from the interior of the sun upwards. Charged particles don't like to cross magnetic
field lines. So as they're trying to come up through this process of convection, they
get restrained or inhibited by the strong magnetic fields in a sunspot such as this.
And that gas reaches the top of the sun, cools, and the supply of hot gas isn't replenished
because of this restraining process produced by the magnetic fields.
You can measure the rotation rate of the sun by monitoring the sunspots as SOHO has done.
And here are some big groups of spots cruising across the face of the sun, showing that it
rotates. And the rotation takes about one month. It's faster at the equator than at
the pole, but the average is about a month. Interestingly, the number of sunspots and
the number of flares and prominences and other signs of activity on the sun varies with time.
And here I show a graph of specifically how many sunspots were visible as a function of
time over the past century or so. And you can see that there were many spots and then
few and then many again and few and many and few. And the peaks are not all the same height
here in 1957. There was a very high number of sunspots and then a small number a few
years later. This cycle lasts about 11 years. So after about 11 years, you have a repeat
of the number, the approximate numbers of spots visible on the sun, large numbers, small
numbers, large numbers, small numbers. And during this time of increased sunspot activity,
you also have more prominences, more flares, more coronal mass ejections, more activity
in general. And this is called the solar activity cycle. Now if you look with Soho at the sun,
you can see its general activity as a function of time in 1996. And then we will see a year
later in 1997. And then one more year later in 1998. And during this time, the sun is
becoming more active. See 1996 was a period of low activity, 1998 and now 1999 is a period
of reasonably high activity. You can see how many more active regions there are on the
sun. In the year 2000, there were lots of them. The sun was teeming with activity around
2000 and 2001. That was around the time of the last peak of the sunspot cycle. If you
look at where the sunspots appear with time on the sun, here is a plot of where they appear
during the course of the sunspot cycle. You can see that they started out at high latitudes
near the poles and they gradually drift down toward the equator. So the sunspot cycle starts
pretty far from the equator and the zones of activity tend to migrate downwards toward
the equator with time. How is the sun's magnetic field generated? Why does it look like a bar
magnet like this? Well, we don't really know and we understand even less why it changes
every 11 years because it reverses itself, it turns out, every 11 years. The north pole
becomes the south pole and the south pole becomes the north pole. But we think that it is caused
by this process of convection. There's this zone in the sun where the gases are sort of
boiling. They're going up and down. Pockets of gas are rising and falling. These convective
motions generate currents, electrical currents within the sun and just as an electrical current
in a wire generated a magnetic field, I illustrated that when I showed you a simple electromagnet,
so too do the currents in the sun generate a magnetic field which is then manifested near
the surface of the sun and outside it. And if you have a very hot core compared to the
surface, you tend to get more convection and a strong magnetic field. If the temperature
of the core were smaller relative to the surface, then you get less convection and a weaker
and less extended magnetic field. And if the temperature of the core of the sun were very
low compared to the surface, then you get much less convection and a very weak magnetic field.
So somehow we think the magnetic field is linked with the convective motions, the boiling
within the sun, but exactly how that occurs is still not well known and why the north and
south poles switch every 11 years is also not known. If you look at the sun's rotation,
I mentioned that at the equator it rotates more quickly than at the poles. So at the equator rotating
in 26 days, the magnetic field lines get stretched out and tangled and this tangling effect is
what we think leads to the strong magnetic fields that you see in sunspots. So there's
a region that has a strong magnetic field all tangled up and you get more and more of those
with time. So it's the fact that the sun doesn't rotate as a solid body that makes it stretch
out the magnetic field lines, cause them to eventually become tangled and lead to the
appearance of these sunspots. The sunspots tend to appear in pairs and you can see them
here. In the northern hemisphere, the pairs are aligned with north at the left and south
at the right. In the sun's southern hemisphere, it's the opposite. The pole of a pair of sunspots
has south at the left and north at the right. But as I said, every 11 years the polarity
changes so south becomes north and north becomes south. So if you consider the overall sunspot
cycle, instead of being 11 years long, it's 22 years long because there's this reversal
of the poles. Our earth does that as well. We totally don't understand that. We don't
even really understand how it occurs in the sun, a relatively simple system. But we're
getting there, we're making more progress. And yet another way in which we're studying
the sun is by noticing that it goes through a sort of a breathing motion. The sun oscillates
in size a little bit. Every five minutes or every minute or every few seconds, it goes
through these motions where it's getting a little bit bigger and a little bit smaller.
And here you can see one of the modes in which it oscillates. Some parts are farther out,
some are closer in. And there are many modes like this in which it does this. And these
solar oscillations offer yet another clue to the sun's interior structure. And by measuring
the different solar oscillations and the magnetic activity cycle and the sunspots and flares
and all this, we are gradually coming to a better understanding of what is intrinsically
a very complex structure, our sun. But the advantage that the sun gives us is that we
can see it from very nearby. And if it's a typical star, which we think it is, then
much of what we learn about the sun should be applicable to our general study of other stars as well.
