We begin our study of planets in our solar system with the four innermost or terrestrial
planets, Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars.
Now terrestrial in Latin means earth or earth-like, so all four of these planets are much like
the earth in their overall characteristics.
For example, they're small, they're close to the sun, they're rocky, they're dense,
they have a density of around five grams per cubic centimeter, five times that of water.
They have few moons, they don't have giant atmospheres like the giant planets farther
from the sun, they have thin atmospheres or no atmosphere at all, so they're all quite
similar in that regard.
We will start with the earth, with which we of course are most familiar.
Our home planet, our oasis in the universe.
What's it like?
Well, Earth's internal structure looks like this.
It has a solid iron-nickel core, the dense things sank to the middle early in the history
of the earth, and it's surrounded by a liquid-nickel iron core.
And then there's a thick mantle on top of that, separated into two major parts, the
lower mantle and the upper mantle.
The lower mantle especially is sort of plastic-y, it's sort of viscous, it flows, although only
very slowly like molasses, but you can have motions in it, and to some degree you can
have motions within the upper mantle as well.
And then there's a solid crust that floats on top of that.
And the way we've learned about the basic structure of the earth is by studying seismic
waves, earthquake waves, and how they travel through the earth.
Now there are a number of different types of waves, I won't go into the details, but
the three main kinds that travel into the earth are called P, K, and S waves.
The P and K waves are what's called longitudinal waves.
They're like the waves of a slinky, when you jostle it up and down like this, you can see
the compressions and the rare factions.
And those are in the same direction as the direction along which the wave moves, those
are longitudinal waves.
And the longitudinal waves are able to travel through the different layers, but they bend
because the density changes in the different layers, and so just like light waves bend
when they enter a denser substance like glass or water, so too do these seismic waves, which
are essentially sound waves, bend.
And the primary ones go wandering around through the mantle.
There are these other longitudinal waves that can go through the liquid outer core of the
earth, but then there are the other kinds of waves called shear waves, and those are
basically transverse.
That is, the motions are this way compared to the direction of motion.
And they occur in rock, and you sort of displace the rock one way and it pulls itself back
like that, and these waves are not able to travel through a liquid very well.
So the shear waves don't go through the outer core, and this is how geologists know that
at least part of the iron core of the earth has to be liquid, because these shear waves
don't make it through.
So by watching where an earthquake occurs and what kinds of waves appear at what times
throughout the rest of the earth, you can figure out how these waves move through the
earth, and you can, after many, many earthquakes, learn about the internal structure of the
earth.
And it's very complex, but that's the basic idea of how it happens.
So you have this inner iron core, which is very dense.
And it got there by sinking.
So the earth had to have been molten early in its history, and it achieved this layered
structure through a process called differentiation.
That is, the dense things had a chance to sink to the middle, and the lighter, rocky material,
the silicates and things like that rested up on top and froze out at different times.
And the crust lost its heat and froze and became solid, and parts of the mantle are
still liquid because there's still some heat in there.
So the early earth was completely melted throughout and went through this process of differentiation.
And you could ask, why then was the earth molten throughout in the beginning?
And there are two basic reasons.
One is that, as I will discuss later, the earth and the other planets formed, we think,
as a result of the coalescence of a whole bunch of particles of dust and rock and gas
and stuff, and these things hit each other and stuck.
And then they gravitationally attracted more and more material, and some material just
happened to hit because it was going along the right direction.
But the point is that all these things hit each other and accumulated, but in the process
of colliding, rocks and particles liberate the energy of motion that they had, and they
turn it into heat.
They turn it into microscopic, random, thermal motions of the constituent particles.
And so if you have enough hitting like this, you can heat up a rock or a metal sufficiently
to melt it.
Now when you look at a waterfall, for example, and you measure carefully the temperature
at the bottom of the waterfall and compare it with the temperature at the top, if you
did your measurement sufficiently carefully, you would find that the temperature at the
bottom is slightly hotter than at the top because some of the energy of motion, the
kinetic energy of this falling water, got dissipated into heat and random, thermal jiggling around
this motions of the constituent particles, and that's what we call heat or a higher temperature.
So the rock heated up and became molten.
It also melted because there were radioactive elements like uranium in the earth when it
was made.
There still are, in fact.
And these things decay into more stable forms of elements, more stable isotopes as they
are called.
And in the decay process, energetic particles are liberated and they too deposit their energy
into the surrounding material, heating it up and contributing to this molten state.
And indeed, the earth remains partially molten because of the continual decay of radioactive
elements that have a long time scale of decay.
We'll discuss that a little bit more in the next lecture when we talk about the moon.
Well the crust floats on this soft sort of slowly churning layer, the mantle.
And the crust gets moved then by motions within the mantle.
And you get this phenomenon that we call continental drift, or more generally it's now known by
the term plate tectonics because the crust is divided into a bunch of different units
or plates and they move relative to one another.
This idea was first articulated by Alfred Wegener in 1912.
He was a meteorologist and a geologist who looked at the shapes of continents on earth
and noticed most strikingly, of course, that the west coast of Africa looks like it fits
nicely with the east coast of South America.
It's kind of like a jigsaw puzzle.
And he was particularly struck by that set of shapes, but he found other ones elsewhere
on earth that appeared to fit together like the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle.
Now at that time, other geologists thought that there had been hundreds of millions of
years ago some giant land bridge between South America and Africa connecting the two.
And they needed that because it was known that the fossils of animals that lived a couple
hundred million years ago were the same on the east coast of South America and the west
coast of Africa.
So these landforms had to have been connected and it was thought that they were connected
by a bridge which subsequently sank into the ocean and simply no longer exists.
And Wegener said, well, yeah, that's perhaps possible, but look at the shapes of these
things.
They fit together like a jigsaw puzzle.
Maybe they were essentially contiguous hundreds of millions of years ago and since then have
drifted apart.
And the scientific community thought that this was pretty ridiculous because Wegener
didn't really have a mechanism for this continental drift.
In fact, he had the continents sort of plowing through the bottom of the ocean like an ice
breaker and the amounts of energy involved in that process are just tremendous.
They're ridiculous.
So he was not taken very seriously.
But unfortunately, he was actually ridiculed by the establishment and he was treated very
badly.
And that's really too bad.
But because it was an interesting hypothesis that could have been right and lo and behold,
we now do think that it's right.
There's a lot of evidence now for this plate tectonics.
So we think that about 200 to 250 million years ago, there was this one single supercontinent
that we call Pangea or all lands.
And about 180 million years ago, it split apart into two subcontinents, two still pretty
giant continents, but half of this first one.
And they were called Gondwana land and Laurasia.
And then there were further subdivisions thereafter and now we have all these continents floating
around.
And this Pangea, it turns out, was not even the first supercontinent to have existed.
We think that prior to Pangea, about 600 million years ago, there was a supercontinent
called Panosia and it broke apart, perhaps several times.
And prior to that, there was a supercontinent called Rodinia, maybe 1.1 billion years ago,
and it broke apart a couple of times and then came together.
So this breaking apart and coming together of continents appears to have been a process
that has been common on Earth throughout most of its history.
So Wegener was right, but he wasn't sort of proved right until the 1950s and even late
1960s, when geologists started to study the ocean floors in great detail.
And they found that indeed they are spreading apart and the plates are moving relative to
one another.
And since the late 1960s, this has become the accepted theory.
Wegener did not live to see it be accepted.
So here's a map of the major plates on Earth and where there are boundaries between the
plates, they hit each other, causing mountains and volcanoes and things like that.
And they also slide against one another.
And when the sliding is smooth, you don't have earthquakes, but quite often there are
kinks in the plate boundaries and the plates stick together for a little while and they
push on each other, but nothing happens.
And then finally one of them breaks free and you get an earthquake.
And the magnitude of the earthquake is related to how much energy was released when one plate
finally broke free from a kink in another plate.
And a famous sort of ring of fire exists around the Pacific plate, going through Japan, the
Philippines, and of course the west coast of North America.
And along this ring of fire there are many earthquakes, there are volcanoes such as in
the Pacific Northwest and there's just a lot of signs of activity.
And in the Pacific Northwest there's a series of volcanoes like Mount St. Helens here with
a sun dog to its left and there's Mount Rainier and Mount Hood and others.
And in California of course, where I'm from, we're quite familiar with earthquakes and indeed
the football stadium of my home campus, the University of California at Berkeley, happens
to be on the Hayward Fault, which is sort of a tributary of the famous San Andreas Fault
in California.
And here you can see that the stadium has shifted by several inches over the decades.
Viewed from above it looks like two seas facing one another, this oval, and they're displaced
relative to one another.
So you know what?
Brainiac built the stadium on top of the Hayward Fault.
Well they didn't know at the time that they were building it right on top of the Hayward
Fault so that's the way it goes.
They're in the process of raising funds to sort of retrofit it.
Anyway, the motion of the plates relative to each other is also responsible for the
formation of some of the great mountain ranges such as the Himalayas over here which were
formed by the collision of India with the Eurasian Plate.
And that collision is still occurring so the Himalayas are in fact still rising.
They are quite a young mountain range and India is diving under or being subducted under
the Eurasian Plate but there's still quite a bit of force between these two where they're
colliding and you have the Himalayas.
And similarly the Nazca Plate is moving against the South American Plate and pushing up the
Andes Mountains so you get great mountain chains along these plates.
Now the process that drives the continental drift or the plate tectonics is as I said
this movement of the mantle and in particular the movement is something I described when
discussing the sun.
It's called convection and it's illustrated here.
Convection is where you have bulk motion of a blob or pocket of material that gains a
lot of heat when it's down at the bottom here close to the core of the earth becomes more
buoyant because it expands because of the heat and its buoyancy lifts it up, it then
deposits its heat farther up at the top here, becomes denser and hence it sinks and the
process repeats.
And you can see then that this mantle which is made out of a partially liquid material
can make it through weak spots in the crust and emerge as magma or lava in the form of
volcanoes and also mountain ranges where two plates are spreading apart like in the mid-Atlantic
ocean there's a mountain range that's coming up where two plates are spreading apart.
So this is what drives the continental drift where you have these plates moving around
on this convective mantle.
But interestingly Mars is a smaller planet than earth, it's about half the size of earth
and it lost a lot, indeed most of its heat long ago, so it has a lot less convection
going on and indeed Mars' crust has now frozen to one solid plate.
There are no plate boundaries moving relative to one another because there's simply not
enough convection driving that action.
So Mars is very different from earth in that way.
Okay, well now let's consider earth's atmosphere.
Earth is about 6,400 kilometers in radius, yet its atmosphere is only about 100 kilometers
thick, so it's just a tiny fraction of the radius.
Atmosphere is very thin, 100 kilometers at most for going from the surface to a region
that we call the ionosphere where it's mostly ionized.
But most of the real action, the weather and all that, happens even closer to the ground.
It happens within about 18 kilometers or so from the surface of the earth.
And indeed the highest mountain peaks in the world in the Himalayas are about half that
height, they're 8 or 9 kilometers.
So that's in the troposphere.
And we live of course in the troposphere and we breathe the air and a lot of people think
that all of the air is oxygen, that happens not to be true, most of the air is nitrogen.
Indeed 79% of the air is nitrogen and only about 20% is oxygen, though that's still a
very high proportion because oxygen is a rather reactive element.
It likes to oxidize materials, it likes to combine with them and cause, for example,
it causes decay of organic compounds and it causes rusting of metals and things like that.
So oxygen doesn't really like to stick around and the very high abundance or proportion
of oxygen in our atmosphere demands an explanation.
Well that explanation is life, life itself.
Earth's atmosphere we believe began without oxygen or any appreciable amount of it and
then photosynthesis in plants began and algae formed and cyanobacteria which produce oxygen
formed and certain types of plankton can produce oxygen.
So all these little microscopic creatures began to produce oxygen long ago and then
complicated plants evolved and they began to produce oxygen as well.
So starting from a few billion years ago the oxygen content of the earth gradually started
to rise and now it's about 20% of the composition of the earth's atmosphere.
But if all the things, if all the creatures that ever produced or all the plants that
ever produced oxygen had completely died away and decayed and if all of their waste products
had completely decayed away, that process of decay would have used up as much oxygen
as they produced during their lives.
So to have a net excess of oxygen right now, it must have been the case that a lot of these
photosynthesizing plants and bacteria did not fully decay after they died.
And what we think happened is that massive sediments covered them and they were only
able to partially decay and these partially decayed forms are now what we call coal and
petroleum.
They are our fossil fuels and by burning them we complete the process of oxidation of decay.
We get warmth and heat and all that and energy.
But of course if we use all these things up then there will be nothing else left to use
and so we've got to start thinking about alternative sources of energy like solar energy and wind
and water and probably nuclear energy once again.
Now the oxygen also, well the oxygen usually occurs in our atmosphere in the form of diatomic
oxygen molecules, O2.
But there's another form of oxygen molecule, O3, called ozone.
And ozone can be produced by cars and in cities it's not good, you know it's actually a poison
to earthlings, to humans and we don't like it.
So we try to minimize ozone production by cars and factories.
But high up in the earth's atmosphere at altitudes of 20 to 40 kilometers the ozone is actually
a good thing because the ozone protects us from harmful ultraviolet radiation from the
sun.
It blocks that radiation and if most of that radiation were to come through there would
be a lot more mutations in human cells and most mutations are bad, you know so that's
good that there aren't too many mutations.
Moreover the ozone protects the water vapor in our atmosphere and allows it to produce
raindrops and come raining back down before it gets too high up say above the ozone where
ultraviolet radiation could dissociate or break down the water into hydrogen and oxygen
and then it wouldn't form rain and the rain is very important to clear out our atmosphere
and clear out the carbon dioxide in our atmosphere and for many reasons rain is important.
And it's the ozone layer that helps protect the water vapor in our atmosphere from having
from being broken apart by ultraviolet rays from the sun.
So we have to protect our ozone layer yet we are emitting a lot of chlorofluorocarbons
CFCs with our air conditioners and our freezers and refrigerators and things and that appears
to be having an effect on the ozone.
Here we see the so called ozone hole which is a deficiency of ozone apparent in the southern
hemisphere of the earth during the southern hemisphere's spring.
You can see the continent of Antarctica outlined here but this lighter blue region indicates
a deficiency of ozone and you can see that in the 20 years between 1981 and 2001 this
ozone deficiency has spread and though we don't yet know for sure that that is induced
by humans it is probable that a good fraction of the cause of that is these pollutants that
we are putting into the air and so we have to think about this and figure out ways to
minimize the amount of chlorofluorocarbons and other substances that we put into the
atmosphere.
Let's now turn to the earth's magnetic field.
Earth's magnetic field like that of the sun basically looks like that of a bar magnet
with a north pole and a south pole and well ordered field lines around it.
Now there are some kinks and wiggles and it's more complex than that but the basic structure
looks like that of a bar magnet and it reverses itself from north pole to south pole and upside
down irregularly.
Roughly every 300,000 years the north pole turns into the south pole and vice versa
but this period goes from anywhere from a few tens of thousands of years to a few tens
of millions of years it's very irregular and indeed the last time the field reversed itself
was about 700,000 years ago and we don't know when it will occur next but when the reversals
occur the field is weak and probably a lot more charged particles come in from the sun
and cause mutations and things like that and so it's probably kind of a dangerous time
to live on earth because there's a lot more harmful radiation from the sun that doesn't
get trapped by earth's magnetic field during these reversals.
You can tell that the reversals are happening by looking at this mountain range in the middle
of the Atlantic Ocean where two plates are separating from one another and magma is coming
up and it solidifies and it preserves within that solidified magma the orientation of the
magnetic field so we can tell that these reversals have occurred.
We don't know why they occur indeed we don't even really know why earth's magnetic field
exists.
The cartoon that physicists draw is something like this it's related to what we discussed
for the sun.
The earth is rotating and it has a liquid or partially liquid conducting core.
It has an iron, nickel, outer core that's liquid and this rotation of the liquid core
sets up electric currents which then themselves produce magnetic fields.
So here you can see this convection going on and the convection sets up these electric
currents that you can see here and the electric currents set up magnetic fields like the electrical
magnet that I showed you a number of lectures ago.
The magnetic field is stronger if you have a hotter core let's make a hotter core because
to get the energy out of the core to the surface you need more convection and more convection
drives more of these electric currents which produce the magnetic field.
The magnetic field is also enhanced if you speed up the rotation of the planet see if
the planet is rotating more quickly then again you get more of these currents and they produce
a stronger magnetic field.
So that's the basic idea of how the earth's magnetic field is produced but the details
are still not at all understood and are quite controversial and I think it's fair to say
we really don't understand why the reversals occur.
I mean I told you about the sun last time and I said that we don't even completely understand
the very periodic 22 year solar cycle and its reversal of the magnetic field and yet
the sun is completely gaseous throughout it should be relatively easy to understand compared
with the earth which is partially solid partially molten has rocks has iron has all sorts of
junk you know it's not a simple gas so it's not surprising that we don't understand the
earth very well given that we don't even really understand the sun's magnetic field
all that well.
Well as I mentioned before when you have solar eruptions like coronal mass ejections and
solar flares you get a lot of charged particles coming from the sun they traverse the distance
between the sun and the earth they hit the magnetic field of the earth most of them get
deflected or trapped but some of the trapped ones then can make it down to the atmosphere
of the earth where they bang in to the particles of nitrogen or the atoms of nitrogen and oxygen
and they cause the electrons in those atoms to jump to higher energy levels because they
got kicked by the charged particles and then in coming down from those higher energy levels
you get the display of the northern and southern lights the aurora borealis and the aurora
australis and I talked about the auroras more extensively in lecture three but here you
can see directly the sun earth connection where the sun's eruptions send out these charged
particles that then interact with the earth's magnetic field and then interact with the
atmosphere producing the auroras all right so there's a nice little sun earth connection
there there's also a connection not only between the sun and the earth in the form of tides
but even more strongly there's a connection between the moon and the earth in the form
of tides so let's let's look at the tides on the earth the moon exerts an overall force
on the earth just that's f equals gmm over d squared Newton's universal law of gravitation
but if you look at the moon's attraction for a particle on the near side of the earth
compared with the center that particle is attracted more towards the moon than the particle
near the center is so relative to the center the particle near the moon is pulled away
from the center this is called a differential force so that tends to make water bulge up
on the side of the earth that faces the moon so in that case you might think well so there
should be one high tide on earth at any given time but it turns out there's two high tides
because the particle at the center gets pulled away by a stronger force than that being exerted
on a particle at the far side of the earth so here's the force on a particle at the
far side of the earth relative to the force on a particle in the center of the earth that's
less and so relative to the center of the earth it's as though that particle on the
far side were being pulled outward just as on the near side of the earth the particle
was being pulled outward relative to the center of the earth so water flows toward the back
side of the earth as well as toward the front side and in an ideal earth with no continents
and only oceans you would have something like this the water flows both toward the side facing
the moon and toward that side away from the moon now continents mess this up and all that
but basically if you look at a place and you look at high tide and low tide here's low
tide so that's the places on earth from which the water was taken and then here is high tide
those are the places toward which water was pulled by the moon so low tide and high tide you can
see how much more water there is and the shapes of the coastline and all that do influence this to
some degree so that tides are more complicated than that but this is the basic explanation and so
you can see that any given point on earth here rotates in a 24 hour day through two high tides
one there and one there so take something at a given latitude it rotates around in 24 hours and
it goes through a high tide there and a high tide there and then a low tide at the points in
between and if you're at far northern or far southern latitudes then the difference between
the two high tides can be quite dramatic this high tide is a much more extreme high tide than
that one where there's not much water so you get two tides per day two high tides and two low tides
per day so then you might ask well what about the Sun the Sun is more massive than the moon so
doesn't it exert tides on earth as well it does but only to about half the extent that the moon
does and that's because though the Sun is much more massive than the moon it's far far farther
away and so the difference in its attraction for the near side versus the center and the center
versus the far side that differential force is much less than the differential force exerted by
the moon so it turns out that the Sun's differential force is only about half of the moons because
it's so far away nevertheless it's not zero and so the tides tend to be extreme and they are called
spring tides when the moon and the Sun are lined up so so the Sun's way over here somewhere so
during new moon you get extremely high high tides and extremely low low tides and similarly when
when the Sun is over here and the moon's there so that's full moon again you get these extreme
high tides and low tides they're called spring tides when on the other hand the moon the earth and
the Sun are essentially perpendicular to one another so the moon's over here and the Sun's
either up there or down there then the Sun's tides partially offset those of the moon and you tend
to get not as extreme high tides and not as extreme low tides and that causes an effect that we
call neap tides and there is no season called neap and so you know clearly the spring tides have
have nothing to do with the season spring so the tides on earth are caused by the attraction of the
moon more so on the near side than on the center and more so on the center than on the far side so
you get a stretching of the earth in both directions and the Sun contributes a little bit as well and
this is then the phenomenon of tides on earth
