Let us now turn to the Earth's moon.
Just as the moon is the primary cause of tides on Earth, so too does the Earth cause tides
on the moon, tidal forces on the moon, and that has some interesting consequences on
our view of the moon.
Let's take a look at the moon.
Here it is in the sky, and let us especially note the position of several features relative
to the edge, or the limb.
So here's a little dark spot, and here's a pretty big crater, here's another one.
At a different phase of the moon, so a different part has been illuminated, we don't see quite
as much illuminated anymore.
Nevertheless, those same features appear at about the same distance from the edge of the
moon.
So regardless of the phase of the moon, we appear to see the same face of the moon,
the same side of the moon.
And that's because it turns out that the moon is rotating in a way that's synchronous,
or the same as its revolution or orbit around Earth.
It rotates about its axis at the same rate that it revolves around the Earth.
Let's take a look at what I mean by that.
Suppose we have the moon here, and suppose it were not rotating about its axis at all.
Then let's take a stick here on the moon that happens to be pointing directly at Earth,
at this stage of its orbit.
A quarter of a turn later, it is still pointing in the same absolute direction in the sky,
that is, it's pointing toward the same stars far, far away, because the moon hasn't rotated
at all.
But now you see that it is not pointing toward the Earth, so we would see the stick not on
the near side of the moon, but rather on the edge of the moon.
A quarter of a turn later, the stick is still pointing at the same stars, the same absolute
direction in space, but now it's pointing away from the Earth, so we wouldn't see the
stick at all, because we see the near side of the moon at this stage.
And then a quarter of an orbit later, the stick is still pointing in the same direction
relative to the stars, and has appeared once or on the edge of the moon as seen from Earth.
So if you have no rotation or non-synchronous rotation, then you eventually see all sides
of the moon.
But now suppose you have synchronous rotation.
In that case, the stick is initially pointing toward the Earth, a quarter of an orbit later,
the moon has also rotated a quarter of the way about its axis.
So those two effects cancel out, and the stick is still pointing directly at the Earth, so
we see the same face of the moon.
A quarter of a revolution later, the moon has also rotated a quarter of its way around
its axis, and so again, the stick points toward the Earth.
And so on, a quarter of a revolution later, you have a quarter of a rotation as well,
and so the stick still points at the Earth.
You see the same side of the moon, if the moon's rotation is exactly synchronous with
its revolution or orbit around the Earth.
Now why did it end up this way?
Was the moon just by chance born with a rotation period exactly equal to its revolution around
the Earth?
No, that's unlikely, and in fact, we don't think it's true.
We think that the moon initially started out rotating about its axis much more quickly
than its orbital time around the Earth, but it gradually slowed down in its rotation due
to an effect known as tidal friction.
Let me illustrate that.
Here's a balloon, which is used to represent the moon.
The moon isn't really made of green cheese, but I'm pretending that it is right here.
So the Earth exerts a tide on the moon, that is, it stretches the moon toward it and away
from it, because as we learned last time, the moon does the same thing to the Earth.
It pulls the near side a bit toward it and leaves the far side of the Earth kind of lagging
behind the center.
So the Earth gets stretched in both directions due to the moon, so too, the moon gets stretched
in both directions by the Earth's gravitational tidal forces.
So here's what the moon looks like, but the moon doesn't have an ocean, okay?
It just has these solid rocks, and when the moon was rotating about its axis more quickly
than it was orbiting around the Earth, then different sides of the moon faced the Earth
at different times, and so the different rocks were stretched toward the Earth.
So now these rocks are stretched toward the Earth, and these are stretched away from the
Earth.
Earlier, these ones where you blow through the moon were stretched toward the Earth,
and the other ones were stretched away from the Earth.
And so as it rotates, different rocks are getting stretched toward the Moon, are getting
stretched toward the Earth or away from the Earth.
And so you get this mashing around of the moon, the moon's rocks are rubbing against
each other and deforming and changing shape, and this rubbing action releases energy.
This friction releases energy which causes the moon's rotation to gradually slow down
because the energy has to come from somewhere, it comes from the rotational energy of the
moon.
And the slowing down occurred gradually until the moon's rotation slowed down to such a
slow rate that it exactly equaled the rate of revolution around the earth.
And in that case then, there was synchronous rotation, the moon became permanently deformed
into one shape and the rocks were no longer sloshing around relative to one another dissipating
energy.
Having achieved this rate of rotation that was exactly equal to the rate of revolution,
the moon became fixed in orientation relative to the earth, and so we always see the same
side of the moon.
Now it turns out that the earth's rotation is slowing down as well, the earth's oceans
are sloshing around due to the tidal pull of the moon, and that sloshing around dissipates
energy, it's not as much energy dissipation as when rocks are rubbing against one another
because the water is able to flow, nevertheless it is a dissipation of energy, and it turns
out that as a result earth's day is slowing down by about one second every 100,000 years
or so.
So when the earth was born, the day night cycle was only 8 hours long, and in the 4.5 billion
years since then it has slowed down to a 24 hour day night cycle, so our day is getting
imperceptibly longer, at least imperceptibly to us, you can detect it using sensitive devices.
Similarly, because of this complex interaction, the moon is gradually moving away from the
earth at a rate of right now about 3.8 centimeters per year.
So in a few hundred million years, the moon will be generally too small to fully cover
the photosphere of the sun, and in about half a billion years it will always be too small
to cover the sun, so total solar eclipses will no longer occur.
Anyway, if you look at the moon like this, you can now understand that there is a perpetually
near side and there is a perpetually far side, but it turns out that there is no perpetually
dark side, so in the famous Pink Floyd CD, Dark Side of the Moon, they must have been
referring to the dark side at any given time, because there is no perpetually dark side
of the moon.
Let me illustrate that.
The lunar month is 29.5 days, that is from full moon to full moon is about 30 days, so
almost 15 days of continuous daylight occur on any given spot on the moon, followed by
15 consecutive days of darkness, and you can see that if you take a look at the moon
as it orbits the earth lit up by the sun from the right.
First of all, notice that the features of the moon that are toward the earth are not
changing, that is the moon is in synchronous rotation with its revolution, but second of
all, look how any given feature is bathed in sunlight for about 15 days, and then it
is in darkness for about 15 days.
The orbital time of the moon is about one month, so you get 15 consecutive days starting
now for that feature right there of daytime, followed by 15 days starting right now of
darkness.
So with 15 continuous days of sunshine followed by 15 days of darkness, the temperatures get
pretty high on the lit up side of the moon, and they get pretty cold, they get low on
the dark side of the moon.
Moreover, the moon doesn't have much of an atmosphere, in fact no atmosphere at all,
so it doesn't trap the heat, it doesn't warm the moon like say earth's air, earth's atmosphere
provides kind of a blanket around the earth that keeps it warm at night, or helps keep
it warm at night.
So the moon's temperatures go through extremes from negative 110 degrees on the Celsius scale
where water freezes at zero, that's pretty cold, all the way up to 130 degrees on the
Celsius scale where water boils at 100, so you go from way over boiling to way, way below
freezing, you need, you know, you need some protective covering as well as of course an
oxygen mask and all that.
Now you could ask, well with such extremes in temperature, are there any places on the
moon where there's water, it looks like maybe there are a few places, there are a few craters
at the northern and southern poles that are perpetually shaded, so the bottoms are perpetually
in a shadow, and water could remain there if it was deposited there long time ago by
say a comet colliding with the moon, comets have a lot of water and when they collide
with moons and planets they deposit that water on them, and some of that water could
have remained on the moon for billions of years, and indeed there are some experiments
having to do with how many neutrons come from certain parts of the moon that suggest that
there really is water ice perhaps at the poles because the number of neutrons coming from
the surface of the moon is affected by whether or not there's water in that soil.
The neutrons are created by a complex interaction of cosmic rays, charged particles from the
sun interacting with the lunar surface, and so there are these experiments that suggest
indirectly that there is water in the frozen form at the bottoms of some craters.
Now if you look at the moon you notice that it's heavily cratered, lots of craters, lots
of seas or basins or maria as they were called, initially people didn't really know what they
were they were called seas, now we know that they are frozen or solidified lava flows,
and if you look at the moon near the point where sunrise or sunset is occurring, that
is near the terminator, shadows are long and you can see the lunar features very well,
you become impressed with just how many craters there are and how complex it looks. Look at
these craters, a lot of the big ones seem to have a peak in the middle, see that little
peak in the middle, and almost all of the craters are essentially circular, now some
of them look deformed because craters landed on top of craters but effectively they're
circular and they often have peaks in the middle, and then there are these regions,
the maria, where there are comparatively few craters, there is an occasional crater on
a mare, but relatively few of them, so the moon is just wonderful to look at through
a telescope in this way. Well for a long time there was a debate, are the craters impact
craters or are they of volcanic origin, their shape gives one clue, here is the outline
of a terrestrial volcano here on earth, and here is the profile of a typical large lunar
crater, first of all the lunar craters have less steep sides than terrestrial volcanoes,
and second of all the lunar craters have this thing in the middle, this little blip, both
of these features of the profile of a crater suggest that they are predominantly of impact
origin. Now here I have a little applet that shows what happens when different meteorites
hit the moon, so here I have a little one let's say, and I have it hit the moon, boom,
it excavates a crater, if I have a big one hit it will excavate a bigger crater, but
notice you get a little bit of an indentation at the top or maybe there is a peak with a
little valley in it, in any case the sloshing back of the material can create a little peak
in the middle when you have the formation of an impact crater. Notice also that if you
have the object coming in from directly above you get a nice circular crater with a little
peak in the middle, but even if you have it coming in from an angle you still basically
get a circular crater with a little peak in the middle here, or even from a very large
angle you still get a circular crater, again with a little peak in the middle, if you have
a really big guy coming in you can sometimes get a little indentation in that peak, but
in any case you get a peak in the middle of a circular crater. So this shows that pretty
much regardless of the impact angle you get a circular crater rather than an oblong one,
and that's because the impacting object has a tremendous amount of energy and that energy
gets deposited into the soil of the moon, just it stops on a dime and all that energy
then goes into the surrounding stuff which gets excavated, it just explodes out, and
the resulting crater is 10 to 20 times the diameter of the original impacting object,
so it sort of doesn't matter what angle the object comes in at, it still deposits basically
the same amount of energy and that energy then excavates a large amount of material
from the moon, so the shapes of the craters are circular regardless of the impact angle
of the impactor, of the meteorite. There's very little erosion on the moon, there's
no water, there's no atmosphere, so if you look at the moon and you see very heavily
cratered parts, those are likely to be older than parts that don't have many craters on
them, because we think that the cratering history of the moon and of the whole solar
system was such that most of the craters formed long ago when there was a lot of debris still
floating around from the formation of the solar system, and then all these craters formed
and then maybe there were lava flows that covered them up. So you have lava flows on
top of craters, the lava flows must be younger than the craters, you also have craters on
top of other craters, those new ones are younger than the older ones upon which they are superposed,
so you can tell the relative ages of features on the moon simply by seeing what's on top
of the stuff below it, that gives you the relative time, it tells you sort of what came
first and what came later, but to determine absolute ages you actually have to get samples
of these rocks and figure out their actual age, and the way that's usually done is through
radioactive dating. The idea is the following, there are various elements and isotopes of
those elements where by different isotopes I simply mean the same element but having
different numbers of neutrons, so the number of protons is the same, that determines what
kind of element it is, but the number of neutrons varies, so here's Samarium 147, the
147 is the atomic number, which is the total number of neutrons plus protons, it turns
out to be radioactive and the daughter product is neodymium 143, it emits helium nucleus
in its decay, and the half life is 106 billion years, that means it takes 106 billion years
for one half of the original Samarium 147 to decay into neodymium 143, there's also
rubidium 87 which decays into strontium 87 with a half life of about 50 billion years,
thorium 232 decays into lead 208 with a half life of 14 billion years, uranium 238 decays
into lead 206 through a variety of stages with a half life of about four and a half
billion years and so on, so if you get moon rocks and you measure the relative amounts
of the parent nucleus and the daughter products you can figure out how long those parent nuclei
have been decaying, okay, here's a graph that shows this, the parent nucleus start out being
completely dominant, no daughter products, and then after one half life half of the original
amount is left and half has been turned into the daughter products, after another half life
half of that will decay away giving you one quarter of the original total, after another half
life half of that will decay away giving you one eighth of the original total and so on, so by
figuring out how much of the different parent nuclei and daughter products there are you can
figure out how long this rock has existed since it was last molten because when it was last
molten all these things kind of got mixed together and then it solidified and then the things
started decaying, well they kept on decaying but the point is that they were no longer able to
mix with their surroundings and become contaminated by other stuff, so you can measure the different
ratios of these different elements and their isotopes and figure out how long it's been since
the rock was last molten and so you look at the moon you say okay we need some samples of it, well
in 1969 through 72 astronauts went to the moon, humans went to the moon and landed there and Neil
Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin were the first ones on the moon leaving the famous footstep and the one
small step for man, one giant leap for mankind and they set up various various experiments like
this is a seismograph to measure moonquakes and they put up a little thing, a little reflector
with which you can do laser ranging to the moon, you can send a laser beam to the moon, time how
long it takes to come back and thus determine the distance to the moon and indeed that's how we
know that the moon is moving away at about three or four centimeters per year, so they set up a
bunch of experiments and they went around in their little buggies, their little moon buggies to
various places and they picked up rocks and chipped rocks away from bigger rocks and they
basically picked up lots of samples here's a moon rock that was brought back to the lab on earth and
here's some other moon rocks and they made sure to choose a variety of rocks from a variety of
locations on the various Apollo lunar landings and then they dated those rocks and they found their
absolute ages and what they found was very interesting, the oldest rocks are about 4.4
billion years old so that's how long it's been since they were last molten all right and the
heavily cratered so-called highlands are something like 3.9 to 4.3 billion years old so they really
are old structures, rocks from the maria the solidified lava that apparently covered the craters
those rocks are between 3.1 and 3.9 billion years old all right so the lava flows that covered a
lot of the craters that had been formed and shortly after the moon had formed those lava
flows are pretty old themselves over 3 billion years old and yet those lava flows the maria have
very few craters on top of them that shows that most of the cratering occurred over 3 billion
years ago indeed even over three and a half billion years ago because the maria have relatively few
craters on them and the maria themselves are at least 3 billion years old so indeed the bombardment
of the moon was very heavy shortly after its formation about 4.5 or 4.6 billion years ago and
then it dropped off dramatically down to 4 billion years ago and then these lava flows formed
between 4 and 3 billion years ago and since then the rate of formation of impact craters which is
what's plotted here on the vertical axis versus time has just been an occasional trickle there's a
few big recent craters by recent I mean one to one and a half billion years old like taiko and
Copernicus but really comparatively few craters on the moon have formed in the past 3 billion years
so that's interesting the early era of bombardment of the moon was probably the last stage of the
formation of the solar system that is all these rocks were accumulating into planets and moons and
that last stage of accumulation is what formed most of the craters that we see on the moon now
the astronauts also as I said set up some seismic equipment and they found that the moon does have
some moonquakes but they're they're pretty minor compared to earthquakes so from those data and
other similar data geologists have figured out that the moon has an iron core that's pretty small
surrounded by a zone of moonquakes and then on top of that an upper mantle and finally a crust but
there's really not much motion within the mantle and within this zone of moonquakes the moon is is
pretty solid throughout pretty geologically dead occasionally things shift relative to one another
and produce a small quake due to the motion of the core that's partly melted in the middle there but
there's not vast regions moving relative to one another as there are on earth the moon's far side
looks distinctly different from the near side here's a picture of the far side and there's the near
side low lying areas are blue in this depiction and high areas are yellow or orange or even red and
you can see that the far side of the moon the side that's perpetually away from the earth has
comparatively few maria it has one large basin down here which is pretty heavily cratered itself so
it must have formed early in the history of the moon but really very few more recent lava flows you
know between three and four billion years ago so it's thought that perhaps the far side of the moon
has a thicker crust than the near side of the moon here's the rotation of the moon showing both the
far side and the near side this is based on data gathered from the clementine mission and here on
the far side you can see just how heavily cratered it is and how few maria there are whereas as the
near side rotates into view you can see the maria the more recent lava flows so people think well
maybe the far side has a thicker crust perhaps it's perhaps it's 130 kilometers thick instead of 65
something like that and so there weren't as many weak spots through which Mach through which magma
could flow and cover the surface of the moon let's take a look at what our weight would be if we were on
the moon the mass of the moon is about an 80th of the mass of the earth and the radius is about one
quarter one three point seventh of the earth's radius and we know from Newton's second law that force
is mass times acceleration so acceleration which is a measure of your weight here on earth is just the
force divided by your mass and if the force on you exerted by the moon is Newton's constant g times
the mass of the moon times your mass divided by the square of the moon's radius so f equals gmm over
radius squared and if you divide that by your mass your mass cancels out and the acceleration of
anybody on the moon is g times the mass of the moon over the square of the radius, if you compare
that with the acceleration felt by anybody on earth you get this expression that acceleration on
earth divided by the acceleration felt on the moon is just the mass of the earth divided by the mass
of the moon divided by the square of the radius of the earth divided by the radius of the moon
and you put in all those numbers and you find that the acceleration on Earth is
six times that of the moon. And since your weight is the force on you times the
acceleration, your weight on the moon is one-sixth of your weight on Earth, because
the acceleration on the moon is one-sixth of the acceleration on Earth. So
the astronauts could jump around quite easily, except for their bulky spacesuits,
you know, but they could jump comparatively far. And indeed, in 1971, during the Apollo 14
mission, Alan Shepard hit a golf ball with one hand in his bulky suit and he hit it a couple
hundred yards, which is quite an achievement for someone who's not an expert golf player hitting
with one hand, with one arm, using a bulky spacesuit. So he hit it quite a long way and
that's because it was able to sail away due to the comparatively low gravity of the moon.
Now the Earth-Moon system is almost like a double planet. The moon is relatively large
compared to the Earth if you compare it with the moons of other planets relative to the
planets that they orbit. So the moon is one-quarter of the size of the Earth and that's a pretty
big moon. So viewed from afar, the Earth-Moon system kind of looks like a double planet. And
it is interesting to speculate how the moon formed. There have been traditionally four
hypotheses. One is fission, the moon broke off from the Earth. One is capture, the moon was
captured by the Earth and came from initially far, far away. Another is condensation, where the
moon essentially condensed out of the material of which the solar system was made at the same
time that the Earth condensed out of that material. And finally there's the idea that
something collided with the Earth, expelled some of Earth's material and from that material the
moon formed. It is thought that that last hypothesis is the correct one. And the reason we think that
is that the lunar material is very much like the material of the Earth's mantle in composition.
That is, it's relatively poor or deficient in iron and, you know, if the Earth had differentiated,
if the iron had sank to the middle and then something twice the size of Mars hit the Earth and
blew part of the mantle away, well then that debris would be deficient in iron and would have
roughly the composition of the mantle, all right? So the moon is indeed deficient in iron and has
roughly the composition of Earth's mantle, but it also has some contaminants and those contaminants
may have been from the body that hit the Earth. So here's a picture of what might have happened,
something the size of Mars or twice the size of Mars hit the Earth after the Earth had differentiated,
but still early in the history of the solar system around four and a half billion years ago.
It dislodged part of the Earth's mantle that sent the debris into orbit around the Earth
and then the moon coalesced out of that debris and so it has roughly the composition of the mantle.
Now such an event, such a collision of a big object with the Earth would be rather unlikely,
but it's good for us that it happened because it turns out that by having a large moon orbiting us
we have a rather stable inclination for Earth's rotation axis. If there weren't the moon,
a massive moon, then the Earth's rotation axis would chaotically change every few million or
few tens of millions of years due to gravitational tugs from Jupiter and other planets and we would
have a chaotic tilt relative to the Sun and the seasons would change chaotically every few
million years and it's unlikely or it's less likely that the Earth would have had the stability
that it needed for complex intelligent creatures to eventually evolve. So we perhaps owe our existence
in part to the fact that the Earth does have by this unlikely coincidence a rather large moon
orbiting it, stabilizing its axis of rotation.
