I now turn to the two innermost terrestrial planets, Mercury and Venus.
Though broadly similar in nature to the Earth, they are, after all, terrestrial planets.
They differ quite a bit in detail, especially Venus, which was thought to be Earth's sister
planet.
And indeed, we can perhaps take a warning from Venus and learn to take better care of
the Earth as a result of studies of what happened to Venus.
Let's start with Mercury.
It's difficult to study Mercury from Earth because Mercury is always nearly in the same
direction as the Sun.
Here we see a schematic of the Solar System with the Earth, the Sun, Mercury and Venus.
And you can see that Mercury, orbiting the Sun, is always in about the same direction
as the Sun.
Even when Mercury is at its greatest separation from the Sun, it sets only about an hour or
two after Sun set, and it rises only an hour or two before Sun rise.
Here in fact is what you see from Earth when you look at the projection of the orbits of
Mercury and Venus onto the plane of the sky.
And you can see the Sun just barely below the horizon, and yet Mercury is not all that
high above the horizon.
So we always see it through a thick, blurry atmosphere.
There's always a lot of atmospheric turbulence through which we're looking when we observe
Mercury.
In fact, very few people have even ever seen Mercury.
I've seen it a number of times because I've made a special effort to do so.
Here it is, Mercury, along with Venus, Mars and Saturn.
This was an especially nice grouping of the planets, and Mercury was pretty high up above
the Sun in this case, but you can still see that it's set shortly after the end of evening
twilight.
Now sometimes Mercury passes across the face of the Sun.
It transits the Sun, as does Venus occasionally.
And this happens one or two times per decade for Mercury, but here's an example of Mercury
transiting across the Sun.
See that?
It went zooming by.
Well, okay, that was an airplane.
Sorry about that.
There's the airplane transiting the face of the Sun.
But if you look up here at the upper right, you see a black speck.
That's not a sunspot like this one, but rather the disk of Mercury projected onto the Sun.
It's so hard to see surface details on Mercury that for a long time its rotation rate was
not even known.
So you look at surface features and you see how long it takes for them to make a full circle,
and that's the rotation rate of the planet.
People were fooled for a long time into thinking that Mercury is in synchronous rotation.
That is that it rotates about its axis in the same amount of time, 88 days, that it takes
to orbit the Sun.
That would be similar to what the Moon does in its orbit around the Earth.
It faces the Earth because it is synchronously rotating, and that's what was thought for Mercury
for a long time.
But in fact, the rotation period was eventually measured with something called the Doppler
Effect.
Now, the Doppler Effect will be discussed much more later on.
It's a very important thing in astronomy and physics.
It's an enormously important tool for determining the radial velocity of an object.
That is, the velocity toward you or away from you.
That's what is measured by the Doppler Effect.
And I'll just describe it very briefly right now to help you understand how Mercury's rotation
was measured, but I'll discuss it in much more detail later on.
It was predicted by Christian Doppler in 1842 and confirmed at least for sound in 1845,
though the confirmation for light came much later.
The basic idea is that if you have a stationary emitter of waves, then you can see a wave
going out in this direction, for example, and in the opposite direction, and in all
other directions, of course.
And let's draw circles that connect the wave crests.
So here's one wave crest and another one and another one and another one.
This was emitted first in this sequence of four.
This one was emitted a bit later.
This one later still, and that one even later.
So for a stationary emitter of waves, all these concentric wave fronts or wave crests
in this particular case go out.
And we measure their wavelength to be some wavelength at rest, lambda not or lambda sub-zero.
Now let's suppose the emitter is moving to the left in this case.
At position one, it emitted the wave that later became this outermost circle labeled
one.
It then moved to the left to position two and emitted from that position the wave that
became the circle labeled two.
It then emitted three and finally four.
You can see that in the direction of the emitter's motion, the wave crests are squashed together,
making their wavelength shorter than the observed wavelength for the emitter at rest.
A shorter wavelength is like a shifting to higher frequencies, a shifting toward bluer
colors if you were to do this for light.
And so that's called a blue shift.
Conversely, in the direction opposite to the direction of motion, the waves get stretched
apart to a lower frequency, a longer wavelength or what we call a red shift because red is
a longer wavelength than green and blue is a shorter wavelength than green.
And so green being sort of the middle of the spectrum, we call it a blue shift or a
red shift.
And transverse to the direction of motion, the measured wavelength is equal to what the
wavelength would have been had the object been at rest.
So there's no shift.
All right, well suppose you're cruising along on a road and you're going kind of too fast,
you're enjoying the scenery and you're cruising along oblivious to what's going on.
And an officer of the law points a radar gun at you and measures your speed and they catch
it with these Doppler radar, they call it.
What have they done?
They've shined an electromagnetic wave, and by the way this works for light just as well
as for sound.
They've shined an electromagnetic wave at you.
They know its frequency and its wavelength.
They measure the frequency and wavelength of the reflected wave and they can figure out
how fast you're removing from the shift in frequency.
And it's pretty accurate.
They've got you.
They've nailed you.
You can't really argue it, okay?
So in a similar way, we can shine a radio wave, we call it radar, at two edges of a rotating
planet.
And if the planet is rotating counterclockwise as seen by us, then the side approaching us
will reflect these radio waves, this radar, back toward us with a higher frequency or
a shorter wavelength or a blue shift relative to what we sent.
And similarly, the reflected waves from the part that's receding away from us will be
redshifted.
And so from the amount of this shift, the rotation rate and hence the period of Mercury's rotation
was determined.
Well, it turns out that Mercury rotates about its axis in only 59 days, not a full 88.
59 happens to be exactly two-thirds of 88.
So what this means is that Mercury rotates about its axis three times for every two times
that it orbits the Sun, a three-to-two resonance as it's called.
It's a special number.
It's not quite as special as the one-to-one resonance that Mercury was thought to have
with the Sun or the one-to-one resonance that the Moon has with the Earth, but it's sort
of the next most special one.
And it occurred because the Sun exerts tidal forces on Mercury slowing down its initially
more rapid rotation until it hit this three-to-two resonance.
And it didn't go all the way down to a one-to-one resonance because the tidal effect of the Sun
on Mercury isn't as strong as the tidal effect of the Earth is on the Moon.
So Mercury rotates three times for every two orbits.
This translates into a 176-day-day night cycle on Mercury.
So night time lasts 88 days and daytime lasts a consecutive 88 days for a total of 176.
And we can see how that happens by looking at this diagram.
Starting from position A, let's say an arrow fixed on Mercury points directly toward the
Sun.
As Mercury rotates, that arrow points to different positions in space, B, C, D, until
finally at point E, one full rotation of Mercury has occurred.
You can see that the arrow is pointing into the same direction in space, but now not in
the direction of the Sun.
So sometime later, the arrow keeps on rotating with Mercury, and after one complete orbit
around the Sun, the arrow is now pointing in the opposite direction to that of the Sun.
It takes yet another full orbit around the Sun before the arrow once again points directly
toward the Sun.
So it took two full orbits, or twice 88 days, 176 days, for the Sun to go from overhead
back to overhead.
So 88 days of daytime followed by 88 days of darkness.
How do you like that?
And you thought the Moon had it bad with 15 days of each.
Well, so Mercury heats up a lot during the day, and it cools a lot at night, and it only
has a smidgen of an atmosphere.
Its gravity is only about 40% that of the Earth's, and it's close to the Sun, so it's
hot.
So particles move around quickly, and they tend to escape from the gravity of Mercury.
So it has essentially no atmosphere, just a smidgen of an atmosphere.
So again, there's no blanketing effect, there's no way to sort of equalize temperatures and
keep them kind of warm during the night and a little bit cooler during the day as what
happens on Earth.
So the temperatures on Mercury are quite extreme.
They go up to about 430 degrees Celsius, that is 330 degrees above the boiling point of
water during the day, and negative 170 degrees Celsius at night, 170 degrees below the freezing
point of water.
So I call Mercury schizophrenic in that sense because it's got such huge temperature extremes.
We've sent some spacecraft to Mercury, primarily in the 1970s, the Mariner spacecraft.
And they showed a very heavily cratered surface, basically like that of the Moon, although
there are some differences in detail.
So there are all these craters, and there are craters upon craters, and it's just a very
old geologically dead surface.
There's been very little lava flow activity on its surface from the past 4 billion years
or so, because most of this cratering we know occurred early in the Solar System's history.
We know that from studies of the Moon.
Most of the craters were formed, say, 4 billion years ago, and they're still there on Mercury,
so there's been really very few lava flows.
Some of the craters near the poles, like the North Pole and the South Pole, are, as on
the Moon, shaded from the Sun and appear to contain some water that came in from comets.
So that's about all I want to say about Mercury.
It's kind of an interesting planet, but I think there are more interesting planets, and
in the limited time in this lecture, I want to move on to Venus, the second planet, because
it can tell us a lot about what might happen to some degree here on Earth, if we're not
careful.
Venus is the bright evening star.
Of course, it's not a star, but it's a planet, but we see it as an evening or a morning star.
You can see it here, quite bright in the evening sky, and also in another photograph that I
took, in this case, close to the crescent Moon.
A lot of people have seen Venus.
It's really bright, and it's so bright in part because it's close to the Sun, but
mostly because it's heavily shrouded in clouds.
Here's an ultraviolet image of Venus showing the cloud layers on top of what is, in fact,
a very thick atmosphere.
These clouds are not quite like Earth clouds.
Instead of being made primarily out of water, they are made primarily out of sulfuric acid.
So you wouldn't want to just go wandering around in those clouds too much.
You'd be eaten by the acid.
The clouds cause a very high reflectivity, or what's called an albedo in astronomical terms.
When light rays hit a surface and most of them bounce off, that's a high reflectivity,
a high reflection fraction, or a high albedo.
When not many light rays reflect, but rather are absorbed, that's called a low albedo,
or low reflectivity.
So these clouds cause a very high albedo, and Venus reflects most of the incident sunlight.
And it's close to both the Earth and the Sun, and so all these things together conspire
to make it easily the brightest planet in the sky, and brighter than any of the stars.
So despite its proximity to the Sun, the fact that it has this atmosphere suggested to people
a long time ago that maybe it's kind of a nice place to be.
Maybe it's got these hot, steamy jungles like the equatorial regions of the Earth, and after
all it's kind of nearly the same size as the Earth, and it's got an atmosphere and clouds
and all that.
Yeah, it's a little bit closer to the Sun than the Earth is, so maybe it's just kind
of a hot Earth, okay, but steamy and jungly and possibly even harboring life.
So Venus was thought to be perhaps a sister planet to the Earth.
Turns out nothing could be farther from the truth, and as we will see in a few minutes,
Venus is hellishly hot, it's got no oceans, no jungles, no life is possible as far as
we know, it's got this very thick atmosphere with huge atmospheric pressure at the surface
of the planet, and very, very high temperatures.
And that was known even before spacecraft went there, that it's got, you know, these
high temperatures and a thick atmosphere, but it was confirmed when spacecraft initially
by the Soviet Union, they sent these Venera missions to the surface of Venus and they
landed there and they lasted the better part of an hour and they gathered data, and then
they were crushed by the atmospheric pressure.
Anyway, they measured a hot surface and a very, very huge atmospheric pressure, 90 times
that of the Earth.
And then the U.S. sent some spacecraft, predominantly the Magellan spacecraft, to map the surface
of Venus with radar, you know, they bounced radio waves off of Venus and from the time
it takes to get to Venus' surface and bounce back, you can measure valleys and mountains
and things like that.
And we found that Venus has lots of mountains and valleys and craters and planes and things.
Here you can see some of the mountainous terrain on Venus, and it was found that Venus has
only one plate, it has just one thick crust with no plate tectonics going on, at least
not right now.
It's got some high parts, which we call continents, two main continents, but they're only continents
in the sense that they rise above the surrounding lowlands.
They are not individual plates of their own and they don't rest above an ocean.
Now there is some evidence that there was global, that there were global lava flows
on Venus as recently as half a billion years ago.
So there's not that many craters on Venus that are old and so there had to have been
some relatively recent resurfacing.
So it had some geological activity in the not too distant past and there appear to even
be a few semi-active volcanoes right now that are emitting some sulfur dioxide fumes and
things like that.
But it's reasonably dead place right now and has been for about half a billion years.
Okay, well the really interesting thing about Venus is it's really thick atmosphere and
the high temperature at its surface.
Its temperature is hotter than Mercury's daytime side.
Venus's temperature is 480 degrees Celsius all the time everywhere.
Day or night doesn't matter 480 degrees, a full 380 degrees above the boiling point
of water, a high enough temperature to melt lead.
Now that's amazing because when you calculate what Venus's surface temperature should be
if you assume that it has just a transparent atmosphere, an atmosphere that allows all
kinds of radiation to come in and get out, you calculate that at Venus's distance from
the sun it should have a surface temperature of only about 100 degrees Celsius, roughly
the boiling point of water, not comfortably above the melting point of lead.
So what happened?
Well Venus suffered what we call an extreme or a runaway greenhouse effect.
It's got this thick atmosphere consisting primarily of carbon dioxide, 96% of the atmosphere
is carbon dioxide and about 4% is nitrogen and there are trace quantities of other things.
And this carbon dioxide acts as a blanket that traps radiation that is emitted from
the surface of Venus.
And that radiation gets absorbed by the atmosphere, heating the atmosphere and then the atmosphere
reheats the surface of the planet.
So the radiation gets absorbed by carbon dioxide and that causes a generally hot atmosphere
and a generally hot surface.
Now what kind of rays does the atmosphere trap and why do they even exist?
Well you'll recall that we discussed thermal radiation from objects, objects that are jiggling
around whose material, whose constituent particles are vibrating and stuff, those sorts of substances
emit radiation.
And so what happens is that Venus is illuminated by sunlight and much of the sunlight reflects
off of the high clouds but that visible sunlight that does make it through heats the surface
of Venus, makes the constituent particles move around very quickly jiggling around more
and more, they warm up and emit infrared radiation because they're now pretty warm, the surface
of Venus has been warmed by the sunlight and this warm Venusian surface emits infrared
radiation.
That infrared radiation is what gets blocked or absorbed by the carbon dioxide in Venus's
atmosphere.
Carbon dioxide is opaque to infrared radiation but transparent to visible light.
So the visible light from the sun made it through, at least that part which didn't reflect
off of the highly reflective clouds and that visible light heated the planet but then the
infrared light emitted by the hot planet got absorbed by the atmosphere and that tends
to reheat the surface of the planet then.
So as radiation comes in Venus's surface heats up more and more and more, that means it emits
more and more and more infrared radiation, eventually the amount of infrared leaking out
of Venus's atmosphere balanced the amount of visible light coming in and Venus reached
an equilibrium temperature but that equilibrium temperature is much higher than would have
been the case had the carbon dioxide been transparent to the infrared as it is to the
optical to the visible light.
But since it's not transparent, since it's opaque, the infrared got absorbed, heating
the atmosphere, heating the surface of the planet until a much higher equilibrium temperature
was reached.
Now this is called the greenhouse effect.
It's a misnomer.
Greenhouses on Earth don't work this way.
Greenhouses on Earth indeed have a piece of glass enclosing all your plants and stuff
but what that does is it prevents the warm air in the greenhouse from mixing with the
cooler air outside.
Greenhouses are warmed largely through conduction from the ground and radiation both from the
ground and from the hot glass surrounding the greenhouse.
So the air gets heated inside the greenhouse and then the structure itself prevents that
hot air from mixing with the surroundings.
That's how greenhouses on Earth work.
It's not so much that the glass prevents the infrared light from getting out.
So you see the greenhouse effect on Venus is different from the way greenhouses work
on Earth but that's the way it goes.
Nevertheless, there is an operating greenhouse effect here on Earth and people say, oh that's
bad, greenhouse effect, something to be feared.
No, in moderation it's a good thing.
We have greenhouse gases in our atmosphere, primarily carbon dioxide and water vapor and
there are some others as well.
They lead to some trapping of the radiation although I use that word loosely, the radiation
gets absorbed and that makes the atmosphere hotter, it gets turned into the energy of
motion of the particles.
So we have some of these gases that trap the radiation and that warms the Earth up by about
30 degrees Celsius, 33 degrees Celsius or 60 degrees Fahrenheit above the temperature
it would have had had we not had those greenhouse gases in our atmosphere.
So the Earth would be 60 Fahrenheit degrees chillier if there weren't any greenhouse effect
here on Earth.
So it's a good thing that we have a greenhouse effect.
We'd be frozen over if we didn't.
Earth manages to achieve a comfortable greenhouse effect by recycling its greenhouse gases,
primarily carbon dioxide and water.
And here's how it happens.
As the oceans evaporate, water vapor builds up in the atmosphere but then it begins to
rain and that water vapor turns into droplets and they come back down.
On their way, they combine with carbon dioxide and form a weak kind of an acid, it's called
carbonic acid.
That acid comes down as acid rain, dissolves rocks, forms an acidic solution that has these
carbonates dissolved within it.
The rivers and streams then meander their way down to the oceans and the oceans then
have these carbonates, these dissolved carbon compounds from the rocks and various sea creatures
such as flaminifera and corals and clams and things like that, incorporate these carbonates
into their shells.
They make their shells out of the carbonates that are dissolved in the oceans.
When those creatures die, they form sediments on the bottom of the ocean.
Due to plate tectonics, sometimes the ocean floor gets subducted underneath another continent.
It dives underneath other plates.
These shells then become part of the magma underneath the earth's surface, they get
dissolved within the magma, which later comes out in the form of volcanoes and outgassing
at places like Yellowstone and geothermal vents and places like that.
That puts the carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere.
You see there's a cycle.
The carbon dioxide is in the atmosphere, comes out through rain, comes back into the atmosphere
through these dead creatures that turn into the lava and so on and so forth.
We have a stable amount of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide in our atmosphere.
Similarly, the water vapor is sort of stable in our atmosphere because though the oceans
evaporate, the water vapor forms clouds and the clouds rain or snow down and so the stuff
comes back down and the concentration of water vapor doesn't keep on increasing in
the earth's atmosphere.
Well, how then did Venus reach such a hellish state?
It may have begun its existence as a fairly pleasant place, perhaps even with some oceans.
But if there was not enough rain to remove the atmospheric carbon dioxide that was already
there, and if outgassing from volcanoes was continuing, then there was more and more
carbon dioxide building up in Venus's atmosphere because it wasn't being removed the way it's
removed by rain here on earth.
That caused a faster evaporation of whatever oceans may have existed initially on Venus.
That increased the water vapor content of Venus's atmosphere.
But instead of raining down, what happened on Venus was that that water vapor rose to
an altitude at which ultraviolet radiation from the sun could break it apart because
Venus doesn't have an ozone layer protecting the water from ultraviolet radiation.
The ultraviolet radiation breaks the water apart, the hydrogen being light escapes, the
oxygen combines with carbon and carbon monoxide to form even more CO2, the carbon dioxide.
That increases the carbon dioxide content of Venus's atmosphere even more, that accelerates
the evaporation of the ocean, and you have a runaway greenhouse effect.
Now, it's possible that Venus started out in a hellish state, that it didn't have any
oceans to begin with.
In that case, it had quite a bit of carbon dioxide to begin with.
There was outgassing from Venus's surface from volcanoes or whatever, building up the
carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere.
Without oceans and rain and all that, there's no way to get rid of that carbon dioxide,
and so the carbon dioxide content of Venus just kept on going up and up and up.
It's estimated that if all the carbon dioxide in Earth's rocks and oceans could be converted
into gas, our atmospheric pressure would be comparable to that of Venus.
It's just that our carbon dioxide is incorporated in rocks, in animals, and in the oceans.
So what can we learn from Venus, alright?
Studies of Venus are important for our overall understanding of climate and the Earth's atmosphere.
Now there's a scientific consensus, although not unanimity, that currently there is global
warming going on on Earth.
The temperatures do seem to be rising, glaciers are receding, ocean current patterns are changing,
the oceans are getting warmer, there are extreme dry and wet spells on Earth, there's
an abundance of hurricanes occurring, and you know, it's not unanimous, but it looks
like the global warming really is occurring.
Let's suppose it is occurring.
Is it our fault?
Well, it's probable, though not yet certain, and this is even more controversial, that
human activity is at least partially responsible for this global warming.
We've been burning fossil fuels a lot, especially ever since the Industrial Revolution, and
in so doing we've been contributing to the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere.
And if you look at the carbon dioxide content in CO2 molecules per million molecules of
air going from the 1950s to 2005, you can see a seasonal oscillation, that's understood
and we won't go into that, but there's also this gradual increase.
It only looks gradual over the past few decades.
If you compare it with what the carbon dioxide content has been doing in the past millennium,
this relatively recent rise is quite dramatic, and probably not coincidentally, it's happened
to have started around the time of the Industrial Revolution.
So we're probably increasing the CO2 content and increasing the amount of greenhouse trapping.
Now, there are questions like whether there's positive and negative feedback mechanisms.
A positive feedback mechanism would lead to sustained global warming and more and more
and more, you know, more and more carbon dioxide and all that kind of thing.
But suppose there's negative feedback.
Suppose that with increasing oceanic evaporation, you get more clouds forming and more reflection
of the sunlight, then that could compensate for the increased warming due to the increased
greenhouse gases.
Okay, so that's a negative feedback effect that compensates for the increase in the carbon
dioxide.
On the other hand, other people running computer models say that the increase in the water
vapor content increases the greenhouse heating and more than compensates for the extra reflection
off of the clouds of the Earth.
So some people say that the extra water vapor is bad.
We don't know what's right.
We don't really trust our computer models enough yet because Earth's atmosphere is a
very complex system and we haven't yet uncovered or properly treated all of the variables.
Now a runaway greenhouse almost certainly won't occur on Earth because there have been many
times in the past history of the Earth where comets and asteroids crashed into the Earth,
killing off many species, temporarily raising the temperature of the Earth by a huge amount
and then Earth eventually rebounded back to stability.
So probably there won't be a runaway effect like on Venus.
However, it is widely acknowledged that even a few degree rise could cause devastation
here on Earth in big changes in agricultural patterns and flooding of coastal cities and
things like that.
So global warming is something to be concerned about and we need to do much more extensive
studies of what's going on especially since our system is so complex.
The computer models aren't accurate enough but we should do more of them.
And in any case, we should do what we can to not change too much the atmospheric content
of the Earth because we don't yet know what could happen if we change it substantially
and the outcome could be very, very bad for the Earth.
It might not be bad but it could be bad and we should watch out before taking this fragile
system, our Earth with its fragile atmosphere, to a limit beyond which it becomes inhospitable.
So studies of Venus show us the dangers of messing around with our atmosphere and potentially
making it such that life on Earth will become a lot less pleasant.
