Having completed our tour of the four small, rocky, dense terrestrial planets, we now move
on to the gas-liquid giants, the Jovian planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
These are very, very different from the terrestrial planets.
Here's just a schematic showing their relative sizes.
Each of them is enormous and very massive.
Jupiter, the king of the planets, is 11 times the diameter of the Earth and 320 times its
mass.
Saturn is somewhat smaller, and Uranus and Neptune are smaller still, but they still are
considerably bigger than the terrestrial planets.
All of them have low densities as opposed to the terrestrial planets that are quite
dense.
They have many moons, they're far from the sun, they rotate very rapidly, they're just
different worlds.
And we will see in these next few lectures that their many moons offer us a whole new
view of the solar system and the great variety within it.
We'll start with Jupiter, named after Jov, the king of the gods.
It's about five astronomical units from the sun, and it completes its revolution about
the sun in 12 years.
As I said, it's about 11 times Earth's radius, and that's roughly one-tenth of the sun's
radius.
So if you look here at Earth, Jupiter, and the sun, the ratio of the Earth's size to
Jupiter's size is roughly the same as the ratio of Jupiter's size to the sun's size.
The ratio of one-tenth in each case, but you could fit more than a thousand Earths inside
the volume of Jupiter, and with 320 times the mass of the Earth, Jupiter is two and
a half times more massive than all of the other planets put together.
So it's really a monster.
You can see that it appears slightly squashed, we call this oblate, and in this series of
images you can see it rotating.
So it's squashed because of the very rapid rotation.
Despite its enormous size, 10 or 11 times bigger than Earth, Jupiter rotates fully about its
axis in only 10 hours.
So it's really hauling, especially near the equator, and that causes the gases to bulge
out a little bit.
If you spin quickly, your hair goes flying out a little bit because of the centrifugal
or fictitious force that you feel.
I mean, it's a very real feeling force in your rotating frame of reference, but it's not
a real force in the sense that gravity is or electromagnetism or something like that.
It's a force that you feel in a rotating frame of reference that tends to bulge you out if
you're rotating quickly, and that's why Jupiter and also Saturn and the other gas giants
look somewhat flattened because they're rotating so quickly.
Jupiter and the other giant planets consist mostly of hydrogen and helium, so their composition
is very much more representative of the universe and close to the composition of the sun.
Here you can see in this Pi diagram that Jupiter is about 86% hydrogen and about 14% helium,
and then trace quantities of other elements, mostly in compounds such as methane and ammonia.
When we look at the internal structure of Jupiter and its closest cousin, Saturn, you
can see that there's a rocky core in the middle resembling the Earth, and then an icy layer
around that, and then a very compressed form of hydrogen known as metallic hydrogen.
When you compress hydrogen enough, it starts behaving like a metal.
It conducts heat and electricity.
It's very weird.
We don't have that kind of hydrogen here on Earth.
In fact, quite difficult to even produce it in laboratories, but Jupiter is so massive
and the pressure is so great that it produces this metallic hydrogen, and to a lesser extent
Saturn does as well.
Above the layer of metallic hydrogen is molecular hydrogen, where hydrogen forms a diatomic
or two-atomic molecule, and on top of that, molecular hydrogen then is the outer atmosphere
where there's methane and ammonia and other substances that give Jupiter its variety of
colors.
Jupiter has a strong magnetic field, probably caused by the rapid rotation of this metallic
conducting hydrogen layer, and in fact, it's 10 times stronger than Earth's magnetic field
is, so you get charged particles from the sun trapped in Jupiter's magnetic field.
They then come down to the polar regions and cause auroras, much like those that we see
on Earth.
Now Jupiter and Saturn and the other giant planets formed far from the sun, where temperatures
were low and at the time of formation, and I'll discuss the formation of planets in our
solar system and other planetary systems in more detail later, but basically it's pretty
easy to understand why the giant planets retained so much hydrogen and helium, whereas the terrestrial
planets did not.
The giant planets are much farther from the sun, so they're heated less and the hydrogen
and helium are moving around less quickly and were able to be retained by these planets,
by the gravitational fields of the planets, especially because Jupiter and Saturn built
up these cores that were like the Earth, but maybe 10 times the mass of the Earth, so the
gravity was stronger and the speeds of particles were smaller, and this allowed the giant gas
planets to retain so much hydrogen and helium.
Jupiter's apparent surface is gaseous, it's not really a solid like here on Earth, it's
simply the place beyond which the gases become thick enough to be opaque, so in that sense
it's like the sun's photosphere, you know the sun's photosphere is the place where the
gases are thick enough so that beyond that they're opaque, but unlike the sun's photosphere
Jupiter's surface reflects visible sunlight, it doesn't generate visible energy from within,
so it doesn't glow visibly from within, though it does glow from within at infrared wavelengths.
The colorful bands are seen predominantly parallel to the equator, but they've got all
sorts of wiggles and twists and ovals and things that look a lot like storms, like hurricanes
and tornadoes on Earth.
The various colors are caused by slight differences in composition, more methane, more ammonia,
more sulfur compounds, that kind of a thing, but most of the photographs that I show in
this lecture are color enhanced to show fine variations in reflectivity and darkness and
brightness, these photographs are enhanced, so Jupiter doesn't really look quite so colorful
when you look at it through a telescope using visual wavelengths.
The most famous storm is the so-called Great Red Spot, which has been seen for over 300
years.
It's two to three times the size of the Earth and has persisted for really a long time,
it's like some giant hurricane, but it has lasted for centuries, probably in part because
there are no continents on Jupiter to mess up weather patterns.
Like hurricanes on Earth, however, which are low pressure systems, Jupiter's Great Red
Spot is a high pressure system.
Now, telescopes that are quite small and used by amateur astronomers are fine for viewing
the Great Red Spot and many of the other smaller storm systems.
Here's a nice photograph taken by an amateur astronomer showing many small features as
well as quite easily this Great Red Spot.
And amateur astronomers viewing Jupiter very frequently are often the ones who discover
new storms or changes in the colors of old storms.
And a great example of that occurred in early 2006, where Christopher Goh, observing from
the Philippines, noticed that a spot that used to be quite white and bland had turned
into a shade of orange or red, resembling Jupiter's Great Red Spot.
And astronomers were so excited by this that they used the Hubble Space Telescope to take
more detailed pictures, and they are eagerly following the development of this storm and
how it has changed color.
You can see it here, it's called Red Junior.
It's a little bit smaller than the Great Red Spot, but about the size of the Earth, okay,
I mean, you know, Jupiter's huge.
Interestingly, Mr. Goh's pictures are nearly as good, in my opinion, as those from the
Hubble Space Telescope.
Here's an example.
Look at the details in his photograph.
They're stunning, yet they were taken with the telescope here on the ground.
And the technique he used was to use a camera that could take many, many frames per second,
like 60 frames per second.
And he did this over the course of a long time, and he chose only the clearest images
and combined all of those.
So occasionally, the atmosphere is incredibly steady, and you catch by chance a really clear,
sharp image of Jupiter.
Combine a bunch of those and throw away the fuzzy ones, and you can get clarity close to
that of the Hubble Space Telescope from the ground.
It's really amazing now, with the present technology, what dedicated, serious amateur
astronomers can achieve.
Well, there's been a lot of spacecraft that have gone to Jupiter, starting with Pioneer
10 and 11 in the early to mid-70s.
And then there were Voyagers 1 and 2 in late 70s, and the Galileo spacecraft from 1995
to 2003.
The Voyager spacecraft transformed our view of Jupiter.
It gave fantastic photographs of the various storms.
And again, I emphasize that these have been enhanced in color.
Their colors are real, not that vivid and don't vary that much from storm to storm.
But here's this white oval that Mr. Go noticed had turned red.
There it is, quite white compared to the great red spot in 1979.
So look at these fantastic circulation patterns in Jupiter, just incredible.
There's a Galileo spacecraft photograph of the great red spot.
And it's just great to look at all these pictures and watch all these storms develop.
From studies of such storms, we could learn more about the development of storm systems
here on Earth.
So this has some practical applications.
Now the most recent mission was a spacecraft called Cassini, which arrived in, well, its
primary mission was to go to Saturn, but it passed by Jupiter in 2000 to 2001.
And there were two reasons for passing by Jupiter.
One was to study Jupiter itself.
The other reason was to use Jupiter's gravity to help propel the Cassini spacecraft towards
Saturn faster than it would otherwise have done so.
If you launch a rocket with fuel here on Earth, and the payload is heavy, it takes a lot of
fuel, it's expensive.
But if you launch a rocket with a smaller velocity, and it's not so expensive and doesn't consume
so much fuel, and then if you go past Jupiter and you aim it the right way, Jupiter can
pull the spacecraft and give it a kick, a gravity assist, or what's sometimes called
a slingshot effect, giving it extra speed and changing its direction so that it goes
toward the next planet on your list.
So here's an animation of what was done.
I'll show this twice.
Boom.
Cassini was launched.
It went past Venus and Earth, got some gravity assists from them, then went past Jupiter and
got a gravity assist which propelled it toward Saturn and got it to Saturn much more quickly
than it would otherwise have done.
So let's actually stop the animation a couple of times here.
We launch Cassini, there it is, it's been launched, and then it came close to Venus,
you can see it close to Venus here, and was assisted by Venus' gravity giving it a kick.
It then went close to the Earth again and was assisted by Earth's gravity giving it
another kick right there, and that propelled it toward Jupiter, getting it to Jupiter more
quickly than it would otherwise have done.
Then Jupiter gave it a kick and propelled it on towards Saturn.
So it's great when you use the gravity of other planets to assist you in getting to
your destination.
And here's Cassini's last view of Jupiter from beyond Jupiter's distance, and in such
a case you have the geometry that allows you to see Crescent Jupiter.
Here from Earth we never see Crescent Jupiter, and you can sit down with a diagram and figure
out why not.
Well Cassini showed the atmospheric circulation of Jupiter quite well.
It took a number of photographs in succession.
And here you can see the different bands moving in opposite directions.
So some are moving from east to west and others are moving from west to east, and you can
see some circulation around the great red spot.
The spherical planet has been stretched out, unrolled, if you will, to make it fit on a
two-dimensional sheet of paper like this.
They even got nice images of the polar regions circulating.
This is one of Jupiter's poles, and you can see the circulation of gases around the pole.
So Cassini, though only briefly visiting Jupiter, got a number of quite stunning shots of Jupiter
before moving on to Cassini's main mission, Saturn, which I'll discuss in the next lecture.
The great complexity of Jupiter's atmosphere is probably powered by residual gravitational
contraction of gases inside Jupiter.
So Jupiter, in a sense, is still contracting, still getting smaller on the inside.
And this contraction liberates energy.
If you look at what this energy does, it heats the interior of Jupiter, and in Jupiter you
have then a hot core and a cooler outer surface, and in trying to get out, the energy drives
what we call convection currents.
Now we've encountered these a couple of times in our studies of the Sun and the interior
of the Earth.
Look what happens when I increase the temperature of the core, as would be the case if there's
gravitational contraction still going on in Jupiter.
The convection increases, and you can see that Jupiter's outer atmosphere starts becoming
more complex with storms and various ovals and things.
If you increase the rotation rate of the planet as well, and recall that Jupiter really
does rotate very quickly, you can see that the storms become even more accentuated.
So rapid rotation coupled with a contracting inner region leads to this very stormy complex
atmosphere.
Let me now move on to the four main moons of Jupiter, the so-called Galilean satellites
in honor of Galileo Galilei, who saw them through his small telescope in 1610, and whose
observations helped the Copernican Revolution really take over.
These moons are easily seen through telescopes used by amateur astronomers, and indeed the
moons and Jupiter are a favorite target.
And you can see here the moons going along, and I've shown this movie before.
You have the shadows of two of the moons cast on the surface of the planet, and in a few
moments you'll see a double eclipse.
So a person standing right at that moment, right there at that part of Jupiter, would
see two moons eclipsing the Sun.
But as I mentioned before, both of them would appear so large in the sky that they would
cover not only the Sun's photosphere, but also the inner and much of the outer corona.
Nevertheless, you'd get a double eclipse, and that would be really fun to see.
Well with NASA's spacecraft, we've gotten nice close-up images of these four moons,
and we could study them in detail.
They're huge.
Three of them are bigger than Earth's moon, and one of them, Ganymede, is bigger than
the planet Mercury.
So if these things were orbiting the Sun primarily rather than orbiting Jupiter, we
would call these things planets, but we call them moons because they primarily orbit Jupiter,
and then Jupiter and its moons orbit the Sun.
So let's start with Io, or some people call it Io.
It looks orange, kind of like a pizza, and it's got all these pepperoni slices and anchovies
and peppers and things, and various forms of cheese, like four cheese pizza.
It looks really like a great pizza.
What's going on there?
Well when the Voyager spacecraft got close in 1979, it saw a bunch of erupting volcanoes.
It was great.
Here's one that you can see on the edge of Io.
You can see this plume of material being erupted, being expelled from within Io.
And indeed, Voyager saw about a dozen volcanoes, and later the Galileo spacecraft, which spent
eight years in the Jupiter system, it charted a total of about 120 volcanoes going off.
I mean, it's just amazing.
Io is easily the most geologically active body in the solar system.
So it's spewing out all this stuff, a lot of sulfur compounds, the lava, the magma,
is kind of different from that on Earth, but clearly the interior is molten.
And the reason it's molten is very interesting.
Io experiences tidal forces caused by Jupiter.
I mean, Jupiter is a big, massive thing, and it stretches Io out.
So here's Io, gets stretched out by Jupiter.
Let me put Jupiter up here.
So here's massive Jupiter, and here's Io.
And Io is quite close to Jupiter.
It orbits Jupiter in only about two days.
So it's quite close.
And so the near side of Io is pulled toward Jupiter a lot more than the center is, and
the center is pulled toward Jupiter more than the outside, distant side is.
And so the whole thing looks squashed.
This is similar to the tides induced on Earth by the moon and the tides induced on the moon
by Earth.
So that's what Io looks like.
Because of a complex interaction with the other three Galilean satellites, Io is forced
into quite an eccentric orbit.
So it doesn't go around Jupiter in a circle.
It goes around in an ellipse, and that ellipse is quite eccentric.
So sometimes Io is quite close to Jupiter, in which case the tidal forces are extreme,
and it looks like this.
At other times, Io is considerably farther away from Jupiter, and the tidal forces stretch
much less.
So here it's stretched not much, there it's stretched a lot.
If you focus on Io's shape, and not the orbit at this point, during the course of its orbits,
doing this kind of a thing, being stretched more, more, more, and less.
More and less.
It's in a synchronous orbit with Jupiter.
That is, the same side always faces Jupiter.
So there's no tidal heating because of the rotation, the way there was for the moon originally,
slowing the moon down until it finally became synchronous.
But there is tidal friction due to the changing distance from Jupiter.
So Io is doing that kind of a thing.
The rocks are rubbing against each other and generating a lot of heat through friction.
That heat melts the interior of Io, and the magma comes up through weak spots in the crust,
manifesting itself then as volcanoes.
The person who discovered or co-discovered this effect is Stan Peel, a professor of physics
at the University of California, Santa Barbara, where I was an undergraduate student, and
he was my advisor there, and I can't forget how all this happened.
It made a lasting impression on me.
He and his colleagues did these calculations using classical physics, showing that there
should be extreme tidal forces inside of Io melting its interior.
And he made the prediction that there should be volcanic activity, volcanism on the surface
of Io, just months before the Voyager flyby.
He searched for a journal that would publish his results prior to the flyby, and he found
one that could publish the results within just a few days before the flyby.
So the results came out, then the flyby occurred, and sure enough, there was all this rampant
volcanism.
It was fantastic.
Here's a guy who used his knowledge of physics to figure something out, make a concrete prediction,
and then shortly thereafter, the observations verified it.
It made a very lasting impression on me at the time.
I was a senior in college, and it showed me vicariously the thrill of discovery, because
being around him, I couldn't help but feel like I made this discovery because the enthusiasm
was so great, and this is part of what led me to become a scientist as well.
Io, as I said then, looks like a pizza.
It's got all this volcanism going on, and you could make a comparison of Voyager and
Galileo images of the same regions taken just a few decades apart, and there are changes
in the surface markings of Io just in that short of time, because new eruptions are occurring,
there are new lava flows and stuff, so it's just great.
Here's a Galileo spacecraft image of one of the volcanoes.
There's the caldera at optical wavelengths, but in the infrared, you can see that the
hottest parts are actually two caldera within this one structure that you see at visible
wavelengths, so looking at it at different wavelengths is a good thing to do.
In particular, the infrared shows you the heat radiation caused by this thing being worn.
There's all this hot lava there.
Now, a lot of information has also been gathered with ground-based telescopes, and you might
think, well, how can they compete?
There's the Voyager spacecraft, there's Galileo that spent eight years in Jupiter's system
taking all these images.
How can ground-based telescopes with the turbulent atmosphere possibly compete?
We'll recall in lecture 24 that I said that if the object is bright enough, or if it's
got a bright star next to it, or if you make an artificial star next to it using a laser
beam that shines up and excites a layer of sodium atoms 90 or 100 kilometers above the
Earth, you can correct the distorted waves using a technique known as adaptive optics
where this adaptive mirror exactly negates the distortions produced by the atmosphere
and you get a nice, sharp image.
So there at the left is a star before correction, and at the right is the star after the wave
fronts have been corrected with this adaptive optics.
So with adaptive optics and ground-based telescopes, you can actually get greater clarity than
you can with telescopes in space because the ground-based telescopes tend to be bigger
than the space telescopes, and their theoretical clarity is higher than that of the space telescopes.
And if you achieve that theoretical clarity with the adaptive optics technique, then an
image that initially looks blurred like that because of the Earth's atmosphere suddenly
becomes comparable to or in some cases even better than the space-based images.
And here's a movie of Io circling Jupiter, and you can see these hotspots in the infrared.
This is an infrared picture, they're glowing, and even when Io goes into Jupiter's shadow,
you can see the hotspots glowing because the infrared is coming out regardless of whether
sunlight is reflecting off of Io.
So I love this movie, it shows Io rotating about its own axis and orbiting Jupiter at
the same time with all these active volcanoes sitting around.
The next moon out is Europa, it's also fascinating.
It has a very smooth surface, smoother than a billiard ball, but it also has fractures
in that surface, and you can see some of those fractures here, and a close-up with the Galileo
spacecraft shows them very well.
Europa has a smooth icy surface, the ice is water ice, and it is quite a young surface,
we can tell because there are very few craters on that surface, and so if a crater is formed
on ice and that ice is not really hard, let's say it's got some slush underneath or it's
able to move around a little bit, then the crater tends to get destroyed with time, and
indeed here's a crater, the faint remnants of a crater that formed a while ago and is
gradually just being destroyed by the erosion that occurs if the ice is not really hard
and has some churning material underneath.
So the craters fade away, there are all these ridges and things, it really looks like this
is the frozen surface of some lake, and you know how in lakes on earth you get all these
fractures and the sheets of ice move around and then water can seep up between the cracks
or through the cracks between the plates of ice, this is what Europa looks like, it looks
like it's got icy plates on top of possibly a liquid or at least a slushy ocean underneath.
So we think that the crust is 10 to 50 kilometers thick, but below is a slushy ocean with relatively
warm temperatures, and we would love to drill holes through the ice of Europa, maybe near
one of these cracks where perhaps the crust is thinner and stuff is able to more easily
come out, so if we could drill a hole through the ice and look for microbial or bacterial
life, that would be fantastic, so Europa is on our hit list to look for life in the solar
system. Farther out, Ganymede is even less affected by tidal forces than Europa is, I
forgot to mention that Europa is partially molten inside because it too suffers from
the IO effect, it's just not as extreme as on IO because Europa is farther away from
Jupiter than IO is, and so the tidal stretching isn't as great. Well Ganymede is even farther
away so its interior is molten to an even smaller degree, and there's not that much evidence
for recent activity on Ganymede, but there is some evidence, there's some grooved terrain
that may have been produced in the last billion years or so. Most of the terrain however is
covered with craters that are perhaps 2 to 4 billion years old and have remained preserved
on the surface of Ganymede for all this time because there's been not that much tectonic
activity or erosion on Ganymede's surface. An even older surface, perhaps the oldest
in the solar system, is found on the outermost moon of Jupiter, the outermost Galilean moon
of Jupiter, Callisto. Look at Callisto's surface, it's all pockmarked with craters, it's just
incredible. I wouldn't want to have been there when all those craters formed, but they formed
4 billion years ago during the era of heavy bombardment and there they are, still there,
preserved for all this time because Callisto has a very hard icy old surface. So you go
from IO which is regenerating its surface all the time through to Callisto which has
one of the most ancient surfaces known in the solar system. What a great variety. Here's
a giant impact basin on Callisto, Valhalla, where something smacked into it and created
ripples, a shock-like pattern in the frozen surface a long, long time ago. Well, Jupiter
has many, many more moons, dozens of them, about 60 are known right now, more are being
found all the time. Some of these things you could hardly even call moons, they're smaller
than 4 kilometers in diameter, they're captured asteroids, things like that. There might be
things that are only a kilometer or half a kilometer in diameter and in that case there
might be hundreds or even thousands of moons, but some of them are pretty interesting, none
are quite as interesting as the four main moons. And then it turns out Jupiter even
has a thin ring, not as glorious as that of Saturn, but present nonetheless. So I hope
you've seen what a wonderful system Jupiter presents with a whole variety of moons each
having a personality of its own and lots of cool features to study.
