The
sixth planet from the sun, Saturn, is truly an inspiration. I had already briefly told
the story of how I found it as a freshman in high school by accident. I had received
a small telescope as a gift and I pointed to a bright star. I couldn't quite get it
in focus or so I thought, but the telescope was kind of jiggly, so I let go of it, let
the vibrations settle down, and then I saw Saturn with the rings. Oh, it just knocked
my socks off. It was fantastic. So in this lecture, I'd like to discuss Saturn showing
many of the images that spacecraft and the Hubble Space Telescope have obtained and
even the images of amateur astronomers, such as this image, which nicely shows what I saw
that fateful evening in high school. It was something like this, a beautiful, beautiful
sight. Now, of course, we have spacecraft that show fine detail in the atmosphere of
Saturn and Saturn's rings, and the study of the atmosphere in rings is taking up a
lot of time for astronomers because these are complex systems that are hard to understand.
I'm sort of a Saturn junkie, so of course I have a Saturn t-shirt. Saturn is about
nine and a half astronomical units from the sun, and it takes almost 30 years to fully
orbit the sun. It's a giant planet like Jupiter, though not quite as big. It's about nine
and a half Earth radii in radius, and its mass is about 95 times that of the Earth. So
it's big, but not quite as giant as Jupiter is. Like Jupiter, it has a very low density.
In fact, its density is even lower than that of Jupiter. It's made almost entirely of
hydrogen and helium and doesn't have as much of an Earth-like rocky solid core in the middle.
So this makes its density more like 0.7 grams per cubic centimeter. Now, recall, water's
density is one gram per cubic centimeter. So Saturn, on average, is less dense than
water on Earth. So if Saturn were smaller and could fit on an ocean on Earth, Saturn would
actually float. You could put Saturn in a bathtub, for example, and Saturn would float.
But of course, it would leave a ring. Anyway, here's the internal structure of Saturn compared
with Jupiter. I had already pointed out that the layer of metallic hydrogen in Saturn isn't
quite as thick as that in Jupiter, because Saturn's mass and gravity being less than
those of Jupiter means that the pressures on the inside aren't great enough to produce
this weird metallic conducting form of hydrogen very easily or over throughout a large volume.
Nevertheless, it has this metallic hydrogen, and its rotation probably contributes to the
healthy magnetic field that Saturn has. It does have a rocky ice core, kind of like an
Earth, perhaps with a solid iron core surrounded by rocks, surrounded by ice. Then this metallic
hydrogen, and then a vast layer of molecular hydrogen. The structure is similar to that
of Jupiter, not only on the inside, but also on the outside as well, where we see the outer
atmosphere. It has bands, though they are less distinct than those of Jupiter, and there's
less energy driving the storms and the bands than on Jupiter. But the different colors
are due to different amounts of ammonia, methane, and other trace contaminants. Some
storms are sometimes discovered by amateur astronomers taking photographs of Saturn or
looking at Saturn. Here's a nice photograph of Saturn taken by an amateur astronomer,
and in a similar photograph, an amateur discovered a storm which was then followed by astronomers
using the Hubble Space Telescope, and they watched the development of this storm in a
highly enhanced photograph of Saturn. And again, studies of storms in other planets could
help us understand Earth's atmosphere better. The moderately strong magnetic field leads
to the production of auroras, you can see one here changing over the course of just
a couple of days. Saturn's magnetic field traps particles from the sun, the solar wind,
and brings them down to the northern and southern polar regions where they interact with molecules
in Saturn's atmosphere, and in a way similar to that on Earth, produce these glowing northern
and southern lights, which you can see changing before your very eyes here over the course
of a week or so. Well, Saturn's most notable feature, of course, are the magnificent rings.
It turns out all four of the giant planets have some rings, but man, you know, Saturn's
beat them all by a long shot. Saturn, to me, is the most beautiful planet other than Earth,
and I know beauty is in the eye of the beholder, but nevertheless, who could not say that Saturn
is beautiful? Look at that picture from the Hubble Space Telescope. Here's a picture from
Voyager as it passed beyond Saturn on its way to Uranus, and I love this photograph because
you can see the shadow of Saturn itself cast on the ring system. You can also see that
the disk of the planet is visible through the rings, not just through the major gaps,
but you can also make out the body of the planet beyond or through the rings themselves,
meaning that the rings are very thin, and indeed, we now know that the rings are only
about 20 meters in thickness. Now, compared to the extent of Saturn's rings, which is
vast, that ratio of thickness to diameter is similar to what you would have if you had
a normal CD with normal thickness, but 30 kilometers in diameter. Imagine a CD 30 kilometers
in diameter, but the normal thickness, that's the ratio of thickness to extent that Saturn's
rings have. Saturn's rings are made out of chunks of ice and rock. Here's an artist's
impression of what Saturn's rings might look like if you were right on top of or within
the rings. Fine particles all the way up to bolder sized things, but the smaller the
particle, the more of them there are. And these rocky icy chunks, we think, are a moon
that was never able to form or perhaps a weakly structured, a weakly held together moon or
comet that came in too close to Saturn and was torn apart. The idea is the following.
Every planet has a region around it called the Roche limit, where tidal forces are sufficiently
strong that an object can't just coalesce due to the gravitational interactions of all
the minor little particles. I mean, if you have a rock, a strong rock come into the within
the Roche limit, it won't get broken apart because it's held by its internal strength
and our bodies are within the Earth's Roche limit, but we're held by electromagnetic forces.
So things don't just fall apart, but but you can't bring a bunch of little particles
together under their own self gravity and have them coalesce to form a moon within the
Roche limit. And the rings of Saturn are within this Roche limit. So they are probably a moon
that didn't form or as I said, maybe something with the consistency of souffle came in close
to Saturn and got torn apart. Things that are easy to get to tear apart could get torn
apart by Saturn's tidal forces. You might wonder why the rings are still there. I mean,
collisions among the particles and stuff should make the rings dissipate with time. The particles
would just sort of leave the ring system. So it's a little bit weird that the rings
are there. If they formed four and a half billion years ago when Saturn formed, they
should long ago have left. They should have dissipated away. Maybe there's some some physical
effect we don't know of yet that keeps them there for billions of years. Or maybe they
are a fairly young phenomenon where they've been around for perhaps only 100 million years
and we happen to be lucky. Or there might be a system of moons that help constrain the
particles of the rings to stay in place. Gravitational interactions between moons and
ring particles can have such a shepherding effect as I'll discuss in more detail when
we talk about Uranus. So we don't really know why the rings are still there. One of those
hypotheses is probably right, but we're not sure. Now the rings are in the equatorial
plane of Saturn. So Saturn has an axis and it rotates around that axis. And that axis
is tipped by 27 degrees. Now you'll recall that Earth's axis of rotation is tipped by
23 and a half degrees relative to the perpendicular to the orbital plane. That's 23 and a half
degrees. In the case of Saturn, it's more like 27 degrees. So it's nearly the same as
that of Earth. Now Earth orbits the Sun over here at one astronomical unit. And Saturn
is nine and a half astronomical units away. So people on Earth and someone at the Sun
would get nearly the same view, nearly the same perspective of Saturn. So let's see what
happens here. From this orientation, we would see the top part of the rings, the part facing
us, and we would see them relatively face on. But then about seven years later, roughly
a quarter of Saturn's orbital period around the Sun, we would see them edge on because
the tilt is always 27 degrees and it has no reason to flop around. So as Saturn orbits
the Sun and the Earth next to the Sun, its orientation relative to space doesn't change,
but its orientation relative to the Sun and to the Earth does change. So from this perspective
we see it edge on, and then seven years later we see the underside of the rings relatively
face on, and then another seven years later we see the rings edge on again, like that.
So twice per 30 year revolution around the Sun, the rings appear edge on. This last happened
in 1995, and here is a series of Hubble photographs showing Saturn going from nearly edge on in
this photograph to as face on as it gets. And here is a nice set of images that shows
that process from year to year, the apparent orientation shifts relative to us. Let me
play this again, but I'll stop the animation where the rings are edge on. See now they're
casting a thin shadow on the face of the planet, but you can't really see the rings themselves
anymore. They shine by reflected light, and when they're edge on, we're not above them
or below them, so we don't see the reflection very well. There's not much of a reflection
to see. Now from the ground, only two to four rings are visible, usually two in small telescopes,
sometimes four. The main two rings are separated by a dark gap called Cassini's division, and
it was discovered in 1675 by Jean Dominique Cassini. That's an easy gap to see from the
ground, and it separates ring A from ring B. There's a rather faint ring, ring C, which
is interior to ring B, and in ring A there's another little gap called Enki's division,
but those are kind of hard to see. Cassini's division is caused by what we think is a resonance
between one of Saturn's moons, Mimas, and the particles that would have been in the
place where Cassini's division is. Turns out that those particles would orbit Saturn twice
for every one time that Mimas orbits Saturn, and so Mimas repeatedly exerts a gravitational
tug on the particles that are there, causing them to wander away from that location. It's
kind of a complex process, I'm just explaining the basics of it, but this repeated gravitational
tug in phase because of this two to one resonance causes a clearing out of a region of Saturn's
ring corresponding to Cassini's division, and we think that some of the other gaps are
caused by resonances with other moons. Now it turns out that the Voyager spacecraft
found not just three or four or five major rings, but a bunch of little smaller ringlets.
In fact, over 100,000 individual minor ringlets as they're called, and some of them appear
in groups such as this one, which is ring C, and there's ring B, and there's ring A,
but within those major rings there are many other smaller subdivisions, and here the effect
is enhanced so that you can see the ringlets better, but there are many, many of them,
and they're all quite thin, you can see the ball of the planet behind them, and here's
the shadow of the rings on the ball of the planet. Here's a very enhanced view of the
rings showing minor variations in density and composition as rather large differences
in color just so that you can see what's going on, and in fact even Cassini's division isn't
completely empty, there's a few minor ringlets within it. Now it's hypothesized that in addition
to the major resonances that I just discussed, like that of Mimas and the Cassini division,
there are also, it is thought, small moonlets within the rings that clear away gaps around
them, so if they're little 100 kilometer sized balls within the rings, they will exert gravitational
tugs that tend to clear the region around them, and this has been at least partially
verified for one of the gaps by the Cassini mission that I'll talk about in a few minutes,
where they found a small moon called Pan right in the middle of Enki's Gap. The Cassini spacecraft
was a wonderful, wonderful mission, it's still going on in fact, and here you can see an animation
of Cassini approaching Saturn and Saturn's main moon Titan, an intriguing place. So Cassini
got some fantastic photographs of Saturn, and I just like to pan across one of them to just allow
you to soak in the glory of Saturn's rings. I mean that is just a majestic view, you just can
watch it in silence, soaking it in, look at that view, and all the little ringlets. Oh I love it,
I'm still in love with Saturn over 30 years later, you know, after 30 years after I discovered
Saturn. It's one of the things that led me to become an astronomer actually. Look at that view,
absolutely fantastic, and you can see the shadow of the planet on the rings there.
Close-ups of the rings by the Cassini spacecraft confirmed what Voyager had found previously.
There are many of these things, and they appear in groups, here's a group of several, and here's
another group of a whole bunch. So there are these variations in density and composition,
and we still don't understand exactly what's going on. But here's this little moon, Pan,
which has cleared out a tiny gap around it, and is actually causing waves in the boundaries
of the rings surrounding it. See, so the gravitational interactions cause these waves,
and other moons have caused other waves in the rings. Here's a beautiful series of waves
in the rings caused by interactions between the particles and the moons.
Well those are all small moons. One of the primary missions of the Cassini spacecraft
was to visit Saturn's big moon Titan. Titan is an amazing moon discovered by Christian Huygens
in 1655, and he's by the way the person who realized that Saturn has rings. Recall that Galileo
saw the rings, but didn't get a clear view and called them handles or ears. We've known through
spectra of Titan for a long time that Titan has a thick nitrogen atmosphere. Now there's one other
body in the solar system that also has a thick nitrogen atmosphere. Remember what it is? Yeah,
Earth, we have a nitrogen atmosphere, and you know a fifth of it is oxygen, but it's mostly nitrogen.
So that makes Titan already intriguing. Moreover, reactions within that nitrogen
atmosphere, for example when lightning goes off or whatever, form hydrocarbons. We can tell,
and particulate matter in hydrocarbons and weird compounds and stuff, and so Titan has some smog
and haze, and it's actually hard to see the surface for that reason. You can't peer through
this haze, but the presence of this haze and of possible hydrocarbons raining out of the atmosphere
led to the intriguing possibility that in fact there might be hydrocarbons on the surface
possibly dissolved in methane lakes on the surface, because there's some methane in the
atmosphere as well, and that methane could actually form lakes on the surface. So this got people all
jazzed up. Maybe there's some methane hydrocarbon weird form of life living on Titan, or maybe, you
know, maybe some form of life found some little pockets of water on which to base its existence.
The point is, is that the atmosphere of Titan is thick. There's some greenhouse warming. It's a
pretty warm place compared to the outer frigid zones of the solar system, so it's certainly a
a desirable place for us to visit and study. If you look at Titan from the ground with a
conventional telescope, you nearly always get a very blurred image, even when the atmosphere is
pretty stable. With the Hubble Space Telescope, you can get a much clearer image, and here's one
taken at infrared wavelengths, and you can see some surface features on Titan, but with a ground-based
telescope using adaptive optics, you can get even better images. The Keck telescopes are 10 meters
in diameter, four times the diameter of the Hubble Space Telescope. So they should have
four times the resolution, the clarity, when used with adaptive optics. And indeed, here's an image
taken with the adaptive optics system on, and you can see that it is clearer than the Hubble
image. That's fantastic. Well, we think that Titan has this structure where you have a nitrogen
atmosphere with some methane CH4 mixed in, some thick photochemical haze with perhaps
particulate rain coming down, and then other haze layers up here, possibly methane and ethane
clouds maybe even raining down onto the surface, a very rich atmosphere and the possibility of a
very interesting surface. So one of the main goals of the Cassini mission was to send a spacecraft,
a probe, the Huygens probe, to the surface of Titan, going through the atmosphere and making
all sorts of measurements in the atmosphere, and finally landing on the surface and making some
measurements down there. Here's a view of Titan as Cassini approached Titan. This view is at
visible wavelengths, and you can see that there's not much detail to be seen. At infrared wavelengths,
well, the infrared light penetrates through the particulate haze better than optical light does,
and you can begin to see interesting details. But you could get more information about the
surface features by sending radio waves, radar, to Titan's surface, timing how long it takes to get
there and come back, and from those data you can figure out the height of surface features on
Titan. And so with this radar mapping, kind of like what Magellan did on Venus, Titan's terrain
was mapped, and we could already see that there are various structures on the surface, like higher
regions and valleys and stuff, and maybe the valleys even have some frozen methane in them.
Here's one of the maps made through this radar ranging technique. This is called Titan's Land of
Lakes, and we don't really know that these are lakes. There's no clear evidence for that,
but they do seem to be darker, probably lower and smoother features in between the more rugged,
higher terrain. So indeed, there's a lot of interesting stuff on the surface of Titan.
So then Cassini sent a probe. It launched a probe on a trajectory toward Titan,
and you can see an animation of that right here. As it got closer and closer to Titan,
the Cassini spacecraft turned toward it so as to get data transmitted back from the spacecraft,
from the probe. And here's an artist's impression of what the probe might have looked like as it was
parachuting down through Titan's thick nitrogen atmosphere, and it came to a relatively soft
landing. The instruments survived and actually took data for over an hour, I believe. And here's
an artist's impression of what you might have seen had you been flying over Titan's surface
toward the probe. There's the probe sitting there nicely on the surface taking data.
So what did the probe see on the descent? Well, here's one of the photographs, and when the
scientists studying this saw this, they said, wow, that looks a lot like a shoreline. Now,
maybe that's just their imaginations. Maybe that's what they want to see. But there are other
photographs as well. Here's from a more vertical perspective that really make this look like a
shoreline. And here's some clouds, some methane clouds. And look, these look like rivers and streams
emptying into a lake, or what might have been a lake in the past. We have no evidence that it's
liquid right now. Indeed, that was sort of one of the disappointments is that no clear evidence for
liquid methane or ethane was found on Titan. But these drainage systems were found. This really
looks like there's a bunch of little streams that start off in these highlands here, come together
and form wider and wider streams and finally a river. This is what a drainage system on earth
looks like. It's really very strikingly similar. And in detail, you can look at these things. And
in some places, it looks like the water just started, or not the water, probably the methane
started out from just nowhere. And so these might be springs, methane springs, kind of like water
springs on earth, or it could be that that after periods of heavy rainfall or methane fall,
you know, a lot of these little streams and tributaries would would would pop up. Now here's
the closest people have come to to identifying a possible isolated lake on Titan. There's this
weird little structure here. And we don't know whether that's just some sort of a caldera that
has a smooth surface, or whether there's liquid there, or maybe maybe frozen methane. There will be
later on some images of Titan, where these these same features will be seen at an angle. And what
the astronomers hope to see is reflections off of the surface that that would be more indicative
of a lake. The probe also saw boulders on a plane that kind of look like it might be a flood plane,
but you know, there are many interpretations. It's a bit hard to tell from just a few pictures.
Certainly, Titan is very, very interesting and deserves a lot more study. But perhaps the biggest
surprise of the whole Cassini mission was the discovery concerning one of Saturn's others
other moons, Enceladus. Enceladus has been, Enceladus was known to have a high albedo or
reflectivity, even from studies done by the Voyager spacecraft. The Voyager pictures looked
something like this, and Cassini confirmed it, that Enceladus has a very highly reflective surface
on some parts of which there are very few craters, suggesting that it's a young surface.
Okay, now some other parts are pretty heavily cratered, but here you have not many craters.
Cassini then found plumes of gas coming out from certain parts of the surface of Enceladus.
Look at these plumes. And studies of the plumes showed that those are water ice and water vapor.
Water, H2O, not methane, not some other weird ethane substance, but water. So here's the plume,
and here it is enhanced. And when they traced the source of the plume back down to the surface of
the planet, they found that the plume was coming from this striated region. It's called affectionately
tiger stripes, okay, the tiger stripe region of Enceladus. And measurements of the temperature
of that type tiger striped region showed that though much of it is quite cold, 75 degrees
above absolute zero, you know, this is hard, cold ice, other parts were significantly warmer by as
much as 15 degrees. And those parts coincide with these little cracks or valleys within this
tiger striped structure. And there were several of these places found where the temperatures were
warmer, right where there's a crack. So the working hypothesis is that Enceladus is covered
by cold, roughly 77 degree water ice. Below that icy hard surface is thought to be pressurized liquid
water at roughly the melting point of ice, 273 degrees. And then through these fissures,
that water can flow and turn into vapor and also shoot out particles of ice causing those plumes.
So this is extremely good evidence for liquid water very close to the surface of Enceladus.
And you might wonder, why is there liquid water there? Well, we think that Enceladus is being
tidally heated like Io is by a change by the changing tidal forces that occur during Enceladus's
eccentric or elliptical orbit around Saturn. And this water is really very close to the surface.
And there's a real chance that a probe sent to Enceladus someday could dig down into one of those
fissures and take a sample of the water down there. And where there's water,
there could be primitive microbial life. So Enceladus becomes an even better candidate
for study than Europa, whose crust is probably a lot thicker, 10 to 50 kilometers. So I really
hope that someday we'll go back to Enceladus. Saturn has a number of other interesting moons,
just to give you a flavor of them. Iapetus has one very bright side, one very dark side,
as though the bright side has some freshly fallen snow on it, probably methane, ethane,
maybe some water ice, things like that. There's Mimus, which is highly pockmarked with craters,
including one giant one that makes it look like the Death Star in Star Wars. And then there's Rhea,
which has a very old surface like that of Callisto around Jupiter, highly pockmarked with
impact craters. There are many, many other moons, dozens of moons, as in the case with Jupiter,
probably a lot of these are captured asteroids, or maybe the remnants of former bigger moons that
collided with one another and broke each other apart. New moons are just being found all the
time around Saturn, and I've kind of lost count. I think there are 35 known now with eight more
suspected, that is they've been seen once, but not twice or three times, so we can't yet quite
confirm them. I think the decades ahead promise a lot for the further study of Saturn to see
how this system developed and to determine whether it too may have formed life as we know it.
