Having discussed Jupiter and Saturn, I now turn my attention to the outer giant planets,
Uranus and Neptune. They're not really that big. They're only about four times the diameter
of the Earth as compared with Jupiter's 11 times the diameter of the Earth and Saturn's
nine and a half times the diameter of the Earth. So they're not really gigantically big, but
they're still more closely aligned with Jupiter and Saturn in their overall characteristics
than they are with the terrestrial planets. For example, they consist mostly of hydrogen
and helium and they have rocky and icy cores in the middle. Their masses are not that large
about 14 and a half times that of Earth for Uranus and 17 times that of Earth for Neptune
compared with Saturn's 95 Earth masses and Jupiter's 318 Earth masses. So they're sort
of intermediate between the truly gigantic planets and the terrestrial planets, but again
they're mostly hydrogen and helium and their overall structure is similar broadly speaking
to that of Jupiter and Saturn. You will recall when I showed a cross section of Jupiter and
Saturn that they consist mostly of hydrogen in a very strange state, compressed molecular
hydrogen in the outermost parts, and it's so compressed that it's actually mostly in
liquid form, and then an even more compressed form of hydrogen called metallic hydrogen
farther in the interior, which is also liquid. So when we talk about the gas giants, we really
mean the gas slash liquid giants, mostly liquid, and then in the middle we think that they
have this rocky and icy core. Now that the core of Saturn is pretty well substantiated,
it's 15 to 20 times the mass of the Earth. The core of Jupiter is a bit more controversial.
Some people think that it might be only one times the mass of the Earth or maybe even non-existent,
but we think it's there to some level. The people who think it's non-existent have advanced
this hypothesis relatively recently, and it has some pros and some cons. So we can't really
know the internal structure of these giant planets because we can't drill a hole through
them. This is all based on indirect evidence. Well, if you look at Uranus and Neptune, because
they have less mass, they never compress hydrogen into the metallic form, where it is a good
conductor of heat and electricity. The most compressed hydrogen they have is molecular
hydrogen, and then they have a much larger fraction of their mass in the form of a rocky
Earth-like core with an icy layer around it. And by ice I mean not just water ice, but
frozen carbon dioxide and methane and ammonia and things like that. So a substantial fraction
of the mass of Uranus and Neptune is this rocky core with an icy layer surrounding it,
and there's considerably less hydrogen and helium. For some reason, these planets accumulated
a smaller amount of the light gases. Now Uranus and Neptune were not known to the ancients.
The ancients knew about the sun, the moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.
And indeed, the days of the week are named after those seven heavenly bodies, Sunday
for the sun, Monday for the moon, Saturday for Saturn, and you have to consider the names
of the days of the week in the romance languages in order to see the correspondence with Mercury
and Mars and the other planets. Now let's consider Uranus first. Pronounced incorrectly,
it's the butt of many jokes, but the correct pronunciation is Uranus, okay, despite what
you may have heard. Like other planets, it's named after gods of Greek and Roman mythology.
In particular, Uranus is the father of Saturn, who in turn is the father of Jupiter. Now
Uranus is the seventh planet. It's pretty far from the sun, about 20 astronomical units
from the sun, and it takes about 84 years for it to complete an orbit around the sun.
It was discovered by William Herschel in 1781, and as I said, it consists mostly of hydrogen
and helium, but it has these outer layers of methane and ammonia. And in particular,
the methane reflects blues and greens really well. And so if you look at Uranus and also
Neptune, for that matter, through a telescope, they have a distinctly blueish-green tinge
to them. So the methane absorbs a lot of the red light from the sun and reflects the green
light. And you can tell from the spectrum that there's a lot of methane in the atmosphere.
They're far outs. They're quite cold, only about 60 degrees above absolute zero, so you
wouldn't want to spend too much time out there without a warm jacket, okay? If you look at
Uranus through a telescope, you might be lucky to see some of its many moons. Three of them
are shown here. The planet looks pretty bright in this photograph because, in fact, Uranus
isn't that dim. It's barely visible to the naked eye on a dark, moonless night. Now a
weird thing about Uranus is that its axis of rotation is tipped by 98 degrees relative
to the perpendicular to its orbital plane. So you'll recall that Earth's axis is tipped
by 23.5 degrees, and that's what gives us our seasons. Uranus is tipped by 98 degrees.
So its axis of rotation is nearly coincident with the orbital plane, and that gives it
some pretty extreme seasons. For 21 years of its 84-year orbital period, the North Pole
basically points at the sun. Then for 21 years, the equator basically is aligned with the
sun, and then for another 21 years, the South Pole is basically pointing toward the sun,
and then another 21 years where the equatorial regions are facing the sun. So it has these
extreme seasons, and you might wonder, well, why is it tipped by 98 degrees? We don't really
know. We think that there was perhaps a large collision early in the history of the solar
system when there were still a lot of bodies wandering around, accumulating to form planets,
and maybe a big one hit Uranus and tipped it like this. Uranus isn't unique in this regard.
Venus, in fact, is tipped by 177 degrees, which means it actually spins on its axis in a direction
backwards, or opposite to the direction of motion around the sun. And then Pluto is tipped
by 120 degrees, but as we'll discuss, Pluto is sort of a weird planet that may not be
a planet anyway. You know, we know also that the Earth's moon probably formed as a result
of a collision of a Mars-sized object or something twice the size of Mars hitting the Earth and
spewing some stuff out in that coalesce to form the moon. So collisions early in the
history of the solar system were not all that uncommon. So what I was saying is illustrated
here in this diagram where the axis of rotation of Uranus first points toward the sun 21 years
later is basically perpendicular to the sun, then the south pole points toward the sun,
and then 21 years later the equator points toward the sun. So this diagram shows what
I was trying to demonstrate with that model. Given that the axis of rotation points toward
the sun in this extreme way, you would expect that the heating on the surface of Uranus
would be extreme from one season to the other, and you might expect a lot of storms to develop.
And so in fact it was a bit surprising when Voyager mission in 1986 took photographs of
Uranus and saw very few surface features. Look at that. It's an atmosphere essentially
devoid of features, and about 20 years later, 15 to 20 years later, the Hubble Space Telescope
took images which showed a few faint markings, but really not much going on. Now, that's
a bit weird. You know, you have all this heating on one side and not on the other, so you'd
expect some sort of atmospheric circulation. And as I'll show you in a few minutes, it
was eventually seen, but it's nowhere near as active an atmosphere as the atmospheres
of Saturn and Jupiter. Now, another weird thing about Uranus is that its magnetic field
is tipped by 60 degrees relative to the axis of rotation. In most planets, the magnetic
field and the axis of rotation are relatively aligned. But here in this diagram, you can
see the axis of rotation and the bar magnet, most magnetic fields of planets look like
the magnetic fields of a bar magnet. It is tipped by 60 degrees, and it's offset considerably
from the center of the planet. So some people thought this might be related to the tilt of
Uranus's axis. Maybe the collision or whatever it was that caused that also produced this
offset and tilted magnetic field. But it turns out that Neptune has a similarly weird magnetic
field and Neptune's axis of rotation is nearly perpendicular to the orbital plane, so it's
unlikely that that explanation of the collision could explain Uranus's magnetic field because
there's no real evidence that Neptune underwent a similarly large collision. Some rings were
discovered around Uranus in 1977 when Uranus occulted or passed in front of a background
star. So in this diagram, you can see that astronomers measured the brightness of the
star. Brightness is indicated on the vertical axis here and time on the horizontal axis.
And they were measuring the brightness of the star in order to see how it dims as it
passes through the outer parts of Uranus's atmosphere. So by looking at the rate at which
it dims, you can determine the density and pressure of the Uranian atmosphere. But fortunately,
they turned on their equipment considerably before the star was to pass behind the planet
or be occulted by the planet. And what they found was a series of dips in the apparent
brightness of the star well before it had become hidden by or occulted by the planet.
And then when it came out from behind the planet, some time later, there was another
series of dips. And these dips were interpreted to be the result of rings partially blocking
the light from the star. The rings are very narrow because the dips are short lived. And
also the rings are not completely opaque because the brightness of the star does not go down
to zero as it does when it's behind the planet. Now you can see actually an animation of what
the astronomers measured. There was one dip. We're plotting intensity versus time. Here's
a series of four dips. Then the star goes behind the planet. It dims gradually because
it's going through the atmosphere of the planet. Then it's completely hidden by the planet.
And then as it comes out from behind the planet, it brightens gradually because it's going
through different layers of the atmosphere. And then some time later, you get this series
of dips again when it goes behind the rings. So that's great. There were these rings and
that's how they were discovered. Now you might wonder how are the rings kept so narrow? They're
only about 10 kilometers wide. And some theoretical astrophysicists, Peter Goldreich and Scott
Tremain predicted that there must be what they called shepherd moons keeping the little
ring particles in place. Now it's a complex gravitational interaction, but the basic idea
is that you have a small moon on either side of the rings and these small moons prevent
the particles of the rings from wandering too far out. That is, they prevent them from
spreading. If a particle starts spreading out toward the outer shepherd moon, the outer
shepherd moon takes some of the energy away from this particle that's spreading outwards
and that forces the particle to come back in. Whereas the particle that goes in toward
the inner shepherd moon gains some energy as that shepherd moon passes it up and that
flings the particle back out toward the ring. So these moons act like little shepherds keeping
the particles in this narrow ring. And Peter Goldreich was a professor of mine when I was
in graduate school at Caltech and he figured this out along with Scott Tremain and he's
actually quite a good tennis player. I finally remember the many tennis matches I had. But
this prediction was kind of interesting and people thought, well, I don't know, it's kind
of weird. You know, they're these shepherd moons. Maybe it's just a bunch of fairy tales.
But when the Voyager spacecraft in 1986 flew past Uranus, it actually found shepherd moons
around at least some of the rings. So here's the Voyager picture of the thin rings and
it didn't take pictures all over the place. But in some of the places where it took pictures,
they actually did find these moons. Here's Ophelia and Cordelia, the shepherd moons keeping
this ring thin. And so there was great euphoria in finding these shepherd moons and in photographing
in great detail the narrow rings. It was really a fantastic mission. The problem was that
just a few days after Voyager arrived at Uranus, there was the terrible space shuttle disaster
where the Challenger basically blew up. And so that kind of muted the excitement. It was
a terrible day in the history of space exploration. Nevertheless, the science was fantastic. And
as with Stan Peel's prediction of the volcanism on Io that I discussed a few lectures ago,
this prediction by Peter Goldreich that there should be shepherd moons really struck me
in terms of the beauty and power of having a physical prediction for some phenomenon,
which then turns out to be proven correct. So it's just great how physics can be used
to make these predictions and then you can do observations and experiments to confirm
those predictions. And when you're right, you feel really good. Now here's some more
recent pictures of Uranus. Here's one taken with the Hubble Space Telescope where you
can actually see the thin rings. And interestingly, some high clouds formed in Uranus's atmosphere,
which you can see in this photograph. Here's another photograph taken with a large telescope
in Chile, the European very large telescope. And you can see many of the moons as well
as the rings very nicely. And in fact, this picture makes Uranus look almost like Saturn.
But this picture was taken through a special filter that enhances the visibility of the
rings and diminishes the brightness of the planet. It's taken through a filter centered
on one of the absorption lines produced by methane in the atmosphere. So the planet looks
comparatively dim. And yet the icy rings look bright because light scatters very well off
of the rings. And this methane band is irrelevant when you're looking at the scattered light
from the rings. But it's not irrelevant when you're looking at the atmosphere because it
absorbs a lot of the light and so less of it is reflected. So that's kind of a cool
picture. It almost looks like Saturn. And here's another Hubble Space Telescope picture
showing that the clouds have sort of moved around. And there's another one taken a short
time later where you can see the rotation of the planet as well as the movement of the
clouds. So it's kind of got some activity in the atmosphere. But as I said, less than
in the case of Jupiter and Saturn. Now Uranus has a bunch of moons. The most interesting
one is Miranda. It's a relatively small moon as they go. And so people didn't expect all
that many interesting features on it. But as you can see here, the Voyager photograph
shows all sorts of striations and craters and canyons and what looks like might be fault
blocks. Anyway, if you like hiking, Miranda would be a great place to go hiking. I'd love
to go there someday. Uranus has 27 known moons and Neptune has 13. This is fewer than around
Jupiter. Jupiter has about 60 known moons and Saturn has roughly 40 known moons. And
we think that Jupiter and Saturn captured a lot of sort of wandering asteroids and that's
why they have this many moons. Uranus and Neptune are farther from the asteroid belt,
which I'll describe in a few lectures. And they also are less massive than Jupiter and
Saturn. So they collect fewer moons, but still a lot compared to the terrestrial planets.
In this photograph, you can see some of the moons and the rings very nicely. And in fact,
you can see that the moons orbit the planet. These two pictures were taken just an hour
and a half apart. And in fact, you can even trace the rotation of the planet itself by
looking at the positions of these clouds. Here's a time lapse movie taken in 2003 of
a faint satellite, a faint moon of Uranus. And you can see it just moving very slowly
around Uranus. Most of these other little dots are cosmic rays. They're high energy charged
particles that hit the detector and masquerade as moons. Let's go on to Neptune now. Neptune,
as I said, is about the same size as Uranus. And it consists, again, mostly of hydrogen
and helium. So it, like the other giant planets, is much more representative of the overall
composition of the universe. It's named after the Roman god of the sea, a son of Saturn.
Here's a ground based photograph taken at Lick Observatory of Neptune showing its main moon
Triton. Now Neptune was discovered in 1846 by Johann Galli as a result of the analysis of
Uranus's orbit by Urbain Leverier and John Adams. It turns out that Uranus's orbit wasn't
exactly agreeing with the predictions of where it should be. So you observe where it is and
you predict where it should be and there was a slight discrepancy. So these fellows said,
well, maybe there's another planet out there perturbing or gravitationally pushing around
Uranus, making its true path a little bit different from what you would expect if that,
if another planet weren't pushing it around. So Leverier and Adams calculated where Neptune
should be and Galli observed the sky in that place and indeed discovered Neptune. So that's
a, another great triumph of celestial mechanics where Leverier and Adams predicted the existence
of something based on already observed phenomena. Interestingly, Galileo actually saw Neptune
in late 1612 and in early 1613. On December 28th, 1612, he actually drew what he thought was a fixed
star in one of his, one of the pages of his notebook where he was drawing Jupiter and the
position of its moons. And then a month later in January, on January 27th and 29th, he saw this
fixed star again. And he even noted that, that the star seemed to have moved relative to some of
the other background stars in the field, but he didn't recognize that that might mean that it's a
planet. Okay, so, you know, a fixed star that isn't quite fixed might be a planet, right? And,
and Galileo knew that, but, but didn't quite make as much of this observation as, as he should have.
Had he said, hey, this is another planet, it would have been ironic because it would have
meant that planet eight from the sun was discovered before planet seven, you know, 1613 versus 1846.
So anyway, it turns out that if we use the known position of Jupiter at the time that Galileo was
making his measurements and take his plotted position of Neptune relative to Jupiter, and then use that
observation, we can refine our knowledge of Neptune's orbit. We know Neptune's orbit much better
because of Galileo's observation than if we just start in 1846 or something. So
if, if you publish a paper on the, on the orbit of Neptune, you really should add Galileo as a
co-author because he, he added an important data point. Voyager got to Neptune in August of 1989,
and it approached within 5,000 kilometers of the surface, showing some beautiful features,
like these icy methane clouds, skirting above the main part of the atmosphere, and deeper
storms like this great dark spot that's reminiscent of Jupiter's great red spot.
Voyager also showed other storms. I like this one here called scooter because he
scoots around the planet at a speed of 1,100 kilometers per second. I mean, that's really fast.
So Neptune has a much more dynamic, a much more active atmosphere than, than Uranus does, and
that's a little bit strange given that Neptune is farther from the sun and is being heated less.
So there must be more of an internal source of energy within Neptune than there is within Uranus.
Maybe there's more gravitational settling of the interior material of Neptune or something like
that. Here's a close-up of the great dark spot, and you can see these highly reflective methane
ice clouds skirting around in the upper atmosphere, and there's scooters zooming around at 1,100
kilometers per second, and here's a smaller spot. So there's storms in Neptune's atmosphere,
and they come and go, like the great dark spot later on disappeared. When Hubble Space Telescope
looked at it, it didn't see the great dark spot that the Voyager spacecraft had seen,
and other spots, other storms have come and gone since then. So it's quite an active atmosphere.
So here are images taken with the Hubble Space Telescope, first in 1998,
enhanced to show some of the, some of the various clouds and storms on Neptune.
And if you look at some images taken in 2005, you can see not only some of the moons orbiting
Neptune, but also some of the high atmospheric features that stand out most clearly. If you
look at them through a filter that diminishes the apparent brightness of the planet by looking
in an absorption line of methane and enhances the clouds because they reflect light quite well.
Methane clouds, methane ice reflects, reflects light quite well. And in this little series
of photographs, you can also see traced out the orbits of some of the moons of Neptune.
Now, if you use adaptive optics from the ground, you can get even better images of Neptune. So
here's a Keck image of Neptune taken from the ground, and you might say, well, that looks
really crummy. But that's without adaptive optics, this technique that I described in a previous
lecture. If you turn on adaptive optics, you can see a lot of beautiful features and in great
detail around Neptune. So with a 10 meter telescope using adaptive optics, you can actually get
better clarity than with a 2.4 meter telescope, the Hubble Space Telescope above Earth's
atmosphere, because the adaptive optics essentially gets rid of the turbulent effects of Earth's
atmosphere. Let's go back to the Voyager pictures. Some of the photographs taken with Voyager
showed the rings of Neptune. Now, I mentioned that there are thin rings around Uranus by a similar
technique of occultation of a star and watching that star's brightness as seen from the ground.
Astronomers had deduced that Neptune probably has rings as well, although clumpy rings, not
full complete rings. And indeed, when Voyager looked at Neptune, it saw these rings and they
have these major clumps in them. There is some material between the clumps, so the rings are
continuous, but clumpy. And we're not sure why they're clumpy. Maybe they're the result of a
moon that was relatively recently torn apart by the tidal gravitational force of Neptune.
By the way, the image of the disk of Neptune itself is highly overexposed in this photograph
in order to show the faint rings. I had mentioned Neptune's strange magnetic field
in relation to the discussion of Uranus's magnetic field. Here it is. You can see the
rotation axis of Neptune. The bar magnet that represents Neptune's magnetic field is offset
from the center of the planet and tilted by 55 degrees relative to the rotation axis. And
that's really weird. Neptune's rotation axis is only tipped by 30 degrees relative to the
perpendicular to the orbital plane. So that's kind of like Earth, 23.5 degrees, Mars is 25.2,
Jupiter is 3 degrees, Saturn is 27. So Neptune's tilt is about right for the rotation axis, yet
it has just as strange a magnetic field as Uranus does. So probably whatever is causing this weird
magnetic field is unrelated to Uranus's strange tilt. So what is it that causes the magnetic field?
Astronomers don't really know, but they think that it's a circulation of charged particles,
that is currents, in a shell around the rocky icy core of both Uranus and Neptune. So there's
some charged particles around that core that are circulating in an asymmetric way, causing
this weird magnetic field. But no one is really sure because we've never probed inside either of
those planets. Let me end the discussion of Neptune by discussing its really weird moon Triton. Now
this is a pretty big moon, it's a bit larger than our own Earth's moon, and it's got a thin nitrogen
and methane atmosphere, mostly nitrogen actually. Now it's weird primarily because it goes backwards
around Neptune, that is most of the moons are orbiting in one direction, and that's the same
general direction as Neptune's orbit around the Sun, all the same general direction. But Triton
is going backwards, okay? So this immediately suggests that it didn't form out of a disk of gas
from which Neptune itself formed, rather Triton was probably another body captured by Neptune
long ago, okay? And the capture probably occurred in such a way as to give it an elliptical orbit
around Neptune, a highly eccentric orbit, because it's hard to capture a body and have it be in
a circular orbit right away. So this eccentric orbit meant that Neptune's moon Triton should be
subjected to large variations in the tidal forces. So you might expect that Triton's interior was at
least at one time partially molten, and if so, there could be signs of activity on its surface.
Well, in fact, when Voyager went by Triton, it saw a fantastic terrain. Here's part of the moon,
where you can see what's called the cantaloupe terrain, a series of depressions about 30 kilometers
in diameter, crisscrossed with these various ridges, which might even be like faults, like fault
blocks here on Earth, and other parts of the surface had other weird things going on. So it really
does look like Neptune's moon Triton had a geologically active history in the relatively
recent past. And most interesting were these little dark streaks that Voyager saw in some parts of
Triton's surface. These streaks are thought to be due to icy volcanoes, where Triton's crust
has some fissures, and through those fissures, nitrogen gas emerges and then is blown across the
surface, forming a shadow and sort of some dark debris on the surface, because the interior
stuff has sort of a different color than the surface material. So these are sort of icy
volcanoes, and they're reminiscent of the ice volcanoes that have been seen on Enceladus,
but in the case of Enceladus, we think that the vapor that's coming out is water vapor, whereas
on Triton, it's nitrogen gas, or nitrogen vapor, but they're reminiscent of the icy
volcanoes on Enceladus. So this was a great way to end Voyager's 12-year odyssey and Ed Stone,
the project scientist of the Voyager mission, was moved to quote T.S. Eliot from Four Quartetes,
not farewell, but fair forward Voyagers. And here is the parting shot of Voyager as it was
streaming away from Neptune, showing the crescent Neptune and crescent Triton in the background.
So what a great, great voyage where the Voyagers first went to Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and then
finally Neptune with all of its splendors.
