We have seen that in addition to the planets of the solar system, there are various nomads,
such as the Kuiper Belt objects, the asteroids, centaur-type objects, and then the random
meteoroids that go flying around through the solar system.
Well, another type of nomad are the comets.
Comets come from the Kuiper Belt and also from a much more distant cloud, the Oort cloud,
and we think that they provide clues to the nature of the solar system just as it was forming.
So in this lecture, I'd like to discuss comets.
Comets appear as diffuse, luminous patches in the sky, often with long tails that will
stretch over many tens of degrees in the sky for a great comet.
Other ones are kind of puny, so there's not much to see.
But there's a great comet roughly once per decade in the sky.
Here's a fantastic one, Ikeaseki in 1965, Grace the Skies, and you can see that beautiful tail.
In 1970, there was Comet Bennett, also a gorgeous comet.
In 1976, Comet West, with its beautiful tails having different types of structure,
if you look at them over time, you can see the structure changing, in fact.
And then in 1996, Comet Yakutaki, whose tail actually went across more than 70 or even 80
degrees of the sky if you were watching it in very dark, moonless conditions.
This photograph was taken by an old junior high friend of mine, Michael Hannah.
And then just one year later, a fantastic comet, Hale Bopp in 1997, with a beautiful
double tail, a blue so-called ion tail, and a yellowish-white dust tail.
Just a fantastic comet that was easily visible, even from brightly lit cities.
And in fact, it was so inspirational that one of the staff members, Patrice Stone,
in the Berkeley Astronomy Department, designed this t-shirt with Comet Hale Bopp
between the Berkeley Campanile and the building Campbell Hall that houses the Astronomy Department.
So it's a great comet that inspired many, many people.
Now, Comet really means sort of hairy star.
It comes from the Greek aster cometis, which means long-haired star.
And so to the Greeks, it appeared that these were stars that had these, you know,
beards or mustaches or hair sticking out from them.
See, the name stuck and, you know, they're comets.
But they're not hairy stars.
They have nothing to do with stars at all.
They're in our solar system.
And as we will see, they are basically dirty snowballs that evaporate as they get close to the sun
and the sunlight and the solar wind, which consists of electrons and protons and things like that,
pushes the gases away and they then reflect the sunlight.
And that's what makes the tail.
Nevertheless, long ago, before anything was known about comets,
they were historically viewed as bad omens, portents of doom, basically.
And indeed, in Shakespeare's Julius Caesar, there's the quote,
when beggars die, there are no comets seen.
But the heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.
So bad omens.
Okay, you see a comet in the sky and you're the king.
Oh boy, you'd better, you'd better, you know, get your troops ready to fight some demon or something.
Anyway, some dragon.
As I said, they're basically dirty snowballs.
Fred Whipple came up with this model over half a century ago.
And in basic principle, it's correct.
I mean, there are some details that are being found out now that are probably a bit wrong.
And comets vary from one to another regarding how much they consist of ices versus rocks.
But they have to have some ices there.
Water ice, carbon dioxide, ammonia, methane, because these ices have to evaporate
as the comet reaches areas close to the sun.
And it's those evaporated gases that are then pushed away from the comet by the radiation pressure.
That is, by the photons, by the light, and also by the electrons and protons and nuclei of atoms,
the solar wind that is streaming from the sun.
So you need to have some ices there.
And indeed, spectra of comets show these various molecules.
Methane, ammonia, water, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide.
So there's definitely some ices there.
So if you look at the trajectory of a comet as it comes close to the sun,
it evaporates more and more the closer it gets to the sun.
And then this solar wind and radiation pressure pushes away this gas.
And then that gas reflects sunlight and glows.
But nothing is burning.
There's no chemical reactions here.
It's just reflection of sunlight.
And on the way in, the tail points away from the sun.
So it might seem to you that this is just the tail that forms.
Like if I'm zooming through the air and I have long hair, my hair would flow back.
You might think that's what's causing the tail.
It's not really.
I mean, it's the radiation pressure that's causing the tail and not the motion through space.
And you can tell because on the outward journey, as shown here,
the comet is moving in this direction and the tail is basically in roughly the same direction.
That is, it's not trailing the comet.
It's sort of leading the comet.
Here on the way in, it was trailing the comet,
but that's not because the gases were rushing through some medium like air.
Rather, the gases were being pushed away from the sun by the sunlight
and the radiation pressure of the solar wind.
And so too is the case when the comet is going away from the sun.
And so when it's going away from the sun, the tail essentially leads the head.
In any case, the tail is always directed roughly away from the sun.
Here's comet Hale Bopp as seen next to the Campanile in 1997.
And this is what inspired Patrice Stone's t-shirt.
And, you know, you can essentially tell where the sun is.
The sun has to be down here somewhere below the horizon
because the tail is being pushed away from the sun.
Well, this basic model was confirmed in 1986 when a spacecraft called Giotto
went close to the nucleus of Hale's comet and imaged it.
And the sun is in this direction.
Here's the head or nucleus of Hale's comet.
And you can see that the parts of the comet that are facing the sun are warmed up and they out gas.
And that gas goes away from the nucleus.
But then, you can't see this in this photograph,
that the gas bends around because the sunlight and the solar wind push on it.
And the most of the tail would be off to the left here.
But the outgassing occurs on the parts of the comet that face the sun.
The comet's nucleus, in this case, looks sort of like a potato.
Okay, so it's a big version of a potato, maybe 16 kilometers long or so.
Now, usually you have two tails, a dust tail and an ion tail.
The ion tail consists of charged particles coming from the nucleus.
And they're pushed away by the solar wind at a very high speed.
So they go basically just zooming away and they reflect sunlight and are also ionized.
So they sort of glow on their own and cause this very straight tail.
The dust tail consists of particles that are heavier than the ions.
And so they sort of lag behind a little bit here and curve away.
So you can sometimes see two distinct tails.
Both of them point roughly away from the direction to the sun,
but the dust tail curves more than the ion tail.
And in Comet Hail Bop, you can see both tails very well.
Here's the ion tail, which is mostly charged particles.
And they're glowing in part because they've been ionized.
And here's the dust tail, which doesn't consist of charged particles.
And it's simply reflecting sunlight and lagging a little bit behind
as the particles slowly go out from the nucleus of the comet
and take on other trajectories as dictated by Newton's Laws.
So it makes the tail of the comet sort of lag behind a little bit.
In other comets, you get mostly just an ion tail.
Like in Yakutaki, there was very little dust.
And so you had this very straight, long ion tail and not much of a dust tail.
I think there's a little bit of one right there.
Whereas Hail Bop had a very prominent dust tail.
If you look at a periodic comet, it circles the sun once per orbital period.
So according to Kepler's second law, it spends very little time near the sun
and a lot of time away from the sun.
So it goes, that kind of a thing.
And this is Kepler's second law.
Equal areas are swept out by the comet in equal times.
If you take a look at a segment joining the sun in the comet,
it sweeps out a pi-shaped region whose area is always the same
for an equal time interval throughout the orbit of the comet.
And the comet is really not very massive at all.
It's only about 1,100 billionth of the sun's mass.
And so each time it passes near the sun, it loses a little bit of that mass.
And you might expect comets to wither away after a while
when they've lost most of their gases.
So for example, Halley's comet, the most famous periodic comet,
is losing mass every time it comes around the sun, every 76 years.
And in some tens of thousands of years, there'll be essentially nothing left.
It'll break apart, disintegrate, and there'll be nothing left.
But right now, this is the most famous periodic comet,
and it's named after Edmund Halley, who in fact noticed in the historical records
that a bright comet comes around roughly every 75 or 76 years.
He reasoned that it's the same comet, and he predicted its next occurrence.
Unfortunately, he died before that date occurred,
but his prediction was validated, and the comet is now named after him.
And you can see the trajectory of Halley's comet.
Here it is in 2006.
It's now near its farthest point from the sun, but its last passage was in 1986.
And you can see here that from 77 to 83 to 85 to 86 to 87 to 88,
it just sort of zoomed past the sun.
So they go zooming past the sun,
and then they spend a lot of time out far away from the sun.
In this case, sort of between Neptune's orbit and Pluto's orbit.
Now, the comets that have short periods, less than about 200 years,
and also which are in the plane of the solar system, come predominantly from the Kuiper Belt.
And basically, collisions and gravitational interactions among objects in the Kuiper Belt
occasionally send them careening towards the sun,
and others might escape from the solar system.
But those that come toward the sun heat up, evaporate, and form this tail.
And often, big planets like Jupiter and Saturn can perturb or alter the orbits of these comets
on their way in, capturing them and turning their initially very long periods,
the periods of the Kuiper Belt objects, into short period conets,
because the planet might perturb the comet's trajectory during its passage close to the planet,
and that'll turn it into a much shorter period comet.
So you can get comets with periods of just five years or 10 years,
or Halley's comet is 76 years, but there are ones that are much shorter than that.
And that's because they've been perturbed by passage close to a major planet.
So here's the Kuiper Belt out here, beyond the orbit of Neptune,
and these guys take a very long time to orbit, one or two or 300 years,
depending on where you are, Neptune, Pluto, and beyond,
but sometimes they come in, get perturbed by one of the big planets,
and assume a shorter period orbit.
Now, there are also comets that come in from any direction,
not just the plane of the solar system, but outside the plane of the solar system,
and many of those have much longer periods,
and those are thought to come from the much more distant Oort cloud.
Now, the Oort cloud is a region of space,
maybe 50,000 astronomical units from the Sun,
but occasionally a passing star might perturb one of those bodies and send it in towards the Sun,
and if it doesn't encounter any planets along the way,
it'll pass by the Sun and go zipping on out, and it'll never be seen again, basically.
But if it passes reasonably close to a planet, again, a planet can alter its orbit
and turn it into a much shorter period orbit than tens of thousands or millions of years,
it can turn it into a period of maybe a thousand years or a few hundred years.
So that Oort cloud is way out there.
To remind you, here's an animation going out from the solar system,
from the inner solar system, out beyond the orbits of the outer planets,
beyond even the Kuiper Belt, and beyond even the trajectory of Sedna,
which is a weird object that might be one of the innermost members of the Oort cloud.
So there it is, the Oort cloud way out there,
and maybe Sedna was one of these objects that got kind of perturbed by a passing star
and sent into an orbit that has a much shorter period than that of most of the Oort cloud objects,
which are way, way out there.
So you look at Sedna, and though it's got a very large orbit compared to
that of even Neptune or Pluto, it's still small compared to where we think most of the
incipient comets of the Oort cloud are located.
The Oort cloud is named after Jan Oort, who predicted its existence.
He was a Dutch astronomer who made many, many important discoveries.
So the Oort cloud and the Kuiper Belt is sort of way out there,
and they're in a deep freeze.
And it is thought that they consist of material left over from the formation of the solar system.
So when it was very young, there were all these little bits and pieces.
I'll talk about that more in a couple of lectures.
And then those bits and pieces came together to form planets.
But the things that didn't come together to form planets are the stuff that's left over in the
Kuiper Belt and in the Oort cloud.
So studies of comets can tell us about the origins of the solar system.
And moreover, spectra of the comets show that in some cases,
they have quite a few organic compounds in them.
So if they crashed into the Earth early in its history,
they may have brought some of the organic compounds
that later provided the seeds for life on Earth.
Even the water on Earth may have come largely from comets.
Surely there was some water on Earth originally,
but from outgassing during volcanic action and other effects,
during the time when the Earth was young and hot,
much of this water might have evaporated,
leaving the Earth fairly dry, some people think.
And it got wet again when a barrage of comets early in the history of the solar system
pummeled into the Earth and blessed it once again with liquid water.
That's a bit controversial.
We don't know how much of today's water came from comets,
but certainly at least some of it probably did.
Now there have been several spacecraft that have studied comets.
Most recently, the Stardust mission visited Comet Vilt II in 2004.
It was a spacecraft that was launched in 1999, visited the comet in 2004,
and it had this stuff called aerogel shown here,
which collected material, dust particles from the comet.
Now aerogel is very weird stuff.
In its lightest form, it's only about twice or three times the density of air.
Yet it is a solid.
I mean, if you touch it, it feels kind of like styrofoam.
There are various forms of aerogel.
Some of them are more like 10 times or 15 times the density of air.
But in its lightest form, it's the lightest solid,
the least dense solid known in the Guinness Book of World Records.
So it's weird stuff, and if you put it out on a platform,
like a little tennis racket here on the Stardust mission,
it can collect dust particles from the comet,
and those dust particles embed themselves in the aerogel,
but don't destroy themselves.
So if you then examine the aerogel,
you can see that dust particles from the comet entered the aerogel,
in this case from the right, deposited a lot of their energy
in the first few bits of aerogel,
but then gradually slowed down and reached a terminal point here.
And you can find these comet dust particles.
And in the case of the comet,
the dust particles or at least some of them are pretty large,
a couple of hundred micrometers in diameter,
and they can be picked out using automatic software.
And they're now being studied,
because this stuff just got back,
so we don't have really many results yet,
but they're being studied.
And here you can see in more detail where the dust particle entered,
caused a big splash initially,
and then slowed down and came to a rest or a terminus here at the end.
And in this case, it kind of looks like a heart.
The particular dust particle looks like a heart.
So people are now studying this dust from comets,
using the tracks and the debris left in the aerogel.
The Stardust mission also wanted to capture interstellar dust,
not associated necessarily with comets,
but just sort of floating around out there.
And a lot of that dust is very small,
smaller than a micron in size,
and the computer programs can't pick that out very easily on their own.
So the Stardust mission group or team
solicited the help of the general public
to look through samples or photographs of this aerogel
to track down these little missing particles.
So they first look at photographs,
and then they look at the actual samples of aerogel.
And 100,000 people or more have already signed up
to help with this scientific analysis process.
So you too can participate
if you go to the Stardust at Home website.
Another way of studying comets
is to actually collide something with them.
And in fact, on July 4th, 2005,
a projectile from a spacecraft known as Deep Impact
collided with a comet known as Comet Temple One.
And a 370 kilogram projectile
moving at 10 kilometers per second crashed into this comet,
excavating some material which could then be studied
by the cameras and the spectrometers
aboard the Deep Impact satellite.
So here is a picture of Comet Temple One,
the ninth periodic comet ever catalogued.
This is taken from the ground on July 4th.
And here is the trajectory of this comet.
It goes around the Sun like this in an eccentric orbit.
It goes out almost to Jupiter
and comes in to roughly around where Mars is.
And the launch of the spacecraft was in January 2005.
It reached the comet in July of 2005
and crashed this projectile into it.
Now leading up to July 4th,
the comet showed quite a lot of activity,
as can be seen here.
Hubble Space Telescope photographs show
that even without anything hitting the comet,
it was already going through outbursts of activity.
Sometimes there's more outgassing
than at other times because a chunk of ice
might break loose from the comet,
revealing the soft, volatile stuff
underneath the hard surface.
And so here, apparently, on June 14th,
something broke off of the comet,
a bunch of gas outgassed, and then it reflected sunlight.
So this amount of activity,
more than two weeks before the Deep Impact collision,
suggested that there would be a fair amount
of stuff ejected during the collision
because already the comet was pretty active
and pieces were breaking off.
Here is an artist's conception
of what the impactor might look like
right when it's nearing the comet.
And here is an animation showing the whole process.
So there is Deep Impact releasing a 370 kilogram projectile,
and the cameras on the Deep Impact spacecraft
turned in such a way as to watch the projectile
as it got close to the comet
and hit the comet with a speed of 10 kilometers per second.
This is like a bullet hitting a bullet
in the middle of empty space.
And so all this stuff got ejected,
and then the cameras and the spectrographs
on the Deep Impact spacecraft could study the ejected material
and determine its composition
and watch the trajectories of the ejected material
and thus determine the gravity and the mass of the comet
and all sorts of interesting things were found out
about the comet as a result of this mission.
The data are still being analyzed,
but some of the interesting early findings
are that indeed a lot of stuff was ejected
and from the trajectories of the ejected material
they figured out the mass of the comet
and knowing its size they figured out its density.
And its density is so low that in fact
it has to be at least 75% empty space.
It turns out it's very porous,
very much like a sponge that's kind of crumbly.
You can see what was visible
when the Hubble Space Telescope watched the impact.
Here's a few images that show, bam, that the thing hit
and then a lot of stuff got ejected
and it reflected sunlight so there was quite a flare.
And it's that ejected stuff that was watched in detail
by the cameras aboard the Deep Impact spacecraft
and they could then determine the trajectory
of the ejected material and figure out the mass
and the gravity and stuff like that.
They also found out that there was comparatively
little water on this comet,
but a fair amount of organic material,
various organic compounds.
So this particular one would have been a good comet
to hit the early Earth and help seed the Earth
with organic material from which life may have formed.
Well, we can also study the breakup of comets
in a natural way.
That is not hitting a projectile at them.
They break up on their own sometimes.
And here's a series of images of comet linear
which broke up in July of 2000
and formed some pieces that sort of, you know,
formed little miniature comets of their own.
You can see that in on July 7th
it looked considerably different
from the image on on July 5th.
And later on you can see those major pieces
broke up into other minor pieces.
And so, you know, comets are pretty weak.
They have the consistency of souffle.
You know, they're not very dense
and they break up just because of internal pressures
as gases start evaporating and stuff.
So you can study the innards of a comet
without necessarily crashing anything into it.
I'm not saying they shouldn't have
crashed Deep Impact into it.
It's just that there are other ways as well
that provide complementary information.
And here's a good one.
Comet Schwassmann-Wachmann 1973,
which broke up first into three or more major fragments.
There were some minor ones as well
that were also assigned letters.
And then if you look in detail at fragment B,
it broke up into a whole bunch of little tiny pieces like this.
Look at that.
And studies of those pieces
can show us the composition of the comet.
The spectra tell us what it's made of.
And that was a really great one.
Well, so comets vary quite a lot in their composition.
And you can tell by watching them as they break up.
The break up process also leads to a swarm of particles
out in space, which, if intersected by the earth
during its trajectory around the sun,
can cause a meteor shower.
So if you look at the sky,
occasionally you see sporadic meteors.
But occasionally, if you watch for a long period of time,
you will see that the meteors come from a particular area.
In this particular case,
this one is coming from the constellation Perseus.
And if you took a bunch of photographs
of a bunch of meteors,
they would all seem to be emerging
from the constellation Perseus.
It's hard to tell when you have just a few meteors.
But if you've got a bunch,
like here we're watching a view of the Leonid meteor shower
over the course of a few minutes.
And you can see a bunch of streaks
that all seem to come from about the same region,
in this particular case,
from a region in the constellation of Leo.
And here's a photograph taken during the 1999 Leonid meteor shower.
So here's Leo and the radiant,
where all these things were emerging from,
seem to come from this constellation, Leo.
And basically what's happening is that
meteor showers occur when Earth passes through
the debris of a long dead or still disintegrating comet.
So out here in most parts of its orbit,
the Earth only gets the occasional sporadic meteors.
But when it goes through the debris
along the trajectory of a dead or dying comet,
it encounters a lot more stuff.
And the radiant forms simply because all these guys
are coming in along parallel rays,
like rays of sunlight.
But the rays appear to diverge from a convergent point
for the same reason that railroad tracks or hallways appear to diverge
from a convergent point very, very far away.
It's just a perspective effect.
And we encountered it earlier
when we discussed the sun rays
or crepuscular rays early in this course.
So it's just like you're standing along some railroad tracks.
You see them sort of diverging out from a radiant
or a convergent point.
So it's the same sort of a thing.
Now in the case of the leonids,
the radiant is in the constellation Leo.
And you get a weak meteor shower
if you're going through a part of the orbit
that doesn't have all that much debris.
So in this animation, we illustrate the comet
that gives rise to the leonid meteor shower.
It's Comet Temple Tuttle.
And there it is, zooming along.
Now it hasn't completely broken up yet.
It's an intact comet,
but there's debris throughout its orbit.
And where the Earth enters the debris,
you get a meteor shower.
But it's a fairly weak meteor shower
because there's not all that much debris.
Okay?
See, every year around November 17th,
there's the leonid meteor shower.
But occasionally, every 33 years or so,
there's a meteor storm.
And that's because Comet Temple Tuttle
is only just now disintegrating.
There's debris all along the trajectory,
but most of the debris is still clumped
near where most of the comet's material is,
where the head is, where the nucleus is.
So it turns out every 33 years,
this clump of material is in about the same place
as the Earth is, where Earth intersects
the orbit of the comet.
And then you get a brief meteor storm
within the more extended shower.
And the last of these was in 1999,
and this photograph was taken
during the leonid meteor storm.
That was a pretty good storm,
but it wasn't as good as the storm in 1966,
a photograph of which is shown here,
where there were several meteors visible
at any one time in the sky.
It was just fantastic, you know?
So that's, you know, in 1966,
the Earth was passing through a major clump
in this disintegrating comet,
and it formed this fantastic storm.
And in 1833, apparently,
it went through a really big clump
of the disintegrating comet,
and people thought literally that the sky was falling.
Here's a woodcut from 1833 during the leonid storm.
Imagine if you were around back then,
you'd think that doom is upon you.
All these things are falling from the sky.
Ah, you know, we're about to get killed, you know?
Well, okay, so people were naturally afraid
of comets for those reasons, you know, meteor showers.
They all seemed to be associated.
In general, comets are nothing to worry about.
I mean, you have to beware of fraud.
Like in 1910, people said,
oh, there's cyanide in the tail of a comet,
and Earth is gonna pass through the tail of Halley's Comet.
So here, I'm gonna sell all these potions to people
that will protect them from the cyanide.
You know, there's fraud.
You have to watch out about the fraud.
And in some cases, it's definitely very dangerous
if you get all worked up about something
that has no real physical basis.
And an example is given in 1997,
when Comet Hale-Bopp came around,
and the Heaven's Gate cult leader said that
there's a UFO following Comet Hale-Bopp,
and it's gonna take all of us, Heaven's Gate people,
to paradise.
But to get to paradise, their leaders said,
you have to first commit suicide, all right?
So all these members of the cult committed suicide
as a means to get to paradise.
And there were all these headlines,
house of horror, cult leader preached space rides to Heaven.
You know, there were other good headlines about the comet,
the great comet in Newsweek.
But you have to watch out and not get swayed
by charismatic leaders that really don't know
what they're talking about.
Most comets and most meteoroids and asteroids
are nothing to be afraid of.
Okay, don't believe the things that you might read.
However, as we will see in the next lecture,
occasionally there are meteoroids or comets
that have Earth's name written on them.
And those are the ones that we do have to be afraid of,
because they could wipe out our existence
if we're not careful.
