I've been discussing the nomads of the solar system, comets, asteroids, meteoroids. Most
of them just go flying around posing no threat to our existence. But they have in the past
occasionally caused huge destruction on Earth, and in fact even at least one mass extinction.
So if a big one of these things hits, it can be very, very bad news for us. Not because
the whole Earth will get broken apart, as in this cartoon from the 19th century. That's
not going to happen. I mean, you'd need a really massive object hitting us really hard
to cause the Earth to break apart. That's not going to happen. But the crater that forms
in the dust thrown into the atmosphere, and the fires that result, and everything else
can cause much of life on Earth to be extinguished. So you have to watch out, and I'd like to
study these catastrophic collisions in this lecture. Some groups of asteroids, namely the
Apollo asteroids, or the best known, have orbits that cross that of the Earth. So you
can see here the one after which the family is named, Apollo itself, crossing the Earth's
orbit. And here's Icarus that crosses Earth's orbit as well, and gets actually quite close
to the Sun. Now there's quite a few of these. Here are several more. And in fact, about
2,000 relatively large Apollo asteroids are known. By relatively large, I mean greater
than about 100 meters in diameter. So these things can be pretty dangerous, and they cross
Earth's orbit. And usually the asteroid is not at the location of the Earth where the
paths cross, but occasionally the two bodies are at the same place at the same time, and
a great collision can occur. Indeed, we know that collisions have happened. There's evidence
for them on the face of the Earth. Here's the famous Beringer meteor crater in Arizona.
It's about a kilometer in diameter, and is thought to have been formed by the impact
of an iron-rich meteorite, perhaps only 50 meters in diameter. So it's 20 times wider
than the thing that hit the Arizona desert about 50,000 years ago. And it's so well
preserved because there's not much erosion in Arizona in the desert where this thing
landed. There's another event, the Tunguska event in 1908 in Siberia, where we think that
an object broke up in the atmosphere of the Earth before actually hitting the surface
of the Earth. But it leveled about 2,000 square kilometers of forest in Siberia. And
here you can see some of the remains of the forest a couple of decades after the impact
in 1908. There was a tremendous explosion, equivalent to something like 15 megatons of
trinitrotoluene, TNT. That's an explosive, and measuring explosions in terms of megatons
of TNT is a common way of doing it. For example, the biggest bombs ever exploded on Earth are
about 60 megatons of TNT. And this one was 15. So this was a quarter of an H bomb. I
mean, it was no laughing matter if you had been there. Now we know from studies of the
moon that collisions have occurred over all of its past history, mostly when it was young,
mostly in the first few hundred millions of years. And here is a bunch of preserved craters
on the surface of the moon, some of which are pretty young, most of which are old. And
you can see the old ones on the moon because there's essentially no erosion. There's no
rain, there's no wind, there's no rivers. There are some erosional processes like craters
can be destroyed by the impact of additional things that hit them, or by the dust from
other impacts that settles upon them. But basically other than that, the craters pretty
much live forever. On the Earth, there must have been just as much cratering over Earth's
history as there was on the moon, but there's a lot of erosion, and there's subduction of
continents underneath, under other plates and things like that. And so most of the craters
have been destroyed. They get destroyed quite quickly. Despite all of the erosion, we know
of about 180 craters on Earth that have still survived. You can tell that they're there.
And here's an example of one that now is filled in by water. You can see this ring of water
that basically fills a giant crater up in Canada. There are many other examples as well.
Now if you look at when a rock, a meteorite, hits the ground, you might think, well, alright,
it'll produce a crater only the size of the rock itself. But as I said earlier, in fact,
the crater ends up being much, much bigger. And the reason for that is that the rock hits
and it stops on a dime. So all of the energy of motion, all of the so-called kinetic energy
gets absorbed into the material. The material right around the rock gets vaporized, but
a lot of the material right around the rock at greater distances feels this impact, feels
the energy of the impact, and gets excavated. So the excavated amount is much larger than
the size of the rock itself. And here we can see a little animation that I played when
we studied cratering on the moon. I'm going to let a crater form as a result of a rock
hitting the moon. There's one. Boom. It formed. Now let's suppose I make a bigger rock. Well,
it hits the moon and it creates a bigger crater. In all cases, the crater is much bigger than
the size of the thing that hit. Because all of this energy was deposited in a very short
time, causing material surrounding the impact site to get all energized from all this energy
and eject it outwards. So all these ejecta come flying out. And if you had a one kilometer
sized projectile hitting the earth, and you had a city at ground zero, it wouldn't just
destroy directly the central kilometer of that city. It might be 10 or 20 kilometers
in diameter. That is, the crater that forms might be 10 or 20 kilometers in diameter.
And so the whole city, Los Angeles or New York, would be ground zero for this thing
coming in. Plus, of course, there's all the surrounding regions, which I'll talk about
in a few minutes. But anyway, it's a big, big crater that forms. Now, over 800 near-earth
asteroids are known whose size is greater than one kilometer. So these could cause huge
destruction on earth. We think we actually know of most near-earth asteroids of that
size. We think there's only about 1,100 in total, and we know about 800 of them. Well,
we expect one collision with earth every million years or so of one of these big guys. And
the explosion energy would be something like 100,000 to a million megatons of TNT. Now,
that's like several thousand H bombs going off all at the same time. You don't want several
thousand H bombs going off all at the same time in the same place. It is not good news.
This would cause major effects, major damage to world agriculture and commerce and everything
else. I mean, it would be a huge disruption, obviously. It's like a huge nuclear war. Well,
we know about the 800 of the 1,100 kilometer, one kilometer-sized objects out there. Maybe
the chances that they'll hit are pretty low. Once in a million years is not that high.
You might not be too worried. But in the long run, we've got to be worried. We've got to
do something about the ones that are heading our way, and I'll have more to say about that
later. But it's important to remember that there's a lot more smaller ones. It's estimated
that there are over 100,000 near-Earth asteroids whose diameter is greater than about 100 meters.
So there's a lot more little ones. There are big ones. And you expect a collision of one
of these guys with the Earth every, say, 10,000 years or so, and that would produce an explosion
of 100 to 1,000 megatons of TNT. So that's like several or a dozen H bombs going off.
Again, not a good thing. I mean, even one nuclear weapon can ruin your whole day, right?
So imagine several or a dozen of them. And don't worry that there's no radioactivity.
So what? Everything else will kill you, okay? So, you know, it's, you might say, oh, they're
not dangerous because they're not radioactive. Well, forget it, man. The kinetic energy is
what's going to kill you and everything else, you know? And small blasts like the one that
occurred in Siberia, the Tunguska event of 1908, happen roughly every 1,000 years or
maybe even every few hundred years. So this is something to worry about. Now, it turns
out that statistically, averaged over something like 100 million years, you are actually about
as likely to die from a cosmic collision as you are from, say, an airplane crash or a flood
or a tornado, you know, fairly common disasters on Earth like this that you read about every
year in the newspapers. Average over 100 million years, they only produce as much death and
destruction as these cosmic impacts. And the reason is that when a big one hits, bigger
than about 10 kilometers in diameter or so, it can wipe out all of humanity. Now, this
happens only roughly every 100 million years or so. The 10 kilometer sized objects are
very rare. But there's enough of them that roughly every 100 million years, and it's
not periodic, it's a random kind of a thing, one will hit. And it causes so much destruction
that unless we do something about it, everyone dies. Okay, everyone dies, the probable end
of human civilization. So let's do a simple order of magnitude calculation, all right?
If 6 billion people die every 100 million years when one of these 10 kilometer sized
comets or asteroids hits us, all right? Well, that's equivalent to, say, airplane crashes
where 60 people might die every year for 100 million years. That total is 6 billion people.
So you either do it at 60 people per year for 100 million years, that's 6 billion people,
or you do it all at once, 6 billion people die when one of these giant things hits us.
So it's the same numbers remarkably enough, you know, kind of a, I don't know if that's
a sobering thought, I mean, makes you feel good about airplane crashes or bad about them,
but whatever, you know? All right, so let's consider one of these giant objects bigger
than 10 kilometers in diameter. It would produce an energy or release an energy equivalent
to something like 100 million to a billion megatons of TNT. So that's a lot of bombs,
okay? Clearly such an impact would devastate the surrounding region about a thousand kilometers
in radius or so, okay? And the rest of the earth would essentially be like an oven set
to broil because when one of these things crashes into the earth and releases all this
energy and there are all these ejecta flying through the atmosphere and they're rubbing
against the air and all that, there's a heating effect which disperses itself throughout the
entire earth. So no part of the earth is safe. I mean, the people at ground zero in a sensor
are the lucky ones, you know, they don't know what hit them, they died instantly and that's
it. It's the rest of us that have to worry then about this earth, you know, broiling
us to death, you know? Fires get lit all over the place, right? There's huge wide wildfires
everywhere. And then after that's over, you get what's called impact winter. So much dust
can get thrown up into the atmosphere as a result of one of these collisions that it
blocks off the sunlight and things get cold, temperatures get cold down here on the surface
and that can disrupt the growth of vegetation and then the herbivores die out and the carnivores
die out and it's a whole chain reaction, okay? Beyond that then, there's all this stuff that's
been dumped into the atmosphere, it's going to come down in the form of acid rain. There
are all these carbonates and stuff, carbon dioxide goes up into the air, forms carbonic
acid when it combines with water, the acid rain comes down, starts eating away at you
and all that. And then there's all this carbon dioxide in the atmosphere which for a few
centuries can cause a huge elevated greenhouse effect that can disrupt climate over a few
century timescale or something. So there are many different timescales involved here and
all of them lead to some destruction here on earth and unless we plan for such an event
it's unlikely that we could survive because this is a catastrophic very quick change in
our climate and everything else. It's not a slow kind of a thing like global warming
which we might be able to do something about, okay? So the realization of all this led to
some legitimate headlines here on Newsweek, Doomsday Science, new theories about comets,
asteroids and how the world might end. This is not just speculation here, it could happen,
all right? These mass extinctions have occurred. Now most of them probably occurred for other
reasons, climate change or rampant volcanism on earth or whatever. But in some cases they
may have been produced by these collisions. And some scientists even think that the collisions
have been periodic. Every 30 or 60 or 100 million years something like that, there's a big collision
and life on earth gets destroyed or at least much of it does. I would say that the evidence
for periodic impacts of large objects is not very strong. Though there is quite intriguing
evidence for a 62 million year periodicity in mass extinctions regardless of their physical
cause. And the last extinction that was really large that we know of, the Cretaceous tertiary
extinction 65 million years ago, probably was precipitated by a collision of this sort.
Here's the idea, 65 million years ago, a comet larger than 10 kilometers in diameter hit
the earth, caused this sequence of events that I was just talking about and led most
famously to the extinction of the dinosaurs. They all kind of died out. But it turns out
that it's not just the dinosaurs who were alive then and watching this thing. This is
not a true painting or photograph from that era. No one was around back then, but it's
kind of what the dinosaur might have seen. And the dinosaur didn't like what he or she
or it saw. Well, okay, all the little creatures didn't like it either. And there are lots
of little creatures. And in particular, you can see all sorts of things called foraminifera,
these little objects, these little creatures made out of calcium carbonates for their shells
that form in the oceans from the carbonic acid acting on various substances. And a lot
of them died suddenly 65 million years ago, along with ferns and other living things.
There's this abrupt layer where two thirds of all living species on earth died quite
suddenly. And it's very, very distinct time. And you could argue, well, dinosaur bones
are big. You can't tell exactly what layer of the geologic strata they're in, you know,
what time in the past does that correspond to. But little creatures are small and you
can tell from the strata pretty much exactly when this event happened. And it was very,
very sudden. Now, it turns out that if you look at the strata back from that era 65 million
years ago, you find a large abundance of the element iridium. You might say, why iridium?
Why is that strange? Well, it turns out iridium loves iron. And when the earth was young and
molten, the iridium latched onto the iron and sank to the middle of the earth in this
process of differentiation, which I already discussed. So the surface layers of the earth
are relatively deficient in iridium. But if a comet or asteroid comes crashing into
the earth and disperses its material over the surface of the earth, there will be a
thin layer with an anomalously high concentration of iridium. Louis Alvarez, Walter Alvarez,
Frank Asaro and Helen Michael studied strata of the earth and found a layer rich in iron
and in iridium corresponding right to the time of the Cretaceous tertiary extinction.
It's amazing. If you look at the layers of strata that they studied, here are old strata.
They're all these foraminifera of various species. Above them, there's a bunch of foraminifera
and other plankton-like objects of other kinds of species. Between them, there's this layer
of clay, which is rich in iridium. So it's as though something hit the earth, killed
all the old species of foramins, then deposited this layer of silt as the stuff gradually
came through the atmosphere and settled on the earth. Then new species arose and died,
gradually informed the deposits above the iridium-rich layer of silt. It all hangs together. And
more recently, the probable impact site of this comet was found off the coast of the
Yucatan Peninsula. It's called the Chicksalube crater, and it's now covered by something
like 500 meters of sediment. So it's subterranean, but you can tell that it's there through
measurements of the local gravity. You can tell that there's a deformation there.
And there's other evidence of a calamity 65 million years ago. The Gulf Coast shows
evidence for huge tsunamis, tidal waves, around that time. And there are vast deposits
of charcoal from forest fires at around that time. So the whole earth went through something
catastrophic 65 million years ago. The crater, the Chicksalube crater has been dated, you
know what its age is? 65 million years. And it's 200 kilometers in diameter, in other
words, comparable to what would have been produced by a comet hitting the earth with
a diameter of 10 or 20 kilometers. It depends a little bit on the composition of this stuff.
An iron-rich thing produces a bigger crater than a comet having the consistency of souffle.
But the point is that there's a crater there with the right age and about the right size.
And there's all this other evidence. Well, some have argued that the dinosaurs were
on their way out anyway because of climate change or whatever. Fine, okay, let the dinosaurs
die for some other reason. I don't care. All these other little creatures, two-thirds
of which died quite suddenly, were not on their way out. And so the evidence of a very
rapid mass extinction is indeed very, very strong. Now, regardless of whether the dinosaurs
themselves died as a result of this process, it is a very real process, these collisions.
We know they occur. And excellent evidence was given in 1994 when a comet discovered
by David Levy, Carolyn Shoemaker, and Eugene Shoemaker crashed into Jupiter, releasing
tremendous amounts of energy. This was the ninth comet found by this team. It's called
Comet Shoemaker-Levy-9. And it was a very interesting comet because in 1992 it passed
fairly close to Jupiter, was torn apart into many pieces by the tidal forces of Jupiter.
And then in the next time around, it was actually orbiting Jupiter by this point because Jupiter
had captured it in an orbit around itself some decades earlier. But anyway, in 1992
it passed close to Jupiter, got torn apart, and then the next passage near Jupiter, 1994,
led to a collision course. So over the course of maybe a week, July 16th through 22nd, a
bunch of fragments hit Jupiter. Here's a Hubble Space Telescope picture of the 20-some-odd
fragments of Comet Shoemaker-Levy-9 after it was torn apart in 1992 by Jupiter's tidal
forces. They're named in order, fragments A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, and so on. Some letters
are missing here, some fragments broke up into two later on, like Q1 and Q2. Anyway,
there are all these fragments, and they hit Jupiter. Now here's an artist's impression
of what they would have looked like. All these little tiny comets, the sun's over here some
worth it, so they're all forming tails pointing away from the sun, and they hit Jupiter. And
an animation of what happened is shown here. Jupiter is rotating, we're now on its dark
side. Here are these ghostly comets coming in, oh man, oh yikes. Here they are, whoa.
On a collision course with Jupiter. Oh wow, look at that, look at that, they're going
to hit the night side, and boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. Over the course of a week, there
were 20-some-odd booms. And the energy was fantastic indeed, this whole thing so gripped
the public that here's the cover of Time Magazine, Cosmic Crash. A shattered comet is about to
hit Jupiter, creating the biggest explosion ever witnessed in the solar system. Could
it happen here on Earth? Yes, dot, dot, dot. The cover came out before the event occurred,
but the predictions of astronomers were validated. The amounts of energy released were truly
huge. Over the course of the week, something like 40 million megatons TNT equivalent of
energy was released. The biggest chunks had 6 million megatons each. That is like 100,000
H-bombs for the biggest single chunks. You want a 100,000 H-bombs to hit you in the head?
I don't think so, okay? Look at the energy released, which you can see with infrared
photographs. Here's an infrared photograph of Jupiter, and that is one of the impacts.
And here's a series of frames showing a region of Jupiter before the impact. Then here's
the impact beginning. There it is in full swing, and then it kind of dies out. There's
Jupiter's great red spot. And here's an animation corresponding to that sequence. The bright
thing on the right here is the moon Io. You can see, boom, it hit and released a tremendous
amount of energy. And from that energy, you can calculate really how much total energy
was released by all 20 of these fragments hitting Jupiter. Now, here's a Hubble image
of the site of the impact of the G fragment, okay? So it produced this spot on Jupiter,
actually affectionately known as the G spot. And it shows stuff that was excavated from
beneath Jupiter's visible surface. This thing hit, and it excavated stuff out, and it deposited
that stuff on the surface of Jupiter. And remember, Jupiter is about 11 times the size
of the Earth. So this region over which stuff was deposited is about the size of the Earth,
showing that stuff can spread out over an area the size of a small planet. So it's really
serious business. Scientifically, this spot and the other spots were very interesting
because you could study the development of the atmosphere and the currents and things
like that on Jupiter by watching how the shape of this debris changed with time, from July
18th to the 23rd to the 30th to August 24th. You could see the spot spreads apart and becomes
distorted, and that allows people to study the atmospheric currents and the circulation
in Jupiter. Moreover, spectra of the G spot showed molecular sulfur and carbon disulfide
and ammonia and other molecules that were excavated from underneath Jupiter's surface.
So this provided us with a chance of studying Jupiter's interior without having to ourselves
send a physical probe there. So it was really a fantastic event, but it alerted astronomers,
and more importantly, the general public and politicians to the fact that we do need to
worry about this. So astronomers are now funded to try to find all the possible objects that
might hit the Earth someday. And I've already mentioned the Palomar 1.2 meter Ocean Schmidt
telescope with which Michael Brown and his colleagues are finding big Kuiper Belt objects.
Well with the wide array of CCDs on the camera of that telescope covering a big area of the
sky in one picture, astronomers can search for objects that might have trajectories that
cross that of the Earth. And here is a comet, comet NEET, found by one of these studies,
the Near Earth Asteroid Tracking Project or NEET it's called. So here's one of the comets
found by NEET. It's kind of a pretty comet, though it wasn't very bright. The pace of
discovery of Earth crossing asteroids is rapidly increasing. The ones above one kilometer or
so, as I said, have been mostly found already. Here's a graph of the number of known Near Earth
objects versus year. And the large ones are defined to be those bigger than one kilometer
in size. And you can see that through the past decade, we found a lot of them, but the pace
of discovery seems to be leveling off. On the other hand, for the ones that are smaller
than one kilometer, our discovery is rapidly rising. And indeed, there may be a hundred
thousand objects bigger than 100 meters across. And those, though they won't lead to a mass
extinction, will nevertheless lead to huge disruption in commerce, industry, agriculture,
you name it, and you know, could even launch a nuclear war if some country got hit by one
of these things and thought that another country had attacked them, right? It's a mistake,
right? It's a mistake. Don't shoot, right? But you don't know what hit you, and they
might just assume that some other country, the U.S. or whatever, pushed the red button.
Now we don't know of any killer asteroids with Earth's name written on them at this
time. So don't believe what you see sometimes in the tabloids. Satan's face photographed
on giant asteroid. Top secret NASA photo. Celestial Rock is 20 miles wide, and it's
on a collision course with Earth. Oh, come on. Okay, we don't know of any such things.
Okay, we're looking, but we don't know. And I think we're pretty safe for the next few
years, okay? Don't believe, and well, don't get worked up by predictions made by people
who really don't have the expertise. We don't have the proper training in celestial mechanics
and all that. For example, in May of 2006, one fellow made the prediction that Kammet
Schwarzman-Wachmann, which I showed in the previous lecture and is shown again here right
now, would crash into the Earth on May 25th of 2006. And he even said that aliens were
directing this comet toward us because they were unhappy with our nuclear policy and what
we're doing in Iran and Iraq and stuff. Here's this thing that's all breaking up, and supposedly
one of these fragments was going to hit us, okay? Well, it didn't happen, okay? And I was
on some radio shows discussing why it wouldn't happen, and indeed it didn't happen. So maybe
the aliens said that, oh, well, you know, maybe they were pleased with what our government
did. I don't know. I mean, you can always make up excuses, but at least this guy made
a specific prediction and he could be shown to be wrong. So don't get worked up. There
have been some close calls. For example, on July 3rd, 2006, an Apollo asteroid named 2004
XP-14, for the day that it was discovered, came within 270,000 miles of Earth. That's
only 1.1 times the moon's distance. And it was discovered by the Lincoln Lab Near Earth
Asteroid Research Project. And you can see its trajectory occasionally takes it very
close to that of Earth. And indeed, 1.1 lunar distances is a close call. But, you know, had
that thing hit, it would have caused massive destruction. But we knew that it wouldn't
hit, okay? You know, there was no chance it would hit. So don't get too worked up. There
was another close call when Tutatis, a well-known asteroid, 4.6 kilometers long, you can see
it's kind of oblong shaped here, came within four lunar distances in 2004. So again, that
was a close call and you can see the trajectory. But there was no reason to be alarmed because
we knew that it would miss. There was just no chance it would hit. So don't worry about
the close calls, all right? Some day it might happen. And astronomers searching for objects
like this may warn people that it's going to happen. And if they find the objects far
enough in advance, it is possible that we could send a spacecraft there that would deflect
it. You don't have to blow it up. Don't believe what you see in some of these movies where
you have to blow up the whole thing that's the size of Texas or something. You know,
more likely than not, it's only 100 meters or a kilometer in diameter and you just have
to deflect it. And if we know about these things far enough in advance, we may be able
to do something about it. And I'm convinced that if there is a celestial threat of this
kind, the world will come together and unify against this greater threat and forget about
the minor squabbles and fights that we're having amongst ourselves all the time. Maybe,
maybe what we really need is a wake up call to get all of us to unify behind a common
cause, that is saving all of humanity rather than fighting amongst ourselves all the time.
