Having completed our inventory of the solar system,
I now address other planetary systems and the search for life elsewhere in the universe.
The next six lectures will constitute the second unit in the second major part of this course, the contents of the universe.
So we'll look at our planetary system, the formation of it, and other planetary systems and looking for sort of life elsewhere.
Now in this particular lecture, I will discuss the formation model not only for our solar system but for others as well.
We think that most planetary systems formed in about the same way.
And although the word solar system is technically reserved for our own solar system, people loosely call other planetary systems solar systems as well.
People will probably use the words interchangeably, don't get confused in what I'm talking about.
If you look at our solar system, it has these planets as we've discussed with some nomads, debris floating around in between them.
And a schematic of it shown here illustrates two of the main physical characteristics of the solar system.
First of all, all of the planets orbit the sun in the same direction.
And most of them rotate about their rotation axes in that same direction and with an axis that's roughly perpendicular to the plane of the solar system.
I mean, they're a little bit off sometimes, like Earth is at 23 and a half degrees, but that's roughly perpendicular.
Some are considerably off, such as Uranus, but we discussed how that's an odd ball.
So they all go in the same direction around the sun and they rotate about their axes in the same direction and so too does the sun.
It goes around its axis in that same direction as well.
Now that's a top view, a face on view.
A side view looks something like this.
The solar system looks like a thin disk and most of the planets are nearly in the same plane.
They're a little bit tilted relative to one another.
Pluto is tilted by 17 degrees, but as we've seen, it's a Kuiper Belt object.
It's not a true planet.
So it's a thin disk and it's spinning, a spinning thin disk.
And that suggests that it came from some sort of a spinning structure that may have contracted and formed these regions where, through some process, material accumulated into planets.
And this idea of the basic formation of the solar system goes all the way back to the 18th century.
Immanuel Kant and Pierre Simon de Laplace thought about this and had this basic nebular hypothesis in mind when they were trying to explain the overall physical characteristics of our solar system.
We've been trying to figure out the details ever since and the details are thorny and sticky.
We don't really understand the formation of stars and planets all that well yet, but we've come a long way, as I'll show you, since the times of Kant and Laplace.
So in this nebular hypothesis, you initially have a gravitationally contracting, slowly spinning cloud of gas and dust.
Now by dust, I mean fine little particles, just what you think of when you look at a dust blowing over a desert or something.
There are some particles that formed somehow in the history of the universe.
We think that they form in the atmospheres of dying stars. I'll discuss that later.
But in any case, we see that dust exists in our galaxy and we see that gas exists.
And occasionally there are regions that are denser than average.
So the average in our galaxy might be one particle per cubic centimeter.
But if you have 10 or 100 or 1000 over a big enough region,
that region can become gravitationally unstable and start collapsing.
Now if that region had even a little bit of rotation to begin with,
and that can easily be achieved through passage of nearby stars, you know, a cloud starts rotating a little bit or whatever,
anyway if you had even a little bit of initial rotation, as this cloud collapses, the spin, the rate of rotation increases.
And that's because there's a very deep physical principle known as the conservation of angular momentum.
Now angular momentum is sort of a measure of the total amount of spin that an object or a system has.
It's a product of the rate of spin, the speed, the amount of material, the mass, and its overall extent, its size.
So if you have a given amount of material and it is collapsing to form a smaller structure, its size is getting smaller,
the mass is remaining the same, so to make the product of spin rate, mass, and size a constant, the spin rate has to increase.
So contracting objects spin faster.
And a good example is when an ice dancer brings in her arms.
Here Michelle Kwan is spinning faster as she brings in her arms because more of her mass is concentrated closer in to the axis of rotation,
and so the spin rate has to increase in order to keep the total spin, the angular momentum, constant.
So the contracting cloud in a similar way spins faster with time.
Now as you can also see here, things that are spinning tend to get flung out.
Look at her skirt, it's flung out like this.
If I were to rapidly whirl around and I had long hair, it would go out.
Or if I were to hold a rope and spin around very quickly, the rope would tend to be flung out.
Spinning objects tend to get flung out or away from the axis of spin, of rotation.
And that's because they are in a rotating or spinning frame of reference.
And in such a frame, an object, a particle feels what's called the centrifugal force.
It's a fictitious force.
It's not one of the fundamental forces like gravity or electromagnetism or the forces that hold the nuclei of atoms together.
It's a force that's a manifestation of the rotating frame of reference.
And you feel it when, for example, you're in a car and you turn a corner very rapidly, you're flung out to the side.
We've all felt it.
Or you go to these amusement parks where you have these rotating cylinders and you're flattened against the cylinder.
And it's spinning really rapidly and then it turns this way or something like that.
And you know that you hope, right?
Or you hope that the thing doesn't stop spinning because you know what will happen if it stops spinning.
You'll fall.
But as long as it's spinning, we're all used to this.
We know that there's this force that pushes us out to the side.
So spinning objects feel this centrifugal force.
And so what happens when you have a contracting cloud of gas is that along the plane of rotation,
you could call it the equatorial plane if you want, particles feel more and more of the centrifugal force as they come in as a result of the force of gravity.
So they're being, at some point, they're held back.
They can't fall in anymore because the centrifugal force outward balances the gravity trying to pull them in.
So they get kind of held back, all right?
They don't go all the way in because they're spinning and they feel this force.
On the other hand, a particle along the axis of rotation doesn't have any distance from the spin axis.
So the total amount of angular momentum is zero in that case.
And it doesn't feel a centrifugal force.
And so it falls right straight down, OK?
So a more general particle falling in at an angle like this, well, that can be thought of as a motion this way along the plane of the disk.
And that feels the centrifugal force plus a motion perpendicular to the disk.
And that doesn't feel the centrifugal force.
So a general diagonal motion is a combination of these two motions, one of which is subject to the centrifugal force and the other is not.
So what happens is particles coming in along an angle like this fall toward the rotation plane,
but also come in to a certain distance until the centrifugal force that they feel balances the gravitational force inward.
But you can see that what's happening is a general flattening of this spinning cloud.
That's the important point.
Contraction plus conservation of angular momentum leads to this flattening of the spinning cloud.
All right.
Well, eventually this disk forms where all the particles are balanced in that the gravity that they feel inward is balanced by the centrifugal force outward.
And the disk is thin.
And in the center, a whole bunch of material accumulates.
And that presumably is where the sun forms, OK?
So the sun forms in the middle.
And then there's this disk.
And by some process, the planets coalesce in the disk.
But you can naturally explain the flatness of the solar system using this nebular hypothesis.
So that's the idea.
Let's see if we can find any evidence for it in the universe.
So here we see the Orion Nebula.
It's in the sword of Orion.
It's an example of a giant cloud of gas and dust.
And we see many such nebulae in our galaxy and in other galaxies.
And as I said in lecture six, the colors are enhanced here because when you're looking at faint objects, your rods and cones change in their response compared to when you have a lot of light.
And in particular, you can't distinguish colors very well when the level of light is low.
But in a photograph, you can see the colors.
And they're due to various atoms glowing as a result of being heated by the stars inside.
So you have these giant contracting clouds of gas and dust.
And what happens is that during the contraction, the cloud can fragment into a bunch of smaller units that are denser than average.
And each of these little units contracts and forms a spinning disk with a central region where a star can form.
So in fact, we expect these clouds to produce clusters of stars and planetary systems, not just a single star all alone.
In each of these little clumps, as the clump contracts, the temperature and the pressure rise,
because the energy of motion of these little bits of dust and the atoms and stuff gets converted into general random motions.
You know, when things hit each other and they've got some general bulk motion, they hit each other, they heat up.
And that systematic motion inwards starts turning into a random motion.
Well, random motions of particles is what we mean by heat, by temperature, by hot gases that have a lot of motions inside them,
have a lot of these random thermal energy.
And that energy and all those motions are associated with pressure, pressure pushing outward.
So as this thing is falling in, the pressure is gradually rising and eventually the pressure can balance the gravitational force pulling in.
And if that balance is achieved at a high enough temperature in the very middle, then nuclear reactions can start and you have a full-fledged star.
And I'll talk about stars later on in this course.
But they're formed as a result of this contracting cloud of gas where the temperature and the pressure rise in the center and eventually nuclear reactions can start.
So here's the central part of the Orion Nebula where you can actually see a cluster of young stars that formed as a result of this gravitational contraction.
And here's a cluster of stars where the gas has been cleared away.
Most got used up and the rest got blown away by the analog of the solar wind that all stars or most stars have.
And so indeed this grouping of stars presumably formed from a giant nebula sometime in the last few hundred million to a billion years.
Well, it's hard to see this process in detail at optical wavelengths because the gas and dust become opaque if they're sufficiently dense.
So in fact, you can see here a very famous Hubble Space Telescope picture called the Pillars of Creation.
There's general nebulosity all over the place, but then there are these regions where the gas and dust are particularly thick and they become opaque to visible light.
So you can see these opaque regions in many nebulae.
Here's a famous one called the Trifid Nebula and here are these particularly dense dusty regions that are opaque to optical radiation.
Here's another one known as the Keyhole Nebula.
There's nebulosity all over the place and this nebulosity is illuminated by that bright star there, but here the gas and dust are too thick to see through.
And so it's hard to see this process of star formation.
Here's another example where the dust and the gas are very thick and you can't see into the inside very well.
Well, if you look instead at infrared wavelengths, you can see the light much more easily from these newly formed or still forming stars.
And that's because infrared radiation and also radio penetrates gas and dust much more easily than optical radiation does.
For example, you can hear your radio station on a foggy day even though you might not be able to see very far with visible light, right?
So radio and infrared are a good way to peer down into these central star forming regions.
And here's a comparison of the central part of the Orion Nebula viewed with the Hubble Space Telescope at both optical wavelengths and infrared.
You can see a lot more faint stars deep in the heart of this nebula in the infrared than you can in the optical.
And here's an animation showing a view as you are zooming down into the Orion Nebula, getting ever closer all the way down to the so-called trapezium of stars that make the whole thing glow a lot in the surrounding region where there are fainter stars.
And the interesting thing here is that at the end, you see a star that seemed to have debris still around it.
Here's several examples of such debris around newly formed or still forming stars.
This debris often has a disk-like shape, and these are called, indeed, protoplanetary disks or proplids for short.
Many, many young stars deep in the heart of these nebulae show debris disks surrounding them.
Well, gosh, that's just what we needed in the nebular hypothesis, right, for planetary formation.
You wanted not only the stars to form, you wanted flat debris disks around them as well from which planets could then form.
So here's an artist's conception of what one of these proplids might look like if viewed up close.
There's the star in the middle, but in the disk itself, there are regions of concentration where matter is beginning to accumulate, and that is what could form planets.
Eventually, the remaining debris gets blown away, and you get planets in a disk-like structure with relatively little between them.
Still, a few nomads and asteroids and meteoroids wandering around, but not much gas and dust remain.
And that's because stars have, especially early in their lives, the analog of the solar wind, a stream of charged particles pushing out, being ejected from the stars.
And in fact, here you can see a nice Soho movie of the sun with two comets that just went streaming behind it.
And you can see these coronal mass ejections and other outbursts, which contribute to this solar wind of charged particles, electrons and protons and nuclei of other atoms,
literally being ejected from the sun and pushing out on whatever is surrounding them.
And that sweeps the area clean of whatever debris remained after the planets formed.
Now, these coronal mass ejections in the solar wind are enhanced if the young star is spinning rapidly.
And indeed, when we look at young stars, we do see that they're spinning rapidly.
They have a lot of angular momentum. They later get rid of it as part of this solar wind.
But initially, they're spinning rapidly, and so they clear away the remaining material from which that planetary system was born.
Okay, so we see lots of debris disks around newly formed or still forming stars.
Interestingly, some of these debris disks even show clumps or evidence of the beginning of clumping.
They're not uniform. They're no homogeneous throughout. There's a clump. There's a clump. There's a clump.
Here are lots of clumps in one of these debris disks, and you can see for comparison the size of Pluto's orbit in our own solar system.
It's conceivable that planets have already formed in this inner region and have cleared out any debris that remained after the solar wind cleared it out.
And out here might be something analogous to the Kuiper Belt, or maybe this is a big planet forming. Who knows?
I mean, not all planetary systems will be the same way, and maybe some of them have a big planet at a distance from the star,
where in our own solar system there was only Pluto and the Kuiper Belt.
In any case, there are many such disks where you can see the clumps.
And here's one seen edge on, where you have the star forming in there, and then this is an edge on disk,
and viewing it from the side like this, you can see that there's several major clumps.
Photographs like this led to big headlines in Newsweek and other magazines, the birth of planets.
Scientists discover new solar systems and rethink the odds of life beyond Earth.
And indeed, this particular artist's conception was quite realistic because you've got these planets here surrounding the star
and a Kuiper Belt-like region of debris left over at bigger distances.
Now we have even better photographs of these Kuiper Belt-like debris disks.
Here's a couple of them, one viewed face on with the Hubble Space Telescope, and one viewed edge on.
And these big black circles are regions where bright stars were masked out of the photograph,
so as to not overwhelm you with the bright light.
These disks are very faint and hard to see.
Here's some beautiful ones, one around the star AU Microscopii, and this is an edge on disk,
and you can see the size of Neptune's orbit in our solar system for comparison.
And here's a face on disk around the star HD107146.
I'm not going to make you memorize the names of these objects, okay?
These are just random stars around which disks have been found, but they're just beautiful.
And you can even see them pretty well from the ground if you use the technique of adaptive optics.
Here's this AU Microscopii disk as imaged by the Keck telescope,
and the central star has been blotched out here as has the diffraction pattern caused by the optics of the telescope.
But here you can see this edge on disk, and a nice close-up of it shows that it's even kind of distorted
and clumpy in some locations as though planets are beginning to form in that disk.
Well, how do the planets actually form?
You've got this disk of gas and dust.
Well, we think that particles begin to clump together.
They kind of hit each other, and they're sticky, and there are electric forces between them,
and they begin to stick together and grow in size.
And then these clumps can hit each other and grow even more in size,
especially if they're icy.
They stick together more easily than when they're made only out of rock,
although apparently even the rocky ones somehow stick together.
This is where the details are unclear, okay?
I'm kind of waving my hands here a little bit because we don't really know what's going on.
But here's a model of these things clumping together.
And when the clumps become between, say, one and a hundred kilometers in size,
they are called planetesimals, little planets, if you will.
They're planetesimals forming in a dusty and gaseous disk.
Now, once you have a bunch of these one to a hundred kilometer diameter blobs, these planetesimals,
their gravitational influence for one another begins to bring them together,
and they start accumulating into bigger structures.
And this can form the core of a planet,
and then if the core of the planet is, you know, is big enough, it can attract more stuff,
and you could end up with a bunch of cores growing like this,
a bunch of planetesimals with a bunch of cores,
and then some of them will come together and grow into a larger planet.
Others will be ejected gravitationally, as is shown here,
leaving finally one or two major bodies at that location.
Now, if you have relatively cold temperatures where the planet is forming,
that core can attract the icy clumps around it.
You know, far enough from the sun, the temperatures are cold enough that the planetesimals were icy and sticky,
and they can then be accumulated by this relatively massive core that has grown,
and then that even more massive object can accumulate the hydrogen and helium that's still left over in its vicinity.
Because far from the star, those gases and the ices and all that don't just evaporate away.
They don't leave that area until sometime later, until the solar wind or the stellar wind turns on.
So big cores far from the sun can accumulate a lot of material around them,
and we think that's how Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune grew to be so big.
They are in regions where ices formed, and you can see here, beyond a certain distance,
it was cold enough for icy planetesimals to form,
and those icy planetesimals could stick to the core of the planet being formed and make it bigger,
and then that big thing could accumulate the gas that remained in the system there, the hydrogen and helium,
and this process could lead to very large planets.
Whereas in the inner part of the disk where the temperatures were higher, you didn't have the ices forming,
so it was harder for objects to stick together and form big cores to begin with,
and you didn't have many light gases hanging around, like hydrogen and helium,
because they all would have been evaporated away sort of blown out of the system by whatever stellar wind already existed
when the sun or the star was very young.
So we expect terrestrial-like planets to form in the inner parts of such a disk
where there aren't many ices, there isn't much light gas hanging around,
and conversely, the big guys should form farther out.
Okay, well, beyond a certain distance, the particles don't collide with each other frequently enough
because there are not enough particles and the distances are vast and they don't accumulate,
they don't collide with each other very often.
And so that region would be the Kuiper Belt, and here in this animation,
you can see the formation of planetesimals and planets in the inner parts of the disk.
There they are forming, there's some big ones out here,
but in the outer parts of the disk, the collisions were sufficiently infrequent
and there's sufficiently little material that a big planet simply could not form.
So we actually don't expect there to be a big Jupiter out in the depths of the Kuiper Belt.
And in this animation, you can see what an observer in and then beyond the Kuiper Belt might see.
There's the sun far away, there's some planets orbiting the sun pretty close in,
and then far out there's this debris left over that was not able to accumulate into a full-fledged planet.
So that's the Kuiper Belt, it's the stuff left over.
Now what about the Oort Cloud?
Well, that was formed, we think, by these big planets, Uranus, Neptune, and to some degree Saturn and Jupiter,
flinging material out from their vicinity through a gravitational slingshot effect.
If material comes close to a planet, it can get flung out like this.
And although some of the material got flung along the plane of the solar system,
other material got flung perpendicular to the plane.
And that is what we think formed the Oort Cloud.
Now we think that Uranus and Neptune contributed more to the Oort Cloud than did Jupiter and Saturn.
There were more icy rocks in the vicinity of Uranus and Neptune than near Jupiter and Saturn.
And moreover, Jupiter and Saturn seemed to have accumulated into their own mass more of the material in their vicinity.
Whereas Uranus and Neptune aren't all that massive, they were not able to accumulate as much of a mass,
rather they ejected more of it out.
So that's the formation of the Oort Cloud.
Now Jupiter formed very quickly for whatever reason, it just grew very, very, very quickly.
And its gravitational tugging, as I've mentioned before,
led to collisions among the planetesimals and the asteroid belt
that were too energetic to allow them generally to stick to one another.
So Jupiter's bullying presence caused the trajectories of the planetesimals and the asteroid belt
to behave in such a way that the collisions were harder than they would have been
had this whole thing been moving together in a nice, quiescent way.
Jupiter pushed guys around, and so the asteroids were prevented from forming a planet.
Jupiter did another thing.
Jupiter cleared out certain parts of the asteroid belt.
For example, those parts of the asteroid belt where a particle would orbit two times or three times
for every one time that Jupiter orbits got additional tugs all in the same direction
and cleared out of that region.
And these are known as the Kirkwood gaps, and they are a form of resonance in the solar system
where a big planet can affect the amount of material in a region
by progressively tugging on it more and more and more through these resonances
where you have an integer number of orbits of one particle for every one
or integer number of orbits of Jupiter or another big planet.
Now, there's another idea of how these big planets formed,
and that is that in a certain region of the disk,
maybe gas just sort of collapsed all at once into a giant planet,
kind of like stuff collapsing to form a star.
This is not as widely believed a hypothesis.
There's not as much evidence for it, although there is some evidence for it, okay?
Now, if you look at big clouds like this,
there are certain impediments to the formation of disks and stars.
Here are some bright stars that are emitting so much radiation
that they effectively evaporate the cloud of gas.
And you can see droplets here with lots of gas evaporating from them.
Maybe the evaporation could be so strong that it completely gets rid of all the gas
before the star and the planets can complete their formation process.
Well, that's a problem. Evaporation is a problem.
Another problem is that the spinning cloud has to get rid of angular momentum.
It has to spin slower in the end than it would have had it conserved all of its angular momentum.
And what we think happens is that the angular momentum is taken away through what are called bipolar outflows,
jets of material streaming away from the star perpendicular to the plane of the disk.
And here you can see a disk with a bipolar outflow coming out.
And there's an artist's conception of what one of these things might look like.
Now these jets have spinning clouds, spinning blobs of gas that carry the angular momentum with them.
They're like bullets, like spinning bullets shot out of a rifle.
They're spinning. They're not just going with no spin at all.
And a nice animation showing the solution to both of these problems is given here,
where we're going to fly through the Orion Nebula,
encountering some dense clouds of gas that will have solved both of these problems,
the evaporation problem and the angular momentum.
So here are these real little proplads, protoplanetary disks, which are being evaporated by some bright stars there.
See, look at that one. It has some stuff streaming away from it.
And all of them tend to have some stuff streaming away from them.
But here's a close-up view of one of these things.
And if you look close enough in, there's a lot of gas there and dust,
and it protects the star and the planetary system from completely evaporating away before it forms.
Moreover, we can see this bipolar outflow that carries angular momentum away from the star
and allows it to get rid of it so that when it finally forms,
it's spinning more slowly than it would have had it not gotten rid of that angular momentum.
And indeed, stars aren't spinning as quickly as you would have predicted
had they not gotten rid of their angular momentum.
So that problem seems to be at least partially solved.
Well, we've seen that we now have a much better idea of star and planet formation
than we did a couple of hundred years ago.
We've come a long way.
We've detected the dusty disks around stars,
and the next step is to actually find planets around other stars.
