We have seen that there is ample evidence for disks of gas and dust around other stars,
especially young stars.
And some of those disks even have clumps and deformations suggesting that planets are
forming in them.
Now the challenge is to actually find the planets themselves, the fully formed planets.
That's the big next step.
And it's really hard work.
It's very, very difficult to find planets.
But after several decades of effort, I'm happy to say that they've finally been found.
We can say without any doubt whatsoever now that there are planets around many other stars
in our galaxy and presumably in other galaxies.
They have been found.
And they're called extrasolar planets or exoplanets for short.
An artist's conception of what one of these things might look like is given here.
After the discovery of these things, people started making lots of paintings of them and
you know, other worlds.
What do they look like?
You know, the imagination runs wild.
Some day we hope to have actual pictures of these planets, but it was a challenge just
to detect them.
And that's the challenge that I want to discuss in this lecture.
The main problem is that the glare of the star is so much greater than the amount of
light that the planet reflects that you just can't see the planet next to the very, very
much brighter star.
And here's an example of a bright star that actually has at least two planets orbiting
it.
If you diminish the brightness of the star, then you can see the two planets.
But normally the star is very bright and you can't see those two planets because of
the glare from the star.
Remember, planets only shine by reflecting the light from the star that they orbit.
And they're very small, so the total amount of light reflected is very small compared
to the total emitted by the star itself.
So you really need to find some other technique to find them.
And the key is to measure the slight motion of the star induced by the orbit of a planet
around it.
It turns out that it's not true that a planet orbits a perfectly stationary star.
The star moves a little bit in response to the planet's motion.
It wobbles.
It's a reflex motion.
And there are ways of detecting that reflex motion.
The key point is that of the center of mass.
If you have two stars like these ones here, they are orbiting strictly speaking not one
around the other, but each around their common center of mass, or center of gravity.
Now from the perspective of one, it looks like the other is orbiting it.
And from the perspective of the other, the first one is orbiting it.
But really, physically, they are orbiting their common center of mass.
The idea is like that of a seesaw, where you have a balance point or a fulcrum on which
the seesaw is resting.
And the two masses can be balanced on this seesaw.
In general, the bigger the mass, the closer it has to be to this balance point.
So the big guy is close to the balance point.
The little guy is far away, all right?
And you know that this is the case when you play with a seesaw in a playground.
In the case of the two stars, they orbit around this balance point.
So if I look at two stars here, I can make them go around each other.
But really, they're each going around their balance point, their center of mass, which
is somewhere between them, depending on the relative masses of the two stars.
I'll show the equation for that in a few minutes, but that's what they're doing.
And here's a little animation that shows this motion of each of the stars around the
center of mass.
The big star in this case, the blue one, is the more massive one.
It's closer to the center of mass, just as in the seesaw analogy.
The little one, the red one, is less massive.
And in this particular case, the blue one happened to be 3.6 times as massive as the
red one.
And the eccentricity was zero.
That is, the orbits were circular.
But the same physics applies to elliptical orbits as well.
They orbit around their common center of mass.
Now let's take a look at the equation.
It's not really very complicated.
If you have two objects of equal mass, then the center of mass is directly between them,
at the midpoint between them.
And the center of mass is always somewhere along a line between them.
But in this case, it's right in the middle, because the masses are equal.
If you have one object that's more massive than the other, then the center of mass is
closer to the more massive object than it is to the less massive object.
And in the case of a very massive object compared to the other one, the center of mass is nearly,
but not exactly, at the center of the very massive object.
The general equation is that the mass of one object, multiplied by its distance from the
center of mass, is equal to the mass of the other object, multiplied by its distance from
the center of mass.
That is, M1 R1 equals M2 R2, where 1 and 2 simply denote the two objects that are orbiting
one another.
In the case of M1 being much, much greater than M2, for example, the sun is much, much
more massive than the earth, the center of mass of the sun earth system is nearly, but
not exactly, at the center of the sun.
And all this is true in general for two objects being held together by their mutual gravitational
force, F equals G M1 M2 divided by the square of the distance between them.
So now if we look at the center of mass, when you have a very massive star and a very
low mass planet, you'll notice that the center of mass is close to, but not exactly, at the
center of the star.
And in fact, the center of mass is inside the star, but not completely at its, or not
exactly at its center.
So in a sense, the star kind of hangs over the center of mass, it's the center of mass
is within the star.
And here is an example then of a star and a planet each going around the center of mass.
The center of mass is always between the star's center and the planet.
And the star undergoes a little circle around its center of mass, whereas the planet undergoes
a big circle around the center of mass, the common balance point or the common center
of mass.
So you might detect this tiny motion of the star, the reflex motion of the star caused
by the planet orbiting it, or orbiting more correctly, the center of mass.
The star orbits the center of mass as well.
It's just that it's much more massive than the planet, so it doesn't move very much
at all.
Well, how can we measure this reflex motion?
You could take photographs of stars in the sky and see if their positions wobble back
and forth ever so slowly or ever so slightly.
You could have a backdrop of fixed stars and maybe there's a nearby one that's being
orbited by a massive planet and the reflex motion is this little wobble back and forth
and it might be circular or elliptical or back and forth if it's along the line of
sight, if the orbital plane is along the line of sight.
But in any case, it's a slight motion.
And measurements of positions of stars in photographs and their motions is a subfield
of astronomy known as astrometry.
Astrometry is the measurement of the positions and motions of stars.
And this is technically very challenging because most stars being orbited even by massive
planets will move only so slightly that you'll never see this effect or it'll be very hard
to see, maybe in a few cases you could see it.
It's never been seen definitively for other stars other than our own.
Another way to look for the periodic wobble is to examine the star's light and search
for a shift in the wavelengths of the absorption lines in the spectrum of the star.
This is basically caused by the Doppler effect.
Now I introduced it quite a few lectures ago and I said that if you have a stationary
emitter of waves, then the waves go out in spherical wave fronts like this and there's
a well-defined wavelength that you can measure.
And that's the wavelength of the light with the object at rest.
But if the object is moving toward you or away from you, then the waves are squished
together if the object is moving toward you or spread apart when it's moving away.
So if it's moving toward you, the light is blue shifted.
It's shifted to shorter wavelengths.
But if the thing is moving away from you, then the light is red shifted.
And if it's moving transverse to your line of sight, then there's no shift at all.
So this is a Doppler effect for light.
And if you look at a star, for example, from our position near the sun and the star is
moving perpendicular to or transverse to your line of sight, then an absorption line seen
in the spectrum of the star has no shift.
That is, it appears in the same place where the same absorption line in a laboratory gas
at rest would appear.
But if the star is moving away from the sun, then that same line is shifted to longer wavelengths
or redder wavelengths.
Conversely, if the star is moving toward the sun, that line is shifted to shorter wavelengths
or bluer wavelengths, and we call it a blue shift.
Now, if we plot the spectrum of the star by looking at its brightness on the vertical
axis versus the wavelength on the horizontal axis, we see all these absorption lines.
And here I've drawn in particular absorption lines produced by the hydrogen atom.
Here's hydrogen alpha, beta, and gamma.
If the star is not moving relative to us or moving only perpendicular to our line of sight,
there's no radial motion, then there's no shift, and these lines appear at the wavelengths
at which they appear in a laboratory gas at rest.
If on the other hand the star is moving away from us, then the whole spectrum is shifted
slightly toward redder wavelengths, longer wavelengths, and you can measure that shift
delta lambda.
And similarly, if the star is moving toward us, the lines are shifted toward bluer or shorter
wavelengths, and again you can measure the shift delta lambda.
Now there's a formula that relates the shift delta lambda to the speed of the object relative
to you.
That formula, the Doppler formula, is pretty simple.
You measure the observed wavelength of the line lambda, you subtract the wavelength it
would have had in a gas at rest in your laboratory, that's lambda naught, and you divide that
by this rest wavelength lambda naught.
So you're taking delta lambda, the Greek uppercase delta is used in physics to denote
a change in a quantity, so delta lambda over lambda naught turns out to be the speed of
the object divided by the speed of light.
And again I emphasize that it's the radial component, it's only the part going toward
you or away from you that matters.
Perpendicular to your line of sight doesn't matter here, so it's the radial velocity.
So let's take an example, suppose you look at a star whose hydrogen alpha line is measured
to be at 6,565 angstroms, and the true laboratory wavelength is 6563 angstroms, well then delta
lambda, which is the measured wavelength minus the laboratory wavelength, is in this case
two angstroms, 6565 minus 6563.
Then take the ratio delta lambda over lambda naught, well that's two divided by 6563,
that's just three times ten to the minus fourth power.
But according to the Doppler formula that's equal to V over C, so if you multiply that
quantity by the speed of light C, you get the speed of the star toward you or away from
you, and in this case the product is 90 kilometers per second, and we know that the star is moving
away from us because the observed wavelength of the line was longer or redder than the
true wavelength of the line, so that's how the calculation goes.
Don't worry if you don't want to pay attention to the calculations, that's okay, the spirit,
the qualitative spirit of the discussion is the important thing, but I thought I'd include
this for those of you who want to see more of the mathematics.
So let's look at exoplanets then and how we could detect them.
If you have an unseen planet orbiting around a star, the star itself moves as well because
they both orbit their common center of mass, and when the star is moving towards us it'll
be blue shifted in its spectrum, and when it's moving away from us there will be an
observed red shift.
So let's look at how this goes in an animation, we see a star going away from us and then
moving toward us ever so slightly because of the reflex motion caused by the planet
and it orbiting the common center of mass, and when it's moving away from us you can
see that the lines are sort of spread apart, the waves are spread apart, that's a longer
wavelength, that's a red shift, and when it's moving toward us you get a blue shift, and
it's a periodically changing shift like this, and that's something that can be measured.
Now you can also do this for the audible Doppler effect by just supposing that you have a horn
or a buzzer or a siren moving in circular motion at different speeds.
Let me illustrate that here first at low speeds.
You can hear that when the buzzer is coming towards us like this, the pitch is higher,
it also sounds louder because of the way that our ears respond, and when it's moving away
from us the pitch is lower, that's easier to hear if you go to a higher speed.
And if we make an even higher speed then the change in pitch is extreme.
Okay now let's try this with light, let's start with the maximum speed.
You can see that a light bulb moving in a circular orbit viewed nearly edge on has these absorption
lines that shift periodically back and forth to redder wavelengths and bluer wavelengths
depending on whether the object is moving away from you or toward you.
If you go more slowly, the shift is smaller.
The total delta lambda is smaller for all these lines than when the object is moving
quickly.
So that's the idea.
Now if you look at the case of a star and a planet orbiting their mutual center of mass,
here's what you get.
I've set this up so that the mass of the planet is pretty large and the distance of the planet
from the star is pretty small.
In that case the planet causes the star to move quite a bit and you can see the blue
shifting and red shifting of the star's light depending on whether the star is moving away
from you like here where it's red shifted or toward you like there where it's blue shifted.
Now if we make the planet mass smaller, then its gravitational influence is less and so
it tugs on the star less, the wobble is less and the total amount of shifting is less.
If you similarly increase the distance between the star and the planet, again the gravitational
motions or wobbles induced by the planet on the star are smaller because the planet is
farther away from the star and so the total amount of shifting is less.
So that's how you can do this, but the total shifts are very small because planets are
not very massive compared with stars and so you're not going to get hundreds of kilometers
per second for the reflex motion of the star, you're going to get maybe tens of meters
per second or three or four meters per second like a fast walk, that's the kind of expectation
that you might have and so you need to spread the light out a lot.
Here's a very spread out, long skinny spectrum where progressively longer or redder wavelengths
have been stacked below the blue or shorter wavelengths, but within a given horizontal
line, wavelength increases from left to right.
You can see the periodic Doppler effect, very minute motions first toward the red part
of the spectrum, then toward the blue, as the star first goes away from us, then toward
us, but the changes are tiny, as I said maybe three meters per second, that's a fast walking
speed, but you can maybe detect those kinds of motions if you analyze the light sufficiently
carefully.
Well, let's look at what the effects of Jupiter and Saturn would be on the Sun.
Jupiter causes the Sun to wobble back and forth a little bit with a period of 12 years
because that's Jupiter's orbital period and you can see that the Sun is moving first in
one direction at about 10 meters per second and then in the other direction at about 10
meters per second with a period of about 12 years, reflecting Jupiter's orbital period
around the Sun.
What you proposed on this is the reflex motion in the Sun caused by the orbit of Saturn.
Saturn's period is about 30 years and Saturn is less massive than Jupiter and farther away,
so the amplitude of the motion of the Sun caused by Saturn is much smaller than the
amplitude of the motion caused by Jupiter and the period is longer, it's a 30 year period
rather than a 12 year period.
If you look at all these, if you look at the effects of all the planets combined on the
motion of the Sun, this is what you get.
The radial velocity in meters per second is plotted on the vertical axis and the year
is plotted along the horizontal axis and you can see the main effect is that of Jupiter.
A secondary effect is Saturn, but Uranus and Neptune also produce effects.
What is the Earth?
But the Earth's effect on the Sun is 10 centimeters per second, creeping along, creeping along.
That's the Earth's effect on the Sun.
Even big bullies Jupiter and Saturn don't produce much of an effect, 10 meters or a
few meters, so the Earth isn't going to do much at all.
I should also say that this diagram is correct if you view the orbit's edge on, like this.
If you were viewing them face on like that to the audience there, there would be no radial
velocity whatsoever because there's no radial motion and so there's no shift.
So it's a maximum effect if you're viewing the orbit edge on, a zero effect if you're
looking at it face on, and some intermediate amount if it's tilted at some intermediate
angle.
As you can figure out the mass of the planet causing the tug from the amount of motion
that it induces, clearly you're only going to get sort of a minimum mass, a lower limit
to the true mass of the planet because if the orbits were in the plane of the sky, there'd
be no shift at all in the spectrum of the star, even though there is a massive planet
pulling on it.
So you would deduce too small a mass because you would measure no motion at all.
If the orbits are edge on, then the total velocity is what you measure.
It's a radial velocity toward you here and away from you there, but the point is that
the radial velocity is the total velocity rather than zero as in this case, and in the
more general case the orbits are sort of tilted like this, so only part of the total velocity
is measured using the Doppler effect.
So you're only measuring part of the planet's influence on the star, so you only get a minimum
mass for the planet using this technique.
You get a number which is actually the mass of the planet times the sign of the inclination
angle.
If the inclination angle is 90 degrees, the sign of it, the trigonometric sign is one,
and the measured mass is the true mass.
If the angle is some other number, then the sign is less than one, so for the mass times
the sign of the inclination angle to equal some number, if the sign of the inclination
angle is less than one, the mass of the planet has to be bigger in order to compensate such
that the product of those two terms is equal to the measured amount of wobble.
So you get a minimum mass using this technique.
All right, well, if we now look at what you would see when you look at a star using this
technique, you might not see anything at all because the wobbles are so small, and for
many years astronomers didn't see anything at all.
But in October of 1995 there was a breakthrough where two astronomers at the University of
Geneva, Michel Mior and D. D. A. Kalos, found a wobble in the spectrum of the star 51 Pegasi
in the constellation Pegasus, the flying horse.
Here are Michel Mior and D. D. A. Kalos, and they found this planet, and it was quickly
confirmed by Jeff Marcy then at San Francisco State University, but he did a lot of his
research at Berkeley, and now he's a faculty member at Berkeley.
And a postdoc of his, Paul Butler, who was a postdoc at Berkeley at the time.
And they used the three meter telescope at Lick Observatory to measure the spectrum
of 51 Pegasi, and they confirmed with exquisite data the results of Mior and Kalos.
Here is the speed of the planet versus time, and here's some data points.
You can see it's going back and forth, back and forth, with a period of only about 4.2
days, and a whoppingly large amplitude of something like 50 meters per second.
This was totally unexpected.
Remember Jupiter orbiting our sun causes the sun to have an amplitude of 10 meters per
second.
Here's one that's 50, and the orbital period is only four days.
Jupiter's orbital period is 12 years.
This was totally unexpected, very weird.
So here's the artist's conception of what it might have looked like.
This captured the imaginations of the general public, got a lot of publicity, and Marcy
and Butler in particular got a really a lot of publicity, even though they didn't first
discover this object, because it turns out they had lots of data which showed similar
sorts of massive planets orbiting very close to the star that they are orbiting.
They quickly came up with a catalog of many such objects, and so they became very very
famous, and there was a big article in Newsweek where they are pictured under a title, searching
for other worlds.
This was big news because people had been waiting for the discovery of planets for a long time.
One can ask, why didn't Marcy and Butler find the planet first if they had all these data
and they were looking for such planets for 10 years or so?
Well, it turns out, again, they didn't expect the wobbles to be so big.
They didn't expect giant planets like Jupiter to be so close into a star, because giant
planets, I just told you in the previous lecture, are supposed to form far from a star.
So they didn't expect short periods, and they didn't expect big wobbles.
They expected long periods, so they were gathering lots of data over a decade, and they were
expecting small speeds, so they were perfecting their analysis technique in order to measure
those tiny anticipated speeds, like a walking speed, not 50 meters per second, which is
a very very fast run, okay?
I can't even run that fast actually, it's like an ostrich or something.
So they weren't expecting such a signal.
And the particular case of 51 Peg was unfortunate, because it had been a star that was misclassified
in the catalogs as being not sun-like in its properties.
It was more of like a giant star, and I'll talk about giant stars later, but it wasn't
really a sun-like star, and they had specifically been looking for sun-like stars in order to
find counterparts to our solar system.
So that star wasn't even being monitored by them, and so they got kind of unlucky there
as well.
But then as I said, they found a whole bunch more later on, and they've now found really
a lot, but the moral of the story is don't let your preconceived notions of the universe
limit what you do.
Be as objective and unbiased as possible, they had bad luck in a sense, plus they could have
analyzed their data, but to their credit they had a lot of other data and access to great
telescopes, and they've now found about 120 of these things, fully two-thirds of the 180
known exoplanets were discovered by Marcy and Butler, because they got lots of time
at Lick, and then they started getting time at the Keck telescopes, and they just found
lots of them, lots of them, almost 200 known now.
And remember, none were known until 1995, so it's a fantastic breakthrough.
And here's a plot of about 170 of the known ones, and you're not supposed to be able to
read this, but it's just to sort of overwhelm you with how many have been found in just
a little over a decade, and the great range of properties that they have, and I'll talk
about their properties more in the next lecture.
Now, Jeff Marcy and Michel Mayor were recently awarded the Shaw Prize for their work, and
it's sort of like the Nobel Prize of the East.
It's awarded in Hong Kong, and it's a million dollars like the Nobel Prize.
Their co-workers deserved it as well, but as with the Nobel Prize, you can only give it
to a limited number of people, and they were the two team leaders.
So Marcy and Mayor got this Nobel Prize of the East.
Among the first planets discovered, you can see in this table some real interesting trends.
First of all, they're all pretty massive.
In units of Jupiter masses, they range from half a Jupiter mass all the way up to ten
Jupiter masses in this table.
That's a selection effect.
The point is that these measurements are hard enough, even with a very massive planet tugging
on a star.
They become very difficult, if not impossible, with the technology of the past decade for
little planets orbiting stars.
The fact that they're finding big planets does not mean that there are no little planets
to be found.
The other effect is that they're finding objects that have very small separations from the star
that they orbit.
Here's a plot of the number of planets found versus the distance from the star, more technically
the semi-major axis of the orbit.
You can see there are many, many, many below one astronomical unit, quite a few even below
a tenth of an astronomical unit.
And again, the reason for that is clear.
Even if there are many planets far from stars, the ones that are easiest to detect with this
Doppler shift method are those that are close in, both because they produce a bigger reflex
motion and because the orbital periods are short, so you can find these things in a couple
of years rather than having to wait 20 or 30 years like for Uranus and Neptune or Saturn.
So that's another selection bias.
The other thing that you might notice in this table is that there are quite a few planets
with very large eccentricities, with very eccentric orbits, not circular like that of
51 Pegasi.
And a good example is 16 Cygni B, one of the stars in this double star system, has a planet
orbiting it in a very eccentric orbit.
So it goes zoom, zoom, zoom around the center of mass, and in a similar way then the star
responds by going zoom, zoom, zoom around the center of mass.
And in the radial velocity versus time plot, you get a non-sinusoidal motion like this.
And that turned out to be an interesting surprise.
We did not anticipate that so many planets would have such eccentric orbits as shown
here for the 16 Cygni B planet.
Well as I will discuss in the next lecture, these first few discoveries were not oddballs
in any way.
It turns out that our assumption that other planetary systems are just like our own was
wrong.
