In the previous lecture, I described the method by which most exoplanets or extrasolar planets
have been found.
One measures the slight wobble of the star, induced by the planet's motion around it,
or more correctly, both the star and the planet are moving around their common center of mass,
but the center of mass is very, very close to the star, so the star moves very little.
In this lecture, I'll discuss some of the main results of such studies, and I'll also
explain other techniques that are used to find exoplanets, complementary techniques
that might be used to find small earth-like planets, not just the big ones that are found
with the wobble technique.
A trend that I briefly mentioned at the end of the last lecture was that many of these
exoplanets have exceptionally small orbits, that is, they're a very short distance from
the star that they orbit.
And here you can see a plot of the number of planets versus the semi-major axis, which
is basically the distance of the planet from the star, in units of astronomical units.
So in our own solar system, the earth is one astronomical unit away from the sun, Venus
is about 0.7 astronomical units from the sun, and Mercury is about 0.4 astronomical units
from the sun.
And you can see here a bunch of planets that are 0.3, 0.2, 0.1, even less than 0.1 astronomical
units from the star that they are orbiting.
Those are incredibly close to the star.
I mean, that's incredible.
And they're big.
They're massive.
I told you last time that they're like Jupiter or bigger.
So we call them hot Jupiters.
It's very difficult to see how they could have formed that close to the star because
they consist of a large amount of gas, and such gas couldn't have clumped together so
near the star early in the history of the planetary system because it's really hot there.
You know, I mean, it's hard for gases to clump where the environment is really hot.
You might say, well, a tenth of an astronomical unit is pretty far from the star.
Maybe a planet could clump up there.
But if you look at the first few bins in that diagram that I showed you, and you spread
the distribution out a little bit, so you can see with greater clarity just where the
planets are, you can see this incredible clump where there's a bunch of planets with
just a three-day orbital period around the star.
And that means that these planets are just outside the star, and there's no way hot Jupiters
could have formed there initially.
They must have formed farther out where conditions were colder and ices could clump together,
and then the rocky icy iron core could drag in through gravitational accretion surrounding
gas and stuff.
So they must have formed much farther out and somehow migrated in.
Now one idea is that the planets far out in the disk encountered a lot of material and
rubbed against it, and that frictional drag then allowed the planet to gradually spiral
in toward the star.
But given that many of them are in these three or four or two-day orbital periods around
the star, some must have kept on migrating and actually have been swallowed by the star.
So in fact, here's an artist's rendition of a planet being swallowed by the star that
it was orbiting because it got too close.
One other idea is that the planets formed farther out, and then gravitational interactions
among the planets sent some of them careening in toward the star, and then they achieved
initially an elliptical orbit around the star, and gradually through a number of processes,
including tidal effects, that elliptical orbit gets circularized.
So that's another idea.
Or maybe a passing star perturbed some of the planets that were initially far out and sent
some of them to closer in trajectories.
In some cases, the planet is so close to the star that you can see the atmosphere of the
planet actually evaporating away, and here's an artist's rendition of that process.
Obviously, we've never seen any of these things close enough in enough detail to actually see
this process.
I mean, we've barely detected the planets.
We don't yet have hopes of imaging them in such detail.
Well, let's plot the representative orbits of some of the planets that have been found,
some of the roughly 180 that have been found thus far.
And in this diagram, you can see some of the hot Jupiters, and in fact, the star is drawn
so big here that it would be bigger than the orbits of some of the hot Jupiters, but here
you can see other hot Jupiters well inside the orbit of the planet Earth, plotted on
the same scale.
The next interesting thing you see is also something that I had mentioned at the end
of the last lecture, and that is that quite a few of the exoplanets have highly eccentric
orbits.
In our solar system, the orbits are circular or nearly circular, and here you can see these
incredible eccentricities.
What produced such eccentricities?
We don't think that the planets were initially formed that way because the rotating disk
of gas and dust is rotating in a fairly circular way.
So probably what happened is that some of the planets were relatively close together and
interacted gravitationally, and in these gravitational interactions, one planet might
be flung out of the system entirely, and the other one rebounds with a kick that gives
it a rather eccentric elliptical orbit like this.
And so that didn't happen in our own solar system with the planets that remain, but clearly
quite a few of these things did experience something that gave them these eccentric orbits.
Now the hot Jupiters that are close in usually don't have elliptical orbits, and again that's
because even if the orbits were initially elliptical, if they're very, very close to
the star, there's a subtle tidal effect that occurs that can gradually circularize the
orbit if it's very, very close into the star.
And so indeed we don't find hot Jupiters very close to the star with highly eccentric
orbits.
They're all nearly circular, but the planets that wander farther out have these rather
eccentric orbits.
Then the final trend you see in this diagram is that some planets are pretty far from the
star that they orbit, a couple of AU, one or two in this case, and they have pretty circular
orbits.
These are the planets that most resemble the ones in our own solar system, a few astronomical
units away from the star with nearly circular orbits.
So there are some representative planets that look like those in our solar system, but the
big surprise was that there are these hot Jupiters really close in, and there's a lot
of planets farther out with highly eccentric orbits, and that's just something that had
not been anticipated.
There's an interesting trend, and that is that though overall something like five to
ten percent of the stars that have been monitored have revealed an exoplanet orbiting them,
that percentage increases as you look to stars that have higher proportions of heavy elements.
Okay, so let me clarify what I mean.
Most stars are predominantly hydrogen and helium, well over 98% hydrogen and helium.
But of that remaining two percent, there's heavy elements like iron and carbon and nitrogen,
and some stars have only half a percent of such materials, some have only one percent,
our sun has about two percent of such heavier materials, some might have four or six, that's
about the range.
As you go from nearly zero percent heavy elements, of which iron is a representative
heavy element, up to one, two, three, four percent, the fraction of stars that have detected
exoplanets increases.
Let me show you a graph of that.
Here is the abundance of iron, a common heavy element relative to the sun.
So the sun has one in these units, it's got whatever iron and other heavy element abundance
that it has.
And here's one tenth of the abundance of iron and other heavy elements.
Here's one third and here's three.
So you can see that the stars that have very few heavy elements in them basically don't
have planets, whereas those stars that have more than the sun's abundance of heavy elements
have lots of cases with planets.
So 20% of stars that are three times as abundant in iron and other heavy elements as the sun
have planets, maybe 10% or 12% of those that are a little bit more abundant in iron than
the sun have planets, and maybe 6% or 5% of the ones that are a little bit less abundant
in iron than the sun have planets and so on.
So apparently the greater the abundance of heavy elements, the greater is the likelihood
that planets formed around that star.
This greatly supports the idea that big Jupiter-like planets formed through the process where first
a heavy iron, rock, ice, earth-like core formed, and then that thing accreted some more ices
and grew even bigger, and then that remaining object or that built up object was able to
gravitationally attract a lot of hydrogen and helium.
That process won't occur unless you can make the heavy earth-like core to begin with, right?
And you can't make the heavy earth-like core unless you have the heavy elements from which
to make it.
So this trend supports the hypothesis of growth through gravitational accretion of gases onto
a heavy core that was first formed.
In 1999, a multi-planet system was found, the first of its kind, Upsilon Andromedae.
And in fact, now about 20 such multiple systems are known, so it's nice to know that these
stars don't have just one planet orbiting them.
In many cases they have two or three or more, we just haven't detected them in most cases.
So here is the radial velocity curve, velocity of the wobble of the star versus time for
the star Upsilon Andromedae.
In this graph, the effects of a planet having a 4.6-day period have already been removed
because they would cause a very rapid jiggle in this diagram.
So we've already removed the planet that was first known, yet you can see that there are
additional oscillations back and forth.
That's the model, and here you can see the actual data points to which the model was
fit.
So that's a planet having a 0.7-year period, and then on top of that there's another oscillation
of a planet having a 4-year period.
So this is a 3-planet system, and if you plot the orbits of the planets on a scale similar
to that of the solar system, you can see for the solar system Mercury, Venus, and Earth,
and for the planets orbiting Upsilon Andromedae, you can see them right there.
There's a hot Jupiter, then there's a planet that sort of orbits between what would have
been Venus and Earth in our solar system, and then there's one way out here that orbits
sort of that 3 AU between what would have been Mars and Jupiter, sort of where our asteroid
belt is.
So that's Upsilon Andromedae.
That's kind of cool.
Here's another one, 55 Cancri, that also has three planets, and indeed in 2004 a fourth
planet was found, but here are the three that were known for a while on a diagram to be
compared with that of our solar system.
So in our solar system we have Jupiter, way out here, and Mercury close in, 55 Cancri has
two planets within the orbit of Mercury, and then one big planet out roughly where Jupiter
would have been.
So here is Lynette Cook's artist's conception of what this system might look like.
Lynette Cook is probably the most imaginative and accomplished of the painter's exoplanets,
and of course we don't know that they look just like this, but this is her view of what
the most distant planet in the 55 Cancri system looks like.
It has extensive rings like Saturn.
We don't really know that, but anyway it's kind of cool to imagine what these things
look like, and there close in you can see the other two planets.
Now in 2004 a fourth planet was found, which is really fantastic, and its mass is very low.
It's only about 14 Earth masses, and again that's a minimum possible mass, but it's probably
not too far from the true mass, and so that's getting comparable to the masses of Uranus
and Neptune in our own solar system.
It's got a very, very short period, only 2.8 days, so here is Lynette Cook's conception
of what this system looks like now.
You can see the two inner planets there, and then way close in there's another one.
There's that inset there, orbiting with a 2.8 day period.
Curiously Lynette decided to draw the big planet without rings this time, so I guess
it lost its rings or something, but anyway.
So this thing with a 2.8 day period orbiting really close in can't be mostly gaseous.
It's got to be at least partly rocky and have a pretty big iron core in order to even retain
whatever gases it has, because it's so close into the star that it would be fried, and the
gases would just escape.
So maybe it looks something like this, where it's partly gaseous, but maybe mostly rocky,
and intermediate in size between Earth and Jupiter.
So that's a really cool planet.
Well, we got to progressively lower and lower masses, Jupiter-type masses, Saturn, and then
finally Uranus and Neptune-type masses, and around the star Gliese 876, two planets were
known until about 2005.
They had masses of around six-tenths of a Jupiter mass and 1.9 Jupiter masses, with
orbital periods of about 30 and 60 days.
There's kind of a resonance there, by the way.
But in 2005, the big news was that another planet was discovered, and in this case, it
only has 7.5 times Earth's mass, so that's getting to be really low in terms of planetary
masses discovered with the Doppler technique.
And you could call this sort of a super-Earth or a super-mercury, because it's really close
in to the star.
It orbits in just two days.
So it's sort of a super-terrestrial planet.
But mercury is perhaps a better analog than Earth, because this planet, so close to the
star, is just fried by the star.
It's incredible.
So it's almost certainly a rocky planet.
A planet that has such a low mass and is so close to the star almost certainly cannot
retain a very massive hydrogen and helium envelope.
So here's Lynette Cook's artist's view of what the two planets that had been known for
a long time in this system look like.
And then here's this rocky planet very close in, and a close-up view of it might be something
like this.
And of course, we don't know that it looks like this.
We have no images of planets.
NASA hopes to build an instrument called the Terrestrial Planet Finder, which would be
launched sometime between 2020 and 2030 to take images of terrestrial planets and to
find them and to take images.
But we don't really know that this is what they look like.
OK, so we've been getting down to even 7 and a half Earth masses, but that's not quite
Earth, right?
People want to find true Earth-like planets with Earth-like masses or even less and not
so close into the star where they're fully baked, you know?
So how do you find them?
Well, the Doppler technique isn't so great for that, because the Earth at its distance
from the Sun induces only a 10 centimeter per second motion in the Sun.
So that's not very fast.
And the current limits for the precision of the Doppler technique are around one meter
per second.
So 10 centimeters per second is a factor of 10 below the current limits.
And there are certain fundamental properties of stars that may inherently limit the precision
of the process, such as turbulence in the star's atmosphere causes motions of gas that
can smear out the tiny Doppler wobble that you're trying to look for.
So probably the Doppler techniques won't detect Earth-like planets, at least not in
great abundance.
So a different technique is needed.
And one such technique is planetary transits.
So suppose you have a star here with a planet orbiting it.
And suppose the orbital plane is exactly aligned with your line of sight.
Then occasionally the planet will go in front of the star, as seen by you, and block part
of its light.
And so the planet would block the light, making the star's light appear ever so slightly
dimmer.
And if you watch the transit of Venus across the face of the Sun, as viewed from Earth
in our own solar system, I discussed how that happens twice, roughly every century or more.
The Sun's visible brightness during the transit is less than not during the transit, because
in this case, Venus blocked part of the light.
So it turns out that if you watch this process, you can see it occurring in other stars.
A planet can go between us and the star, temporarily blocking some of the star's light.
And in 1999, the first such system was found.
So here is a plot of the expected brightness versus time as the planet gradually traverses
a path in front of the star.
So when the planet is outside the star, the star is not blocked at all, and you see it
at its full brightness.
As the planet begins to traverse across the star, you can see the brightness of the star
decrease a little bit.
It stays a bit low throughout the transit, and then the brightness goes up again as the
planet stops blocking the star.
Now the data for the best such system known, HD 209458, are just exquisite.
They were obtained with the Hubble Space Telescope, and they show beautifully how the star's apparent
brightness decreases with time for a while as the transit occurs, and then as the transit
ends, the star's apparent brightness comes back up again.
Interestingly, the data are so good that if that transiting planet had had a substantial
moon next to it, the moon would have blocked part of the star's light as well and would
have caused additional dips.
So would have rings.
Substantial rings would have caused dips as well.
Such dips are not seen in the data, suggesting that this transiting planet does not have
a large moon or extensive rings, but the data are that good.
It's really amazing.
Now another really remarkable thing was found about the system, HD 209458.
During the transit, an atmosphere was detected around the planet.
So here's what happened.
The planet was transiting the star, and during that transit, the spectrum of the star looked
a little bit different from what it had looked like before the transit.
So here it is, transiting, and the spectrum of the star was a little bit different.
Here's what's going on.
The star's spectrum normally is just whatever it is, but when the planet is transiting,
it not only blocks part of the star light, that's okay, that just makes the star dimmer,
but it actually absorbs some of the light from the star due to the fact that the atmosphere
of the planet is largely transparent to most forms of light, but absorbs those photons
that correspond to allowed electronic transitions in atoms of the atmosphere of the planet.
So here, photons from the star are going through the atmosphere, and they got absorbed in some
cases by sodium atoms in that planetary atmosphere.
And so here are two absorption lines that could be seen in the spectrum of the star
that were deeper as a result of the light having passed through the atmosphere of the
planet than they would have been had that light not passed through an atmosphere.
So sodium was detected in that atmosphere.
That's a remarkable discovery.
Not because sodium itself is that important for life, so I mean it is actually a sodium
chloride, salt, and all that, but the point is that atoms and molecules can be detected
in planetary atmospheres during this transit process because the spectrum of the star light
is ever so slightly altered.
And I actually think that the first detection of signs of life in a planet might be found
during such a technique where you see methane or other signs of life in an atmosphere as
a result of monitoring such a transit.
So that's got really great potential.
Now the other cool thing about the transits is that they can be used to detect even small
Earth-like planets.
A big planet like Jupiter causes a large dip in the star's light.
A little planet like the Earth causes only a very small dip.
Just how small?
Well, Earth is about one one hundredth of the diameter of the sun, a little bit less
actually than that, one one hundred and ninth.
So its area in the sky is about one one hundredth squared, or one ten thousandth of the area
of the disk of the sun.
So when the Earth passes across the sun as viewed from the outside, the sun's light would
dip by one part in ten thousandth, by about one one hundredth of a percent.
And that can be detected.
The overall brightness will decrease a little bit.
So we could detect terrestrial planets around other stars by looking for minute dips of
this sort.
The problem of course is that there are sunspots and presumably around, or on the surfaces
of other stars, there are star spots.
And as those spots traverse the star, as the star rotates, the star will get dimmer or
brighter in a non-periodic way depending on which spots happen to be around.
You might think it would be periodic because the spots keep coming around and around, but
remember the spots don't last all that long.
They kind of form and then they disappear and the next rotation there are some other
spots around.
So stars should vary ever so slightly in brightness anyway, and on top of that you want to notice
a tiny blip caused by the transit of a terrestrial planet.
That's hard to do, but not impossible.
Because if you monitor the stars for a long time, the variations due to star spots will
not be periodic, whereas the variation due to a terrestrial planet orbiting every year
or every half year or something like that will be periodic.
And you might be able to dig that signal out from the chaotic looking variations of the
star's light.
It helps, of course, if you monitor really a lot of stars, because say you try to ask
yourself, well, what are the odds that viewed from outside the solar system that Earth would
pass along the line of sight between you and the sun?
That is, what are the odds of a transit occurring?
The odds are only about half a percent.
For viewing the solar system from random angles, you've only got about a half a percent chance
that the Earth will actually block any part of the sun.
So you've got to look at a lot of stars in order to raise the odds that any of them will
have been blocked by a transiting terrestrial planet.
Well, NASA is planning a spacecraft, the Kepler spacecraft, that will be launched perhaps
in 2009, and it will monitor something like 100,000 stars continuously for four years
looking at their brightness and the variations in the brightness.
And it'll be able to monitor such a vast number of stars continually for four years
because its field of view will be 104 square degrees.
That's sort of like 10 degrees on a side and 10 degrees like that.
Take a square like this and your hands outstretched like this at arm's length span about 10 degrees
that the tip of the finger to the thumb does, actually a little bit more than that.
But anyway, take your hands like that and imagine a square in the sky.
That's the square in the sky that the Kepler satellite will monitor, and they're going
to point in a pretty rich part of our galaxy toward the constellations Cygnus and Lyra.
And so they'll monitor all these stars continuously, and they hope to find transiting Earths out
of these 100,000 stars.
And they especially hope to find Earths in what's called the habitable zone, where the
temperatures allow liquid water to exist.
And we think liquid water is pretty important for the development of life.
So we're really looking forward to the Kepler mission.
There are other ways of detecting planets.
Related to this transit technique, suppose instead of the planet blocking part of the
starlight, suppose the planet goes behind the star and the star blocks some of the planet's
light.
Well, at visible wavelengths, you wouldn't really see much of anything because normally
the planet reflects only a tiny fraction of the star's light anyway.
But at infrared wavelengths, the planet itself can emit light because of its heat, because
of its thermal motions.
And so if the planet is not being blocked by the star, the total brightness of the star
plus planet system is greater than when the planet is being blocked by the star.
So indeed, with the Spitzer Space Telescope shown here, in 2005, the thermal emission
of a planet was indeed detected in this way.
Here's an artist's view of what the planet would look like at visible wavelengths.
It doesn't reflect very much light from the star, and the star's glare overwhelms it.
But at infrared wavelengths, the planet itself glows.
And when it's blocked by the star, the total amount of light goes down.
So here's an animation of what was seen with the Spitzer Space Telescope.
A planet was orbiting a star nearly edge onto our line of sight.
And when the planet went behind the star, the total brightness of the star plus planet
system decreased a bit.
And when the planet came back out again, the total brightness increased.
And that was a discovery that was made in 2005, fantastic discovery.
Well there's one other really interesting way of finding planets, and that is through
gravitational lensing.
I had mentioned earlier, and I'll talk more extensively later, about how the sun bends
light around it because of the warping of space and time.
That's the area of Einstein's general theory of relativity, and I'll talk about that more.
But the idea here that I just want to introduce briefly is that if you look at a background
star, and another star passes between Earth and the background star, but exactly along
the line of sight, then there can be a focusing effect of the star's light onto the Earth,
causing the background star to appear slightly brighter than it would have had the other
foreground star and its planet not been crossing through the field of view.
So if you look at the brightness of the background star versus time, as the foreground star is
traversing the line of sight toward the background star, the background star's light gets focused
toward the Earth, and it brightens, and then it dims as the alignment becomes less and
less perfect.
But when the planet is perfectly aligned with the background star and the Earth, you get
a very temporary spike, a very short brightening of the background star's light due to the
microlensing effect of the planet itself.
That's really cool.
And just in 2005, in fact, a planet was detected for the first time using this gravitational
microlensing technique, and it has only something like five Earth masses, even lower than the
least massive of the Doppler-Wabble planets that have been detected so far.
So this technique has a lot of potential.
Obviously, you're not going to see the same planet twice because the alignment is perfect
only occasionally.
Star passes right in front of another background star only very rarely, but statistically you
could find lots of Earth-like planets this way.
And so I expect that this is a technique, along with the transit technique, that will
gather a lot of attention in the next few years as the search for terrestrial planets
continues in full swing.
