The discovery of over 180 exoplanets, and of dusty gaseous disks around other stars,
and of reasonably hospitable locations for life elsewhere in our solar system, rekindles
the age-old question of whether there, in fact, is life beyond the Earth, or whether
it only exists here, near where we are, on the surface and below the surface of the Earth.
Indeed, headlines of this sort, the birth of planets, scientists discover new solar
systems and rethink the odds of life beyond Earth.
Headlines like this appear on national magazines because this is the kind of stuff that excites
the public's attention.
One I think would really like to know whether we're alone in the universe.
Not just intelligent life, but even primitive life, microbes and bacteria.
Do they only exist on Earth, or do they exist elsewhere?
This is one of the great questions.
Now the known extrasolar planets that we've discovered in the past 12 years or so orbit
nearby stars.
That's part of the appeal to the general public, is that you can see some of these stars with
a naked eye.
We now know that there are planets orbiting them.
But those nearby stars are only a few out of the three or 400 billion stars in a typical
large galaxy like our Milky Way galaxy.
And this one appears much like we think our Milky Way would appear if we could view it
from the outside.
So there's a vast number of stars per galaxy.
And there's a vast number of galaxies in the universe.
This is a tiny fraction of the sky photographed with the Hubble Space Telescope.
And you can see it's just littered with galaxies.
There are very few stars in our own galaxy in this photograph.
Most of those blobs are galaxies, and again they contain billions, if not tens or hundreds
of billions of stars, each of which may have planets and an abode for life.
So the life in the universe question is one of the biggies.
I think that if life were discovered elsewhere, especially intelligent life, it would be one
of the most monumental discoveries of all time, or perhaps ever in the past and in the
future of the human race.
Well, in our discussion of life elsewhere, to reduce the amount of speculation, let's
restrict our attention in most cases to life as we know it.
Otherwise, there'd be essentially no boundaries to what we might imagine.
There's been lots of science fiction books, of course, about very exotic life.
For example, there could be a community of intelligent beings living on a neutron star
made out of nuclear material.
And this was the premise of a book called Dragon's Egg by Robert Forward in 1980.
And it was based on an idea, actually, of an astronomer, Frank Drake, about whom I'll
have more to say later.
Or there's another great book by Fred Hoyle called The Black Cloud.
It was written in 1957.
And it suggests that a giant cloud of atoms and molecules behaves as though it's an intelligent
creature.
There's interactions between those molecules that allow it to think.
And in fact, it's far more advanced and far superior to life on Earth.
So you can think of exotic forms of life like this, but then the imagination just completely
runs wild and you don't know where to set boundaries.
So most astronomers and biologists thinking about life elsewhere in this emerging field
of astrobiology or exobiology generally limit themselves to life as we know it.
So life as we know it is based on organic compounds called amino acids.
Now organic compounds, of course, are long chains of carbon with hydrogen stuck off to
the side and an occasional oxygen and nitrogen molecule.
There are many forms of these things.
But you can construct long chains of these amino acids all end to end and form proteins.
And there are literally hundreds of thousands of possible proteins.
Yet life appears to select only a relatively small number of proteins out of all that could
possibly exist.
So life is a very selective process.
And the most famous of these proteins is DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid, the double helix,
the key to life, you know.
So here's a model of DNA at the Lawrence Hall of Science near the University of California,
Berkeley.
And here's samples of my DNA, my daughter Zoe, who's nearly 13, my son Simon, who's
10, and my new daughter Capri, who at that time was only one month old.
So there's an example of DNA.
And we don't really understand how DNA formed and how it can do all these great things that
it does, but it is a very special protein, a very special collection of amino acids built
in such a way that it can self-replicate and evolve as a result of mutations.
So how do you make these organic compounds?
First you need to make the simple ones before you make the long chains, the long complex
compounds.
A number of people have done experiments to try to replicate the formation process for
at least the simplest organic compounds, the simplest amino acids.
And a very famous experiment of this sort was done in 1953 by Stanley Miller, then a
graduate student, working under the direction of Harold Urie.
And what the Miller Urie experiment was, was a series of tubes and vessels containing gases
and liquids that tried to replicate conditions thought to occur in the primitive atmosphere
and surface of the earth.
Here's a flask of boiling water that produces water vapor that goes into another flask containing
methane, ammonia, and hydrogen.
Miller and Urie thought that water, methane, ammonia, and hydrogen were constituents of
earth's primitive atmosphere.
And then they had a pair of electrodes here between which a spark could occur, and that
was used to simulate the extensive lightning that may have existed early in the history
of the earth, and also the impact of ultraviolet photons, the effect of ultraviolet radiation
coming from the young sun.
And they let this thing sit for a couple of days with these electrodes creating a spark
between them.
And they found that the material changed color.
That is, stuff formed in this set of gases here condensed in a tube that was relatively
cold.
It had cold water running around it, and then collected down in this trap here where there
was some other water and stuff.
And they found that this gunky stuff, brownish sometimes or yellowish, it formed in this
water trap down there.
And when they analyzed the composition of this water in the trap, they found that it
had simple amino acids.
So they were easily able to produce amino acids out of this representative primitive
atmosphere.
Now this was a monumental experiment, and it really excited people, and it was replicated
many times over in the following decades, and more fancy examples of it were produced.
And it showed that amino acids are relatively easy to form.
Now the problem is that our understanding of Earth's primitive atmosphere has changed
in the last half century, and we don't think that it consisted mostly of methane and ammonia
and hydrogen.
Those are very reactive compounds, and one might imagine that, yeah, if amino acids are
going to form, they're going to form out of these highly reactive compounds.
Instead we now think that Earth's early atmosphere had more carbon dioxide and nitrogen molecules,
not much methane and ammonia.
So in fact, when you pass sparks through an atmosphere consisting of nitrogen and carbon
dioxide, you don't get amino acids released, not much of anything.
So it appears as though the Miller and Urie experiment doesn't apply probably to Earth's
primitive atmosphere.
But it was still a very useful experiment because it shows that complex molecules can
form under some not-so-far-fetched conditions, and such conditions may have existed around
some exoplanets, or some moons of exoplanets, or maybe even elsewhere in our solar system.
So I think it was a monumental experiment.
Moreover we now know that there are other places on Earth where life exists and may
even have formed, other than in ponds and at the surfaces of oceans.
We know of geothermal vents on Earth where there's a source of energy that's not the
sun, it's rather geothermal activity underneath the Earth's crust, and the magma seeps up
and heats the surrounding regions, and that's a source of energy, a nice source of energy,
and the raw materials for complex compounds can exist in these regions.
So you don't need to do this in the dilute oceans or even the more concentrated ponds.
It could be that the raw materials are present near geothermal vents more along the lines
of the proportions used in the Miller and Urie experiments.
And finally we know that amino acids just can't be all that hard to form because we
find some simple amino acids in some of the meteorites that land on Earth, in particular
the carbonaceous kind have amino acids in them, and the most famous of this sort is
the Murchison meteorite, you can read about it if you google it.
So we find amino acids in meteorites and also in comets, and I mentioned a few lectures
ago how the deep impact probe smashed into a comet revealing then a bunch of organic
compounds underneath its hard crust.
So amino acids aren't that hard to form, clearly nature does it in abundance.
Of course there's a long way to go between just having simple amino acids and a complex
long chain of them that's able to replicate and evolve and all that.
How do you go from the chicken soup to the chicken, that's the hard part.
Where does the spark of life come from?
All right we've got amino acids, where do we go from there?
We don't know yet.
We don't know.
It's a hard thing.
Biologists are studying the origins of life and it's difficult because even the simplest
cell is an amazingly complex structure.
Here I have a t-shirt of a eukaryotic cell, here's a close-up of it, that's not really
the simplest cell, the simplest cells are the so-called prokaryotes that don't have a nucleus.
But anyway you get the picture, you get the idea, look at this thing, it's really complicated.
There are all these ribosomes and the Golgi complex and all sorts of other crazy things,
you know.
I mean it's not just a collection of amino acids and a flask.
How do you get a cell?
How do you get life?
We don't know.
It's a great question, one of the outstanding questions of modern science.
Nevertheless, we know that primitive life, microbes and bacteria, must have arisen very
quickly on the surface of the earth.
Because you'll recall that the earth is about 4.6 billion years old.
But for at least the first half billion years or so of its existence, it was still being
pummeled by debris coming in and making the earth bigger.
There were all these meteorites, you know, that landed.
All these meteoroids were flying around intersecting the earth, accumulating on the earth and making
it bigger.
And when they hit the surface of the earth, they dissipate a huge amount of energy, making
the surface of the earth very hot for a long time, even molten early on.
So the end of bombardment was something like 4 or 3.9 billion years ago, surely life did
not exist at that time, you know, before the end of bombardment, because it was just much
too hot for anything to exist, I mean the atmosphere had been vaporized, that's how
we lost our really primitive atmosphere, and you know, some of it probably was replenished
throughout gassing later on, or with comets coming in and depositing their water, whatever.
We don't really know where our atmosphere came from.
But in any case, up until 3.9 billion years ago, conditions were pretty darn harsh for
life.
Yet, there's evidence, fossil evidence for life, easily 3 billion years ago, a little
bit more controversially, back to 3.5 billion years ago, and there's chemical evidence for
life all the way back to 3.8 billion years ago.
Now the evidence for life 3 billion years ago is in the form of these stromatolites,
they are giant collections of cyanobacteria that live trillions upon trillions in these
colonies, and in fact, they still form today.
In some parts of western Australia, you can find colonies of stromatolites, but these
things go back to 3 billion years, and then there is evidence showing collections of cells
all the way back to 3.5 billion years ago, it's fossil evidence, but it's hard to interpret,
so there's still some controversy about that, and then there's chemical evidence all the
way back to 3.8 billion years ago for some forms of life.
So in the first 100 million years or so after conditions became suitable for life, life
arose.
I mean, it just did.
You're looking at the primitive oceans, and for a while there's nothing there, and then
100 million years later, teeming with organisms, simple ones, but nevertheless they're there.
If that's typical, then life may form easily on other moons and planets elsewhere in our
galaxy and in other galaxies.
Maybe even life arose a couple of times on Earth and was squelched by some meteoroid
that hit it.
We don't really know that that happened, but in any case, in the first 100 million years,
life arose at least once, and then it has continued unabated since then.
All right, well, you might say maybe conditions were just perfect on Earth for the formation
of this primitive life, and maybe it doesn't happen elsewhere.
But in fact, if you look in various parts of the Earth in extreme conditions, you find
that life is plentiful there as well, from the Antarctic to the Sahara Desert to underneath
the Earth's surface, you find life everywhere.
And let me give you just a few examples of these extremophiles that live and indeed flourish
in very harsh conditions.
There is an area of Yellowstone National Park known as the Pinwheel Geyser, and you can
see water that is nearly at the boiling point, and it's flowing along here, and there are
all these different colors.
Each color corresponds to a different species of bacteria that lives in this nearly boiling
water.
Moreover, the acidity of the water is enormous.
Here's my colleague at Berkeley, Jeff Marcy, measuring the water with a piece of paper
that allows you to measure the pH, the acidity or alkalinity of the water.
And he found that it has a pH of two, water, neutral water is seven, a pH of two is like
acidic battery acid.
It is not extremely good stuff, you know, I mean, you don't want to go around touching
it very much, all right?
This stuff can corrode metal quite easily.
Here he's holding, again, a strip of paper that can measure the acidity of the fumes,
and then a little binder clip that was immersed in the water, and you can see that the binder
clip got corroded fairly quickly, and algae that was in that water accumulated on this
clip.
You know, there's algae sitting around in this acidic, nearly boiling water.
I mean, that's incredible, right?
So it thrives there.
Moreover, there's been algae found a centimeter or two beneath the surface of Antarctic rocks
where it's nicely protected from the elements, and there's evidence for bacteria that live
over a kilometer down underneath the surface of the earth.
They form there, and they thrive there.
It's not entirely clear how they form there, but it appears that they survive on hydrogen
generated by a chemical reaction between water and iron silicates in the volcanic rock, a
kilometer beneath earth's surface.
And conditions may have been similar on Mars.
You know, Mars had volcanism and similar sorts of conditions, so life might have formed on
Mars in a similar way.
And you might think, oh, well, that's really rare life, but it's not.
On earth, it's estimated that up to, or perhaps even more than, half of the biomass of the
earth might be in the form of these various microbes sitting around a kilometer underneath
earth's surface.
You know, we see what's wandering around here, giraffes and elephants and people and
slugs, but that's not necessarily representative of all of life on earth, and indeed a lot
of it thrives deep underneath the earth's surface.
So life does appear to form and thrive in rather extreme conditions.
It doesn't need the perfect environment of an air conditioned room, OK?
Well the question of whether simple life forms easily can be tested experimentally.
We can look for life elsewhere in our solar system and elsewhere in our galaxy.
The discovery of even a single species of indigenous life elsewhere on some other moon
or planet would greatly support the hypothesis that simple life forms easily, OK?
So we'll begin our search for simple life in our solar system because it's most accessible
to our observational techniques, and later we'll move on to these various exoplanets
that have been discovered.
And in our solar system, I've already briefly mentioned in the appropriate lectures the
various places where there may have been conditions suitable for the formation of at least life
that likes rather extreme conditions.
I mentioned Mars, Europa, Enceladus, and also possibly Titan and Io.
We know that whatever life formed in the solar system elsewhere other than earth, it
had to have been confined at best to primitive life, microbes and bacteria.
There's no good evidence for intelligence elsewhere in our solar system despite published
claims to the contrary in the tabloids.
New NASA photo proves humans lived on Mars.
Stone monument is a mile long and 2,000 feet high.
Well I've already mentioned this, I talked about it in the Mars lecture.
This was an area of Mars where for years satellite images showed sort of a fuzzy looking face.
There are the eyes, there's the nose and mouth looking up at us supposedly constructed by
an intelligent civilization.
But more recent images show that it's just a rock or a pile of rocks, a mountain that
has various rifts and things upon which the sunlight falls and the shadows sometimes make
it look like a face.
It's not anything that was built by an intelligent creature.
Some people claim that Elvis moved to Mars and indeed still lives there.
I've heard that report and there's the argument that you sometimes hear that the reason that
so many of our spacecraft to Mars have been dismal failures is that there are aliens living
on Mars who don't want us to know about them and so they destroy the spacecraft before
the spacecraft are able to land or orbit the planet very much.
And so for example among the many missions to Mars that have failed was the Mars polar
lander which didn't, that's my wife Noelle's joke, the Mars polar lander that didn't.
I mean it's sad that it happened but you've got to make the best of a bad situation.
And usually engineers are able to figure out what went wrong.
In this particular case a software error caused the descent engines to shut down prematurely
so the thing crash landed rather than landing gently.
Engineers can often figure these things out after the fact.
Unfortunately sometimes they make mistakes along the way before the spacecraft reaches
the planet or lands on it.
In particular on September 23rd, 1999 the Mars climate orbiter was lost because it crash
landed and well actually it went through the atmosphere of Mars more quickly than it should
have and it burned up and then it crash landed.
And the problem there was that one engineering team had been using metric units and the other
had been using British or English units, pounds and things like that rather than kilograms
and you know meters and yards that kind of thing and they were conversing and exchanging
numbers without the units attached and that led to this crash landing.
So be careful and keep track of your units.
If I say I weigh 60, well 60 pounds, boy I'd be pretty skinny, 60 kilograms maybe that's
a little bit more reasonable, okay?
So anyway, so there's not much evidence for intelligent life out there.
What about primitive life?
Well let me cover this briefly because I've discussed it already in the previous lectures.
In the case of Mars in 1976 the Viking lander scooped up some soil and subjected it to a
number of tests in search of life and for example they took the soil and put it in a
broth sort of like chicken soup you know full of nutrients and they looked for signs of
metabolic processes and respiration, things like that, release of carbon dioxide you know
and initially they even thought they found evidence for life but later on it turned out
to be inconsistent with other experiments that they had done and they finally settled
on a chemical reaction of non-biological origin as having been the source of this initial
excitement.
Unfortunately Viking didn't even find any organic compounds on the surface of Mars suggesting
that life never existed there but that's not a clear conclusion because ultraviolet radiation
filtering through Mars' thin atmosphere could easily destroy any organic compounds that
once existed there.
So what we really need to do to test whether there are organic compounds on Mars is dig
a foot or so or a meter if you want to use metric units you know three feet right, dig
underneath the surface soil and then try to look for organic compounds in a protected
area of Mars and we might still find them.
And then finally there was this meteorite from Mars shown here.
We know it was from Mars because you can measure the composition of the trapped gases inside
and they perfectly match the composition and the peculiarities of the Martian atmosphere.
So we know that this thing came from Mars and some NASA scientists announced their studies
that suggested along four or five lines of evidence that there may have been primitive
microbes on Mars and the evidence was in the form of these long tube-like structures which
unfortunately are a factor of ten smaller than even the smallest nano-bacteria found
on Earth so it's hard to see how you would fit a self-replicating protein inside that
thing but nevertheless there were these tube-like structures and various forms of chemical evidence
like carbonate globules that form in the presence of water and magnetite crystals that are produced
on Earth by certain forms of microbeactivity and things like that.
And they acknowledged that no single piece of evidence was at all compelling but they
felt that all of them together give a pretty compelling piece of evidence for the presence
of microbes on Mars.
Now other scientists have analyzed the data and have pretty much shot holes through each
of these individual arguments.
It is still not completely certain that the idea is dead but most scientists think that
the evidence isn't nearly as good as had been suggested by these initial reports.
Still, the absence of evidence is not the evidence of absence so there may be bacteria
on Mars that we simply haven't found yet but headlines like this one on the Canadian version
of Time Magazine, Life on Mars, were probably premature.
There should have been a question mark there.
Well, we now think that Mars may have actually formed life early on because conditions on
Mars may have been very, very good early in its history, maybe even preceding the time
when conditions on Earth were good and so it's possible that microbes did form four
billion years ago on Mars and it's even possible then that some meteoroid hit Mars, excavated
a crater, sent debris flying through the solar system and that debris landed on Earth and
even polluted the Earth with microbes and it's conceivable that we are the descendants
of Martians.
That's not a completely crazy idea and it's even thought that this crater may have been
the crater from which the meteorite ALH-84001 came.
Now, clearly that's not the meteorite that provided the seeds of life on Earth but the
point is simply that ejection of material from the Martian surface may have polluted
the Earth and provided the seeds of life even here.
We don't know.
If we ever find microbes on Mars and can analyze their DNA, if their DNA ends up being just
like that of most of life here on Earth then the connection will be pretty clear that we
originated in the same place.
Well other places you can look are Jupiter's moon Europa which I had mentioned before is
partly molten inside because it's being squeezed tidally because it's got an elliptical orbit
around Jupiter so sometimes it's close to Jupiter and the tidal forces are greater and
sometimes it's farther away so the tidal forces are smaller.
So it's being squeezed as is Io and these moons are partially melted inside and you
can see in the case of Europa that the surface is covered with this ice with lots of fissures
and cracks and the suggestion then is that these are ice sheets floating on top of an
at least partially melted layer of ice and it is almost certainly water ice, the structure
of this is water almost certainly and a diagram of what the interior of Europa might look
like is shown here.
You've got an iron core surrounded by a rocky layer which in turn is surrounded by something
consisting largely of water in a partially melted form sort of a slush so if this really
is a partially frozen ocean one could say that it's the first ocean discovered ever
since Balboa quote discovered unquote the Pacific Ocean.
Then on top of that there's this layer of ice.
Now Saturn's moon Enceladus also has a layer of ice on its surface but that layer seems
to be even thinner than the 10 to 50 kilometer thick layer on Europa because we can see these
geysers coming out of Enceladus with water vapor coming out and so looking for life on
Enceladus might be a really good thing to do because you won't have to dig very deep
in order to reach the subsurface layers so I'm really excited about the future prospects
of a search for life on Enceladus.
You might even think that perhaps Saturn's moon Titan has life.
That would be kind of weird life.
It would be methane based life.
Methane is a solvent and it could take the place of water on Titan where you know things
dissolve in it and then molecules can form and eventually a self replicating molecule
can form.
We're not really sure what that kind of life would look like but it might possibly form.
And then finally there's Io where we have a bunch of sulfur compounds and stuff and
lots of erupting volcanoes and things like that.
It's conceivable that some sort of sulfur based life might form and indeed biologists
are studying the possible formation of life deep beneath the Earth's surface where there
are sulfur compounds in the presence of iron silicates and a little bit of water and stuff
and it's thought that maybe life can form under those conditions.
So it's conceivable that there's life all over the place in our solar system and we
just don't know of its presence yet.
But there are many places to search.
We used to think that Earth was alone in terms of being a nice place to live but for certain
extreme forms of microbes and bacteria other places in the solar system might be just as
nice as Earth and we should certainly search there as a first step.
