In the previous lecture I explained how astronomers determine the distances of stars, at least
those that are most nearby to us.
And I explained also how we measure the surface temperatures of stars and briefly the compositions
of stars, the chemical abundances of the elements.
In this lecture I'll describe the brightnesses of stars, both their apparent brightness and
their intrinsic brightness, or power, or luminosity, or umph.
You know, that's an important characteristic of a star, how much energy it produces.
And so that, together with these other fundamental properties of stars that we've been discussing,
will give us a more complete understanding of the physical way in which stars work and
generate their energy and shine.
Now perhaps the most obvious observed fact about the stars, when you go and look at them
in the sky, is that they have different apparent brightnesses.
Here we can see the constellation Orion with some very bright stars, Betelgeuse up here,
Rigel down there, some other fairly bright stars, and then the belt and the sword.
Then there's this backdrop of much fainter stars, some are sort of intermediate in brightness,
but you go out and look at the sky and you can tell that the stars have different brightnesses.
Now astronomers use the term apparent magnitude to quantify the observed or apparent visual
brightness of a star.
This dates all the way back to the Greek astronomer Hipparchus over 2100 years ago, who made a
catalogue of the positions and apparent brightnesses of over 850 stars.
Now Hipparchus looked at the sky and proclaimed that the typical brightest stars in the sky
are of the first magnitude, magnitude one.
And he also said that the faintest stars that are visible to the naked eye on a very clear
dark, moonless night, those are the ones that are of magnitude six or sixth magnitude stars.
So notice the bright ones have a smaller numerical magnitude than the faint ones.
First magnitude for the brightest stars that you can see, the typical brightest stars,
some are even brighter.
Sixth magnitude for the very faintest stars that he could see in very clear, dark conditions.
Now keep in mind that apparent magnitude is a term that refers simply to the observed
brightness of the star.
It is not the star's physical size, it's just the apparent brightness.
Well later on astronomers determined, quantitatively, that a first magnitude star is 100 times
brighter than a sixth magnitude star.
That is, per second, 100 times as many photons hit your eye from a first magnitude star than
a sixth magnitude star.
So it's interesting that a difference of five magnitudes, six minus one is five, corresponds
to a factor of 100 in brightness.
And this is basically because our eye responds on what's called a logarithmic scale or close
to a logarithmic scale.
For every equal factor in brightness, you get a one step increase or decrease in the
observed magnitude, the response of the eye to the star.
Let me clarify that.
A difference of five magnitudes corresponds to a brightness factor of 100.
That means that every one magnitude difference must correspond to the fifth root of 100 in
brightness.
Now 100 to the one-fifth power is in irrational number, it's 2.512 and so on, roughly two
and a half is usually good enough.
If you want to be a little bit more careful, 2.512 is even better.
So a first magnitude star, for example, is roughly two and a half times brighter, more
photons that is, than a second magnitude star.
Or a first magnitude star is 2.5 times 2.5, or a little over six times brighter than a
third magnitude star.
Or roughly 16 times brighter than a fourth magnitude star.
Or another factor of two and a half, or roughly 40 times brighter than a fifth magnitude star,
and finally 100 times brighter than a sixth magnitude star, that's how it goes.
And if you're mathematically inclined and want to see the equation, it looks something
like this.
For two stars, A and B, with apparent brightnesses B sub A and B sub B, and apparent magnitudes
M sub A and M sub B, the ratio of apparent brightnesses B sub A over B sub B is this formally
irrational number, but we will approximate it by 2.512 raised to a power equal to the
difference in magnitudes, the faint one M sub B minus the bright one M sub A. And you
can tell that this works if B is six and A is one, for example, the difference is five,
and 2.512 raised to the fifth power is indeed 100, so it all works out.
So what are the apparent magnitudes of some common celestial objects that you might see?
The sun has an apparent magnitude of minus 26.8.
It's really bright, so apparent magnitudes can be negative.
Hipparchus didn't say that one is the brightest thing possible.
The sun is minus 26.8.
The full moon is around minus 13, minus 12.6, something like that, depends on whether it's
close to us or far away in its orbit.
Venus, when it's at its brightest, is around magnitude minus 4.4.
Mars at its brightest is around minus 2.8, and Jupiter is comparable as well.
Sirius, the brightest star, is minus 1.5.
Canopus, the second brightest star, is minus 0.7.
Then there's a bunch of stars that have magnitudes of zero and many that are one, and those are
the typical brightest stars in the sky, the ones that are magnitude one.
The very faintest ones you can see with your unaided eye on a perfect night are magnitude
six.
Pluto is around magnitude 14, so you definitely need a pretty good telescope to see Pluto.
You need to collect more photons with a bigger collecting area than the pupil of your eye.
And the faintest star is observable in long exposures with great telescopes like the Hubble
Space Telescope or the Keck Telescope is around magnitude 30.
And again, this is a logarithmic scale.
Factors in brightness correspond to equal intervals in magnitude.
Let's take a look at the night sky, and since, you know, it might be fun for you to look
at the constellations and estimate the magnitudes of stars, let me show you here the constellation
Orion.
Rigel, the lower right-hand foot of Orion, has a magnitude of around 0.12, and the magnitude
of Betelgeuse, the upper left shoulder of Orion, is around 0.5.
Now the belt stars of Orion are around second magnitude.
Looking again at the winter night sky and extending the belt of Orion down to the lower
left, you come to Sirius, the brightest star in the sky, at magnitude negative 1.5.
Extending the belt to the upper right, you get to Aldebaran, which has a magnitude of
0.85.
And off to the left of Orion is Canis Minor, the minor dog, and its brightest star is Procyon,
with a magnitude of 0.38.
If you look at the summer sky, a prominent feature is the summer triangle, I've mentioned
it before, Vega has a magnitude of 0.03, usually just approximated as zero.
Altair down here in the constellation Aquila, the eagle, has a magnitude of 0.77, and Deneb
in Cygnus, the swan, or the northern cross, has a magnitude of 1.25.
The Big Dipper, of course, is a familiar sight to most people.
Its stars are generally around magnitude two, roughly two.
This one here, where the handle joins the bowl, is around 3.5.
You can see it's distinctly dimmer than the others, which are roughly magnitude two.
So the Big Dipper has pretty bright stars, but not super bright.
Orion has the brightest stars of any constellation.
You can look at star charts that give not just the positions of the stars and the shapes
of the constellations, but also their magnitudes.
And when you look at the sky with one of these charts, you can recognize the constellations
in part, not just by their shapes, but also, of course, by the brightness of the stars.
Orion and the Big Dipper are a lot easier to recognize than some of the fainter constellations.
Now the book that I recommend for this class, The Cosmos, Astronomy in the New Millennium,
has, as its inside covers, star charts corresponding to the winter, summer, fall, and spring skies.
And here is the winter sky in the northern hemisphere.
And you can see the various bright stars and the outlines of the constellations shown.
And this is the northern part of the sky.
The southern part of the sky, visible during the winter, is shown in this next diagram.
And here, too, you can see the scale, where the different sizes of the dots correspond
to different magnitudes.
So the very biggest circle is negative one.
That corresponds to Sirius.
There it is right there.
Sirius is the big circle.
Negative 1.5 magnitude.
Zero th magnitude, well, there's a few such stars.
Capella, a sun-like star, very much like the sun, is about zero th magnitude.
So are Betelgeuse and Rigel.
Then there are the first magnitude stars, the second magnitude, third, fourth, and fifth.
And they have progressively smaller dots.
The chart drawn here by Will Tyrion doesn't show the sixth magnitude stars because there
are so many of them, and also because you really need very dark, clear conditions to
see them.
So most people don't see them in general.
They see only down to fourth or fifth magnitude, especially in a city.
Now if you look at the stars through different filters, like blue filters and red filters,
you will isolate the light that is emitted either in the blue part of the spectrum or
the red part of the spectrum.
And technically, the apparent magnitude of a star depends on which part of the spectrum
you're observing.
A cool star like Betelgeuse looks really quite red.
It emits a lot less energy at the blue wavelengths.
So if you were to look at Betelgeuse through a blue filter, that is a filter that only
allows blue light to pass through, it would be fainter than if you looked at it through
a red filter.
And it would have a bigger magnitude at blue wavelengths than at red wavelengths.
So technically, you have to specify when you're talking about magnitude which part
of the spectrum you're looking at.
And usually we just say visual magnitude, which is the middle of the spectrum.
Now if you look not just at Betelgeuse, a red cool star, but at Rigel, a hot blue star,
it would be the exact opposite of Betelgeuse.
Through a blue filter, it would look brighter and would have a small magnitude.
And through a red filter, it would look dimmer and have a big magnitude.
So anyway, that's, you know, you have to be a little bit technical there if you ask someone
what the magnitude of a star was, you have to specify which filter they were observing
through.
Okay, well that's the apparent brightnesses of stars.
Let's now go to a more fundamental quantity, their intrinsic power, their umph, their luminosity.
And that can be quantified with a term called absolute magnitude.
The absolute magnitude of a star is simply the apparent magnitude that it would have
had had it been placed at a distance of 10 parsecs from us.
Now 10 parsecs is about 32.6 light years.
Put all the stars at a distance of 10 parsecs, that's the standard distance, and then compare
their apparent brightnesses.
If they're all at the same distance, the differences in their apparent brightnesses will correspond
to differences in their intrinsic power, right?
Because they're all at the same distance.
You don't have some that look bright because they're close and some that look faint because
they're far away.
So if we put our sun at a distance of 10 parsecs instead of one astronomical unit, it would
look magnitude 4.8, a far cry from minus 26.8, right?
It looks so bright to us because it's so nearby, it's one astronomical unit.
Well one parsec is 200,000 of those things, so 10 parsecs is 2 million of those things.
The sun would look a lot fainter.
It would look about as bright as this star here in the little dipper.
It's fifth magnitude, roughly 4.8.
And so if you look at the little dipper in the sky, you'll notice it's actually hard
to make out, especially these last two stars there in the bowl are pretty dim and some
of the stars in the handle are pretty dim.
It's hard to see the little dipper unless you know what you're looking for.
And our sun would just be one of these random stars if it were at a distance of 10 parsecs.
Now again, for those who want to know, the mathematical equation relating apparent and
absolute magnitude isn't that complicated and I'll show it here, but if you don't care
about the math, that's perfectly fine.
You can understand what I'll say in the rest of the course just by having a qualitative
understanding of the effect of distance and intrinsic power on the apparent brightnesses
of stars.
But for those who want the math, the apparent magnitude little m minus the absolute magnitude
big M is equal to 5 times the base 10 logarithm of the ratio of the distance of the star
to 10 parsecs.
So if you measure the distance D in units of parsecs and you put it in this equation,
take the logarithm, multiply by 5, that'll give you the difference between the apparent
magnitude and the absolute magnitude.
And this clearly works for a distance of 10 parsecs because 10 over 10 is 1, the logarithm
of 1 is 0, 5 times 0 is 0, and so the apparent magnitude minus the absolute magnitude is
0.
Well, that's the definition of absolute magnitude.
It's the apparent magnitude a star would have had at 10 parsecs.
Okay, so it works, it turns out.
Well magnitudes are useful to professional astronomers in some situations and also to
amateur astronomers who want to know whether they're likely to see a particular object
through their own telescope.
If the object is ninth magnitude, they're likely to see it through their small telescope.
If the object is 27th magnitude, good luck.
They're just not going to see it unless they have access to the Hubble Space Telescope
on a continual basis.
So magnitudes are useful in many ways, but they're not really very physical.
Just based on what Hipparchus decided 2,100 years ago, oh, there's the first magnitude
stars, they're the bright ones, and here these faint guys are sixth magnitude.
That was hardly very quantitative.
What we prefer to use in most cases and what I will use through most of this course is
a more physical unit of brightness, the apparent brightness.
Now I defined it loosely earlier on as being just the number of photons that hit your eye
each second.
But in fact, it turns out that it's a little bit more complex than that.
It's not just the number of photons, you have to take into account their energy as well.
So technically, apparent brightness has units of energy divided by second.
It's the amount of energy per second per square centimeter of your eye or your telescope
or whatever other collecting area you have.
So apparent brightness is in units of energy, say ergs, ergs are a unit of energy, per second,
per unit of time, per square centimeter, per unit of area.
And this apparent brightness B is clearly related to the true power or luminosity L of
a star, the bigger the luminosity, the bigger the oomph of a star, all other things being
equal, the bigger its apparent brightness will be.
But clearly the distance must have an effect as well because you could have a very intrinsically
powerful star look dim because it's very, very far away.
Or you could have an intrinsically dim star look dim yet be quite close to us.
So distance must be an important factor as well.
And indeed there's a relationship between the apparent brightness, the true intrinsic
brightness or luminosity or power L and the distance.
And that relationship is known as the inverse square law.
Let me illustrate it here.
First mathematically, apparent brightness is luminosity L divided by 4 pi D squared
where D is the distance to the star.
Here's what's happening.
A star is emitting radiation in a roughly spherically symmetric way.
And after a distance of one unit where that unit is arbitrary, let's say it's one light
year, a given cone of light has spread out over one square unit of area.
Now if you go to a distance that's twice as large, D is two units in this case, that
same cone of light has spread out now over four of these square units of area.
So each of the square units of area must have only one quarter of the energy passing through
it per second that the square had at a distance of only one unit.
If we now go to a distance of three units away, that cone of light has spread out over
nine square units of area.
So each of them must be receiving only one ninth of the energy per second that the unit
up close had received because it's the same amount of light spreading out in this cone
and just increasing in area.
Good analogy.
Suppose you've got a hose and you want to spray people.
You can spray one person nearby and really soak him or her, or you can fan out and spray
a whole bunch of people with that same quantity of water relatively little each, right?
Spray one person a lot, spray a lot of people only a little, be careful who you spray.
Make sure they're your friends and they're in a good mood.
Now let's take a look at a little animation which has two 1,000 watt light bulbs initially
at the same distance.
Now let's put one of them twice as far away as the other.
It will look as though it were a light bulb one quarter as powerful or only 250 watts.
Now it's true wattage is still 1,000, but it'll look like it's 250.
And if we place it at an even bigger distance 10 times farther away, it will look one 100th
as bright, the inverse square law, and one 100th of 1,000 is 10.
So it will look as though it were a 10 watt light bulb.
But it's really a 1,000 watt light bulb far away.
So that's the inverse square law of light.
You can look at the headlights of a car for example.
Here's a car viewed from 10 meters and you can see that the headlights are very bright.
If you double the distance to 20 meters, the headlights look to a first approximation one
quarter as bright.
Now with headlights it's not perfectly an inverse square law because the headlights have
these reflectors that channel the light in a somewhat collimated beam out in front.
They don't spread out in a spherically symmetric way.
So it turns out not to be exactly the inverse square law, but conceptually you can see what
I'm talking about.
Suppose the light just spreads out uniformly.
And if we now go another factor of two farther away to 40 meters, it looks one quarter as
bright as at that previous distance or one sixteenth as bright as initially.
10 meters, 20 meters, 40 meters, you get initially a certain brightness, then one quarter of that
brightness, then one sixteenth of that brightness.
And that's the inverse square law of light.
And indeed you judge the distance of an oncoming car at night in part by looking at how bright
the headlights appear to be.
Now if they look dim, the thing's probably pretty far away.
If they're up close, you'd better break.
If you're not very good at doing this instinctively without even thinking about the inverse square
law, you shouldn't be driving at night.
It turns out the other way we judge the distance of an oncoming car is by looking at the angle
between the two headlights.
In the example I just showed, not only does the apparent brightness of the headlights decrease
with increasing distance, but the angular separation of the headlights also decreases
with increasing distance.
And that's the other way in which we're able to judge the distance of an oncoming car.
Okay, well now let's go back to this inverse square law and see how luminosity, brightness,
and distance are related in a quantitative way and how we can use this relationship to
determine the luminosity.
So we had B equals L over 4 pi D squared.
The 4 pi D squared is simply the surface area of the sphere at distance D away from
the star because the star's light, each second the light is going through a bigger and bigger
sphere and the surface area of that sphere is 4 pi times the radius squared or 4 pi
D squared.
So that's the sphere over which the light has spread out.
That's where the 4 pi D squared comes from.
A given L spreads out over that surface area.
Okay, so that's the inverse square law.
Well if we multiply both sides of the equation by 4 pi D squared, you get L equals 4 pi D
squared times the apparent brightness.
Now that's really great because you can measure the apparent brightness B of a star using a
CCD for example or a photographic film as they used to do.
And if the star is sufficiently nearby, you can measure its distance using the trigonometric
parallax technique, triangulation if you will.
So you know D, you've measured B, you know what 4 and pi are hopefully, and you multiply
all those together and that's how you get L. So you know L by using the inverse square
law having measured B and D. Alright, that's how we get the luminosity or power or oomph
of a star.
Well stars emit a lot of energy, okay?
And indeed the numbers are humongous.
The sun for example emits 4 times 10 to the 33 ergs per second.
Now what's an erg?
An erg is a unit of energy, turns out that an erg is about the amount of energy it takes
one fly to do one push-up.
Have you ever watched flies doing push-ups?
They do this kind of a thing, lizards do it too.
Lizards expend a bigger amount of energy when doing push-ups than flies do.
Now that's not the formal definition of an erg of course.
The formal definition is the amount of energy it takes to lift one gram, one centimeter
at the surface of the earth.
But it turns out to be about the amount of energy it takes a fly to do a push-up.
So imagine 4 times 10 to the 33 power flies doing all these push-ups.
That's how much energy the sun emits.
And you know, it's hard to get a quantitative grasp, it's hard to get a feeling for how much
energy this is, all these zeros flying around.
So we will define a more convenient unit, the solar luminosity.
The solar luminosity designated L sub sun, where the sun symbol is a circle with a dot
in it.
Okay, that's the symbol astronomers use for the sun.
L sub sun is this quantity, 4 times 10 to the 33 ergs per second.
So if you measure a star's luminosity, and it happens to be 8 times 10 to the 33 ergs
per second, you would simply say, oh, that's a two solar luminosity star.
That's a lot easier.
It's a lot more convenient than repeating all these large numbers.
By the way, 10 million ergs is a joule.
So an equivalent way of stating the solar luminosity is that it's 4 times 10 to the
26 power joules per second, and a joule per second is a watt.
So our sun is a 4 times 10 to the 26 watt light bulb.
A lot, a lot more powerful than the typical 100 watt light bulbs you've got sitting around
in your house, okay?
But anyway, even those numbers are inconvenient.
So let's just call it one solar luminosity, all right?
Okay, so now let's go out and measure the apparent brightness of a bunch of stars, compute
their distance from the trigonometric parallax, and thus determine their luminosity.
We get the luminosity of a bunch of stars.
Now let's go and use, say, Wien's law, or a detailed analysis of the absorption lines
to determine the surface temperature of the star.
You can do that as well, okay?
I discussed that in the previous lecture.
And now let's plot these two quantities, surface temperature versus luminosity, and see what
we get.
Two astronomers in the early 20th century did that, Anar Hertzsprung and independently
Henry Norris Russell.
And they came up with this now called, so-called Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, but I like to
call it the temperature luminosity diagram.
And you can see that with the luminosity plotted on the vertical axis and the temperature
in units of thousands of degrees Kelvin plotted on the horizontal axis, stars fall in certain
regions of this diagram.
Now notice that my temperature scale, or that of Hertzsprung and Russell, goes backwards.
The hot stars are at the left here, the cool stars are at the right, and the luminous stars
are up here, the low luminosity stars are down there.
So the luminosity goes in the right direction, the temperature sort of goes backwards.
And the thing to note is that most stars fall along a well-defined sequence in this diagram.
This so-called main sequence.
There are some stars higher up here, luminous stars.
And there are some stars that are down here, very dim, intrinsically dim stars.
But most of the stars are along the main sequence, and even more importantly, certain parts of
the diagram have very few stars at all.
So for some reason, stars only congregate in certain regions of the temperature luminosity
diagram.
There must be some physical reason for that.
There's something about the structure of stars that only allows them to have certain combinations
of surface temperature and luminosity.
And those combinations can actually change for a given star as it evolves.
We will study that later on.
The Hertzsprung-Russell diagram is very important for that purpose.
But the physical characteristics of most stars are confined to these very specific regions,
not randomly placed over the whole diagram.
And the first step that scientists take when trying to get a physical understanding of an
object or a class of objects is to look for patterns to see whether the variables that
dictate the observed properties of the star are completely random, fall all over the map,
or have certain patterns to them that beg for an explanation.
When you see patterns, you know that there's got to be some physics behind those patterns.
And watching the patterns and quantifying them allows you then to get to that first
step of a complete physical understanding of the object that you are studying.
