In the previous few lectures, I've described how astronomers determine the intrinsic properties
of stars, their power or luminosity, their umph, their surface temperature, their radius,
things like that.
Now, it turns out that these intrinsic properties are dictated by the mass of the star.
The mass determines essentially everything else about the star, except for a few things
like its chemical composition and a few other things.
Its distance, for example, is independent of the mass, but many of the intrinsic properties
are dictated by the mass.
And indeed, the mass determines how long stars live, at least single stars live, for a time
that's almost entirely determined by their initial mass.
So in this lecture, I will describe how this key property of stars, their mass, is determined.
As for extrasolar planets, the mass of a given star can be measured if it orbits another
star using Newton's laws of motion and universal gravitation.
If you look up at the sky and you see all these stars out there, most of them to you
look single.
But if you looked at them very carefully, you would find that indeed half of all the
stars, or perhaps even more, are parts of multiple systems.
Two stars orbiting one another, but they look like one because they're so far away, or even
three or four stars sometimes.
These are called binary stars, or multiple star systems.
So if you consider the fact that over 50% or about 50% of the stars that you see in
the sky are double or triple or quadruple, that implies that the majority of stars by
a long shot are parts of multiple star systems.
Here's an example where you have two fairly bright stars so close together that to the
naked eye, they look like one.
And indeed, this one here, 16-signy B, we know is orbited very close in by exoplanets.
I discussed that in one of the previous lectures.
Here's another double star, albedo, or beta-signy, which when viewed through a telescope appears
as two stars, but if you look at it with the naked eye, it looks like one.
Albedo can be found at the bottom of the northern cross, or alternatively the head of Cygnus
the swan.
It's right there.
That's albedo, and it's visible to the naked eye, but not as two stars, rather as one star.
And you have to look through a telescope to see that there are two stars there.
Now I like albedo because the two stars have colors blue and gold, and those happen to
be the school colors of the University of California Berkeley, my home institution,
or Cal.
And I would say to students in my classes that, oh, look at that, you know, we should
name this the Cal Star because it has the Cal colors.
And every year I'd say that, and so one year one of the student body senators said, okay,
let's do something about this.
And she proposed to some higher governing body that albedo would be named the official
Cal Star, and this went through a bunch of committees, and eventually it was so named.
Just on the university campus, of course, this isn't really official according to the
astronomical, the international astronomical union.
But anyway, here's a t-shirt that was designed in honor of this Cal Star albedo, albedo.
The two stars in a binary system orbit their common center of mass, or their balance point.
And we go back to the seesaw drawing I showed when I discussed exoplanets.
Indeed, much of the physics is what I've already discussed in connection with extrasolar planets
orbiting other stars.
So a high mass star is closer to the center of mass than a low mass star is.
And indeed, mathematically, the mass of the high mass star multiplied by its distance
from the center of mass is equal to the mass of the low mass star multiplied by its distance
from the center of mass.
So this is sort of a balance point, or the center of gravity.
The stars orbit their common center of gravity, or center of mass, according to Newton's law
of universal gravitation and his laws of motion.
So we see here a massive star and a lower mass star orbiting their common center of gravity.
In this case, the mass of star is 3.6 times as massive as the low mass star, and the eccentricity
of the orbits is zero.
The orbits in this case are circular.
Now in general, you have this relationship that M1R1 equals M2R2, that is, the mass of
the more massive star multiplied by its distance from the center of mass is equal to the mass
of the less massive star multiplied by its distance from the center of mass.
So if the two masses are equal, the center of mass is equidistant from the two stars.
That is, it's in the middle of the line segment joining the two stars.
In general, the center of mass is not in the middle, and we've already discussed the case
where one object is far more massive than the other.
For example, a star and an extra solar planet orbiting that star.
In that case, M1 is much, much greater than M2, and the center of mass is nearly but not
exactly at the center of the star.
The two stars are held together according to Newton's law of universal gravitation.
The masses are M1 and M2.
The distance between them is D. The force is just Newton's constant of gravity times
the product of the masses divided by the square of the distance between them.
And here, the orbits are circular, but in general, the orbits can be elliptical.
And so in this little animation, you can see elliptical orbits.
And as you would expect, according to Kepler's second law, when the two stars are close to
each other, they move faster than when they're farther apart.
It's like a comet going around the sun.
And it's close to the sun.
It goes zooming past.
And when it's far away, it goes very, very slowly.
This is all a consequence of Newton's laws of motion and universal gravitation.
Now you might wonder, what's the chance that there's exoplanets orbiting in a multiple
star system?
I mentioned the case of 16-signy A and B. Star B does have some exoplanets orbiting
it.
But those exoplanets are very close to star B. All right?
You can have planets orbiting close to one star or the other, so they're not influenced
by the other star very much.
Or you could have exoplanets orbiting far, far away from both stars so that the gravity
of those two stars acts as though it were one star, or nearly so.
So there's two stars there, and this planet is orbiting way out here.
Those are the two stable kinds of ways that exoplanets can orbit.
If you try to have a figure eight going between the two stars or some other complicated orbit,
it tends to be unstable and the planet will be ejected.
Let's look at the types of binary stars that exist in the sky.
Really these are ways of identifying binary stars.
The types that I'll talk about are not, in general, mutually exclusive.
There are, first of all, the optical, or I call fake, doubles.
Optical doubles are simply two stars that happen to be along our same line of sight,
or nearly the same line of sight, but they are not gravitationally bound to one another.
They're just two separate stars that have nothing to do with one another.
And a famous example of an optical double is Alcor and Mizar, the second star from the
end of the handle of the Big Dipper.
If you have keen eyes and a dark sky, you will see, even visually, without a telescope,
that this star is actually two stars, Alcor and Mizar, and indeed it is considered a test
of good vision.
Although it's not that hard.
I suspect that Alcor and Mizar used to be closer together in angle than they are now, because
I don't think it's that hard a test.
But anyway, you can go out, look at the Big Dipper, and see if you can see those two
stars clearly.
They are not gravitationally bound to one another.
They're a fake double.
They're what's called an optical double.
The other kinds of binary stars are genuine binary stars.
That is, they're gravitationally bound together.
And the first type are the so-called visual binaries.
That is, if you look at the star with your naked eye, it looks like a single star.
But if you peer at it through a telescope, it breaks up into two.
And it turns out that in the Alcor and Mizar system, Mizar is a visual double.
If you look at it through a telescope, you will see two stars separated by about 15 seconds
of arc.
Alcor, the one that's not gravitationally bound to them, is a full 11 minutes of arc
away.
So it's quite far away compared to this angle.
So Mizar breaks up into Mizar A and Mizar B. As I'll discuss in a few minutes, both
A and B are themselves binary stars.
Another example of a visual binary is Polaris, the North Star.
Here it is.
You can find it by taking the two end stars of the bowl of the Big Dipper and extending
them out by a factor of maybe five times their separation.
And you get to the North Star there, Polaris.
Through a telescope, Polaris breaks up into two stars, Polaris A and Polaris B. Now, with
the Hubble Space Telescope, you can tell that, in fact, Polaris A is itself a double
star.
A bright one, Polaris uppercase A, and a little faint guy next door, Polaris uppercase A,
lowercase B. So there are many such systems where, upon further scrutiny, apparently single
stars break up into two or more.
The Cal Star is a great example of a visual binary, where you can see the two stars through
a telescope.
And, in fact, I like to use this example when illustrating Wien's Law and the Stefan
Boltzmann Law.
We know that these two stars are about the same distance from us.
We know that the blue one is hotter than the gold one, so it emits more energy per unit
of emitting area, yet it appears fainter than the gold one.
So if more energy is emitted per unit area by the hot one, but it appears fainter than
the yellow or gold one, that means that the yellow or gold one must be a physically much,
much bigger star.
It must have a much bigger surface area over which to radiate.
So indeed, it turns out the gold one is a red giant.
It looks bigger in this photograph, but that's just an artifact of the photographic process.
Both are points of light as seen from our distance, and you can only really deduce that
the gold one is physically bigger than the blue one using the argument that I just gave.
The parent size on the photograph is meaningless.
Now let's turn to another type of binary star, or another way of identifying binary
stars, and that's the eclipsing binaries.
They generally appear as single stars through a telescope, but if you monitor the brightness
of an eclipsing binary star, which looks like a single star even through a telescope, you
will notice that the brightness changes with time, and that's because there's another star
orbiting that star, I mean they're orbiting their mutual center of mass of course, but
you can think of it as one star orbiting the other.
From our perspective over there, one star passes in front of the other and blocks part
of its light, and then it itself gets blocked, and so part of the light is diminished, and
then it blocks it again right there, and so on.
So when they're spread apart like this, even though your telescope still only sees one
star because they're very close together, that one star is the combination of the light
from both stars, whereas when one is blocking the other, then part of the light is blocked
and the total amount of light decreases.
Let's look at an animation which shows this really well, the brightness or magnitude versus
time.
If you start the process here, this cooler star is blocking part of the light of the
brighter star for a while, and so there's a dip, then when they're separated, the total
brightness is a constant, then the brighter star is blocking the dimmer star, the dimmer
star is the cooler star, and so there's a smaller dip.
Then the cooler star is blocking the brighter star partially, so there's a bigger dip,
and then the brighter star blocks the cooler or dimmer star partially, and so there's a
smaller dip.
In other words, the areas blocked are the same in both cases when one star is in front
of the other or vice versa, but the size of the dip in total brightness depends on whether
the hotter star, which has a greater amount of emission per unit area, or the fainter
star, which has a smaller amount of emission per unit area, is being blocked.
If you increase the temperature of the star that's eclipsing the other star, let's make
them both equal, you will see that the dips are of the same size, the same depth, the
same magnitude.
Okay, so there was one of the dips when one star was blocking the other, and now here's
the other dip, and you can see they're the same size because I've constructed these
stars to have the same surface temperature.
And even though one is physically bigger than the other, you can see that during an eclipse
the same amounts of area are blocked off, and so the size of the dip is the same.
There's another one right there.
Now let's make the eclipsing star hotter than the star being eclipsed.
In that case, when the hotter star eclipses the cooler star, you get a dip, but when
the cooler star eclipses the hotter star, you get a deeper dip.
There it is, you get a deeper dip, because the same amount of area is being blocked,
but the hotter star emits more energy per unit area.
So already you can see that studies of binary stars can tell you all sorts of things about
those stars.
If you monitor the binary stars and watch the dips and measure the period and stuff
of the eclipsing binary, you can tell all sorts of things about it already.
Now if you go on and ask yourself, well, are there other ways of detecting binary stars?
There are.
I mean, you can have astrometric binaries.
For example, if you have a star being orbited by another star, but you can't see that other
star because it's very faint, you might be able to deduce its presence by noting that
the star that you can see is moving ever so slightly back and forth in the sky.
Astrometry is the measurement of stellar positions and movements in the sky, very slight
movements and positions, and you might see that it's wobbling back and forth, and indeed
serious the brightest star in the sky was found to have a companion through this technique
of astrometry long before the companion actually became visible through a telescope.
That companion is called Sirius B, it turns out to be a white dwarf star, but we didn't
know about it until people saw that Sirius A seems to be shifting slightly back and forth
in the sky as though it's being tugged by an unseen companion.
So here, in fact, is the position of star A over the course of many years, 1900, 1910,
1920, 1930, 1940, 1950, 1960, 70, 80, 90, and 2000.
You can see that the position of the star is shifting ever so slightly in the sky, and
it was deduced that there must be another star denoted here by the blue dotted line,
which is tugging on it, and indeed its position is calculated to be as is shown right there,
and when photographs were taken that were good enough to show the star, lo and behold
Sirius B was found.
So here, in fact, are two representative positions of Sirius A and B, one in 1965 when they're
nearly the farthest apart that they can be from one another, and then in 1992 when they
are in closest approach to one another.
So they have these elliptical orbits, and sometimes they're close together, and other
times they're far apart.
So those are the astrometric binaries.
Now let's turn to perhaps the most important class along with the eclipsing binaries, and
that's the spectroscopic binaries.
Those are the ones where you look at the star, and even through a telescope, it appears as
though it's one star, and you look at its brightness, and it doesn't seem to be changing,
so it's not an eclipsing binary, I mean it might be an eclipsing binary, but in general
it's not, in general the plane of the orbit is not along your line of sight, but you look
at the star and you say, okay, well I'm going to take a spectrum of it, and you look at the
spectrum, and you might see, for every, say, hydrogen line, you actually see two of them
there, closely spaced together, and for every iron line where you expected only one, you
might see only two, or where you expected to see only one, you might see two.
So if you then take multiple spectra of this star over the course of a night, or many nights,
you'll see these lines, the hydrogen lines and the iron lines shifting around from night
to night.
Let's look at that.
If you go and stare at an apparently single star through a telescope, and measure its spectrum
shown down here, you will see that in general each line appears doubled, but the doubled
lines move back and forth, sometimes one line is bluer than the other, later on that other
line will be bluer in wavelength than the first, so you see they're shifting around,
and that's because they're orbiting one another, and when one star is moving toward you and
your telescope, the light is blue shifted, conversely the other star at that moment must
be moving away from you, so its light is red shifted, and when you have both stars moving
perpendicular to your line of sight, there's no shift, so in fact the two absorption lines
merge into one, and then a little bit later you have the opposite thing, the line that
used to be blue shifted is now red shifted and vice versa.
Let's increase the speed of the orbit, you can see that this wobbling back and forth
of the spectral lines is bigger for a bigger speed, and that's because the Doppler shift
is larger if you have a higher speed, so if you now make the speed very high, you can
see these guys zooming back and forth.
These little animations are available with the text book, the cosmos, the astronomy in
the new book millennium by the way, if you choose to read that book.
Let's go down to slow speeds, and there you can see that the shifts are very minute, very
small, it might take a while for you to measure them, well anyway, these spectroscopic binaries
are all over the place, I mean many stars that appear single in the sky are spectroscopic
binaries, and a good example are the two stars Mizar A and Mizar B, if you look at them through
a telescope and you take their spectra over the course of many days, you find that in
fact Mizar A consists of two stars orbiting with a period of 20.5 days, indeed their mutual
orbits would barely fit inside the orbit of Mercury going around our sun, and both stars
have about 2.5 solar masses, that is each of them is about 2.5 solar masses.
Mizar B is also a spectroscopic binary, but with a significantly longer orbital period,
175.6 days, so this is actually a quadruple star system, and then Alcor is simply an optical
double with Mizar which has nothing to do with Mizar itself, but Mizar is four stars.
Well with these stars, the spectroscopic binaries and the eclipsing binaries, you can really
figure out a lot about the system, the best systems are those that are both spectroscopic
and eclipsing, because then you know that you're looking along the orbital plane, if
it's eclipsing it's got to be, you know, your line of sight has to be along the orbital
plane, and not at some random angle that you would have a hard time figuring out. So if
you have an eclipsing binary and you also measure its spectrum, and you take all those
numbers and you figure out what they mean, you can determine the masses of the individual
stars and their radii, it turns out, if you have all the numbers. Now I won't go through
the calculations here, but you can do it using Newton's laws of motion and universal gravitation
and measuring the orbital periods and measuring how long each star is eclipsed and all that
kind of stuff, all that gives you the radii and the masses. And it is from these eclipsing
spectroscopic binary stars that we know the masses of a few hundred stars really, really
well. Most other stars we can only sort of guess at the mass, but in a few cases we know
the masses really, really well. Let's turn to what the masses tell us, at least for the
main sequence stars. Now the main sequence is the prime of a star's life. I'll tell
you in a few lectures how a star behaves when it's on the main sequence, but basically it's
sitting around fusing hydrogen into helium, it's very stable, its luminosity isn't changing,
its radius isn't changing. That's what our sun is doing right now. It's in the middle
of its main sequence, it's in the prime of its life, it's a stable star. Most stars are
on the main sequence. That's the longest part of the active stages of a star's life.
Well, when you look at the masses and the luminosities of main sequence stars, you find
something very interesting. You find that the luminosity of a main sequence star is
roughly proportional to its mass to the fourth power. So here's a graph of luminosity relative
to the sun's luminosity. Ten to the zero is just one, so here's the sun having one solar
luminosity and one solar mass. Well, a star that is ten times as massive as the sun has
roughly ten times ten times ten times ten, or ten to the fourth times ten thousand times
its luminosity. Conversely, a star that's one tenth as massive as the sun has roughly
one ten thousandth of the sun's luminosity. The power of stars is highly dependent on
their mass. Now we'll figure out why later, but this is right now just an observed fact.
So, the mass-luminosity relationship actually implies that the more massive main sequence
stars have shorter lifetimes than the less massive stars. They have more fuel to burn.
We will see later that they're undergoing nuclear fusion. So true, they have a bigger
gas tank in a sense, but they use up their fuel at a disproportionately large rate, and
so they live fast and die young because they run out of gas essentially. Luminosity, quantitatively,
is proportional to mass to the fourth power, very roughly. The amount of fuel a star has
is roughly proportional to its mass. The lifetime is simply the amount of fuel divided by the
luminosity. It's sort of how big is your gas tank divided by how quickly are you burning
that gas? That'll tell you how long the gas tank will last full of gas. Well, that's
m over m to the fourth, which is 1 over m cubed. So the lifetime of a main sequence
star is proportional to 1 over the cube of its mass. A star twice as massive as the sun
lives only one eighth as long on the main sequence. A star ten times as massive as the
sun lives only one one thousandth as long on the main sequence. Now the sun lives about
ten billion years on the main sequence. A ten solar mass star would live accordingly
only about ten million years on the main sequence. So we can tell that some stars are young
because when we look at them, for example, in the heart of the Orion Nebula, we can see
that they are very massive main sequence stars. They couldn't be more than a few million
years old because if they were more than a few million years old, they would have not
been on the main sequence anymore. They would have turned into some other kind of a star,
a super giant, or maybe they'd blow up. I'll tell you later on what they do, but they wouldn't
be main sequence stars if they were more than a few million years old. So here are stars
that had to have formed in the last few million years, and indeed that's consistent with the
fact that we see the process of star formation going on when we look deep in the hearts of
these nebulae. Well, let's summarize what I've said. Everything depends on mass. If
we look at the main sequence here, it is a function of mass. The mass of stars are the
luminous main sequence stars. The low mass stars are the dim main sequence stars. The
sun is somewhere in the middle. Everything else, it will turn out, depends on mass. The
evolutionary time scale, everything. Mass is critical. So let's look at a table of the
properties of these main sequence stars. Don't memorize this. Just look at the trends. As
you go from massive stars down to low mass stars, you go from O through B, A, F, G, K,
M, and then L in the spectral sequence. Their surface temperature goes from high to low. Their
radius goes from relatively high to relatively low, and their luminosity goes from exceptionally
high to very, very low. The luminosity is a very sensitive function of the mass.
Physics can explain all this. Now, it turns out that when you look at tables like this
and you find out all these things, you might say, oh, this is really kind of tedious, right?
Why are we doing this? Well, we're gathering and organizing facts. We've been getting a
lot of facts and figures about the stars, and they will tell us something about how stars
behave and why they do so. But the process, you might think, is kind of tedious. And indeed,
there's this famous poem by Walt Whitman when I heard the learned astronomer. Let me recite
it. When I heard the learned astronomer, when the proofs, the figures were ranged in columns
before me, when I was shown the charts and diagrams to add, divide, and measure them,
when I, sitting, heard the astronomer where he lectured with much applause in the lecture
room, how soon unaccountable I became tired and sick till rising and gliding out, I wandered
off by myself in the mystical moist night air, and from time to time looked up in perfect
silence at the stars. That's by Walt Whitman. Now, I understand what he's saying, presented
in a dry, boring way. All these facts and figures may just seem tedious and take the
beauty away from the, from the heavens. But I don't think of it this way, because with
these kinds of measurements, we will be able to figure out, and indeed, astronomers and
physicists have figured out how stars work, what makes them shine, how do they change
during their lives, how do they die? These are all interesting things. To me, knowledge
of how a physical system works only serves to enhance its beauty, not to track from it.
Sure, we've heard boring lectures by scientists, but I claim that people in all walks of life
give boring lectures sometimes. That's just the way it goes. But when you go and search
more deeply and see what does all this mean, and figure out how things work from all these
facts and figures, to me that enhances their beauty, I know how a rainbow works, I hope
you do, too, now. And to me, that doesn't distract from the beauty and wonder of a rainbow.
I know how a comet works, to me, that enhances its beauty. There's still the awe and mystery
of how it all got here, why the laws of physics even exist, and why they lead to such an
interesting and complex universe with an essentially infinite variety of objects.
