I have mentioned in previous lectures that a main sequence star is in the prime of its
life. It has a stable luminosity, surface temperature, radius. It just doesn't change
very much. Well, in this lecture I'll explain how a star achieves this stability. What is
it actually doing while it's on the main sequence? The sun and most stars are on the
main sequence. What is it that gives them this very long lived part of their active
lives? I'll begin by reviewing how stars form in gravitationally bound collapsing clouds,
a topic that I discussed in lecture 37. You know, there are these vast clouds of gas and
dust. They become gravitationally unstable and they start collapsing and they form stars
with planets orbiting those stars. That's the first stage in achieving the stability
that a star finally gets to on the main sequence. So let's review that. Here's the Orion Nebula,
one of these vast clouds of gas and dust. It is gravitationally unstable. Parts of it
are collapsing inwards, the outer parts going farther in, and they coalesce into denser
and denser blobs in the centers of which stars can form, as you can see here in the central
part of the Orion Nebula. Now, as I said earlier, in many cases the gas and dust is so dense
that you actually can't see very well the inner parts of the cloud. But with infrared
and radio telescopes, which can penetrate those dusty, dense layers of gas, you can
actually see the stars as they are forming. The large clouds of gas typically fragment
into smaller units or cores, and those protostars that are collapsing will turn into individual
stars. So here a vast cloud fragments into a bunch of cores, each of which will turn
into a star, and all of those stars initially will be gravitationally bound together forming
an open star cluster, or a globular star cluster if you're talking about a cloud of gas that
forms stars early in the history of the universe. Those protostars are essentially in free fall.
There's essentially no pressure supporting them. It's like you take the floor out from
under me, and I would fall down, like in the cartoons, you know, cartoon characters go
running off of clips, and then they fall straight down. In a similar way, this collapsing cloud
essentially is in free fall for the first part of its collapse. But as the balls, as
the gas molecules and dust particles are collapsing down, they're picking up speed, just like
a dropped ball picks up speed. And when all these particles collide with one another,
the dust particles and the gas particles, that energy of directed motion inwards gets converted
into random or thermal motions, okay, because all these guys are colliding, and that's what
starts giving the cloud some pressure, some outward force that begins to impede the free
fall collapse of the cloud. So as the pressure rises and the temperature rises, the collapse
slows down to a slower contraction. And when the contraction is reasonably slow and steady,
we call that a premain sequence star. It's not a protostar anymore, it's a premain sequence
star. And it shines through the gradual release of gravitational energy as it gradually contracts.
Now that's different from the free fall collapse of the protostar. Here this is now a gradual
process. The premain sequence star is almost a main sequence star, but it's not quite reached
a stable configuration. Instead, it is still slowly contracting, releasing this gravitational
energy in the form of photons. The gravitational energy gets converted into photons through
collisions among all the particles and processes like that. Now in some cases, you've got
debris discs still surrounding the star, and those discs can form planets as we discussed
before. So an artist's conception of what one of those discs looks like is shown here.
We have to of course worry about protecting the disc from being evaporated by the bright
light of nearby stars. And apparently some clouds of contracting gas form sufficiently
thick cocoons as are shown here to protect the debris disc from being fully evaporated
before planets have a chance to form. So here are some of these proplids, these protoplanetary
discs which are being irradiated from the outside by bright stars and they're evaporating
away, but in some cases they are apparently thick enough such that the evaporation process
doesn't go all the way down to the disc before planets are formed. So this broadly speaking
is the process of planet and star formation. You also of course have to get rid of some
of the angular momentum, the spin of the star with which it was initially born, and that
we think is carried away by spinning jets of material, clumps and blobs moving away from
the star perhaps being projected outwards by complex magnetic fields in that central
region. We're still not sure of exactly what happens. But in broad brush terms this is
the process of star formation. Now at the point where we have a premain sequence star
it is slowly gravitationally contracting and it's liberating some of that energy of gravitational
contraction, but the other part of the energy of gravitational contraction goes into heating
the star causing the temperatures to rise, the pressure to rise, the whole thing is trying
to battle the inexorable pull of gravity and the gas particles are heating up, they're
exerting more pressure, and eventually for a sufficiently big premain sequence star
the pressures in the temperatures become high enough to ignite nuclear fusion. Now this typically
happens at temperatures of 10 million degrees, but you need a minimum temperature of something
like 3 million degrees for fusion of light elements in this particular case protons hydrogen
nuclei into heavier elements. In this particular case for a main sequence star we will see
that hydrogen fuses into helium, that's what's going on. And that fusion occurs at a control
that is non-explosive rate. This is a controlled nuclear reactor. Once the fusion reactions
begin they occur at a rate exactly what is necessary to keep the star in this stable
form now with a constant luminosity, a constant radius, a constant surface temperature. That
is once the fusion reactions begin there's an almost limitless supply of energy to be
fed from the center of the star and so there's a lot of energy to keep the star hot and pressurized
inside and so the gravitational contraction halts and the star achieves stability. So here's
a diagram showing what happens when fusion starts in the core. Energy is released from
the core through these fusion reactions, it heats the star increasing its pressure and
eventually the pressure is sufficiently big to counteract the gravitational contraction
of the star and the star can remain in this stable phase for billions of years. The stability,
the mechanical stability is called hydrostatic equilibrium. Gravity is pulling down, pressure
is pushing up, that's exactly what happens in a swimming pool. Hydro means water, static
means it's not moving, hydrostatic means that the swimming pool is not changing its
level and it doesn't need to change its level at all unless something bothers it, unless
something hassles it. So a swimming pool has water in hydrostatic equilibrium. In a similar
way a balloon is in hydrostatic equilibrium even though it's not made out of water, okay
you don't need water to achieve hydrostatic equilibrium. In this case the tension of the
rubber trying to pull the balloon in is exactly balanced by the pressure of the compressed
air pushing out on the balloon. So again in this case the balloon is getting neither larger
nor smaller, it is in hydrostatic equilibrium. In the case of a star you have gravity pulling
in, pressure pushing out and at every layer of the star they are in perfect mechanical
balance in perfect hydrostatic equilibrium. Even though energy is being lost from the star
it remains in this equilibrium because the new energy generated by nuclear reactions
heats the star and replenishes the lost energy, the energy that is lost as the star radiates
into the universe. The star can be perturbed from its equilibrium if you wish, here's a
little animation that shows what would happen if I increase the diameter of the star, suppose
I pulled out on the star. Well and then if I release it the star oscillates back and
forth until it dissipates some energy and achieves that mechanical balance once again.
Conversely I could compress the star, make it smaller but that would increase the pressure
inside and when I release it the star would bounce back, become bigger, oscillate a few
times and then once again achieve this mechanical balance, the balance that it wants to achieve
given the mass that it has. So you can play around with different amounts of compression
and you always see that the star comes back to an equilibrium value, you can extend it
by a long ways and see that it comes back. So these kinds of animations are really fun
to play with, you can check what happens when you vary the physical parameters and again
these animations are accessible to users of the book, the Cosmos, Astronomy in the New
Millennium. The star is also in thermal equilibrium, that means that the nuclear reactions are
occurring at exactly the rate they need to to keep the star from getting too hot inside
or too cool inside. This is like a thermostat, if I were to heat the star up in the middle
with a blow torch or something like that, the nuclear reactions would go at a faster
rate and that would tend to heat the gas more causing it to expand and expanding gases cool
so the nuclear reaction rate would go down. So if I artificially increase the nuclear
reaction rate, the star responds by decreasing the reaction rate. Conversely, if I artificially
decrease the reaction rate by cooling the star, having it, you know, some ice cubes
thrown in or something like that, then there will be less pressure in the star, the star
will contract a bit, it will heat up and that will increase the rate of the nuclear reactions.
So once again, you can look at what would happen in this animation. If you were to change
the nuclear reaction rate, the fusion rate, let's increase it. The star responds by decreasing
the rate of reactions until it achieves stability once again. Let's suppose that we make the
nuclear reaction rate too low. The star responds by increasing the reaction rate until it is
the right value to achieve stability. So it's like a thermostat that knows what to do. It's
fantastic. Stars know the right thing to do and they achieve the stability which is the
hallmark of the main sequence phase of a star's life. Alright, well, I've talked a lot about
nuclear fusion. What is it and how does it occur? In the center of a star, like the sun,
the temperature is very high. The central temperature of the sun is about 15 million
degrees, for example. Lower mass stars have lower central temperatures and more massive
stars have higher central temperatures. At such temperatures, the hydrogen and helium
atoms and other atoms that might exist there are completely ionized. That is, they've lost
their electrons. Collisions are so vigorous that the electrons just get knocked off of
the nuclei and the electrons go wandering around on their own, not bound to any specific
nucleus. So you just have, say, protons and electrons if you're considering a pure hydrogen
gas. Now the nucleus of a hydrogen atom is simply a proton and we designate it as H,
that's the element of which this proton is the nucleus. The symbol to the upper right
of the element gives the total number of protons and neutrons. The number to the lower
left of the symbol gives just the number of protons. A helium nucleus looks something
like this. There are two protons and two neutrons, so we denote it as H e with to the
left of it a 2 indicating that there are two protons and to the upper right a 4 indicating
that there are two neutrons and two protons for a total of four nucleons. Now a helium
nucleus is also known as an alpha particle, it turns out. So let's see what happens in
a star where nuclear fusion is going on. The central temperature is high and at high
central temperatures particles are whizzing around all over the place and protons have
a chance of getting fairly close to each other before being repelled by electric forces,
you know protons are the same charge so they like to repel each other. But if the temperatures
are sufficiently high and these guys are moving around sufficiently quickly, they will have
a chance to get pretty close to one another before being repelled away and those that
get sufficiently close to one another can bind together a new kind of a force, one that
we haven't really discussed before. The strong nuclear force can overcome the electric repulsion
of protons and latch them together, they become bound as a pair. And in the process
one of the protons turns into a neutron it turns out and it liberates some particles
but that's a detail that we'll consider in a few minutes. The important point here is
that at the high temperatures you can sometimes get protons close enough together for them
to latch together, to bind together as a result of this strong nuclear force. And if
another proton comes along and another one comes along in a sequence of reactions that
I'll show in a few minutes, the end result will be that four protons turn into an alpha
particle, a helium nucleus. The basic reaction is four protons goes to a helium nucleus
plus energy. Energy is liberated in the process of this binding together of the protons and
two of them turn into neutrons as well. But it's this process of binding energy, it's
this process of binding that releases energy and allows the star to shine. Now two of the
protons turn into neutrons, they also in the process released particles called positrons,
those are the antiparticles of electrons. So if an electron and a positron shake hands
they annihilate each other turning into a burst of energy, a burst of photons. So the positrons
produced by this process annihilate with the electrons in the star releasing some energy.
And also some light is released simply by the binding process. So the point is energy
is released in a form that the star can utilize. There's also some energy that's released
in a form that escapes from the star and doesn't do it any good. And that's the energy that
comes out in a ghostly little particle called a neutrino. Neutrinos are these funny little
particles produced by these reactions and they hardly interact with anything at all,
they just go flying out of the star and don't contribute to its temperature and pressure.
But the positrons and the photons released and other things, they do contribute to heating
the star and keeping it alive, keeping it in a stable situation. The fundamental thing
that has happened is that the helium nucleus is more tightly bound than the four original
protons of which it was made. So the four protons far apart from each other have a certain
mass and the helium nucleus, it turns out, has less mass than the four protons initially
did. So you put the four protons together forming a helium nucleus and it has a smaller
mass than the four original protons. That's because it is bound by this strong nuclear
force. There is a binding energy associated with the force which is kind of like a negative
energy. You put these balls together, make them bound and the final mass of the system
is less than what you started with. That difference in mass through E equals mc squared is what
produces the energy that we see shining from the sun and other stars. It's E equals mc
squared and the m, in this case, is the difference in mass between the four original protons
and the helium nucleus that they formed. The difference in mass is only 0.7 of a percent.
It's not much. The helium nucleus is less than a percent, less massive than the original
four protons, but that slight difference through E equals mc squared is enough to give you
the observed luminosity of the sun and of the other stars. And this was, of course, this
is part of relativity. Relativity was figured out by Einstein, but other physicists used
relativity to deduce the workings of stars. Well, this binding energy seems like kind
of a weird concept. How is it produced? I mean, does it have something to do with the
nuclei or does it appear more commonly in life? It appears more commonly. When electrons
jump from higher levels to lower levels in atoms, releasing optical photons, that's a
process I've discussed earlier in this course, the energy that they release is the binding
energy of the electron. That is, it goes from a higher energy level to a lower energy level.
That energy difference is a binding energy that then comes out as a photon, an optical
photon in this case. Now, the strong nuclear force is a lot stronger than the electric force
holding electrons around a nucleus. So the typical photons emitted in the nuclear force
transitions are gamma rays. They're energetic photons, much more energetic than the optical
photons that tend to be produced in electronic transitions. Well, you might say, oh, electronic
transitions are not something I can easily fathom. Is there a more everyday example of
binding energy? Sure. If I jump from a chair down to the floor, I release energy. My energy
of motion increases and when I hit the floor, it dissipates and that energy goes off as
heat and light and stuff. Well, that energy that was given off by my collision with the
floor having jumped from the chair, that's the gravitational binding energy released
as I'm falling from the chair. So in a sense, my mass when I'm high up plus the mass of
the earth initially is a slightly bigger number than once I've gotten down to the floor.
The mass of the system decreases ever so slightly and it is that decrease in mass which through
E equals mc squared gets released in the form of energy. The thud when I hit the floor, the
floor heats up a little bit, light is emitted, it's hard to see but it is emitted. That emitted
energy is exactly equal to the decrease in the gravitational binding energy when I jump
from a chair. So you can see E equals mc squared is ubiquitous. Well, let's look in more detail
what happens in these nuclear reactions. The nucleus of a hydrogen atom is known as a proton.
There it is right there. But you can have different isotopes of hydrogen. For example,
the proton could be bound to a neutron and that is known as a deuteron or the nucleus
of a deuterium atom. Or you could have even two neutrons and then you have tritium or
a triton. Deuterons are these combined pairs of protons and neutrons. Physicists sometimes
say that the study of deuterons is known as deuteronomy. That's a joke we have. But anyway,
you can have different forms of hydrogen. Protons, deuterons and tritons. Similarly,
you can have different forms of helium. Normal helium has two protons and two neutrons, two
helium four. But you can also have an isotope or form of helium that has two protons and
only one neutron. That's a form of light helium, two helium three. So what happens in the first
stage of nuclear reactions is that two protons combine to form a deuteron, a positron, an
anti-electron and one of these ghostly neutrinos. This happens twice. So two deuterons form.
Now each of those deuterons can itself combine with a proton to form a nucleus of light helium,
helium three. This happens twice once to each of the deuterons that was formed in the first
set of reactions. So protons one and two do this. They produce a deuteron. Protons three
and four do this. They produce another deuteron. Each of those deuterons can then combine with
a proton, in this case five and in the other case six, to produce a nucleus of light helium,
helium three. Then those two helium nuclei fuse together to form the heavy normal isotope of
helium, helium four. And in the process two of the protons get liberated. So only two of the four
protons in the two helium three nuclei end up getting assimilated into the heavy form, the
normal form of helium four. The other two protons get liberated. So you used six protons, but two
of them are left over and four got assimilated into this bound helium nucleus. And that is the
process by which fusion occurs in the core of the Sun and other main sequence stars. They are
fusing protons into helium through what is known as the proton-proton chain. The process of combining
six protons into a helium nucleus plus two left over protons. Now the Sun's life on the main
sequence is 10 billion years. You might say how can it do that when in fact it's using up nearly
700 million tons of protons, hydrogen nuclei, every second, every second 700 million tons of
protons are being converted into helium. How can the Sun possibly do this for 10 billion years,
you might ask? Well, answer is simple. There's plenty of raw material. The Sun is 70% hydrogen and
the Sun's mass is enormous. And the central 10 or 15% of the Sun's mass ends up participating in
these nuclear reactions. And when you do all the sums, you can figure out that indeed the Sun can do
this thing, this process of fusion of hydrogen into helium for 10 billion years. It is now 4.6
billion years old, so the Sun is about halfway through its normal main sequence life. And other
stars do this as well. The more massive stars have to have a higher pressure, a higher temperature
inside in order to keep themselves in hydrostatic balance or hydrostatic equilibrium. So they have
to use up their fuel more quickly than the less massive stars. They're more luminous, the
temperatures are higher to keep themselves stable. But the consequence of that is that they use up
their fuel more quickly. All main sequence stars are converting hydrogen into helium in some way.
The lower mass ones like the Sun and below use the proton-proton chain. The more massive ones
use another kind of a process called the carbon-nitrogen-oxygen cycle or the CNO cycle. That's the
main process for stars that are about 10 or 20% more massive than the Sun and beyond. They use sort
of a different variation of this fusion of hydrogen into helium. Effectively, what they do is they
start with a carbon nucleus left over from some long dead star. It fuses with a proton, forming
nitrogen. Then the nitrogen decays into another isotope of carbon, releasing a positron and a
neutrino. Then that isotope of carbon combines with another proton to form nitrogen, but a different
isotope than before. Then that nitrogen combines with a proton to form a certain isotope of oxygen.
The oxygen then decays into another isotope of nitrogen. That nitrogen can then combine with a
proton to form carbon, carbon 12 plus helium. The net effect of all this is that you started with
the carbon nucleus and you end with the carbon nucleus, but four protons along the way got turned
into a helium nucleus plus energy. That's how the stars that are more massive than about 1.1 or 1.2
solar masses derive their energy. There's a cool song called Why Does the Sunshine popularized by a
group called They Might Be Giants. In this song, they describe this process by which the Sun derives
its energy, that it's a big ball of gas, a gigantic nuclear furnace really, in which nuclear reactions
are occurring deep in the core, producing this energy. They say that hydrogen is fused into helium and
they get most of the physics right, actually. They imply that a significant fraction of the Sun's
luminosity comes from the CNO cycle rather than from the proton-proton chain. At that time, maybe we
didn't know that it doesn't derive that much of its energy from the CNO cycle, but that's just a minor
technicality. It's a detail. They get most of the physics right and I encourage you to look up this song
and listen to it. It's great that physical processes like this that are so important to life as we know
it have made it into at least some of the pop culture of today.
