in the previous lecture, I discussed the process
by which we think our sun is producing energy.
Basically four protons, hydrogen nuclei, combine or fuse together bound by the strong
nuclear force to form a helium nucleus.
And that helium nucleus has less mass than the original four protons did.
And through E equals MC squared, Einstein's famous equation, that mass difference between
the four original protons and the final helium nucleus gets turned into energy.
This is nuclear fusion.
So that's what we think is going on in the middle of the sun.
But you might ask, how do we really know that's happening?
We can't stare into the middle of the sun very easily.
In fact, with optical light or even with radio waves, the sun is completely opaque.
You can't get anywhere close to the middle of the sun with electromagnetic radiation
as viewed from outside.
So maybe the sun actually shines through some other process.
Let's consider the possibilities.
Could it be chemical burning?
No, it can't.
Chemical burning, like fire, flames of paper or wood burning, doesn't produce enough energy
by a gargantuan factor to explain the observed luminosity or power of the sun.
It doesn't even come close.
And if you were to pack a lot of wood or paper in the sun and just make it all go off very
quickly to produce the observed luminosity of the sun, then you'd use it all up really
quickly and you wouldn't have a very long lasting sun.
So it just can't be happening.
And in fact, we know that temperatures in the sun are too high in general for any chemical
burning of the conventional sense.
So basically, there's no chemical burning.
Could it be gravitational contraction, like in a premain sequence star?
After all, a premain sequence star shines quite brightly, but it does so not because
of fusion, but rather because it's slowly, gravitationally contracting, releasing its
gravitational energy and turning it into light.
Well, a physicist named Lord Kelvin, after whom the absolute or Kelvin temperature scale
is named, calculated that through this process of gradual gravitational contraction, the
sun could have lived only about 50 million years.
In other words, at the current rate at which it's generating energy, you couldn't have
had it generating energy for more than about 50 million years, otherwise the star would
have contracted down to zero volume right now, and clearly the sun is pretty large.
So there's only a certain amount of contraction that could have happened.
So the so-called Kelvin contraction time, 50 million years, though much longer than the
time the sun could have shined if it were only chemically burning, is still nowhere
near enough time.
The Earth has been around for about four and a half billion years, and we have evidence
through studies of fossils that life forms existed easily up to three billion years ago,
and they needed surface temperatures comparable to what we have right now.
So we have pretty good evidence that the sun has been shining out about its present rate
for at least three billion years, a far cry from just 50 million.
We also know now through other studies that the sun is simply not gravitationally contracting,
at least not much, and in fact we think it's not contracting at all.
So that hypothesis pretty much flew out, flew out the door.
Well, so what could it be?
Physicists essentially by the process of elimination decided that nuclear fusion must be what's
going on.
There's really no other source of energy that the sun could be using.
All the other potential ideas had been shot full of holes through various observations
and physical reasoning.
So they said, okay, nuclear fusion is going on, and in fact they didn't even really know
how that could be happening because though the temperatures in a star are pretty high
and the protons get pretty close to one another, they still don't hit each other, and you might
wonder, well, how can the strong nuclear force, which has a very short range, even get these
protons to bind together to form a deuteron if in fact the protons never get close enough
to each other to feel each other, to hit each other?
Physicists didn't know how at the relatively low temperatures of the sun you could do that.
If the temperature were a billion degrees, sure, the protons could slam into each other
and then the strong nuclear force could take over.
But the temperatures are only 10 million degrees, and at such temperatures the protons don't
even get close enough together.
So some physicist says, no, it can't be nuclear fusion.
Well, okay, then quantum mechanics was developed and our perception of particles changed and
they are waves of some probability distribution of where they might be, and it turns out these
probability functions overlap ever so slightly, even when protons are pretty far apart from
each other and the strong nuclear force can take over.
Okay, I don't want to get into the details of that, but basically nuclear fusion problem
was solved with the development of quantum physics.
So, you know, physically people said, okay, it can happen, but we still don't really know
that it's happening.
You don't see the middle of the sun, and you might say, well, yeah, but we know that photons
are leaking out.
The fact that photons are leaking out right now, you might think means that fusion must
be going on right now, or does it?
Well, it doesn't really, it doesn't directly, and that's because when a photon is produced
in the middle of the sun, it encounters a very opaque gas on its way out.
The sun is so opaque that the photon bounces around and takes on average 100,000 years
to escape.
So it doesn't travel at the speed of light right zooming out of the sun.
It's traveling locally at the speed of light, but it's bouncing around every which way,
and gradually it finds itself at the surface of the sun where it can then zoom away.
But that takes 100,000 years.
It's like a random walk.
You know, you have a drunk who's looking for his car keys, which are somewhere underneath
a lamp post, and the lamp post is shining there, but the drunk, you know, is kind of wandering
around in every direction and gradually makes his way to the lit up part under the lamp
post.
But it takes a while to get there.
It's not a direct path, and in a similar way, the photons take a very indirect path
in coming out.
So if you shut down the fusion reactions in the sun right now, we wouldn't know it for
100,000 years, because a bunch of photons are already on the way, and it'll take them
100,000 years to get out.
So you could seriously question whether, in fact, fusion is occurring in the middle
of the sun.
It was a legitimate question to ask.
Do we have direct evidence for such a physical process?
Photons don't provide it, but remember in the last lecture I said that a ghostly little
particle called a neutrino is produced during the fusion reactions.
Neutrinos are very strange particles.
They're very light.
For a long time people thought they were massless.
I will give you evidence for a very slight mass today.
People thought that they also travel at the speed of light, or nearly at the speed of
light, and that they hardly interact at all.
That last fact is true.
They're very antisocial particles.
You could have a bunch of neutrinos going through a light year of lead, and most of them would
make it through unscathed.
Most of them would not encounter anything along the way.
They wouldn't bounce off of anything.
They wouldn't reflect off of anything.
They go through a light year of lead as though it were a vacuum.
That's how noninteractive they are.
So in fact, they don't care that there's this opaque cloud of gas around them.
They're not affected by the sun's gases.
They just go zooming right out, takes them two seconds to go from the core of the sun
out to the surface, and another eight minutes to reach us here on Earth.
So they are a direct probe of what's going on in the core of the sun.
If we could detect neutrinos coming in great numbers from the sun, that would prove that
nuclear fusion is going on right now.
So where do these neutrinos come from?
Well recall the first step of the proton-proton chain.
Two protons combined to form a deuteron.
In the process, one of the protons turned into a neutron, a positron, that is an anti-electron,
and a neutrino.
The positron annihilates with an electron and produces some photons, some energy.
That's part of the way in which the sun shines.
But the neutrino just goes zooming out of the sun.
And more precisely, this is a kind of neutrino called an electron neutrino because it is associated
with the process that forms electrons, or in this case, anti-electrons.
This is one flavor of neutrinos.
By the way, if you want to learn more about particle physics, there's a whole teaching
company course on particle physics.
I'm going over things very briefly here just to give you the idea of what's going on.
Well John Bacall calculated how many neutrinos should be coming out from the sun and reaching
the Earth.
Turns out that every square centimeter of the Earth, every second, is bathed by about
60 billion neutrinos.
That's how many are passing through your body every second from the sun if the theory
is right.
60 billion per square centimeter of your body per second.
That's an awful lot of neutrinos.
Some might interact.
When you've got that many, some will interact and maybe you can detect them.
John Bacall inspired experimental physicists and chemists to search for neutrinos, the
rare neutrinos that might interact with something here on Earth.
Well, how do you do it?
How do they interact?
A neutrino can combine with a neutron in an atomic nucleus turning it into a proton and
an electron.
Specifically, a nucleus of chlorine can absorb occasionally an electron neutrino, turning
it into a radioactive form of argon.
That radioactive argon can in principle be detected with a Geiger counter or some other
device that detects radioactivity.
So there were experiments designed to detect these radioactive argon atoms and variations
on this theme.
And the most famous and long lasting of such experiments was conducted by Ray Davis in
the Homestake Gold Mine in South Dakota about a mile underneath Earth's surface.
He did it way down there to shield the experiment from cosmic rays, from charged particles coming
from outer space and from the sun.
Here's a photograph of the tank that he had holding 100,000 gallons of dry cleaning solution
per chloroethylene, C2Cl4.
And here are John Bacall and Ray Davis in 1964 next to his contraption, looking it over,
trying to perfect the method by which the detections of the argon atoms are made.
And indeed, the experiment was amazingly precise.
Out of a 100,000 gallon tank of cleaning solution, Davis could detect one radioactive argon nucleus.
His graduate students, he told them, you know, put a couple of them in there, and don't
tell me how many you put in, and I'll try to find them.
And by golly, he found them.
He found the right number.
That's amazing, okay?
One atom.
All right.
Very highly sophisticated experiment.
Solar neutrinos in a nutshell were detected.
It was a fantastic discovery.
They're there.
A few of them occasionally interact with the chlorine to produce argon.
Sometime later, in Japan, in a similar experiment, Masatoshi Koshiba made a similar discovery,
and he could actually tell from where the neutrinos are coming.
He could tell that they're definitively coming from the sun.
Davis was only detecting neutrino interactions with chlorine.
He couldn't definitively say that they're coming from the sun, although it's sort of
like, you know, where else would they be coming from, if not the sun?
That's the, you know, shining brightly in neutrinos, and nothing else comes close, because all
the stars are much farther away.
So Davis presumed they're from the sun, Koshiba showed that they are from the sun, and they
shared the Nobel Prize in physics in 2002 for their discovery.
But I think John Bacal deserved part of the Nobel Prize as well, because it was his calculations
that inspired the experimentalists, and he calculated ever more correctly and precisely
just how many neutrinos of different kinds of energy should be coming out from the sun.
And so without his calculations, the experimentalists would not have been able to interpret or evaluate
their data nearly as completely and thoroughly and in such a physically meaningful way.
So I really believe that my friend, the late John Bacal, he died in 2005, deserved part
of the Nobel Prize, and it's a shame that he wasn't given that prize, and many of my
colleagues in physics and astronomy feel the way I do.
Okay, well the detection of neutrinos was a great breakthrough, but there was another
puzzle.
Davis was only detecting roughly one-third of the expected number of neutrinos.
Let's look at the graph of the number of neutrinos plotted on the vertical axis versus
the year in which the data were gathered on the horizontal axis.
The units are called solar neutrino units, you don't have to worry about what those
are, but it's just a unit of measurement for the detection of solar neutrinos.
Theory predicted that eight solar neutrino units worth of neutrinos should be detected
every year.
This found that only two or so were.
But there's uncertainty in the measurements and there's uncertainty in the theory, and
two is consistent with one-third of six, the lower limit for the theoretical value.
So basically after a while everyone starts saying that we're only detecting about a third
of the expected number of neutrinos, one-third to one-quarter, and this was a big puzzle.
That suggested that something is wrong, perhaps in our theory of what's going on in the middle
of the sun.
For example, perhaps the temperature in the core isn't quite as high as Bacall thought.
That would mean that an energetic rare form of neutrino produced by a rare variation of
the proton-proton chain.
I won't go into the details, but there are variations on the theme that I discussed in
the previous lecture, and only certain reactions produce the very most energetic neutrinos
that the Davis experiment was able to detect.
So maybe the temperature in the sun isn't high enough to allow that rare branch of the
proton-proton chain to occur.
Or maybe the sun simply isn't fusing much at all.
Period right now.
Maybe it's taking a break.
It's on vacation from fusion.
And the light we're seeing is those 100,000 years worth of photons still leaking out.
So those are astrophysical solutions, or possible solutions to the solar neutrino problem.
There were also solutions proposed based on fundamental physics.
Maybe the electron neutrinos, which are the ones that Davis could detect, are turning
into some other flavor of neutrinos.
They come in different kinds.
There are muon neutrinos, and there are tau neutrinos as well.
So maybe they're turning into other kinds of neutrinos.
And so what we really need are other experiments that might detect those other forms of neutrinos,
and also experiments to detect lower energy neutrinos.
Well, a possible solution was found in 1998, or at least hints of a solution, when a Japanese
group made a measurement of a type of neutrino called the muon neutrino using an underground
lab, kind of like Ray Davis's, but more sophisticated, where they have a giant swimming pool of water
surrounded by a whole bunch of photomotor plier tubes that are able to detect flashes
of light that occur when muon neutrinos interact in various ways with the water.
And here you can see them cleaning the photomotor plier tubes.
In 2001, by the way, one of the tubes broke, and it set off a chain reaction that sort
of popped three-quarters of their photomotor plier tubes, a huge disaster for them.
Fortunately, they had gathered some fantastic data before that, data that turned out to
be revolutionary.
Well, what they did was they measured muon neutrinos produced by the interaction of cosmic
rays from space with molecules in our atmosphere.
So here a cosmic ray goes crashing into a molecule and produces some muon neutrinos denoted
by these red arrows.
And then this experiment, the supercamioconda experiment, could detect these muon neutrinos,
both those coming from the direction just above the detector close to the surface of
the Earth, and also those coming from the backside of the Earth, and also those coming
from other random directions.
I won't go into the details, but suffice it to say that the number of neutrinos coming
from the backside of the Earth was smaller than the number coming from the part of the
Earth close to where the detector was, suggesting that the muon neutrinos going through the
Earth turn into some other kind of neutrino or some other kind of particle on the way,
because their detector was sensitive only to muon neutrinos.
So if the ones that traverse the whole diameter of the Earth turn into something else along
the way, you'll find fewer of them coming from that direction than from the direction
right above you, and that's what they found.
This was the first real evidence that neutrinos can change flavor, and there was additional
evidence announced through other experiments of a similar nature around that time, and
it was very exciting because it hinted that at least muon neutrinos can change flavor,
and so perhaps the electron neutrinos from the Sun can change flavor as well.
Well okay, that's good that muon neutrinos can change flavor, but you know the Sun produces
electron neutrinos, maybe the electron neutrinos don't really change flavor the way the muon
neutrinos appeared to do.
So what we'd really like is an experiment of an analogous nature that attempts to measure
the electron neutrinos from the Sun and whether they change with time into other kinds of
neutrinos.
That would be the real test of what's going on in the Sun.
And in the last few years there's been a brilliant experimental test of this sort done in Canada
at the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory.
Once again it is one of these underground tanks, they have them very deep underground
to shield them from natural cosmic rays coming in all over the place in our atmosphere and
surface radioactivity from various radioactive elements in surface rocks and stuff.
So here's the chamber at Sudbury Neutrino Observatory, or SNOW for short, that has a
whole bunch of water inside and it is surrounded by lots of these photomultiplier tubes, as
in the case of the Supercomioconda experiment in Japan.
The difference in the case of SNOW is that they used a heavy form of water.
Water whose hydrogen atoms, or at least one hydrogen atom, consist of a deuteron being
circled by an electron rather than a proton being circled by an electron.
So this is called heavy water, deuterated water.
Remember deuterons are protons plus neutrons together, one each, and that's still hydrogen,
there's one proton, so it's still hydrogen, but it's a heavy form of hydrogen because
there's a neutron attached as well.
Well in this heavy water two types of reactions can occur.
In one type of reaction, a neutron in the deuteron absorbs an electron neutrino, transforming
itself into a proton and an electron.
So the deuteron gets destroyed, it gets turned into two protons which repel each other, but
along the way an energetic electron is formed, and that electron is so energetic that it
can travel faster than the speed of light in water.
They might say, wait a minute, didn't I tell you earlier that nothing travels faster than
the speed of light?
Well I did, and that's one of the fundamental assumptions of Einstein's special theory of
relativity.
But light slows down in water and other substances, indeed that's what leads to the bending of
light, the refraction of light, and in fact relativity says that you can have particles
going through water faster than the local depressed speed of light, but still slower
than the speed of light in a vacuum, so you're not violating anything in relativity.
When you have such a particle traveling faster than the speed of light in water, it forms
electromagnetic radiation called Cherenkov light.
This is analogous to an airplane moving through air faster than the speed of sound, it produces
a sonic boom.
Well Cherenkov light is an electromagnetic boom, it's light emitted as a result of the
particle traveling faster than the local speed of light, and that particle has to be
charged for this to happen.
Well the charged particle moving through water produces this light and it leads to the detection
of the neutrino that had combined with the neutron to form the proton and the rapidly
moving electron, and when they did this kind of measurement they found that only one third
of the expected number of neutrinos was detected, so that confirmed Ray Davis' result.
But there was another type of interaction that's sensitive to all kinds of neutrinos.
That interaction is shown here, a neutrino of any flavor, electron, muon, tau, doesn't
matter, can scatter or reflect off of an electron in the water, that kick makes the electron
that's in the water move away with a rapid speed faster than the speed of light and that
charged particle, the electron traveling faster than the speed of light, produces once again
Cherenkov radiation.
So the neutrino slammed into it, kicked it, made it move fast, made the electron move
fast and then you detect the Cherenkov light.
This reaction is insensitive to the type of neutrino that slammed into the electron.
All of them do it about equally well.
So this type of reaction potentially finds all of the neutrinos and when they counted
up all the neutrino events from this reaction, guess what?
They found Bacall's expected number, total number of neutrinos.
Is that great or what?
They're all there, but the electron neutrinos are only one third of them.
How can that be?
The nuclear reactions produce only electron neutrinos, they don't produce the muon and
tau kind.
Well, the electron neutrinos must have changed flavor along the way, that's the conclusion.
Electron, muon and tau neutrinos are different flavors, which are in fact manifestations
of different combinations of a more fundamental type or set of types of neutrinos, boringly
called type one, type two and type three.
The one, two and three are the fundamental neutrinos.
The electron, muon and tau neutrinos are combinations of those fundamental neutrinos that can actually
be observed.
You observe the electron, muon and tau, but the true fundamental kind are the ones, twos
and threes.
So what can happen is that in the sun an electron neutrino might be produced, but it's a combination
of say a type one and a type two, just for illustrative purposes.
The type ones and twos have a different quantum mechanical wave function associated with them.
They can change and they travel along like this and you see they're in phase initially,
that's an electron neutrino, but after a while they're out of phase.
The type two is sort of oscillating up here and the type one is oscillating down.
That may be a different kind of neutrino, a muon or a tau neutrino, indeed here where
they cross they're going in opposite directions than what they were initially.
So this might be the muon or tau neutrino, I'm just showing this for illustrative purposes.
And then later on they become an electron neutrino again, maybe later on they become
a muon or a tau neutrino.
In other words they change their flavor and so what happens is that they've changed their
flavor on the way and that's why the Davis detector didn't see enough electron neutrinos
because only one third of them on average are electron neutrinos at any one time.
The other two thirds are muon and tau neutrinos.
Well this solved not only a huge problem in astrophysics but also raised a lot of eyebrows
in fundamental particle physics because in fundamental particle physics neutrinos are
supposed to be massless yet it turns out they cannot change flavors if they're massless.
The reason for that is that if they're massless they must travel at the speed of light otherwise
they wouldn't exist it turns out.
But at the speed of light time stops, recall that we discussed this gamma factor, the time
dilation factor when we studied relativity in lecture 42.
At the speed of light gamma is 1 over 0 or infinity.
So time progresses in the neutrinos frame of reference at a rate which is equal to that
in the lab divided by gamma, gamma is infinity, anything divided by infinity is zero, so
time doesn't pass in the neutrinos frame of reference.
If no time passes it can't change flavors, it's as simple as that.
If it changes flavors it has to move at a speed less than that of light.
In that case time passes and there's a way for it to change flavors.
But if it travels slower than the speed of light then in fact it must have mass, that's
the only way in which a neutrino or anything else can travel at a speed slower than light
it must have mass.
A massless particle has to travel at the speed of light otherwise it doesn't exist.
So the great discovery here is that neutrinos have mass and that is sending the world of
fundamental particle physics, the physicist studying that world into a tizzy because the
standard model of fundamental particles predicts that neutrinos should be massless.
So this cool result is affecting not just astrophysics and our understanding of the
sun but also our understanding of the ways in which particles fundamentally behave in
their microscopic and submicroscopic scales.
The experiment that's now being done at the Sudbury Observatory is to try to detect a
difference in the rate of neutrino oscillations or changes when traveling through the earth
versus when traveling through the vacuum of space.
Some theories suggest that neutrinos traveling through earth change flavors at a different
rate than neutrinos traveling through the vacuum.
When the results aren't out yet, I think the data have been gathered, the rumors I've
been hearing are that indeed the rate of neutrino oscillations is different inside the earth
than when they are traveling through a vacuum.
So this is a fantastic story.
The detection of neutrinos and neutrino oscillations is one of the greatest achievements of the
past few decades.
It affects not just astrophysics confirming our understanding of the core of the sun,
it also affects fundamental particle physics throwing a giant wrench into the theory.
And that's really exciting.
