The solar neutrino experiments discussed in the previous lecture prove conclusively that
the source of energy inside the sun is nuclear fusion. Deep in the core of the sun, the temperatures
are so high that protons confuse together through the proton-proton chain, forming helium
nuclei. And this provides a long-term source of energy for the sun, and presumably for
other stars, which are simply distant suns. Now, the fusion that occurs in the core is
occurring at a temperature of at least three million degrees, and typically more like ten
million degrees. Indeed, in our sun, the temperature of the core is about fifteen million degrees.
So there's this fusion in the core, which then produces energy that leaks out through
the rest of the star over the course of something like fifty to a hundred thousand years, and
then is radiated out into space, and that's how the sun and other stars shine. Now, prior
to the onset of fusion, however, the sun was a pre-main sequence star. It was releasing
energy through gravitational contraction, and that's what replenished the supply of energy
in the star that was lost to the surrounding space. Now, as the contraction proceeded and
the center of the star heated up, eventually this contraction stopped because nuclear fusion
turned on, providing a stable new source of energy other than gravitational contraction,
and resulting in the halting of the contraction because now there was no reason for the star
to continue contracting because it had a new supply of energy, nuclear fusion. And at the
point when nuclear reactions start in a contracting pre-main sequence star, that's when we say
that the star is born. It achieves stardom once nuclear reactions start. The star achieves
hydrostatic and thermal equilibrium. It's not contracting anymore. It's just staying
put. It's producing energy at exactly the same rate that it's losing energy to the surroundings.
It is in perfect equilibrium, and that is what we call a star. Now, in some cases, if
the thing that's contracting has less than, say, about a 12th of the solar mass, that's
roughly 75 Jupiter masses or .075 solar masses, then in that case, the temperature never gets
high enough for fusion of ordinary hydrogen to begin through the proton-proton chain.
You just don't get up to that temperature of a minimum of 3 million degrees. So fusion
doesn't begin, and contraction remains the only source of energy being leaked out into
space. You know, you've got to replenish the energy that's leaking out into space from
a star. If you don't, the star will just contract or collapse if it completely loses all of
its energy. So it replenishes the energy by contracting slowly, and that contraction process
has to continue unless there's some other source of energy, such as nuclear fusion.
But in a sufficiently low-mass contracting object, you can't get that nuclear fusion,
and so the object continues slowly contracting and does not achieve stardom. It does not achieve
this nuclear fusion. Such an object is called a brown dwarf. It's often also called a failed
star, a star that was on its way to being formed, but nuclear fusion simply never started
up. The term brown is a little bit misleading. It was chosen because these objects are very
cool and very dim, so they're sort of, you know, you can't see them very well, but people
didn't want to call them black dwarfs because black dwarfs will, as we see, be a term that's
used for extremely cool white dwarfs, which is another class of object that I'll talk
about in two lectures. So a lot of the names that you could potentially use had already
been used up. Brown dwarf was chosen because they're cool and dim and small. They're a
dwarf, and they're sort of an extension of what the main sequence would have been in
the regular temperature luminosity diagram. You know, you've got smaller masses, and you
have smaller and smaller dwarfs, and so this is a dim, cool dwarf, and people simply called
it a brown dwarf. I think Jill Tartar of Setty fame first came up with that term. This brown
dwarf continues contracting until a new form of pressure starts becoming important in addition
to the normal thermal pressure associated with random motions of particles. The new pressure
is called electron degeneracy pressure. Not because it's morally reprehensible or anything
like that, it's simply the name that quantum physicists give to this weird quantum mechanical
pressure having to do with electrons basically not liking each other, and I'll explain
more carefully what I mean in a few minutes. This sort of pressure also occurs in white
dwarfs and neutron stars, so we're going to encounter it several times in this course,
so why don't we discuss it here in some detail right now. Electron degeneracy pressure results
from the fact that electrons are a type of fundamental particle called a fermion. Now
fermions don't like each other. They don't like to be close to each other. More precisely,
they don't like to be in the same quantum state. Now the quantum state of a particle,
broadly speaking, consists of its position and its momentum, or mass times velocity,
and its spin. Particles can spin in different directions, and you can have two particles
with the same position and momentum but opposite directions of spin, say clockwise and counterclockwise,
and they can occupy the same quantum state other than the spin because the spin makes
them sufficiently different from one another. They're not completely identical.
Fermions, of which electrons are an example, don't like each other, and more than one fermion
cannot be in a given quantum state. The other fundamental kind of particle is called a boson,
and bosons are just the opposite. They love being in the same quantum state. Photons are
bosons, and in fact the operation of lasers is based on this principle that photons like
all being together in the same quantum state. So what happens is that in this contracting
cloud of gas, this brown dwarf, eventually the density becomes so high that the electrons
start overlapping spatially quite a lot. They're in about the same place. So to be in different
quantum states, they're momenta, and hence they're energies because the energy is basically
proportional to the momentum squared. So their momenta and energies have to be quite different,
and indeed some of the electrons must have very high energies and momenta because all of the
lower energy and momentum quantum states are already fully occupied. So these electrons that
have high energy and momentum exert an extra pressure over and above the random thermal
motion pressure that particles exert. And had they not had this constraint that they
can't all go in the same state, they would have gone in the same state, a low state,
and they wouldn't have exerted this quantum mechanical pressure. But because they can't
all go into the same or the same few lowest energy states, some of them have to be in
rather high energy states which exert this extra degeneracy pressure. Let me illustrate
what I mean right here. Here is a schematic of what the energy states might look like
in a brown dwarf. Energy goes up vertically along this axis. Energy equals zero is at
the very bottom. And here we have all these energy states. And each energy state can have
two electrons of opposite spin, but only two. And so you see that they all line up in these
various energy states. By the way, they can't have zero energy because there's a quantum
mechanical jitter that they can't get rid of. So no electron is in the zero energy state.
But some are nearly at zero. And others are pretty high. And it's these that are moving
around rather quickly and they exert a pressure that helps support the contracting brown dwarf.
Let me give you an analogy. It's like an apartment building with lots of apartments, but there's
the restriction that only two people can be in a given floor of this apartment building.
So there's two, two, two, two, and two. The people on the highest floors are energetic
people. To get up there they had to have been energetic. Now you could say that by climbing
those flights of stairs they lost all their energy. But let's say they took the elevator
and they're living up there and they're just energetic sorts of people and they're just
bouncing off the walls and stuff. So that's what those electrons are doing. They're moving
around very quickly because they're forced to do so through this quantum mechanics. And
they are the ones that exert this pressure. Now they can't go jumping down to lower energy
levels because those lower energy levels are already filled. And all these guys together
actually work in a quantum mechanical way to exert this extra degeneracy pressure. And
here we illustrate it for a fully degenerate electron gas. That is, all the electrons are
in the lowest possible states that they can be in. Well, long before a brown dwarf becomes
degenerate, the temperatures are sufficiently high and the densities are sufficiently low
that the electrons are not degenerate. And in that case this apartment building looks
like this. Here are those same levels and you have one or two electrons per level, sometimes
zero electrons per level, but they're all more spread out randomly. And they exert the
normal thermal pressures of a normal gas, a non-degenerate gas. But as the thing contracts
and the densities rise, gradually the electrons start overlapping more and more, feeling each
other more and the degeneracy pressure starts setting in. So here at the very right we have
a non-degenerate electron gas. As it contracts and the electrons start overlapping, some
of them are in their lowest possible energy states, others are not, but now there's some
extra degeneracy pressure. And then finally in the fully degenerate electron gas, all
of them are in their lowest possible energy states and all of the pressure is this electron
degeneracy pressure. None of it is the random thermal motions that you had in a non-degenerate
gas. So it's a very weird sort of a pressure and it's a very weird sort of an object, this
brown dwarf. They're very small and very faint. They have about the same size as Jupiter.
They don't get much smaller than Jupiter because the electron degeneracy pressure doesn't let
them. And being cool and so small, they don't emit much light. And so they're very difficult
to notice. They especially don't emit much visible light because they're so cool. What
electromagnetic radiation they do emit tends to be in the infrared. Well, do they exist?
For a long time, astronomers weren't sure. They were looking for brown dwarfs for literally
decades. I mean, they were predicted many decades ago. Now, in 1994 and 95, the first
few convincing cases of brown dwarfs were found. And now, a little over a decade later,
there's over 600 known. So this decade, or 12 years, let's say, has coincided with the
explosive growth in studies of exoplanets. So exoplanets were discovered in the mid-1990s
and now we know of lots of them. And brown dwarfs were discovered in the mid-1990s and
now we know lots of them as well. Here's the first clear photograph of a brown dwarf. This
one happens to be gravitationally bound to another star. In the Hubble Space Telescope
image, it looks like there's a spike sticking out of the star. Maybe the star is firing
a laser beam out at aliens near it or something. Don't pay attention to that spike. That's
an artifact of the photographic process with the Hubble Space Telescope. So here's this
normal star and next to it, at the same distance from us, is this diminutive faint little star,
which in fact is so dim that it can't be a normal main sequence star. It must be a brown
dwarf. And when the astronomers who found it took a spectrum of this object, they found
in the spectrum absorption bands of methane. Now, that's what you see when you take the
spectrum of Jupiter or Saturn. You see absorption bands of methane and ammonia and things like
that, but mostly methane. And this really solidified the case that this is a brown dwarf.
Indeed, such cool brown dwarfs that have methane in their atmospheres are called T dwarfs.
The ones that are hotter are L dwarfs. Now, some of the L's are actually genuine stars.
Remember, O B A Fine Girl Kiss Me Lovingly? Well, some of the L's are main sequence stars.
Other L's are somewhat more luminous brown dwarfs than the T dwarfs. So the T's are sort
of an extension of this main sequence and you could say, O B A Fine Girl Kiss Me Lovingly
Tenderly, if you wish. So it's sort of an extension of the main sequence, but fusion of the normal
sort isn't going on. After that first discovery, quite a few other brown dwarfs were found
orbiting nearby stars. And with the technique of adaptive optics, you can see them next
to, for example, this bright star and this one here. Actually, these are the same star
observed with the Gemini 8 meter telescope in Hawaii and the Keck 10 meter telescope in
Hawaii. And you can see that the adaptive optics process has made the main bright star
look kind of serrated and weird, but that's just an artifact of the optical process. What's
important is you can clearly see this faint brown dwarf right next to it. Well, they're
so faint and cool that the best way to look for them is actually in the infrared. And if
you take a look at several photographs, you'll see what I mean. Here's an optical photograph
of a star field where this is a negative image. Bright things look black and the black background
sky looks white or gray. So here's a faint little guy marked with an arrow. In the near
infrared, somewhat longer wavelengths than the eye can see, you can see that the object
is much, is much brighter than it was in the optical relative to the other stars, which
have stayed about the same. And in the true infrared, the object is even brighter than
it was in the near infrared or the optical relative to the other stars. So these things
emit a lot of light in the infrared. Well, a lot is a relative term. They're very dim
all around. But if you're going to find them glowing, you might as well look in the infrared.
And there have been some surveys recently of the whole sky or much of the sky at infrared
wavelengths that have found lots of these things. And here's an example where we zoom
down into the Orion nebula, first at optical wavelengths. And then we will look at the same
field in the infrared. And you'll see a whole bunch of faint little stars and star like
objects pop up. Some of those are simply faint L main sequence stars. Others are L type brown
dwarfs. And some are even cooler T type brown dwarfs. And those might be the very faintest
little dots here, maybe brown dwarfs. And the brighter dots are L stars, which may or
may not be brown dwarfs. It's a bit hard to tell sometimes. You have to know the mass
in order to really know whether it's above or below this fusion dividing line. So these
surveys have found a truly remarkable number of brown dwarfs. They're all over the place.
But they have low mass. So their overall contribution to the mass of our galaxy is relatively low.
Main sequence stars, though not as numerous, are much more massive and they outweigh the
brown dwarfs. You can sometimes find binary brown dwarfs. And those are really good because
just as in the case of binary stars, you can use them to measure the masses of the two
components using Newton's laws of motion and the law of universal gravitation. And here's
an example of a binary brown dwarf. The images are a little bit elongated here because of
the photographic process. Here's an artist's conception of what one might look like. And
if we zoom down into the Orion Nebula, we can find one where, again, the artist is sort
of simulating what the orbit might look like. But from the spectra of the brown dwarf taken
over the course of time, you can tell that the thing is orbiting or that there are two
brown dwarfs orbiting each other there. And so that's great because we can figure out
their masses. And indeed, the masses are below this 0.075 solar mass dividing line, roughly
one-twelfth of a solar mass. Now, just as there are exoplanets around normal main sequence
stars, you might expect there to be exoplanets around at least some brown dwarfs. And indeed,
with adaptive optics, those have been found, at least in a few cases. Here is one particularly
good case where the image of the brown dwarf shows next to it an even fainter dot. And that
dot seems to be associated with the brighter object, the brown dwarf, and it is thought
that this is an exoplanet orbiting the brown dwarf. That's still a little bit of a controversial
conclusion, but I think it's pretty solid. And as more of these things are found, I'm
sure that people will confirm that, yes, brown dwarfs do occasionally have planets going around
them. Just as the first few exoplanets that were discovered, people thought, well, maybe
those are brown dwarfs, interestingly enough, right? Only a few of the exoplanets had been
discovered and they were pretty massive. They were at least as massive as Jupiter, maybe
even more massive. And people said, oh, well, those aren't exoplanets. Those are brown dwarfs.
Now we know that they are exoplanets, at least in most cases. And so in a similar way, I
think that as more of these guys are found, we will see that many of them are exoplanets.
The more massive ones would be brown dwarfs in their own right. Debris disks have also
been found around some brown dwarfs. And here's one where you can see the artist's simulation
of the disk rotating and planetesimals forming in that disk. So presumably this disk corresponding
to the artist's conception will form a planet in the future. But it will be a small planet
very close into the brown dwarf because the disk that was found is a very physically small
disk. And so it will form a diminutive planetary system. Now, an interesting fact that even
many astronomers don't know is that in brown dwarfs, there actually is some fusion. Some
fusion does occur. Many astronomers think that brown dwarfs are completely devoid of
fusion. That's not true. They're devoid of fusion via the normal proton-proton chain
where you start out with two protons that have to approach each other and then the strong
nuclear force grabs them and binds them together into a deuteron and so on. That's hard to
do. That requires temperatures of at least 3 million degrees. But at lower temperatures,
there form a fusion that can occur and that's deuterium fusion. So let's go back to the
first few steps of the proton-proton chain. This first step doesn't occur in a brown dwarf.
That's where two protons came together, formed a deuteron, a positron, and a neutrino. And
I explained how that has to happen twice. And then, you know, the two deuterons form
helium nuclei which themselves fuse into a larger helium nucleus and so on. That was
the standard proton-proton chain. But suppose you bypass this first step and you already
have some deuterium. It turns out deuterium is produced shortly after the Big Bang. I'll
talk about that later. And if you start with deuterium and bang a proton toward it, it
can in certain circumstances fuse into a light helium nucleus, a helium-3 nucleus. So as
long as there's some deuterium in the contracting object to begin with, that source of fusion
will occur, that form of fusion, okay? It occurs for a while. It doesn't occur for very long
because the amount of deuterium in the universe, the abundance of deuterium, is only one one
hundred thousandth of the abundance of normal hydrogen, of normal protons. So the deuterium
fusion doesn't last long in a brown dwarf, but but it is there. And so the brown dwarf
does fuse for a while. This is true for brown dwarfs between thirteen and seventy-five Jupiter
masses. You get this fusion of deuterium for a while. So some astronomers say, yeah, okay,
they're fuzers, but they're still not really stars, are they? Because they're not fusing
normal hydrogen in the normal way for a long time. Well, yeah, they're not doing it for
a long time, but they are fusing deuterium for a while. So they're undergoing nuclear
fusion. So I and others think that they're not really failed stars. I mean, they're they're
just not the normal sort of star, but they undergo fusion. So a compromise would be perhaps
not to call it a star, but to call it a fuser. Some astronomers like my colleague, Yabor
Basri, say that, well, really, they're they're stars. They're pretty normal stars. They just
have a different fuel supply. And okay, they don't last long, but O type main sequence
stars don't last very long either, just a few million years. And yet we call them stars.
So why don't we call brown dwarf stars as well? Well, then other astronomers say, yeah,
O type stars don't last very long. But at least when they're done with their hydrogen
fusion, they turn into something vastly different. We will see later that they turn into a red
super giant. And finally, they blow up. I mean, you know, once they're done fusing normal
hydrogen, they, they, you know, they become distinctly different. Whereas once a brown
dwarf is done fusing deuterium, it doesn't become distinctly different. And so those
astronomers say that's why you shouldn't call brown dwarfs true stars. Isn't this reminiscent
of the Kuiper Belt object Pluto discussion that we had before where we don't really have
a good self consistent definition of what is a planet? Well, we don't really have a
good self consistent definition of what a star is either in that gray area between stars
and planets. So whatever, you know, I don't know, I think they're fuses. I think they're
they're genuine stars, but other people don't. Now below 13 Jupiter masses, even deuterium
fusion doesn't occur. So those we would say are planets. So some of the objects found
by Marcy and Butler and the other planet hunters of the world are surely brown dwarfs. If you
look at the distribution of the number of planets versus their mass, or more correctly,
their minimum mass, this is the measured quantity is m sine i. So m might be bigger than the
indicated quantity if sine i is less than one. Anyway, these guys that are already near
12 or 13 Jupiter masses at a minimum, those are almost certainly brown dwarfs because
they're more massive than 13 Jupiter masses. The ones that are below 12 Jupiter masses,
well some of them might be above 13. And so they're probably truly brown dwarfs as well.
But the ones that have low mass, those are those are planets because they're orbiting
a star and they don't have any fusion going on. And the fact that there are more and more
of them as you go to smaller and smaller masses, yet the smaller masses, if anything, are harder
to find really convinced astronomers that most of the objects that the exoplanet hunters
are finding really are planets and not brown dwarfs. But some of them near the dividing
line may well be brown dwarfs. Now suppose you have an object below 13 Jupiter masses,
so it's not fusing deuterium, but it is not orbiting a star, it's just flying around
on its own. What do you call that? Do you call it a planet? Well, most people think that
a planet is an object that orbits another star. If this thing is the mass of a planet
but doesn't orbit another star, what do you call it? Do you call it a brown dwarf? Do you
call it a free-floating planet? Most astronomers would say it's a free-floating planet because
though it's not orbiting a star and can't be seen from the light that it reflects from
that star, nevertheless it has a planetary mass and it is not undergoing fusion of any
sort, so it's not a brown dwarf, and so it's a free-floating planet, some astronomers
say. But then you might say, well, alright, was the free-floating planet produced through
an ejection from another planetary system? So for example, here's a planet going around
a star near another planet, and if they get close to one another, a gravitational interaction
between the two can eject one of them and leave the other one in a slightly perturbed
orbit. That can be one way of forming free-floating planets, and indeed a few years ago there
was a well-publicized case where it looked like a planet was being shot out from a star
and this was hailed as the first ejected planet ever found. Later it was found out that in
fact this was just a faint background star and has nothing to do with the foreground
star, but in any case, certainly some of the free-floating planet-like things out there
may well have been ejected from planetary systems, so if they were once planets, why
not continue to call them planets? On the other hand, if they formed not in a planetary
system like this, but rather if they formed on their own through gravitational contraction
out of a cloud of gas, just like normal stars form and just like brown dwarfs form, some
astronomers say the formation process being so similar to that of stars means that these
are really star-like objects. I mean, they're an extension of the brown dwarf sequence and
so we might as well call them brown dwarfs, because they're not escaped planets and they're
not really planets at all. They formed through gravitational collapse not in the disk of
gas around a star the way normal planets form. So people don't really know what to call these
things. My colleague, Gabor Basri, has a solution. He says, let's call objects that are at least
massive enough to be spherical, but not massive enough to be deuterium-fusing brown dwarfs.
Let's call them planimos, planetary mass objects. And if a planetary mass object, a planimo,
happens to be orbiting a star, then we call it a planet. If it's not orbiting a star,
then we call it just a planimo or a free-floating planet, but if you don't like the word planet,
just call it a planimo, a planetary mass object. He has recently proposed that terminology.
I'm not sure that the astronomical community will accept it, but we will see in the future
whether they do or not. Quite a few of these free-floating planets or planimos have been
found in the recent past through, once again, infrared studies of the sky. If you look at
clouds of gas at infrared wavelengths, you find not only low mass main sequence stars
and not only faint small brown dwarfs, but you find some objects that are so faint, so
dim that the calculated masses are in this planimo range. They're below 13 Jupiter masses.
And so, more and more of these things are popping up in various surveys. They appear
not at all to be rare, and we have to deal with them. I think what all this is telling
us is that in the process of star and planet formation, there's a range of masses that
can occur from the most massive O stars to the least massive normal hydrogen fusing stars,
then down to the deuterium fusing stars, and then down to the planetary mass objects that
don't fuse anything at all. It's all part of one continuum, one process that leads
to the same sorts of objects, but having a continuum of masses. That has to teach us
something about star and planetary formation.
