As discussed in the previous lecture, by looking at more advanced stages of evolution of other
sun-like stars, and by using the laws of physics, and in particular the physics of gases, of
hot gases, we have deduced that in about five or six billion years, our sun will expand greatly
and then eject its outer envelope of gases, the outer atmosphere that it contains right now,
becoming a beautiful glowing planetary nebula. Now, here's an example of one. There's the
dying central star. There is this rich structure of gases around it. We don't know that our sun
will look like this one, almost certainly it won't, because we see such a great variety of
planetary nebulae, but it'll look something like this. This basic structure is what we think all
stars having an initial mass between about one-twelfth of a solar mass and eight solar masses
will eventually achieve. Their central star is dying, and it's getting rid of the outer atmosphere
of gases. This central star is basically the denuded core of a once-vibrant star, one that
had lots of nuclear reactions going on, but now there are no nuclear reactions anymore. The core
consists mostly of carbon and oxygen, and they repel each other so strongly through electrical
forces that at the temperature of the carbon-oxygen core, you can't get those carbon and oxygen
nuclei close enough together for fusion to begin. Even in the helium shell around the carbon-oxygen
core, the temperatures are too low for fusion to be maintained. Basically, this is a star that no
longer has nuclear reactions going on, and it's only a small fraction of the mass that it initially
had. Our sun will end up in this stage with about half of its present mass, and even stars up to
eight solar masses lose most of their material through this planetary nebulous stage and through
winds in such a way that they end up with less than about 1.1 solar masses of material in the core,
regardless of the mass with which they started all the way up to about eight solar masses. So,
this core begins to contract because there are no nuclear reactions going on, yet it's losing
energy to the outside world. That energy has to come from somewhere. It comes from the gravitational
contraction, and its density will increase, therefore. So, eventually, the electrons will start
feeling each other. They'll say, hey, I don't like you. I don't want you to invade my space. Get
out of here, right? Remember, electrons are fermions, and they don't like to be in the same
quantum state. Yet, the contraction of the star is forcing them to be on top of one another
spatially. So, to compensate, they have to achieve a range of energies, a range of momenta,
and you get, then, this electron degeneracy pressure where, for quantum mechanical reasons,
the Pauli exclusion principle basically is what says that these electrons don't like each other,
named after Wolfgang Pauli, a great quantum physicist of the early 20th century. His exclusion
principle says the electrons don't like each other, so the electrons take on a range of energies
and momenta and, hence, exert a pressure outward in the core, keeping it from collapsing entirely.
At this point, the core will become a white dwarf. It'll be supported by this electron
degeneracy pressure, the pressure of fermions that Wolfgang Pauli talked about long ago,
and it'll be this weird, retired star, essentially. No nuclear reactions going on. Heat still
liberated from electrons that are coming down to the lowest energy levels and from positively
charged atomic nuclei, which are not degenerate, and they can jump down to lower energy levels,
but basically, no new energy is being created in the star because nuclear reactions have stopped
and gravitational contraction has stopped. The only energy coming from the star is whatever
thermal energy the particles had at the time of formation of this white dwarf. So it's held up
by these counterintuitive quantum mechanical forces. It's very small about the size of the earth,
and it's very dim. As you can see here, the companion of the bright star Sirius is a white
dwarf, and it's much, much fainter than Sirius itself because the star has only about the size
of the earth and about the temperature of the sun, but okay, you know, it's pretty hot, and hence
it looks white, but it's so small that there's almost no area radiating energy, and so the
whole thing is a very low luminosity. So these things are very, very dim. Being so small and
dense, you know, you have about half of a solar mass compressed into the size, the volume of the
earth. That means that a tablespoon of material would weigh several tons. I mean, this is incredible
stuff. Hold this, and well, you can't do it because it would be so dense, incredibly dense. The
degenerate electrons in a white dwarf are moving around very, very fast, and you might say, well,
why can't they lose energy? If you go back to the diagram that I showed for brown dwarfs, it's
essentially the same reason. All the electrons are piled up in the lowest energy states that they
can achieve already. There are no empty states here. See, there are two opposite spinning
electrons per energy level. All of the apartment building stories, to use my analogy from two
lectures ago, are used up. And so there's no places to which the electrons can jump down, and
therefore they cannot lose any energy because there are no available empty quantum states. Really a
weird thing. The other weird thing about it is that for a normal solid, as you increase the mass, you
increase the radius. If I pile more and more bricks on top of one another, there's a greater mass of
bricks, but the radius of the structure is bigger, too. Indeed, for a sphere, the radius is
proportional to mass to the one-third power, because mass is basically proportional to volume, and
volume is proportional to the cube of the radius for a sphere. So, radius is proportional to mass
to the one-third power for normal material. But for a fully degenerate white dwarf like this,
radius actually is proportional to mass to the minus one-third power. That means as you increase
the mass, the radius decreases. And that's because these electrons are getting more and more compressed
by gravity with the higher mass, but they're resisting that compression, yet they can't quite
resist it as much as gravity is pulling in, so gravity slightly wins, and the radius is smaller
for the more massive objects. That fact will end up being critical when we consider the stability
of white dwarfs that are more massive than the sun. The atomic nuclei in white dwarfs can lose
energy. They're not degenerate. So let's take a look at the energy level diagrams for both the
electrons and the nuclei. The electrons are all in their lowest energy states. The nuclei are not.
There's a bunch of lower energy states into which the nuclei could jump. So gradually over time,
as the white dwarf cools, the nuclei are jumping down to progressively lower energy levels,
releasing radiation. That's the light that we see coming from a white dwarf. It is not light
coming from nuclear reactions right now. It is rather light coming from the store, the supply
of energy that the nuclei built up over the normal course of the star's life. So we can think of
white dwarfs as retired stars. They're saving, they're spending their life savings of energy.
They're not generating any new income, any new energy. They're just liberating, radiating the
energy that they stored up during their normal lives. And so they get cooler and dimmer and cooler
and dimmer. And after tens of billions of years, there's almost no light to be seen anymore. And so
at some point, they become so cool and dim that we essentially lose sight of them. And at that point,
some astronomers call them black dwarfs because you no longer can see them. Don't confuse them with
brown dwarfs, which are a different sort of object that we discussed previously, and don't confuse
them with black holes, which are yet again different, we will consider them in the future.
They're still supported by electron degeneracy pressure at this point. The electrons are holding
the whole structure up, but the ions, the positive ions inside have been gradually cooling down.
Now, if you find yourself a cold white dwarf, you could actually put your hand on it and not get
burned, despite the fact that some of the electrons are moving at speeds close to the speed of light.
You might think, whoa, won't they hit my hand and burn me? After all, when I put my hand on a hot
stove, an electric burner, you know, I feel ouch, you know, it stings. And it stings because the
electrons and atoms in the stove are moving very quickly. That's what a high temperature means,
lots of random motions. And when they hit my finger and specifically the nerve endings on my
finger, they transfer some of their energy to my finger. And I say ouch. Well, in transferring some
of their energy to my finger, they have to lose energy and they drop down to lower energy states.
In a cold white dwarf, the electrons are already in the lowest energy states possible,
so they can't lose any energy and transfer it to my finger or hand, because to transfer that
energy to my hand would mean that they'd have to jump to lower energy levels and all those are
already occupied. So you have this gas where some of the particles are moving at close to the speed
of light, exerting tremendous pressure, but your hand won't get burned by it. Pretty cool, huh?
Be sure if you do this to find a cold one though, because if you find a warm white dwarf, remember,
the positively charged ions are not degenerate and they could transfer their heat to you and jump
down to lower energy levels. So only try this experiment with a very cold white dwarf where
the ions are not in any high energy states. You want one in which the ions also are in
low energy states. So let's take a look at what's called the post-main sequence or
after-main sequence evolution of a sun-like star. Here's the temperature luminosity diagram,
and as I've emphasized before, where a star lands on the main sequence is dictated by its mass.
Then on the main sequence, it basically sits there almost unchanged in luminosity and surface
temperature. I mentioned last time that the luminosity does actually gradually grow a little bit
during the star's life, but not much. Then once the hydrogen is used up in the core and it becomes
helium, then you get the ascent to the red giant stage followed by helium burning to carbon and
oxygen, and then a further ascent to an even bigger red giant, then the outer atmosphere of
the star is unstable, starts getting blown off through winds and these cosmic burps that produce
the beautiful glow of ionized planetary nebulae, but then the central star becomes hotter and
hotter and hotter, and that's because you're exposing deeper and deeper layers of the star
as the planetary nebulae ejections progress further and further. That is, with each ejection of the
outer atmosphere, you're exposing what was previously a more interior and hence hotter
part of the star. So it zooms over to the left on the temperature luminosity diagram,
and then the central star is on its way to becoming a white dwarf. It contracts for a while
and dims down and cools, and then finally it can contract no further because it's supported entirely
by electron degeneracy pressure. At that point, it continues to cool but not contract. It cools
because the ions are losing energy, but it remains roughly the same size because the electrons are
holding it up, and then eventually at some point some astronomers call it a black dwarf, though the
distinction between a white dwarf and a black dwarf is sort of arbitrary. So this general pattern
is what all stars between about 0.08 and 8 solar masses do. The details may differ from star to
star, but they all do this basic sequence, this movement through the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram
after a period of long stability on the main sequence, and the main sequence is by far the
longest stage, the longest active stage of a star's life. The white dwarf stage is longer than
the main sequence stage, but at that point the star is a retired star. It no longer has nuclear
reactions going on. Well, what happens in detail depends on the amount of mass with which the star
was born. Our sun will lose roughly half of its mass on its way to becoming a white dwarf. We think
it'll actually end up having about six tenths of its present solar mass. So that's the mass it'll
have when it becomes a white dwarf. More massive stars become white dwarfs that are more massive,
but always less than 1.1 solar masses. Even an 8 solar mass star manages somehow to eject
most of its material and end up as a carbon-oxygen white dwarf, no more massive than 1.1 solar masses.
So that's what happens to the more massive stars in the sun. What about less massive? Well, below
about 0.45 solar masses, the white dwarf that remains consists of helium, not of carbon and oxygen,
because below 0.45 solar masses initial mass, the helium never achieves a sufficiently high
temperature to undergo fusion into carbon and oxygen. So those white dwarfs stop at the helium
stage or those stars during their active lives, stop during the helium stage and don't become
carbon-oxygen cores. On the other hand, if a star is between 8 and 10 solar masses initially,
we don't know exactly what happens to it in all cases, but in some cases what could happen is that
the carbon and oxygen will fuse to form oxygen, neon, and magnesium before the thing turns into a
white dwarf. Then you get this planetary nebula stage and you end up with an oxygen, neon,
magnesium white dwarf, at least according to some theoretical calculations. Other calculations say that
no stars between 8 and 10 solar masses explode at the end of their lives, so we don't really know
what happens in that range 8 to 10. Above 10 solar masses, as I'll explain later, stars don't
do this kind of thing at all, they don't become white dwarfs, rather they explode, and I'll discuss
that in a few lectures. Now let's get back to the white dwarfs. It turns out that white dwarfs
have a limiting mass, 1.4 times the mass of the sun, and this is known as the Chandrasekhar limit,
named after Subramanian Chandrasekhar, a great Indian astrophysicist who derived this
maximum possible mass for a white dwarf in 1930 when he was not quite 20 years old on a voyage
from India to England where he was to be educated. He had finished college at the age of 19 and he
was going on to graduate school in England and the voyage took two and a half weeks and he said,
well, why don't I combine the new fields of quantum mechanics and relativity and apply them
to stars, and he figured out that white dwarfs have this fundamental maximum limit,
which will be related, as we will see, to the explosions of stars, and he derived this, you
know, during this two and a half week journey, and 53 years later he won the Nobel Prize in
physics largely for this work. So it's kind of a cool thing. You could say, wow, here's what I did
on my trip to college, you know, or to graduate school. That's reminiscent of Newton saying, well,
here's how I spent my vacation away from college during the plague. You know, I developed calculus
and the laws of gravitation and all that. So some people are just really smart and really creative.
The Chandra X-ray Observatory is named after Chandra because he went on to do many, many great
things in astrophysics. Interestingly, when he arrived in England and presented his results to
the astronomers there, the most famous one and the most respected one, Sir Arthur Eddington,
publicly ridiculed the result and sort of personally ridiculed Chandra, apparently,
at a scientific meeting. And Chandra was devastated. By the way, I call him Chandra because that's
the way he's known throughout the world. Chandra Sekar's kind of long name and he liked going
by the name Chandra. So anyway, Chandra fortunately didn't get so affected by this public humiliation
that he just quit astrophysics and went on and did something else. He stuck with it and
he was eventually proven right and indeed he won the Nobel Prize and he did so many very,
very important things. He was really one of the great astrophysicists of the 20th century.
Well, this limit occurs because as you pile up more and more mass on a white dwarf. So you've
got a white dwarf and it's accumulating material from a companion star, for example. The radius
shrinks because remember the radius is proportional to the mass to the minus one third power.
So eventually the radius is so small and the electrons are squeezed into such a tiny volume
that their speeds approach the speed of light. But they can't exceed the speed of light and
it's even hard for them to get up to the speed of light. In fact, it's impossible to get
completely up to the speed of light. So their ability to exert pressure on their surroundings
diminishes. Or more correctly, it keeps growing but it doesn't grow as quickly as for electrons
that are not moving quite that close to the speed of light. They're approaching this limiting
speed and so their ability to continue providing more and more pressure diminishes.
And eventually at 1.4 solar masses, the electrons just say we give up, we can't do it. And in fact,
Chandra predicted that such a star should be unstable and would collapse.
We now know that another solution for the star's dilemma is to explode and I'll discuss that in a
couple of lectures. But Chandra saw that there's this limit combining relativity and quantum mechanics,
two whole new fields of physics. He came up with a very fundamental result and it's really amazing
that he was able to do this at the tender age of not quite 20. The evolution that I've described
up to now is applicable to single stars, stars that were born with a certain amount of mass
and didn't gain any mass from their surroundings or from any companion or anything like that.
And the evolution is dictated largely by the initial mass with which the star was born. And a
little bit depends on the initial chemical composition, but most of them are mostly hydrogen
and helium to begin with. So we can say with considerable certainty that the basic idea that
I just spelled out is correct and is about the same no matter which group of four solar mass
stars you're looking at or three solar mass or eight solar mass, for a given mass they all will
behave in about the same way. However, if the star is bound in a system with another star,
gravitationally bound, as most stars are, it can in principle, if it's close enough to the other star,
gain material from that other star and its mass will change. Here's a schematic of two stars
gravitationally bound to one another. This figure eight here shows the Roche lobes of the stars.
The Roche lobes are those regions within which the gravity of a particular star,
either that one or that one, dominates. So if you were to drop a particle here,
it would move toward this green star. If you were to drop a particle there, it would move toward
the blue star. Now, these two guys orbit each other. Eventually, the more massive one, which
evolves more quickly than the less massive one, will bloat and fill its Roche lobe. It can then
start transferring material to the other star, increasing that other star's mass. But if the
star's mass increases, then the pressure in the core increases, the reaction rate has to be faster
to counteract the gravity trying to pull in on the star. And so the star ends up behaving
like a more massive star, and it starts evolving more quickly. So an initially less massive star
can gain mass and evolve more quickly as a result of this process. An accretion disk forms
in the transfer of material from one star to the other because the whole thing is a rotating system,
and the transfer of matter from one star to another cannot occur just along a straight line
between these two stars. A disk has to form. And indeed, we saw this formation process when we
were considering the bipolar outflows of some planetary nebulae. Here's a star expanding to a
red giant and spilling its material onto the other star. And you can see that a disk formed around
that other star. Now, if one of the stars is highly evolved, if it's already a white dwarf,
and the other star starts spilling material onto it, then you can get brightening of stars called
novus. Novastella means new star in Latin, but really this is an old star that's accreting
material from its companion. And that material can fall in clumps onto the surface of the
white dwarf, releasing gravitational energy, or it can accumulate on the surface of the white dwarf,
and then undergo an uncontrolled chain of nuclear reactions, releasing a lot of energy.
So in a number of ways, the white dwarf that's gaining material from its companion star can
quite suddenly release large amounts of energy, becoming a factor of 100 to a million times
brighter than it was before for a very short amount of time. So here's this accretion disk
formed from the spilling of material from the more normal star onto the white dwarf. The white
dwarf is stealing this material. And as this material falls onto the white dwarf and accumulates,
nuclear reactions can occur, or gravitational energy can be released, and so the star can
brighten. And here's an example in 1934 of a star becoming a nova, suddenly brightening by,
in this case, a factor of a few hundred thousand, I think it was. And after this surface explosion
ends and dies down, the star fades. But then it continues gaining material from its companion star,
and once there's enough material on the surface, it can once again explode, producing a nova once
again, a new star. But really, this is an old star that's undergoing surface nuclear reactions.
So nova can recur. And amateur astronomers often find nova because they scan very large parts of
the sky, whereas professional astronomers usually look at only small parts of the sky in great detail.
Amateurs look at the whole sky and they can find bright novae like this one that occurred in the
constellation Cygnus in 1975. Here are Hubble Space Telescope pictures of another nova. It went
off in 1992, also in Cygnus, but unrelated to the one in 1975. And you can see that the ejected
material came out in a ring, not in a spherically symmetric way. Moreover, the ring expanded in
the time interval between the two Hubble exposures. And you can also see that the dramatic improvement
in clarity after Hubble's optics were fixed by the space shuttle astronauts. Now, some stars
are not white dwarfs that undergo outbursts, but rather are pretty massive big stars that undergo
outbursts unrelated to the nova phenomenon, the white dwarf phenomenon. But they still look like
novae. They brighten considerably and, you know, you have to study them in detail to see that
they are not, in fact, white dwarfs with surface explosions. And one such star is Aida Coraina
in the southern hemisphere, where you have a nebula, which through binoculars looks something
like this. And in the middle of that nebula, there's a very massive star that's undergoing a bipolar
ejection like this, kind of like the planetary nebula stage that I showed you earlier. Aida
Coraina sometimes brightens considerably. In fact, in the 19th century, there was a while when it was
the brightest star in the sky. But though it could be confused with this white dwarf surface
explosion process, the process of a nova, in this particular case, that's not what's happening. So
massive stars can sometimes masquerade as white dwarfs that are undergoing the nova process.
One really cool example of this was a variable star that occurred in the constellation Monoceros.
It brightened dramatically in 2002, becoming an incredibly bright star. And what we think
happened was that this star was in a binary system. And for some reason, the main star
suddenly grew bigger. We're not sure whether it was influenced by its companion or what.
But by becoming really big, and I mean almost as big as Jupiter's orbit is around our sun,
sort of between Mars and Jupiter, that's the kind of size we're talking about here,
by becoming really big, it became correspondingly brighter. But we don't know why it became that
big. Now in this particular eruption, no matter was ejected from the star, we can tell from spectra
that the gas was moving out pretty slowly. But apparently, previously during this star's life,
there were ejections of gas, because this particular brightening lit up the gases surrounding the star,
the gases that were emitted in previous ejections having been done by this star.
And you can see the echo, the light reflecting off of the gases that had been previously ejected
from this star. And though ejection is not happening in this particular outburst,
the light from this outburst illuminated that surrounding gas, producing a beautiful nebula
like this. And in fact, you can understand how these things happen if you have a flash of light
that hits clouds of gas and then gets reflected in many directions, including the direction
toward our eyes. And when the light reaches us, we see these glowing shells. So the glowing
shells should change with time. And indeed they did, as the Hubble Space Telescope took
more and more photographs of this object over the course of a couple of years, it could see
progressively more and more extended shells being lit up by the flash of light from the current
outburst of this very strange star. So clearly at the ends of their lives,
stars can do a variety of interesting things, explosive things, from the surface explosions
of white dwarfs to instabilities in more massive stars that cause them to brighten and fade
occasionally. As we will see in the next lecture, some stars literally explode at the ends of their
lives catastrophically destroying themselves. Those are the supernovae, the exploding stars.
