We now begin the fourth unit of the second major part of this course, the contents of
the universe.
In the next 14 lectures, I'll be discussing some of the most exciting and exotic objects
in the universe, exploding stars called supernovae, dense compact remnants called neutron stars,
and then finally black holes.
These are really great things.
Now you'll recall that in the previous lecture, I discussed nova explosions, where a white
dwarf is sufficiently close to a companion star that it's able to steal enough material
from that companion star, have it accumulate on its surface, and then go off as a surface
layer explosion.
That's a nova, a brightening of the star, but the star remains intact.
Now only a small minority of white dwarfs undergo this process because most are not
close enough to their companion star to steal enough material away and have a surface explosion.
So they die in a more quiet, normal way, like our sun's eventual white dwarf will die.
A very small minority of stars literally explode at the end of their lives, blowing themselves
to smithereens and becoming as luminous as millions or billions of normal suns.
This is basically a previously normal star, which suddenly, in a day or over the course
of a few weeks, grows in brightness by factors of up to 1 to 10 billion, dwarfing the previous
brightness that it had during its normal life.
Here is a star at the end of its life.
It has a normal luminosity, and then bam, a day later, it was millions of times brighter
than it was before, a colossal explosion of a star.
Looking at a series of frames of this process, you can see the thing brightening and fading,
and here I've sped up the process for this type of supernova.
The brightening takes a few weeks, and the fading takes many months.
But at its peak, the supernova can rival the brightness of an entire galaxy of stars.
It can be as bright as a few billion stars, and although our own galaxy is hundreds of
billions of stars, some galaxies are only a few billion stars, and so a single star can
rival the brightness of an entire galaxy.
That's just an incredible explosion.
Here's an example, again, showing the power of a supernova.
There's the galaxy before the supernova went off, and here it is after it went off.
That is a single star in this galaxy of stars that is now easily visible through a telescope.
This galaxy is 100 million light-years away, yet a single exploding star within it is comparable
in apparent brightness to a star in our own galaxy only 1,000 light-years away.
So here's one 1,000 light-years away, there's another one 100 million light-years away.
You can do the math using the inverse square law.
The supernova was, in this case, about 10 billion times the brightness of the star.
Wow, that is incredible.
If you were near one of these things and you experienced the explosion from a close distance,
you'd need sunblock of a billion or a 10 billion if the sun were to do this.
Well, we know about sunblocks of 40 or 50 when we go out to the beach and want to block
the ultraviolet rays from our skin, but if our sun were to do this, which it won't, don't
worry, it won't, you would need sunblock of a billion or 10 billion to give you adequate
protection.
Well, needless to say, we don't make sunblock that's not powerful, and in fact, it's impossible
to make.
The gases get ejected with speeds greater than 10,000 kilometers per second in some cases,
and we can tell that by examining the spectra of supernovae as I'll show you in the next
lecture.
Now, supernovae are important for a number of reasons, but first and foremost, they're
just these amazing explosions and seen from afar, from a safe distance.
Who can resist watching them?
I mean, you know, look at how much we like 4th of July fireworks shows.
Everyone goes to these things.
I experienced one this past 4th of July.
It was great.
I loved watching the fireworks.
So in a sense, a cosmic explosion is the biggest 4th of July fireworks show you're ever going
to see, okay, but again, viewed from a safe distance.
Now, my own fascination with explosions actually goes back quite some time.
In high school, I lit up all sorts of powders and stuff that went off in flashes.
Here I am, a senior in high school, doing a science club demonstration where I lit
up a flash powder and it fortunately didn't harm me.
It was a bit more of an explosion than I reckoned it would be.
Interestingly, the smoke went through the school ventilation system, and it started pouring
into the administrative offices, and they were about to pull the fire alarm.
The principal was, then they said, oh, well, wait, let's look at the weekly calendar of
activities.
Ah, there's a science science club demonstration at noon today by Alex Filipenko.
That's probably what's going on.
So they came over, rushed into the room, saw that it was just me doing my explosions and
said, oh, okay, that's all right.
So that's me in high school playing with explosives.
Unfortunately, I don't do it to be a terrorist or anything like that.
I just like the process of the explosion and what a bang it produces.
So I'm naturally drawn to the biggest bangs in the universe besides the birth of the universe
itself, cosmology, which I'll discuss later.
These exploding stars are among the biggest bangs in the universe.
Well they're not just fun to watch.
They're actually important.
They heat the interstellar medium.
The gas is between the stars.
These ejecta of stars slam into the gases between the stars and heat them up, causing
winds to come out of entire galaxies.
You can see galaxies ejecting material that's been heated by supernova explosions, fountains
of gas squirting out of galaxies.
That's really cool.
And supernovae also give rise to compact remnants in some cases, neutron stars and bizarre black
holes that I'll be discussing shortly.
That's cool.
And they accelerate charged particles to very high speeds, the cosmic rays that come in and
cause at least some of the mutations that lead to the evolution in life.
But most important from the human perspective is that supernovae, exploding stars, create
and disperse into the cosmos the very elements of which life is made.
Now I'll discuss later how the Big Bang produced only hydrogen and helium basically.
All the heavier elements were produced inside stars.
We've already seen some of this in our discussion of nuclear fusion.
Hydrogen goes to helium, helium goes to carbon and oxygen.
In some cases I even mentioned that carbon and oxygen can go on to neon and magnesium.
While these nuclear furnaces, stars, produce these elements, but if some stars were not
to explode, those heavy elements would remain forever locked up inside the white dwarfs
and wouldn't become available as the raw material from which new stars, new planets and even
life could form.
So you want some stars to explode to disperse the heavy elements that were created during
the normal lives of stars.
These explosions also produce many of the heavy elements.
Indeed, all of the elements in the lower part of the periodic table, the really heavy ones,
were produced during the explosions themselves, silver and gold and things like that.
And even the iron and other elements were produced during the explosions.
Carbon is in our red blood cells, calcium is in our bones, oxygen we breathe, carbon
is in most of our cells.
All of these elements were produced by stars and in some cases the explosions themselves
and certainly they were dispersed into the interstellar medium becoming available as
the material from which new stars, planets and life were made.
So we can tell that this happens because we can look at the remnants of stars, supernova
remnants of which a schematic is shown here and real life photographs are shown in the
next few pictures.
Here's the remnant of a supernova and you can look at the spectrum of the gases and see
that they are enriched in heavy elements that weren't there prior to the explosion.
Here's another beautiful supernova remnant.
So all of these elements that we see and that are so critical for life as we know it were
produced in stars and in supernovae, the iron, the nickel, the other heavy elements.
Everything except the hydrogen and helium was produced by stars.
Looking at an explosion simulating what it might look like there's a bang and then the
ejected material goes streaming away from the center of explosion becoming ever more
dispersed laden with heavy elements.
Those supernova remnants expand over thousands of years.
Here's one the crab nebula that's only 1,000 years old but after tens of thousands of
years the nebulae expand even more and gradually merge with other existing clouds of gas and
dust within galaxies eventually becoming gravitationally unstable as in the eagle nebula here and
collapsing to form new stars, new planets we think in some cases and even life.
So here are the protoplanetary disks that form around young stars.
Some of them we think coalescent to planets, indeed searches for extra solar planets have
found many of them.
Not yet earth like ones but getting close we're down to five earth masses for some
of the techniques as I've already discussed.
Some of the planets around stars surely will be rocky earth like planets where the material
for life collected and was able at least in the case of the earth to form self replicating
evolving molecules.
DNA the basis of life itself owes its existence to previous generations of stars.
So this ejection of the heavy elements into the cosmos and the production of the elements
themselves is the most centrally important aspect of supernovae in my opinion and in
the course of the next few lectures I will show you the evidence for the creation of
heavy chemical elements in exploding stars.
This process was first understood by two groups of astronomers.
One consisted of Margaret Burbage, Jeff Burbage, Willie Fowler and Fred Hoyle and they wrote
a paper Burbage, Burbage, Fowler and Hoyle now known as simply B squared FH.
It's such an important paper where they outlined the series of nuclear reactions that probably
produces the heavy elements of the periodic table.
Independently Al Cameron came up with very similar nuclear reactions and deduced that
the heavy elements come from stars.
As did some other physicists dabbling with or studying in great detail these processes.
Many of them realize that stars are nuclear furnaces that have the potential to produce
heavy elements.
That's what I mean by dabbling with the subject but some explore the subject in great detail
and show the specific reactions that probably occur in stars and in exploding stars.
Now people often ask is our sun then a second generation star?
Is it a third generation star?
From what supernova did we come?
Well it's not that way.
It's a mixture of exploding stars that produce all this debris in galaxies and the debris
from many explosions mixes together, coalesces and finally forms a contracting cloud of gas
and dust that gives rise to stars and planets.
Some of the stars that contributed to that cloud had short lives.
The massive stars have short lives and explode soon after their birth.
Other stars have long lives before they explode.
So really it was many different generations of stars that gave rise to the cloud of gas
from which our solar system formed.
Typically maybe it would be a hundred generations but some of the stars exploded shortly before
the pre-solar nebula formed and other stars may have exploded six billion years before
it formed.
So it's really a vast timescale.
The most famous supernova remnant is the crab nebula.
It's an expanding set of gases that's a favorite photographic object of amateur astronomers
and professional astronomers.
Here are a bunch of photographs including one that my team took with the telescope that
we run at Lick Observatory.
This photograph I've already shown, it was taken by Richard Crisp through this tricolor
process of isolating light that comes out in the form of various emission lines.
It's a beautiful picture and then the Hubble picture is just astonishing.
Look at the detail of the filaments of these expanding gases rich with heavy elements.
The supernova that gave rise to that remnant occurred in the year 1054, first seen on July
4th by Chinese astronomers.
I don't know what significance July 4th had to the people of the Song dynasty.
I doubt that they celebrated the American Revolution back then.
But anyway, here are some writings from the Song dynasty where it is said that in the
first year of the period Qihou, the fifth moon, the day Qichuo, a guest star appeared
several inches southeast of Tianquan.
After more than a year it gradually became invisible.
I can't read Chinese by the way, this is what my colleagues tell me it says.
And elsewhere it says that the star became four times brighter than Venus and it was
visible in daytime for 23 days and it only became invisible at night after about 653
days.
So this was an amazing guest star that Chinese astronomers studied.
Remarkably, it was not noted in Europe and so it may have simply been a casualty of the
dark ages.
Either people didn't look or they were afraid to write about what they actually saw in
nature.
It was possibly seen by the Anasazi Indians in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico.
There is a drawing made by the Anasazi Indians that looks like a bright star next to the
crescent moon and dating that drawing brings you to a time close to July 4th, 1054.
However, this might have been simply Venus close to the crescent moon.
We don't know the exact date when that drawing was made and there are many times when Venus
happens to be close to the crescent moon or some other stars close to the crescent moon.
So it's not clear whether the American Indians saw this explosion.
There have been other colossal explosions in our Milky Way.
In the year 1006 there was a very bright one whose remnant is shown here, imaged with the
Chandra X-ray Observatory.
A clear supernova was last seen in 1604 in our own galaxy by Kepler.
He studied this supernova in some detail.
Now we can take pictures of its remnant and here's one which is a combination from the
Chandra X-ray Observatory, the Hubble Space Telescope looking at visible wavelengths and
the Spitzer Space Telescope looking at the infrared.
Prior to Kepler, his mentor Tycho saw one in 1572.
Indeed Tycho became quite famous because of the book he wrote about the supernova of 1572.
And now we can see its remnant expanding as well.
Here is a radio image taken with the very large array in New Mexico of the expanding
remnant of Tycho's supernova.
And here's a Chandra X-ray Observatory image of the hot gas associated with that expanding
remnant.
Now supernovae are rare.
In a big galaxy like our own they might occur a few times per century, but in smaller galaxies
they might occur only once per century or only maybe once every two or three centuries.
So it depends on the galaxy that you're looking at.
It's probable that our own Milky Way galaxy is overdue for a good supernova because as
I said there was one in 1572 and there was one in 1604.
You might think hey it's been several hundred years, but you know some of them get hidden
by the extensive gas and dust in the plane of our galaxy.
Here's the Milky Way and you can see these dark blotches which are clouds of gas and
dust that extinguish or dim the light from behind them.
So it's possible that some supernovae have occurred in the past few centuries and we
simply haven't seen them.
There was one that occurred in the 1670s in the constellation Cassiopeia right about
here, but no one saw it or perhaps one astronomer saw a very faint new star there.
And we don't know why it was so faint.
Possibly it was intrinsically not very luminous and possibly it was hidden by a dark cloud
of gas and dust.
But now today we clearly see it's remnant and even a neutron star in the middle.
So anyway there have been a few supernovae in our galaxy in the past four hundred years
but I wouldn't be surprised if a bright one occurred during my lifetime.
I hope one occurs because I love these things.
Supernovae are easier ironically to find in other galaxies.
First of all there's a lot more galaxies out there than just our Milky Way.
So if you can find your search to just the Milky Way you're probably not going to find
one.
But if you look at other galaxies you improve your odds.
It's still hard.
Supernovae are rare.
They're like two-headed snakes.
They're rare.
You occasionally find them but you're unlikely to find one in your own backyard.
You have to look over a wide distance to find a rare animal like a two-headed snake.
And similarly you have to look at distant galaxies and many of them to find an appreciable
number of supernovae.
And they can be subtle.
For example here's a galaxy where there are some foreground stars in our own Milky Way
and then there's one of these things which is a supernova in that galaxy.
Well it turns out to be this one.
But just looking at that galaxy once you wouldn't be able to tell that that's a supernova and
that it's not just a star that belongs there because it's in our own galaxy and happens
to be along the same line of sight.
You can't just look at a galaxy once.
You have to look at a galaxy repeatedly to see if anything has changed.
Well I could force each of my students to look through a telescope.
Here I'm looking through a telescope and I suppose I could do this myself but I could
force each of my students to look through a telescope at one and only one galaxy each
night until they find something new, an exploding star.
And then they would graduate and move on to greener pastures and you know I could write
about the supernova.
But you know there are some crimes that are so egregious that even a tenured professor
can get fired and subjecting students to decades of searching through the eyepiece of a telescope
for an exploding star would be one such abuse of one's power as a professor.
So that wouldn't be a good thing to do.
It's better of course to not just look at one galaxy but rather to look at many galaxies
because if there's one supernova per century per galaxy that's equivalent to there being
one supernova per year per 100 galaxies.
You know each of these 100 galaxies is only going to produce a supernova once in a century
but they're going to do it randomly so on average one of those galaxies will do it in
any given year.
Or if you look at a thousand galaxies ten of them will produce a supernova in any given
year.
So I could have my students looking through the eyepiece at many many different galaxies
but that would be kind of cruel and unusual punishment as well.
Nevertheless there are some amateur astronomers that love doing this.
The Reverend Robert Evans has committed to memory the star fields around about 1500 galaxies
and he looks through the eyepiece of his telescope at this set of galaxies every once
in a while and he sees what's new.
He notices it by comparing with his memory of what the galaxy and the star field around
it should look like.
And indeed in the past two and a half decades he has found visually 40 supernovae which
professional astronomers then studied in great detail.
So I really like Reverend Evans for having found lots of bright supernovae.
He tells me that occasionally he feels that a supernova is going to occur in a particular
galaxy on a particular night.
Maybe he has some sort of inside communication from God or something since he's Reverend
Evans.
But here's an example of one of his discoveries taken with a telescope that I run.
Here's the galaxy before the supernova occurred and there's the galaxy after the supernova
occurred.
Most things look the same but here you can see something looks different.
This image gives us a clue to how we might look for supernovae and find lots of them.
You just take pictures of galaxies and you look for arrows.
And where you see arrows you find supernovae.
Look at that.
There's one, there's one, there's one and it happened twice in this galaxy.
By the process of mathematical induction this technique must work every time.
Just take photographs of galaxies and look for arrows and the arrows will show you where
the supernova is.
Well of course it's not that easy.
You have to identify the supernova and then you use Adobe Photoshop or something to put
in the arrow.
And our team runs a telescope at Lick Observatory which is about a two hour drive southeast
of San Francisco and this telescope, the Katzmann Automatic Imaging Telescope, is not a large
telescope by today's standards.
It's only three quarters of a meter in diameter.
But our team and in particular Dr. Wei Dong Li, a member of my team, has programmed this
telescope to take pictures of lots of galaxies over the course of a single night.
We can take images of over a thousand galaxies on an average night.
So over the course of a week we can get images of seven or eight thousand galaxies and then
the next week we take new pictures of those same galaxies and we can compare the new pictures
with the old pictures and see if anything new has shown up.
Usually there's nothing new but here's an example where something new showed up.
Here's a new image of a galaxy for which we had an existing template or old image.
If you subtract the template from the new image, you indeed get a supernova candidate
that turned out to be a supernova, but you also get a cosmic ray and some poorly subtracted
stars.
The software identifies these as candidate supernovae.
And in general, the students that I have looking at the images verify that the computer
program that identified the object as being a new star, it really is a star and not some
sort of a cosmic ray or some other imperfection or some asteroid flying through the field
of view.
And so these undergraduate students have a chance to get their hands dirty with research
at an early age and this gives them training with which they go on to graduate school and
do other important work.
And I've had many, many students in my group over the years helping the automatic software
discover supernovae by confirming what the software thought it had found and getting
rid of all the fake supernovae that sometimes occur when an asteroid flies through or a
cosmic ray hits the CCD or two stars are blended together and look like they're a supernova
or something like that.
So I'm proud of the record that my students have achieved.
We've found hundreds of supernovae over the past decade or so.
Indeed, we are the world's leaders in finding supernovae.
The first one we found supernova 1997 BS, you might think was of questionable integrity
given its name 1997 BS.
But it turns out that the naming scheme for supernovae is that the first one that you
discover in any one year is given the designation year plus an A. The second one B all the way
up through Z for the 26th one.
And then you go A, A, A, B, A, C and so on through A, Z and then B, A, B, B, C and so
on.
So I will leave it as an exercise to the listener to figure out what number sequentially that
supernovae happened to be that year.
Having one in one year was not a world record, but we then found many in the subsequent years
setting a world record several times.
And we even found the first supernova of the new millennium regardless of your definition
of the new millennium, supernova 2000 A and 2001 A.
So anyway, we found a lot of these things.
We now study them in great detail and try to come to a better understanding of how it
is that stars explode.
Now we've found about half of all the bright supernovae that have been found over the past
decade.
But I should say that amateur astronomers have found most of the others.
Most of the ones we don't find, they find.
And this is really a great thing.
They look with their telescopes taking CCD images in general or as Reverend Evans does,
he looks just visually through the eyepiece and they do the same sorts of comparisons
that we have done, although we have software that does it relatively automatically and
they painstakingly look at their images night after night trying to see what's new.
They've also developed some software that helps them out as well.
But I'd like to pay a tribute to some of the amateurs who have done such a great job in
finding supernovae and in developing software that is similar to the software we have developed
with which they, using their system, can find supernova candidates.
Tim Puckett, living in Georgia, has found over 150 supernovae.
That is an amazing accomplishment.
And Tom Bowles in England has found over 100 supernovae.
Here's his 100th discovery, supernova 2006 BK, where there the markers show a star next
to a galaxy or perhaps embedded in the galaxy and a previous image of the same field did
not reveal that star in the field.
So this was a new star and Bowles discovered it and it was his 100th discovery.
But really it wasn't a new star, it was the death of an old star.
Here's Mark Armstrong, who also has found many supernovae, several dozen I think.
And there are other amateur astronomers, Michael Schwartz and others, who have also found dozens
of exploding stars.
It's really great that amateur astronomers can contribute to our field in such a valuable
way.
By finding lots of supernovae that professional astronomers can then study, they increase our
chances that we will come to a complete understanding of the phenomenon.
And they also free up more of our time using the bigger telescopes so that we can examine
in detail the known supernovae rather than spending most of our own telescope time searching
for supernovae.
You know, you want to spend your time with the Keck telescopes and others studying the
supernovae, not with not not searching for them.
So it's really a great form of cooperation between professionals and amateurs.
And through studies of supernovae over the past few decades, we've now come to a pretty
good understanding of how they explode.
And in the next few lectures, I'll explain the different ways in which stars having different
masses and different configurations, like single stars versus binary stars, can sometimes
very rarely explode at the ends of their lives.
