In the previous lecture, I introduced supernovae, catastrophic explosions of a small minority
of stars at the ends of their lives.
They just go kazzam like that and blow themselves to smithereens.
They're absolutely spectacular.
For a few days or weeks, they can be as luminous or powerful as millions or even billions of
normal stars like our sun.
And they're really important because they produce and eject into the cosmos heavy chemical
elements that are the raw material for the formation of new stars, rocky earth-like planets,
and ultimately even life itself.
We came from stars from supernovae, and I'll give you that evidence in the next few lectures.
So they're amazingly brilliant luminous objects.
What kinds of stars actually explode and how do they do it?
I mentioned last time that the sun won't explode, it'll die a rather gentle, quiet death, becoming
a planetary nebula and then a white dwarf.
Well you can get major clues about stellar explosions from the spectra of those explosions.
So again, just as a review, you pass starlight through a prism, disperse that light into
the rainbow or spectrum of colors, and you can measure various lines, absorption lines
and emission lines produced by the chemical elements in the ejected gases.
And if you plot the intensity or brightness of the spectrum as a function of wavelength
or color going from the ultraviolet at the left to the red and the near-infrared colors
on the right, you find that the spectra of supernovae look like roller coasters.
They have all these up and down undulations, and there are different kinds of spectral
signatures.
Some seem to have hydrogen in their spectra.
Those are observationally called the type 2s, and they have other things as well, iron
and calcium and oxygen, but the notable feature is hydrogen.
And then there are some that have calcium, magnesium, iron, sulfur, silicon, oxygen,
but notably no hydrogen, and those are observationally called the type 1s.
So type 1 has no hydrogen, type 2 has hydrogen.
It's a purely observational distinction.
It says nothing yet about the physical mechanism for the explosion.
They have all these undulations and you look at the spectrum and you see silicon and oxygen
and calcium, these are the sorts of elements that were synthesized during and before the
explosion and expelled into the cosmos, making them raw material for the formation of new
stars, planets and life.
Well if you look at the type 1s and the type 2s, those that don't have hydrogen are generically
the type 1s, but it turns out that among the type 1s there are several different subclasses,
now called 1a, 1b and 1c.
And all of them don't have hydrogen, but there are some other differences among those subclasses.
And the classical most historically long known type 1s are now called the type 1a's.
They're the generic type 1s.
We now know about these type 1b's and 1c's and I'll talk about them in the next couple
of lectures.
They actually have a very different explosion mechanism than the type 1a's.
Now if you look at other differences among type 1s and type 2s, you can find them.
For example, if you plot the brightness on the vertical axis versus time on the horizontal
axis and here the units are days since peak brightness, so here's the peak right there.
You find that type 1a's rise for about three weeks, reach their peak and then decline for
many months and even years.
Initially the decline is pretty fast and then it slows down.
The type 2s rise in a day or less in some cases, maybe some cases two days, but anyway
a very short rise, then they sit around at about the same brightness for up to three
months and then they decline steeply followed by a more gradual decline.
So those are representative light curves or plots of brightness versus time for these
two main classes, the classical type 1a's and the type 2s.
Other differences are the environments in which these supernovae are found.
Type 1a's occur in all kinds of galaxies, including galaxies called elliptical galaxies
like this one, which consist only of old stars, no young massive stars and there's
one that went off in an elliptical galaxy.
So it looks like type 1a's probably come from an old population of stars.
Type 2s on the other hand and also type 1b's and 1c's tend to come from the arms or from
near the arms of spiral galaxies like this one, so you never see them in elliptical galaxies
which consist only of old stars, you always see them in spiral and other irregular type
galaxies that tend to have a lot of star formation going on right now.
So there are massive stars being born and there are young massive stars and massive
stars don't live very long and then they die.
So the fact that type 2 and 1b and 1c supernovae occur in spiral galaxies in or near regions
of massive star formation also suggests that they are somehow related to the deaths of
massive stars.
If you look at the spectra of these supernovae, you find that in all cases there's evidence
for very rapid ejection of gases, speeds of thousands of kilometers per second, sometimes
exceeding 10,000 kilometers per second.
And the way we deduce that is by looking at the spectrum, again brightness versus wavelength,
and here's an emission line of hydrogen and then the absorption line here is blue shifted
relative to the emission line and from the amount of this blue shift you can tell how
rapidly the ejecta are expanding.
Also the general breadth or width of this emission line tells you that the gases are
expanding very quickly because some of the gases are moving toward you, those would be
blue shifted, some are moving away from you, those would be red shifted and the overall
ensemble of atoms moving toward you and away from you at different speeds leads to this
broad emission line and a broad absorption line.
Let me show you in a little bit more detail how that occurs.
If you have a star with only a photosphere, the surface so to speak from which the photons
come, you get a plot of brightness versus wavelength that's a continuum, sort of a continuous
spectrum with no lines.
Now if you have a stationary absorbing shell of material outside the photosphere, that absorbing
shell can produce an absorption line and that absorption line will be at the rest wavelength
if that shell is stationary.
By rest wavelength I mean the wavelength you would have measured for that line in a laboratory
gas at rest.
But now if that shell is expanding away from the photosphere, the line that you see is blue
shifted because this gas is moving toward you.
So absorption occurs of photons that are blue shifted relative to the rest wavelength.
Now if you have a bunch of shells of gas, they're moving at different speeds away from the photosphere
and you get a bunch of absorption lines, all of which are blue shifted relative to the
rest wavelength and which together form a broad absorption line as seen by us.
Then you have to remember that all these shells are also producing some emission as well.
And so if you add that in as well, you find an emission line centered at the rest wavelength
because most of the emission is coming from shells of gas that are moving perpendicular
to your line of sight.
That's where the emission is coming from.
It's coming from these regions here, whereas the absorption is coming from those regions
there.
So you get a blue shifted absorption line and a broad emission line centered at the rest
wavelength of the line coming from all these shells over here.
Now that's a bit of a complex thing.
I just want you to get the basic idea of what I'm saying.
The idea is that from the width of the lines and specifically from the blue shift of the
absorption, you can tell how rapidly this gas is being ejected away from the star.
For many years, there were only a few bright supernovae to study and a lot of those had
been found long after they went off and so we couldn't study how they were exploding
in the first few days or weeks of the explosion.
But now with robotic searches like that conducted by my group at Berkeley and also with the
help of many amateur astronomers, many bright supernovae are found each year and can be
studied in great detail.
So with our search at Lick Observatory conducted by myself and Wei Dong-Li and our whole team
of students, we find lots and lots of supernovae, many dozens per year, up to 100 per year.
And here are five examples.
And we can study them in great detail.
We can follow how quickly they brighten and fade and we can get lots of spectra of them.
And here's one supernova 2000 CX for which we got really great measurements of the brightness
or magnitude versus time.
We can see it brightened and then it declined.
And it had slightly different light curves as viewed through a filter that transmits
blue light or visual light or red light or infrared light.
The light curves differ in each of those bands and we can learn about the physics of the
explosion through studies like this.
Now measuring those actual light curves used to be a really tedious labor intensive process.
But thanks to the great programming skills of Wei Dong-Li and a student of mine, Mohan
Ganeshalingam, we now have a largely automated program.
Here's Mo who helped Wei Dong write this program.
And we can now measure the light curves or brightness versus time of many supernovae
just overnight.
Now once we get the data, you let the program run through its course and you get the light
curve.
And here's a bunch of light curves of type 2 supernovae, all showing this characteristic
feature where they stay at about a constant brightness for a few months and then they
decline.
And here's a bunch of type 1A supernovae where they brighten over the course of say three
weeks and then decline.
And these are really great light curves.
The data like this are of unprecedented quality and we can do that now with all these robotic
telescopes and the automatic programs with which we measure these light curves.
We can also study the rates at which different kinds of supernovae occur.
With our lick observatory sample, we've actually found over 700 supernovae and we've determined
what types they are and what kinds of galaxies they're in.
And so we can figure out what kinds of supernovae occur at what rate, how many per century
on average in different types of galaxies.
And this is important because different types of supernovae produce different kinds of chemical
elements and they pollute those galaxies in which they occur.
So if certain types of galaxies produce more type 1As than type 2s, their chemical evolution
will be different from that of galaxies that produce more type 2s, for example.
And the rates are also important for determining the rate of formation of neutron stars and
pulsars and how quickly the gas between the stars is heated by these titanic explosions.
And so astronomers really want to know the rate at which supernovae occur.
So I have a student, Jesse Lehman, who's quadriplegic in fact.
He can hardly move anything, but he's got a tremendous brain, he's got a great mind.
And he talks to his computer and he can program the computer and he can tell it to analyze
the data and he's been doing a marvelous job at analyzing the data set that we have of
over 700 supernovae sitting in his wheelchair, talking to his computer, programming the computer,
asking it to write papers.
I mean, it doesn't write them automatically.
You can't just say, hey, write the paper.
He has to dictate it, of course, but it does it and he's been doing tremendous science
and I think he'll be a real inspiration to many people who are also in disabled or disadvantaged
positions like this.
Well, let's now talk about what produces these supernovae.
The traditional kind, the type 1As, don't have any hydrogen in their spectrum and you
might say, OK, well, maybe that's because the gas is not at the right temperature to
produce hydrogen.
Maybe it's too cold or too hot to produce absorption lines in the visible part of the
spectrum.
But when you measure the spectrum, you find that it corresponds to roughly speaking a
black body having a temperature of around 10,000 degrees Kelvin.
And at such a temperature, hydrogen optical absorption and emission lines should be very
prominent if there were hydrogen present in the ejecta.
But there's no hydrogen in the spectrum.
So we conclude that there's no hydrogen present in the ejecta or very little.
And that's very significant because hydrogen is by far the most common element in the universe
and any star that doesn't have hydrogen is a peculiar star.
It's not a normal sun or anything like that.
Well, the other interesting properties of the type 1As is that they sometimes, as I
said, occur in galaxies having only very old stars.
And also, all of the type 1As look very similar in their observed properties.
They have the same light curves and they have the same peak power.
And they're almost identical twins.
And all these characteristics sort of shout out white dwarf, white dwarf at some limiting
mass, the Chandrasekhar limit that I mentioned when I discussed white dwarfs.
Carbon-oxygen white dwarf surrounded by a thin helium layer might not have any hydrogen
at all.
I mean, it's stealing some hydrogen from a companion star, perhaps, but that hydrogen
can quickly turn into helium through fusion.
So there might not be any hydrogen and the carbon-oxygen white dwarf might achieve always
the same configuration when it explodes.
And I'll explain that in a minute.
So here's what we think is happening.
There's a white dwarf made predominantly of carbon and oxygen, perhaps with a helium
shell around it, stealing material from a companion star.
Now the way this happens is that the companion star can turn into a red giant near the end
of its life and spill material over to the white dwarf.
Let me show that.
Here are the Roche lobes, the regions within which the gravity of each star dominates.
So here's the star when it was during its normal main sequence life.
Then near the end of its life, it starts expanding.
So on its way to becoming a red giant, it's becoming bigger and bigger.
And you can see that eventually it reaches the size of its Roche lobe, or the region
within which its gravity dominates.
And then material can spill across this point right here and become dominated by the gravity
of the white dwarf and accrete gradually onto the white dwarf, increasing its mass.
All right.
So what we have here then is this picture where the material from a relatively normal
star expanding to a red giant is spilling onto the white dwarf.
That's very similar to the picture that we showed when we were discussing Novi in lecture
52, where I was saying that a white dwarf collects material from the companion star and
then undergoes a series of surface explosions that make the thing look somewhat brighter
than before, maybe a factor of a hundred or a million times brighter than before.
Well, in the case of the Type 1A supernova, what we think actually happens is that the
mass of the white dwarf is able to grow without undergoing nova explosions, which tend to
eject material.
And if the mass of the white dwarf grows enough, it reaches this limiting mass known
as the Chandrasekhar limit after Subramanyan at Chandrasekhar, who first figured it out
when he was only about 20 years old.
And that limit, 1.4 solar masses, is a mass at which the white dwarf has to do something
catastrophic.
It's unstable at that mass, and that's what Chandra knew.
He didn't know exactly what would happen to the white dwarf, but he knew that it would
become unstable.
And what we think happens is that there's a runaway chain of nuclear reactions that completely
obliterates the star.
It just goes, cut, bloom, like that, through an uncontrolled chain of nuclear reactions.
Now, the Chandrasekhar limit is given on this T-shirt that I made.
It depends on the number of protons per number of protons plus neutrons in a star.
And then there's a bunch of fundamental constants, Planck's constant and the speed of light,
and Newton's constant of gravity, and the mass of the proton.
And all these things together give you this fundamental limit at which a star has to become
unstable, and Chandrasekhar figured that out.
Now it's a runaway nuclear explosion because the matter is degenerate.
That means that all of the electrons are in their lowest possible energy states, and they're
holding the star up just barely, trying to keep it from collapsing.
But the nuclei, the carbon and oxygen nuclei, hit each other, they fuse, and they release
some energy.
And that energy is not able to expand the star, as would have been the case in our sun
if you were to suddenly heat up the center of our sun, because degenerate matter doesn't
really care what temperature it's at.
It just keeps the same pressure because the pressure is dictated largely by the electrons.
And so that energy doesn't go into expanding the star, instead it goes into moving the
other nuclei a little bit faster, and they slam into each other, creating more nuclear
reactions, releasing more energy, which doesn't expand the star, but rather goes into heating
up the nuclei even more.
They ram into each other, creating more nuclear reactions, and you can see it's a nuclear
runaway, more specifically a thermonuclear runaway, because it's driven by the heat,
the energy emitted by the first few or any preceding nuclear reactions.
So it's an amazing explosion.
And you can see how bright it becomes here.
Just becomes this hugely luminous star, about the same power as a billion normal suns.
And a Hubble Space Telescope picture of the same supernova shows it much more sharply in
this beautiful dusty spiral galaxy.
And now we observe the ejecta of some of these things in our own galaxy, say a thousand
years later, as in the case of this one that occurred in the year 1006.
So a huge number of nuclear reactions occur.
They fuse carbon and oxygen into heavy elements, primarily radioactive nickel.
Nickel with 28 protons and 56 nucleons, or protons plus neutrons.
And that radioactive nickel decays into radioactive cobalt and then into stable iron.
And that decay process emits gamma rays, very energetic photons, because nuclei emit very
energetic photons, not just optical and infrared photons like electrons do.
And those gamma rays then bounce around inside the exploding star, gradually getting converted
into optical light, and eventually when the stuff gets out, we see it as the optical light.
But roughly six-tenths of the solar mass of nickel-56 forms in this explosion, driving
the optical display of light that we then see for a few months or a few years.
If the radioactive nuclei had not been produced, the explosion would be an optical dud, because
all of the energy that's released through fusion of light elements into heavier elements
would have been used up in the expansion of the star.
Fusion of material uses up energy, so if all the energy were used up and there were
no energy associated with radioactive decay, then you wouldn't see anything in this exploding
star.
It would simply explode, but you wouldn't see the explosion because there'd be no new
energy driving the visible light from the supernova.
So it's good that there's this radioactive decay, it produces a bright fireworks for
us to see.
Now the details of all this are uncertain.
For example, the white dwarf is probably rotating, and it probably has magnetic fields, and these
are all hard problems to solve.
People are trying to figure out now what changes in detail in the exploding star if we incorporate
rotation in magnetic fields and things like that, and we don't really know yet.
We're trying to figure it out.
So we don't exactly know which kinds of stars will explode, but we think that it's only
the white dwarfs in binary systems that are able to accrete enough material to reach the
Chandrasekhar limit.
So then you might say, well, gee, Sirius 8.7 light-years away has a white dwarf companion.
Will it explode one of these days, and being at a distance of only 8.7 light-years, you
know, is that going to hurt us?
Well, we don't think that Sirius B is going to explode, at least not any time soon.
First of all, it only has 1.05 solar masses quite far from the Chandrasekhar limit of
1.4 solar masses.
Moreover, it's pretty far from Sirius A, and it's not at all clear that there will be
sufficient accretion from Sirius A to produce enough mass to make Sirius B reach the Chandrasekhar
limit.
If it does, it'll only do so far, far in the future, when the sun will probably be a lot
farther away from Sirius.
And it could become a nova in between.
You know, it might just accrete a little bit, then blow off the shell that it accretes and
not really grow in mass.
So we don't think it's going to become a supernova.
And nova explosions at a distance of 8.7 light-years are nothing to be afraid of.
So you know, well, you might say, okay, but what if it were to go off?
You know, let's just suppose.
Would it hurt us?
Well, optically, it wouldn't be a problem because it would only be about one percent
of the brightness of the sun, and it would only be that way for a few weeks.
And you know, that would be visible in a daytime sky.
It would be brilliant, but it wouldn't hurt us.
You might worry about the X-rays and the gamma rays that are produced by the explosion because
they can not only deplete the ozone layer, but also cause ionization of our atmosphere,
which leads to currents in the atmosphere and what's called an electromagnetic pulse.
You can get this danger during a nuclear war as well, when a whole bunch of nuclear weapons
go off and they ionize the atmosphere, and there are charge imbalances in the atmosphere
that create voltage drops and essentially huge bolts of lightning, and electronic circuitry
gets short-circuited, and you know, so that can be a real bad situation.
So a Type 1A at this distance would indeed produce some bad effects, but we don't know
exactly what would kill us first.
Would it be the X-rays or the gamma rays, or would it be energetic charge particles called
cosmic rays, which are produced by supernovae and which we see in our detectors?
We don't really know the effects of radiation on human tissue very well yet, but probably
a supernova within 10 light years would be very bad news.
And between 10 and 100 light years might be bad news.
Beyond the 100 light years, I think we're safe, and it's been estimated that at most
one of the mass extinctions that has occurred in the history of life on Earth was perhaps
caused by a supernova explosion, but even that is controversial, and we don't really
know of any direct evidence for an extinction of life on Earth being caused by a supernova
explosion.
Well, let's go back to the Type 1A's and uncertainties in their explosion mechanism.
We're pretty sure that a Type 1A results from the explosion of a white dwarf that's reached
the Chandrasekhar limit.
The spectra that you compute, the light curves that you get from computer models agree very
well with what's actually observed, so that we're pretty sure of.
What we're not sure of at all is how a white dwarf actually reaches the Chandrasekhar
limit in the first place.
How does it become unstable?
If there's a main sequence star trying to spill material to the white dwarf, well, that's
hard because a main sequence star is much smaller than its Roche lobe, so it doesn't
spill material to the white dwarf.
On the other hand, if it's a red giant star spilling material, then shouldn't the explosion
rip some of the gas away from the envelope of the red giant, causing the hydrogen to
glow because, after all, the red giant is made out of hydrogen, and so shouldn't we
see some hydrogen in the spectrum?
We don't, so people say, well, it probably isn't a red giant, but if it's not a main
sequence star and it's not a red giant, what is it?
We really don't know what it is.
Moreover, if you look at this diagram here of the star spilling over to the white dwarf,
as I said before, it looks a lot like the picture we had for Novi.
In the case of Novi, you have the hydrogen accreting onto a surface layer on the white
dwarf, and then it explodes, and then the star gathers material for a few years, and then
it explodes again, and so on.
Each of these Novi explosions can get rid of all of the accreted hydrogen, or even more,
so the star's mass doesn't really grow up to the Chandrasekhar limit, and you might
say, well, all right, maybe you can avoid these Novi explosions by having a very rapid
accretion rate, but in that case, the envelope around the white dwarf swells up, and once
again you would get hydrogen in the spectrum because the white dwarf would explode in a
swollen hydrogen envelope, and it would look like a type 2.
So it's a real problem.
We don't know how the star gets up to the Chandrasekhar limit.
So some physicists have seriously considered sub-Chandrasekhar white dwarfs, where the
mass is less than 1.4 solar masses, and the thing is somehow able to explode.
For example, an explosion can be initiated at the boundary between the helium envelope
and the carbon oxygen core, and maybe that's what happens.
The trouble is, is that the spectra and light curves from such models don't agree with
what's actually observed.
Well, all right, so what do we do?
Well, some physicists have said maybe what you really have are two white dwarfs in a
binary system, which gradually spiral together and merge, causing an explosion.
So you might have a picture like this, where you have two evolved stars, two white dwarfs
spiraling in toward each other, and as they spiral in, they emit gravitational waves.
Now I'll discuss those later on when I cover general relativity and gravitational waves,
but here you can see these stars spiraling in toward each other, and they're emitting
energy in the form of these waves, these ripples in the actual shape of space.
And as they get closer and closer together, they orbit more and more quickly until finally
they just merge and explode, and that might be what produces the actual supernova.
Now in this animation, they merged and formed a neutron star, and it's still sitting around
there spinning quickly, but in other cases maybe there's an actual explosion.
And the animation itself is for a pair of white dwarfs that was recently found that
are orbiting each other in just a little bit over five minutes, so they're really whizzing
around close to one another, and they might merge and form a Type 1A supernova.
But in general, the problems with this model have been that there are too few binary white
dwarfs known in our own galaxy to account for the observed number of Type 1A supernova
each year or each millennium in a typical galaxy.
So binary white dwarfs appear to be really rare.
So I think it's this interesting situation where we know pretty much how a 1A forms.
It's the explosion of a white dwarf star that has reached the Chandrasekhar limit, or in
some other way is undergoing a thermonuclear runaway explosion.
But we're in this embarrassing situation where we don't really know how the star gets up
to this unstable limit.
How does it actually get there?
That's a huge embarrassment, but it's also a great challenge and an opportunity for astronomers
of the future to figure out this fundamental mechanism by which stars reach the explosive
stage, because as we'll see later on, an understanding of Type 1A supernovae and how
they occur will be very important in our studies of cosmology, the overall structure
and evolution of the universe.
