In the previous few lectures, I've explained how some rare types of stars literally explode
at the end of their lives.
Now we've never actually seen directly a white dwarf that then exploded as a type on
a supernova.
White dwarfs are small and faint and can't be seen unless they're very nearby and they
explode only very rarely, so we've never actually seen a white dwarf that exploded.
But as I'll discuss in this lecture, we have seen some very massive stars that then went
through the explosion process, and one in particular, supernova 1987a, was observed in
great detail, both before and after the explosion.
Supernova 1987a was discovered in 1987, it was the first supernova to have been discovered
that year, and in fact it was the brightest supernova in nearly 400 years, so it presented
a fantastic opportunity for astronomers to study the explosion of a star in great detail.
It occurred in a satellite galaxy of our Milky Way galaxy, it's a galaxy called the Large
Magellanic Cloud.
Here's the Large Magellanic Cloud, shown along with the small Magellanic Cloud.
These are dwarf galaxies, small galaxies that orbit around our much bigger Milky Way galaxy.
A close-up of the Large Magellanic Cloud shows that it has a region here, a nebula, called
the Terrential Nebula, which is in fact the largest region of active star formation that
we know of in the local group of a few dozen galaxies close to our own.
It's a massive cloud of gas in which stars are literally being born right now as we speak
and have been born in the last few million years.
The arrow here points to a star in a picture taken before February 23rd, 1987, and that
star later exploded and became so much more bright.
Look at that.
That incredible explosion caused the star to brighten by many millions of times, making
it the equivalent of tens of millions or even hundreds of millions of normal suns, and that's
the explosion that we got to witness in February of 1987.
Now the Large Magellanic Cloud is about 170,000 light-years away, so actually this explosion
occurred 170,000 years ago, give or take a few years.
It's Tuesday 170,000 years ago, it exploded.
Well we can't be that precise, we don't know exactly how far away it is.
But you can just think about what Earth was like back then, 170,000 years ago.
That was really near the time of transition between early hominids and the very first
Homo sapiens, earlier even than the Rhodesia man's skull shown here, corresponding to about
120,000 years ago.
The before and after pictures of the star shown here just illustrate the brilliance
of the explosion and the fantastic opportunity that astronomers were given.
Indeed, it was a really big time story.
See that big time story?
Oh, pardon the pun.
Anyway, bang!
A star explodes, providing new clues to the nature of the universe.
News like this of an astronomical nature doesn't reach us each day, so this was truly
worthy of a giant headline like this in Time Magazine.
Various newspapers covered the story as well.
Exploded star traces reach Earth on one, the San Francisco examiner, and other newspapers
in the country also ran huge stories about this celestial event.
The supernova was discovered by Ian Shelton, a student working at Las Campanas Observatory
in Chile.
He was using a small telescope shown in this shed-like dome here, gathering data for Canadian
astronomers, but on his nights off when he wasn't gathering data for other people, he
took photographs of the Large Magellanic Cloud, one after another, because he wanted
to study variable stars in that cloud, stars that vary in brightness.
So here's Ian observing the Large Magellanic Cloud with a 10-inch telescope, or rather
small telescope, in this shed.
And he got these repeated photographs of the Large Magellanic Cloud.
And the one that he got on February 24th was particularly instructive.
He saw in that photograph an extra little blip of light that wasn't there before.
So Ian is sitting here comparing the February 24th photograph with previous photographs
that he had observed, indeed around February 23rd, the very previous night he had gotten
a photograph of the same region of the sky.
And although in this comparison here, you don't see much of a difference, in fact, if
you look very, very carefully, there's an extra little blip on the right-hand side here
near the tarantula nebula compared with the left-hand side there.
And Ian noticed this blip on the very night that he had obtained this photographic plate.
Indeed, around two or three in the morning, the wind got so strong that it blew the roof
of the shed shut.
And he decided to call it a night early, it was still dark outside, but he went to the
dark room and developed his photographic plate and looked at that plate and saw this extra
blip.
And he thought at first that it was a flaw in the emulsion.
So he went outside to just check whether he could see such a bright thing with his own
naked eye.
And sure enough, in the large Magellanic Cloud near the tarantula nebula, there was an extra
star that simply had not been there on previous nights.
And you know, even with the naked eye, you could see the star because it was so bright
compared to the surrounding stars.
Now it turns out that at the very same observatory, Las Campanas Observatory, there are other domes.
And in particular, there's a dome here where there's a one-meter telescope used by professional
astronomers.
And there was an assistant there, Oscar Duhalde, who liked to look at the skies.
And he had actually gone outside and looked around that same night, February 24th, and
seen the star that Ian Shelton had photographed.
But he didn't tell anyone about it.
I mean, he went back inside the dome and the astronomers in there needed his assistance.
So he forgot to tell people that he saw what seemed like a new star up there.
But when Shelton came over to that dome from his shed to tell people that he thinks he
sees a new bright thing in the large Magellanic Cloud, Oscar Duhalde said, yes, yes, I saw
it too a few hours ago.
And then everyone went outside there and looked up in the sky and saw this new star that was
visible to the naked eye.
Now you will recall I talked about Reverend Robert Evans, who has memorized the star fields
around something like 1,500 galaxies, and he uses his small telescope to look for exploding
stars in those galaxies.
Here he is with his telescope.
Well, this was the big one that got away.
He tells me that that night he had a premonition that there would be a bright new supernova.
And he wanted to go and observe the skies with his telescope.
But it was cloudy where he lived.
So he called up a friend and the friend said, well, where he lives 150 miles away, conditions
are kind of iffy.
It looks like clouds are coming and going.
And this would have been a two and a half hour drive each way in the middle of the night.
And the Reverend Evans had things to do the next day.
I don't think he had to deliver a sermon that day because it was in the middle of the week.
But anyway, he had things to do and he decided not to go to a clear spot, especially since
that spot might not have been clear by the time he reached it.
So that was the big one that got away, basically.
But he has discovered over 40 supernovae in other galaxies.
Rob McNutt in Australia actually had photographs of it the previous night, February 23rd.
That is the night before Ian Shelton, the 24th.
But he didn't look at his photographs that he had taken that night because astronomers
are busy people.
They take all these photographs during the night and then they want to sleep in general
during the day.
And we don't always examine our data right away.
Too bad for Rob McNutt because he would have had it nearly a whole night, nearly 24 hours
earlier than Ian Shelton.
But he later had the data on film and so the data that he has provides some important early
measurements of the brightening of the supernova with time.
And then there's another story, Albert Jones, who's an astonishingly successful observer
of variable stars observing from New Zealand.
He's been doing this since 1943 and, in fact, he's made over 600,000 observations of variable
stars for a worldwide network of variable star observers.
And on February 24th, he reported seeing a new star in the Large Magellanic Cloud.
But his report was three hours later than Ian Shelton's.
So Shelton is officially credited with the discovery.
Interestingly, Jones observed the same field the previous night, February 23rd, and didn't
notice anything there.
Apparently, he observed about an hour too early.
That is, had he observed an hour later, the supernova would have brightened enough for
him to be able to have seen it.
So he would have seen it again about a night earlier than Shelton had had things gone well
for him.
But that's the way it goes.
So, you know, you have these sob stories sometimes.
So once it was discovered, you know, everyone started looking at it with all the great telescopes
because, you know, telescopes were first used for astronomical purposes in the first decade
of the 17th century.
And you know, there was Tyco's supernova in 1572 and Kepler's supernova in 1604, but
it was only 1608 or 09 when Galileo started using telescopes for astronomical observations.
So really, we've been waiting four centuries for a bright nearby supernova to be observed
with the great variety of telescopes that we have now.
And here's an observatory in Chile.
This one is the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory, where lots of telescopes started
observing the supernova at optical wavelengths.
And then various telescopes in the Southern Hemisphere, such as the Parkes Radio Telescope
in Australia, started observing it.
And satellites were sent up above the Earth's atmosphere to observe it at X-rays and gamma
rays and, oh, it was just bonanza of observations.
You know, everyone who had a telescope started looking at this supernova.
Well, it turned out to be a Type II supernova, one with hydrogen.
And here are my colleagues, Bob Kirschner and George Zunaborn, looking at the ultraviolet
spectrum taken by a satellite known as the International Ultraviolet Explorer.
And both the optical and ultraviolet spectra showed indications of a Type II, that is, there
were hydrogen lines visible.
But the ultraviolet showed that the object was fading very much more rapidly than it
should have been.
So it was peculiar in that sense.
And moreover, optically, it didn't brighten as much as we had expected it to.
It was visible with a naked eye, but it should have been really easily visible with a naked
eye had it been a normal Type II supernova.
So it was a Type II, but it was a weird one.
And this gave us a great chance not only to test our existing theories of massive star
explosions, but also to perhaps refine them and develop them further in order to explain
the peculiarities of this particular object.
So was it a massive star near the end of its life, an evolved star, a red supergiant, as
in this diagram here?
You will recall that I said that Type II supernovies should be red supergiants with this
onion-like structure of progressively heavier elements going all the way down to an iron
core.
Well, indeed, photographs of the Large Magellanic Cloud in the many years preceding 1987 showed
many instances of this progenitor.
That is, many of the photographs were of the region containing the progenitor or the star
that exploded.
And there it is.
We can tell what kind of star it is.
And indeed, it is a massive star, a 20 solar mass star initially, near the end of its life.
And it's a supergiant.
So that's all good, but it turned out to be a blue supergiant, not a red supergiant.
It was a blue supergiant, roughly as luminous as a red supergiant, but smaller and hotter,
okay?
So it looks blue.
So on a Hertzsprung Russell or Luminosity Temperature diagram, here are the red supergiants,
they're luminous and cool, and here are the blue supergiants about as luminous, but much
hotter for their surface temperatures.
Now these kinds of stars were not expected to explode.
It was thought by most astronomers that blue supergiants are on their way to becoming red
supergiants and should not yet have built up an iron core.
So what gives?
Why did the star explode?
Well some astronomers even doubted that the star that had been identified as the progenitor
of supernova 1987A was correct.
They said maybe there's a red supergiant hidden there somewhere, and we only think it's the
blue supergiant.
Well, Stan Woosley at University of California at Santa Cruz said that no, it's got to be
a blue supergiant because had it been a red supergiant, you wouldn't be able to explain
some of the peculiarities I had already mentioned.
The rapid decline of the ultraviolet light and the fact that it didn't become as bright
initially as people had expected it to.
Here's the brightness versus time.
We had expected it to become very bright about second magnitude or maybe third magnitude
right off the bat, but instead it started out being roughly magnitude 4.5 and then it
only gradually grew to roughly magnitude 2.5 or so.
So we had expected it to just go zapping up to very bright and then stay the same brightness
for a couple of months as is consistent with the light curves of other type 2 supernovae
that I had shown you in the previous lecture.
So Woosley said this observation and other observations of its type suggest that it really
was a blue supergiant and it wasn't as bright as it should have been when it went off because
initially it was smaller than a red supergiant.
It didn't have as big a radiating area.
That is its surface wasn't as big as that of a red supergiant, so it couldn't become
as bright right away.
And then after it expanded and became big, well then it could shine, but by that time
the expansion itself had actually used up a lot of the energy generated by the explosion
and so that energy was used up in expanding the star rather than in making it look bright
and that's why there's sort of a deficit of light in the first few months after the
supernova's explosion.
Indeed, Woosley had a computer model sitting around for a 20 solar mass star that was just
sort of waiting for an observed example of the same kind, but he had a computer model
essentially describing this or a similar type of process and he and his group submitted
a paper for publication three days after the supernova explosions.
That's fast publication, usually it takes months or years for you to figure things out
and publish a paper, but he had already pretty much figured it out and then this guy came
along.
So that's fantastic.
So anyway, it was an evolved massive star, but there was a wrinkle.
It was a blue supergiant rather than a red supergiant and that teaches us that in some
cases red supergiants go back and become blue supergiants and at that time develop an iron
core.
Now why they do that is not understood completely yet, but we think that maybe this star did
it in the Large Magellanic Cloud because the Large Magellanic Cloud is deficient in heavy
elements relative to say big stars in our own galaxy which have much more heavy elements
because our galaxy is able to retain the heavy elements generated by previous generations
of supernovae better than a little flimsy dwarf galaxy like the Magellanic Cloud where
stars blow up and the heavy elements that they produce get ejected out of the galaxy
and so they're not around to help form new massive stars.
And so when you have a star that's deficient in heavy elements, the structure of its envelope
changes in such a way that it can explode as a hotter smaller blue supergiant rather
than as a red supergiant and that's something we've learned along the way.
Not all astronomers agree with that.
Some say that this thing was a blue supergiant when it exploded because previously it was
in a binary system and maybe it swallowed the other star and that changes the structure
of the outer part as well allowing it to become a blue supergiant when it explodes.
So we're still not exactly sure what's going on but there are several hypotheses that are
at least consistent with the observed properties of the star.
Now the next prediction that we wanted to test was whether a neutron star is formed
during the collapse and whether a bunch of neutrinos are emitted in the process.
Well indeed neutrinos were detected by large tanks of purified water deep underground and
I've already described these tanks when I discussed the detection of neutrinos from
the sun.
So solar neutrinos sometimes interact with the water and produce a signal that can be
detected and in a similar way there was a tank of water in Japan and one in the United
States that detected the signal of a few neutrinos interacting with the water.
So what happens in detail is the following, a neutrino or an anti-neutrino can go zipping
into the tank of water, it can actually collide with an electron or combine with a proton producing
either a high speed electron or a high speed positron that is anti-electron and these particles
can go zipping through the water faster than the local speed of light.
Now that sounds crazy but in fact the speed of light in water is significantly below the
speed of light in a vacuum and there's nothing in relativity that says that particles can't
exceed the speed of light in water, the local speed of light, they can.
And when they do that they set up the electromagnetic equivalent of a sonic boom, a sonic boom occurs
when a plane goes zipping through the sky faster than the speed of sound.
So if a particle, a charged particle is going through water at faster than the speed of
light it produces the light equivalent of a sonic boom and it's called Cherenkov radiation,
you can see a cone of Cherenkov light being emitted by this high speed electron or this
high speed positron and that light then gets detected by a whole bunch of light detectors
which surround the boundary of this tank.
So here are all these little photo tubes that can detect this light.
So a bunch of such detections were made with these two underground tanks of water and here
you can see the energy of the detected neutrinos inferred from the Cherenkov light and this
is in units of millions of electron volts.
One million electron volts is roughly the equivalent of the energy, the rest mass energy
of two electrons, each electron is about a half a million electron volts, anyway that's
just some unit of energy versus time and you can see that about 20 neutrinos were detected
by Kamioka and the Irvine Michigan Brookhaven experiment and usually you'd just see zero
here, there'd be just a bunch of zeros along this plot, no detections at all but in fact
they detected all these neutrinos and from the number of neutrinos that were detected
and knowing how rarely neutrinos actually interact with matter you can figure out how
many neutrinos were actually emitted by the supernova.
You actually have to know the supernova distance as well but we know that, 170,000 light years
and it turns out that when you do this calculation you find out that the total energy emitted
by supernova 1987a mostly in the form of neutrinos in roughly one second or a few seconds was
comparable to the total amount of energy emitted by all the normal stars in the rest of the
observable universe during that one second or during those few seconds.
So here's one star which in a few seconds or one second emits as much energy as all
the normal non-exploding stars in the rest of the observable universe.
That is one hunk of energy, that's a lot of energy.
Supernovae are among the most powerful explosions in the universe, the other kind of explosion
I'll discuss later are the so-called gamma ray bursts and they're associated with supernovae
as well.
Aside from the big bang itself, the creation of the universe, these are the biggest bangs
you can get.
And when you look at the energetics of the neutrinos you find that over 99% of the energy
of the explosion was in the form of these little tiny subatomic particles, neutrinos.
One percent of the explosion energy was the kinetic energy of the ejected gases and one
hundredth of a percent of energy was the visible display that we saw.
So bright though it was, the optical display was just an afterthought.
It was one ten thousandth of the true energy emitted by the explosion.
Wow, I mean you know, so supernovae are bright but that's just a sideshow to the main event,
the creation of a flood of neutrinos in the case of the core collapse supernovae and you
know the ejection of material which is about one percent of the energy or so.
Well about one person in a thousand experienced a neutrino interaction of the sort that the
detectors in Japan and the United States had seen and you know so maybe you were one of
the lucky few that actually detected the supernova if you were around back in 1987 and you can
ask well in the case of the Cherenkov cones of these IMB and Kamyoka detectors did they
point back at the supernova?
In other words if you look at the Cherenkov cones shouldn't they point back at the direction
from which the neutrino came?
If that's the case we could directly say that those neutrinos came from the supernova although
the inference is pretty clear, I mean they arrived at about the same time and at the
right time and all that.
Well it turns out that in most cases the cone of Cherenkov light does not point back toward
the origin of the neutrino and that's because there are two possible reactions.
One is that a neutrino scatters off of an electron causing the electron to go pretty
much in the forward direction okay and that electron then produces the Cherenkov light
which is then detected by detectors and you could extrapolate back and find out the direction
from which the neutrino came but a far more common reaction is for an anti-neutrino to
combine with a proton forming an energetic anti-electron or positron and a neutron.
Now it turns out that in this reaction the positron can go flying off in essentially any
direction.
The process is called isotropic, it goes off in all directions roughly with the same probability.
So it's not a forward scattering process like the collision of a neutrino with an electron.
So when you go and you see where the cone of light is pointing for this positron for
example it doesn't point back toward the point of origin of the anti-neutrino that is it
doesn't point back toward the supernova which is too bad.
So of the twenty events that were detected we think that all but the first were anti-neutrinos
combining with protons to form positrons and neutrons and only one maybe the first interaction
was a neutrino scattering off of an electron and indeed that Cherenkov cone does point
roughly back toward supernova 1987A.
So you can ask yourself well what if you had a really nearby supernova in our own galaxy
where there'd be a bunch of the forward scattering kind of neutrino interactions with electrons
then all of their Cherenkov cones would point roughly back toward the origin of the neutrinos
and if you had enough events that is not just one but you know thousands or something like
that for a sufficiently nearby supernova you could figure out where the supernova occurred
that is where the explosion occurred and because the neutrinos arrive before the light does
not because they travel faster than light but because they escape from the star right
away whereas the star itself doesn't brighten right away because it takes a while for the
shock wave to reach the outer parts of the star and tell it to start becoming bright
and all that.
So there's a delay of a few hours or a day or whatever between when the neutrinos get
out and when the star starts brightening.
So we could have an advanced warning of a few hours or a day or so from the neutrino
detectors and they would say hey point in that part of the sky and in the next night
or so you will see a supernova going off that would be really cool okay and we hope that
when the next supernova in our own galaxy occurs there will be neutrino detectors on
at that time that will be able to tell us where to look so that we can catch it in the
first few hours of the explosion that would be really cool.
Well the next thing that was discovered with supernova 1987a is that heavy elements were
indeed synthesized by the explosion and the way we can tell is that gamma ray telescopes
and other telescopes observing high energy radiation were launched up above much of the
earth's atmosphere and from there they could observe x-rays and gamma rays coming from
the supernova and what they found were gamma rays that correspond to the specific energies
at which radioactive cobalt nuclei decay into stable iron.
So what happened was there was explosive nucleosynthesis in the supernova when all these neutrons were
running around and all that that formed radioactive nickel which quickly decayed into cobalt and
then on a longer time scale cobalt decays into iron and it does so by emitting gamma rays
having a very specific set of energies and those are like the fingerprint of those particular
nuclei no other nuclei produce those specific energies of gamma rays or at least that pattern
of energies and yet that's the pattern that was observed for supernova 1987a.
So those short lived radioactive nuclei had to have been produced by the explosion itself
otherwise we wouldn't have seen them because they're such short lived that they wouldn't
have existed in the star that was 10 million years old at the time that it exploded. Any
elements of which the star was initially made had long since decayed and become stable whereas
these guys now were freshly created were unstable and gave us this signature of gamma rays.
So that's what tells us that that heavy elements are definitely produced by these cataclysmic
explosions of massive stars and as Carl Sagan used to say we are made of star stuff we are
made of star dust. Okay he didn't discover this but he greatly popularized the notion
that we owe our existence to the explosions of massive stars one of the greatest discoveries
of 20th century physics. Well more recently we've been studying the supernova and we've
found that it has shells of gas around it that had been ejected prior to the actual explosion
in relatively gentle eruptions like those that form planetary nebulae in our own galaxy
but in this case around a massive star. So here are these shells that have nothing to
do with the supernova itself but the supernova ejecta are now expanding and colliding with
these shells of previously ejected gas. Knots of dense gas in the main shell are now getting
brighter and brighter as the outermost parts of the ejecta start colliding with this gently
erupted gas and so we should expect to see the supernova brighten in the next few years
again as this collision proceeds. Here you can watch it with the Hubble Space Telescope
and at X-ray wavelengths with Chandra and at radio wavelengths and you can see how the
main inner shell is brightening with time as this supernova starts interacting with
those shells and you can also see that the supernova ejecta themselves are asymmetric
so the explosion was not spherical it was elongated like this and the outermost parts
of the gas are now interacting with these shells causing them to brighten. So supernova
1987A should brighten at all wavelengths again in the future as the collision of the ejecta
with the circumstellar gas proceeds and I'm sure that in the next decade or two supernova
1987A will have additional secrets to tell us.
