In the previous lecture, I showed how supernova 1987a, the brightest supernova in 400 years,
confirmed our basic ideas of how massive stars explode by having an iron core that collapses,
uses a bunch of neutrinos, and then rebounds and expels the outer layers.
But that supernova also showed that we need to refine our models.
In some cases, it's not just red supergiants that explode, blue supergiants can explode
as well.
Now you might ask, well, alright, that's great, 87a showed the basic model, but it didn't
give quite the right kind of star.
Do we have evidence that some other type 2 supernovae do have the expected red supergiant
progenitors?
Indeed we do.
And in fact, recently, in 2005, there was a great example of a supernova in M51, the
Whirlpool galaxy, which isn't very far away, just a few tens of millions of light years
away.
Stones throw for astronomers.
And this was a bright supernova that could be observed very well with the Hubble Space
Telescope, and in particular, we had pictures of that part of the galaxy, which showed the
star that later exploded.
So here's a photograph taken on January 21st, 2005, before the explosion.
And there it is on July 11th, 2005, after the explosion.
And this region of the galaxy is right there in this little green square.
And taking a close-up look at that region of the galaxy, we can see the star before
it exploded, and after it exploded.
And we can pinpoint exactly which star it is.
And it turns out that this was a red supergiant, having about 12 solar masses.
So indeed, in many cases, in most cases, we think that it's the red supergiants that
explode.
This thing had a more normal light curve, normal spectra, and in other ways, this one
and other similar events that we and other groups have observed have confirmed pretty
much that the cores of red supergiants implode, leading to an explosion, as I just discussed.
Now in all of these cases, the imploding core should form a neutron star, a very dense
ball of neutrons held up essentially by neutron degeneracy pressure.
Now this is similar to the electron degeneracy pressure that I had discussed for white dwarfs.
Basically, it's like you have an apartment building where only two neutrons of opposite
spin can occupy each level.
And so the ones that are up here cannot jump down to lower energy levels because all of
those energy levels are already occupied to the maximum possible extent.
And so since all these neutrons up here are moving around very, very quickly, they're
very energetic, they exert an extra quantum mechanical pressure that cannot be described
in the usual terms of just objects, particles, you know, moving around due to their thermal
motions, due to the heat associated with them, due to their kinetic energy.
This is a purely quantum effect having to do with neutrons like electrons essentially
not liking each other and not wanting to be in exactly the same quantum state.
So when you have a structure like this held up by neutron degeneracy pressure, it can
be rather small. A neutron star having roughly one and a half times the mass of the sun can
be only about 12 miles in diameter. So that's really small, about 20 kilometers in diameter.
All the neutrons in this one and a half solar mass worth of material are crammed into this
tiny, tiny, tiny volume. And in fact, the density is so high that a billion, that is
a thousand million tons, would be in one teaspoon full of this material. I mean that, you know,
a billion tons of stuff in a teaspoon full. That's a far cry from white dwarfs which had
only a few tons of material per teaspoon full, but you know, you try holding a few tons of
even white dwarf material and I think you'll have a hard time. So, you know, neutron star
puts white dwarfs to shame. Now a neutron star has some similar properties to those
of a white dwarf. Being made of degenerate material, it is smaller the more massive it
is. So again, unlike bricks where you have more of them and they take up more volume,
in the case of a neutron star, if you have more mass, the gravitational effect is stronger
and these neutrons get squeezed into an even smaller volume before their energies get high
enough to keep the star, you know, from collapsing in on itself. So the more massive ones have
the smaller size. Now neutron stars were predicted by Fritz Zwicky and Walter Bada in 1933,
just a year after Chadwick's discovery of the neutron. And I described in the previous
lecture that Zwicky in particular was a rather interesting character. His colleague Walter
Bada was much more friendly and sort of got along with people better and didn't call his
colleagues spherical bastards and stuff. But anyways, Zwicky and Bada were just amazing
in that they predicted the existence of these neutron stars and even said that they are
probably produced during cataclysmic explosions of massive stars. And they did this in 1933
and they published a more complete paper in 1934. Now you have to go forward about four
decades even more before neutron stars were actually discovered. And they were discovered
by Jocelyn Bell in the form of pulsars. Pulsars were objects in the sky that couldn't be seen
clearly but from the regions in which they exist. That is from certain regions of the
sky there appeared to be pulses of radio radiation coming that were very regular. The first one
that was found by Jocelyn Bell had a period of 1.3373011 seconds. I mean every single
time 1.3373011 seconds. So here it is, here's a plot of the radio brightness versus time
from this region of the sky where there's some sort of an object producing a blip of
radio radiation, then 1.3 seconds later another blip, then another blip and so on. And the
spacing was very regular although the intensity or brightness of the blips varied considerably
with time. So this was just really weird. I mean what is producing very regular blips
of radio radiation from at least this one part of the sky where there was this first
object discovered. The astronomers didn't know what was going on. Jocelyn Bell said
here's the data and Anthony Hewish her advisor who built the radio telescope didn't even
really believe that it was true. He reportedly said rubbish my dear when presented with the
data because it just seemed impossible. No stars were known with such regular periods
of pulsation or oscillation or orbital periods or whatever. So he didn't even believe it.
But then the data looked like they were pretty good. So the astronomers for a short time
considered the possibility that these were so to speak little green men. Communications
from extraterrestrials, maybe not from Mars, I mean this part of the sky was nowhere near
Mars, but some sort of extraterrestrial intelligence that was communicating either intentionally
or unintentionally. But the trouble is shortly thereafter they found several more cases of
these pulsars in other parts of the sky with very regular pulses but having different periods
than the first one. So maybe 0.7 seconds or 2.1 seconds or whatever. And it seemed unlikely
that there was this vast interstellar network of civilizations all communicating in the
same way using these very regularly spaced blips. Moreover there was no evidence of any
Doppler shift having to do with the planet from which the signal is originating orbiting
around a star. In other words there were no Doppler shifts recorded of any sort and so
it looked like these things were not coming from something that's orbiting anything else.
So the little green men idea disappeared after a while and quickly theoretical physicists
figured out that probably these things are rapidly rotating highly magnetized neutron
stars. And one of the clues was that they're found mostly in the plane of our galaxy. Now
here's a map of the Earth in a very special way. This is the whole Earth in this oval
here. The poles are at the top and the bottom and yet it's the whole Earth then projected
on a finite flat sheet of paper. So there are some distortions but the poles are at the
top. The equator runs across the center here. If you make a map of our own galaxy in the
same way you can see that it looks like this thin disk. It's a flat spiral galaxy and we're
looking through the disk here. This is essentially the Milky Way and there's a bulge in the center.
I'll talk about this a lot more later when I discuss galaxies in detail. But it was found
that basically the pulsars come from the plane of the Milky Way. See most of them are concentrated
toward the plane and there's some up near the poles but not many and some at intermediate
galactic latitudes. So it looks like they come from the plane and they are probably associated
with massive stars because massive stars tend to be concentrated toward the plane and lower
mass stars have a much broader distribution up above the plane in what's called the halo
as well. So people thought well probably they're massive stars because of the concentration
toward the plane and maybe there's some sort of a weird magnetic effect associated with
neutron stars. And the logic that they went through was essentially a very interesting
process of elimination. They said okay well there are three basic classes of models that
might produce blips. There could be stars that are oscillating in size or vibrating getting
bigger and smaller and that might somehow lead to observed pulsations in radio brightness.
Well if you ask yourself how does that work for a normal star like our Sun, well it works.
Our Sun is actually undergoing small vibrations like this but the time scale is of order minutes.
In some cases it's hours for other stars. In some cases for some very dense stars it
might be just a minute or so. But the point is all those time scales are too slow compared
with the one second time scale or the tenth of a second time scale observed for pulsars.
So normal stars clearly can't be what's oscillating. What about white dwarfs? They're smaller and
denser and it turns out their natural oscillation period is about ten seconds. That's getting
close but it still doesn't explain the one second or tenth of a second periods for pulsars
So white dwarfs are sort of out of the picture. Then there was the possibility of a neutron
star. A neutron star is very dense and it vibrates like this. The trouble is they vibrate
too fast. Their natural period is one one thousandth of a second. So that's too fast
to be the typical tenth of a second to a second period of pulsars. So oscillating stars just
don't work. So then you could say all right well maybe another class of models would be
stars that are orbiting one another. How about normal stars? They can't orbit each other
in one second or ten seconds or a tenth of a second because they're too big. You can't
fit them within the orbit. What about white dwarfs? Well they can do it almost but they
they too are too slow. A few lectures ago I showed you two white dwarfs that are orbiting
each other in five minutes. That's really fast. I mean that's amazing but it's not
one second or a tenth of a second. What about neutron stars? Well they can orbit each other
very quickly. They can be very close together because they're so small. But in that case
gravitational waves are emitted as I'll discuss more in a future lecture and that carries
away energy which eventually causes these neutron stars to spiral in toward each other
and merge. And the spiraling in would cause the period of of the pulsation which is related
to the orbital period to decrease with time in a measurable way and pulsar periods if anything
were slowly increasing with time. A given pulsar has a period that very almost imperceptibly
increases with time. It doesn't decrease. So so orbiting neutron stars don't really
work either. Finally suppose a star is rotating. Maybe the rotation time about its axis somehow
produces you know or some is the right timescale and there's some way of producing a pulse
of light. Well a normal star rotating at once a second would just fly apart right. You try
rotating really fast and you'll fly apart too okay. So it's not dense enough. A white
dwarf also rotating at once per second or ten times per second would fly apart. The centrifugal
forces trying to essentially disrupt the thing would be greater than the gravitational forces
trying to hold it in. But a neutron star is so dense and small and the gravity is so
strong that a neutron star can easily rotate up to about a thousand times per second but
easily once per second or ten times per second and hence could be consistent with the timescales
observed for pulsars. So that's the reasoning that physicists used and astronomers used
to deduce that probably these things are some sort of a rotating neutron star. Now this
was obviously a great discovery you know pulsars showed that neutron stars exist and they even
rotate really rapidly and a lot of physics was done with these things subsequently. So
in fact Anthony Hewish was given the Nobel Prize for this discovery in 1974. The Nobel
Prize in physics but Jocelyn Bell was not. I mean why not? You know she was the one who
actually identified the pulsars and Hewish even didn't believe the data initially. Hewish
deserved part of the prize. He made the radio telescope and designed a lot of good techniques
with which these observations could be made but surely the person who found the pulses
should have been rewarded as well and it's one of the greatest injustices ever in science
that Jocelyn Bell was robbed of the Nobel Prize in physics. That's the way it goes. I really
feel sorry for her. She took it in good stride. She doesn't feel too bad about it.
Alright well the clock mechanism is this rotation people said but what makes a pulsar shine? We
don't really know exactly but the basic idea is that you have a magnetic field that's in the
neutron star and surrounding it and the axis of that magnetic field is not the same as the
rotation axis of the neutron star. So you get this conical sort of pattern as the thing rotates
where the magnetic axis first points in one direction then in another direction and so on. Now
in some cases you might make electric fields in this rotating magnetic field that are strong
enough to accelerate electrons to speeds close to that of light along the magnetic axis and
accelerating charged particles produce radiation along their direction of acceleration. So you
might have two oppositely directed beams of electrons producing oppositely directed beams
of light and those beams of light point in different directions as the star spins around its
axis of rotation. And let me show you then a demo. It would be kind of like a lighthouse. The
lighthouse is on all the time but you only see it when it's pointing your way. So here I have
a laser pointer. It's on all the time as I'm pressing the button but you don't see that light
until the rotation brings it exactly across your line of sight and as it rotates around again it
can do it again. Bam, like that. You see the blast of light every time it intersects your line
of sight. So that's the idea with this rotating beam. It's on all the time but you see it when it
happens to pass across your line of sight. Now what actually produces the beam in detail? We
don't really know. That's complicated physics. Why is the magnetic field so strong? We think it's
a trillion times as strong as the Earth's magnetic field. The Earth's magnetic field is about one
gauss. That's a unit of magnetism and a neutron star has a trillion gauss. I mean we're not sure
what produces such a strong magnetic field but one idea is that the star already had a magnetic
field going through it. I mean our sun does for example and as it collapses that magnetic field
gets scrunched into a smaller volume and the magnetic field strength increases. You can get a big
increase in magnetic field strength that way. It's not quite clear yet whether you can get an
increase up to a trillion gauss but at least we're on the right track. And why is it rotating so
quickly? Well that's a little bit more easily understood. All stars rotate to some extent and
as they collapse the spin has to increase in order to conserve the angular momentum, the product of
spin rate and mass and size. Remember the example of the ice dancer bringing her arms in and she
spins faster. Well in a similar way a star that collapses will spin faster and indeed you can
reach spin rates of one or ten per second using this mechanism. Now in the middle of the Crab
Nebula, the most famous supernova remnant, there's a pulsar that in fact spins and pulses is seen
to pulse about 30 times per second. It's that star right there and here are two photographs of it when
it was pointing at us and when it wasn't. So when it's pointing at us you can see it and when it's
not you can't see it. And this is actually a photograph taken at optical wavelengths. So very
young pulsars shine not only at radio wavelengths but at optical wavelengths and x-rays and things
like that as well. It's only as they get older that the higher energy forms of radiation die out
and what remains are the low energy forms of radiation, the radio waves. So in this Crab
Pulsar case, detailed Hubble and Chandra views at optical and x-ray wavelengths respectively
show a wind coming out from that region where the rotating neutron star not only is producing these
jets of material in these directions here but also a wind of material going out along the equatorial
plane and this wind and the jets are energizing the Crab Nebula causing it to glow so brightly as in
this photograph right here. So the pulsar is essentially re-energizing the Nebula and causing
it to glow even more brightly than a supernova remnant would have had it not had a pulsar
activating it all the time. And as this energy energizes the Nebula, well the pulsar had better
slowed down because the energy has to come from somewhere and it comes from the rotational energy
of the neutron star. So as these beams of light and the equatorial winds come out, you rob the star,
the neutron star, of rotational energy and it should slow down and indeed astronomers observing
the Crab Pulsar have noticed a marked slowdown in its pulsation period over the course of the years
that we've been observing it. So this is all kind of hanging together, it works out pretty well.
Now eventually as the rotation period becomes too slow the pulsar could die because as the
rotation gets too slow the electric fields that are generated by this rotating magnetic field
become insufficiently strong to accelerate charged particles so you don't get the beams of light.
Moreover with time the magnetic fields die down as well, they sort of dissipate away.
So we expect pulsars to remain on for only about a million or a few million years before both their
magnetic fields and their rotation rate diminish to sufficiently low values that beams of light
simply aren't produced anymore. So every pulsar is a neutron star but not every neutron star will
be visible as a pulsar, some will have died, all right after a few million years they no longer
shine as pulsars or some might have axes of rotation that don't allow the beams of light to
cross your line of sight in that case you won't see it either. So every pulsar is a neutron star but
not every neutron star is visible as a pulsar and here is a neutron star in the middle of the
remnant Cassiopeia A and it's a glowing neutron star, it's a hot young neutron star only a few
hundred years old but it isn't a pulsar either because it's not pointing our way or because it
isn't on for some reason, maybe it's not rotating fast enough or maybe the magnetic field isn't strong
enough. Now typically pulsars spin at about one time per second or ten times per second or maybe
once every ten seconds something like that but there are some pulsars that can spin hundreds of
times per second and in fact we call these things millisecond pulsars, they have spin periods of
just a few milliseconds and if you were to take the frequencies at which they spin like 642 times
per second and convert it to an audible signal this would correspond to a note in about the middle
of the piano keyboard so a bunch of these millisecond pulsars have been found spinning 200 times per
second or 642 times per second or 315 times per second and if you make audible notes out of those
things you could actually create a pulsar symphony and some astronomers have written musical pieces
with the notes of known millisecond pulsars. These guys by the way spin so fast because we think
that they've been spun up through accretion of material from a companion star, the whole thing
is rotating, it's a binary system and the material coming into the accretion disk is also rotating
and when it lands on the star it can actually spin it up so we think these are actually very
old neutron stars that have been spun up a considerable amount. Now a very interesting
discovery was made in 1991 where one pulsar was found to actually have planets orbiting it,
now that's amazing, these were actually the first extrasolar planets found, 1991 preceding even the
discovery of 51 Pegasi in 1995. They were discovered by Alex Walshian and his group at Penn State
University and they were discovered around one of these so-called millisecond pulsars that
actually has a spin period of just 162 times per second and what was noticed was that sometimes
the pulses arrive a little bit too early compared to the expectation and sometimes they arrive a
little bit too late. That's shown in this graphic here where the red dots are the expected arrival
times of this very fast pulsar, 162 times per second you get a blip but what was observed was
sometimes the blips are earlier than expected and at other times they're later than expected
and this would be the case if the pulsar and a planet orbiting it both orbit their common
center of mass so that when the pulsar is on the far side of the center of mass we see the
pulse a bit too late and when it's on the near side it appears the pulse appears a little bit
earlier than expected so this sort of analysis of the arrival times of the pulsars show that this
thing is probably being orbited by three planets about oh two tenths of an astronomical unit up to
half of an astronomical unit from the star and the orbital periods are from 25 days to about 100
days and indeed their masses are comparable to the masses of the terrestrial planets in our own
solar system so that's really groovy I mean that these things not only were the first extra solar
planets found but they are comparable to terrestrial planets in our own solar system and there might
even be a fourth planet in this system but that's more controversial. Now these are certainly not
normal planets they couldn't have existed before the supernova that gave rise to the pulsar
occurred because they would have been blown away in that process they would have been just
disintegrated or or launched away from the system when the star blew up so they probably formed
from a disc of debris around the neutron star that remained after the explosion and indeed
recently another neutron star has been detected which presumably came from an explosion like this
and around that neutron star there is visible a disc of debris which could coalesce to form planets
so here's a neutron star around which there is a debris disc that could form planets that's amazing
so you know if you have planets around a neutron star you'd better also find cases of the stuff
from which those planets formed and indeed we think we have cases like this in at least this one
situation. Now there's a very interesting observation that has been made in the last decade or so
that some neutron stars have really incredible magnetic fields up to a thousand times stronger
than even the trillion Gauss magnetic field of a normal neutron star. These are called magnetars
they are the strongest magnets in the universe if you had one of these things pass within about
half the moon's distance from us it would instantly erase all the data on all of your credit cards and
magnetic tapes and all that so take care of your credit cards if one of these things comes nearby
they have they have incredible incredible magnetic fields 10 to the 15 power Gauss
and in fact these magnetars an artist's impression of which is shown right here
sometimes emit tremendous amounts of energy because apparently the structure of the crust
of the neutron star changes and it's like a star quake and also the magnetic field changes in that
region and releases the tremendous amount of energy or at least part of the energy associated
with that magnetic field. Now an amazing case of one of these outbursts was observed on December 27th
2004 this was the brightest flare ever seen from outside our solar system it occurred
in the constellation Sagittarius there was this great flare and then it sort of pulsed a few times
and nothing like it had ever been seen before it was really really bright so bright in fact that it
affected earth's atmosphere so here is this rotating neutron star
let's put it far away from us at a safe distance it undergoes a flare like this sending out a
pulse of gamma rays and debris the orange stuff is the debris the pulse of gamma rays travels at
the speed of light and it reached earth it activated the sensors on a bunch of satellites
and in fact it even affected our atmosphere it actually ionized our atmosphere the satellites
transmitted the information to radio telescopes down on the ground which immediately moved over
and started observing that location of the sky and they found a bunch of debris moving out at speeds
that are a significant fraction of the speed of light so this was just an incredible
outburst of energy that was not itself a supernova but rather apparently the restructuring
of the surface layers of a neutron star and here's an animation that shows what we think happened
there was this burst of gamma rays as the surface of the new neutron star restructured itself
and it continued to rotate then and we saw these flashes of light as the north and south poles
alternately came into view and then out of view so there was a big flash and then there were
lots of these little pulsations and overall then we think that this was basically a neutron star
with an interior of sort of liquid neutrons and other particles and there's a solid crust
which essentially buckled or cracked and and changed its configuration and in that process
changed the configuration of the magnetic field itself releasing in one tremendous burst a huge
amount of energy a giant amount of energy and we know that these things survive this basic
burst because some of these objects have been seen to repeat after a few years so maybe 10 years
from now this particular one will produce an even bigger burst but for now this is the biggest burst
this guy has produced or any other of these magnetars has produced and wow are they exciting
but don't get anywhere near one especially if you have a pacemaker because it'll definitely mess it up
