In the previous lecture, I introduced Einstein's general theory of relativity. It suggests that
objects with mass or energy warp or distort both space and time in their vicinity, and
other objects then move through that warped space and time according to their natural
paths. Clocks get messed up, distances get messed up, they don't look straight, they
don't look Euclidean anymore, but apparently this is really the way the world works. And
I introduced a good everyday practical example of relativity, the global positioning system.
Now, I'd like to say a few more remarks on it just because of its importance in showing
that relativity really does work quantitatively and does, at least in this one case, affect
our everyday lives. The timing is really crucial. You need to know exactly how far away each
of these satellites is, and the way you know this is through knowing when the signal from
a satellite was emitted and how long it took to reach you. And, you know, if you know the
speed of light, you know then how far away that satellite is, and you can do the same
thing for other satellites, and you can then figure out your unique position on Earth through
all this timing. But the speed of light is about a foot per billionth of a second, a
foot per nanosecond. A billionth of a second is a very small quantity, okay? So, if the
relativistic effects are as big as 38 microseconds, 38 millionths of a second, then the errors
that you get in your position are of order miles, miles per day, and they accumulate
day after day after day. So, suppose you were to take a month-long vacation and you'd want
to drive from San Francisco to New York City, and your GPS system weren't working the correct
way. You know, relativity wasn't taken into account correctly. You'd end up in the wrong
place after a month because you'd be heading in the wrong direction. So, the system designers
knew about relativity, both special and general, and they programmed their atomic clocks to
run at a rate that exactly compensates for both the special relativistic effect, which
is only 7 microseconds per day slowing down of clocks, and the general relativistic effect,
which is 45 microseconds per day speeding up the clocks for a net effect of 38 microseconds
per day speed up. And so, they took this into account, the atomic clocks run at a different
rate up there than they would have here, but one relativity is taken into account, all
the clocks agree, and you can figure out exactly where you are, and it's all wonderful. So,
you know, relativity is important even in a few cases of everyday life, although I must
admit this is the one clear example I know of right now where general relativity is important.
But, you know, who knows in the future what effects there might be where an understanding
of general relativity will be important. I mean, when people thought of quantum mechanics
a century ago, they weren't thinking of practical applications, they just were doing their research
to understand the fundamental physics, and now lasers and the whole electronics revolution
and computers and all that depend on our understanding of quantum mechanics, and similarly there
are effects for special relativity. So, maybe general relativity in the future will be important
in many ways other than just the GPS positioning system.
So let's go back to Einstein's thought experiment where the Sun's mass were to suddenly vanish
for some reason. Newton would have said that the Earth goes in a straight line instantaneously
at the moment that the Sun's mass disappeared. Einstein says no, the Earth only learns about
the Sun's disappearance sometime later, eight and a third minutes later, because it turns
out that the information about the Sun's disappearance travels in the form of what's called gravitational
waves, and they travel at the speed of light according to theory, they've never actually
been measured, but according to theory, gravitational waves travel at the speed of light, reach Earth,
tell Earth that the Sun no longer exists, and then the Earth can go zooming off along
the tangent to its trajectory at that moment. So there's an 8.3 minute delay. Now the way
to think about gravitational waves is to consider an analogy like a swimming pool where the
water is at rest and just motionless, and there are no ripples in it. And now let's
say I toss a ball onto the surface of the water, so there's suddenly a disturbance there.
That disturbance sends a wave that propagates outwards along the surface of the swimming
pool, and sometime later people near the edges of the pool learn through this wave that the
ball has landed on the water. Suppose their eyes were closed and they didn't actually
see the ball land, but they can learn of the ball's landing in the water through the arrival
of these waves. Similarly if the ball is just sitting there and the water is calm, if I
remove the ball, a disturbance will start passing along the surface of the water, and
someone sometime later on will feel it. So in a similar way then, if we look at the Earth's
Sun example, and you remove the Sun, then there's a disturbance in the warping of space
that travels at the speed of light through the solar system, because the warp that the
Sun used to produce is no longer there. Now space is flat there, and you can't just remove
that warp and have flat space instantaneously. That change in the warping of space travels
out as a disturbance, as a ripple in the actual structure of space itself, according to Einstein's
general theory of relativity. So that's really cool. Well, recall that the first historical
test of relativity was the confirmation that Mercury's extra-precession, 43 seconds of arc
per century, could be both qualitatively and quantitatively explained through general relativity.
So that was a great triumph. But 43 arc seconds per century is a very small amount, and even
though it had been measured very well, you might still worry that, oh, that's such a
minor effect, maybe there's some other explanation, or maybe it was measured incorrectly or whatever.
We now have a much better way of testing the same general idea, and that is through two
neutron stars that are orbiting one another. They orbit each other in and with a period
of just eight hours, and the orbits are not circular, they're elliptical, and the two
neutron stars are very close together because they orbit so quickly, they're just zooming
around in just eight hours, and one of the neutron stars happens to be a pulsar. So the
system, which was discovered by Russell Hulse and Joe Taylor in 1974, is called the binary
pulsar, or was initially called the binary pulsar, which is a bit misleading because
only one of the neutron stars is actually visible as a pulsar. But in any case, there's
two neutron stars, here's a little schematic of them, each has about 1.4 solar masses,
they're orbiting each other in elliptical orbits over the course of eight hours, so
here's an artist's rendition of what they might look like, and the procession of this
elliptical trajectory of one neutron star relative to the other is four degrees per
year, much, much larger than Mercury's orbital procession of 43 arc seconds per century.
Four degrees per year is a big effect, okay, you go around the full circle in something
like a century. Well, so the picture that we have is that each of these neutron stars
forms a warp in space like that shown here, and as the neutron stars orbit one another,
or more correctly, they're a common center of mass, this configuration, this warping
of space changes and it creates a ripple, a gravitational wave that propagates through
space at the speed of light, okay? It's this ripple, it's this distortion in the shape
of space itself, in the geometry of space that travels outwards and removes energy
from the system, that's an important point. The wave can't travel without having some
energy, similarly the water wave carries some energy with it, so this disturbance travels
outwards and it might look something like this, you have these two neutron stars orbiting
each other closely and they create this ripple that travels outward and removes energy from
the system, so here's what it might look like where these ripples are just sort of moving
out, and if you have these two stars orbiting each other so closely, the gravitational waves
carry out a measurable amount of energy, that means that the two stars have to approach
each other more and more closely, and according to Newton's laws and Kepler's laws, they
have to orbit each other more and more quickly as they approach each other, and this change
in the orbital period can actually be measured, okay? So the gravitational waves are removing
energy from the system, that means that the two objects have to approach one another because
if their energy is being removed, then in a sense gravity can pull on them more strongly,
not because gravity is stronger itself, but relative to the energy that the objects have,
gravity is now having more of an effect because the energy of the objects has been released
through gravitational waves, and so they get pulled more and more closely together and
as you saw in that animation, they approach each other, their orbital period decreases
because objects that are closer together for a given mass orbit more quickly, Mercury goes
around the sun more quickly than Venus does and Venus goes around the sun more quickly
than Earth does, so you can measure then this decrease in the orbital period and what's
been measured is actually what relativity predicts, and I'll show you the graph in a
few minutes. Now the spiraling together of the two stars has an interesting analogy. Recall
when we discussed extrasolar planets or exoplanets that there were these so-called hot Jupiters,
the massive planets that are largely gaseous and liquid orbiting around the star with a
period of just say a few days, two to four days. Here's a distribution of the number
of planets discovered versus their orbital period around the star that they orbit, and
there's a bunch of them that are massive planets like Jupiter or even more massive, but orbiting
very close to the star. Now they couldn't have formed at those locations because at
those locations the temperatures are really, really high, and if you go back to our model
of the formation of planets, we said that rocky terrestrial planets can form close to
a star due to the gravitational accumulation and collisions between a bunch of small rocky
planetesimals, and gradually these guys all converge and form planets. But to get massive
planets you needed icy objects, rocks and ices as well, and condensed gases to accumulate
into something like an earth-like or bigger core, and then that core could gravitationally
accumulate any remaining particles and gases and icy blobs out there, and you could build
up then very massive planets because those cores would then attract a lot of hydrogen
and helium and become massive planets, whereas close to the star there was very little hydrogen
and helium to attract, and moreover it was harder to hold on to those gases because of
the high temperatures and the high speeds of the gases and so on. So massive planets
should form far out, not close in. Well, in the exoplanet case we think they formed far
out, but then friction due to sort of a rubbing of these massive planets far out against the
remaining dust and debris in that disk caused them to lose energy, and so in a sense the
star pulling on them was able to get them to spiral in because as these planets were
rubbing against other debris in the disk they lost energy and the star's gravitational influence
became more important relative to the energy that they had, and they spiraled in. Now some
probably spiraled all the way into the star and got eaten, others as this diagram suggests
may have stopped shortly before reaching the star because in the immediate vicinity of
the star there may not be much debris, gas and dust with which to have any frictional
effect against the planet because the star's wind can clear out a little cavity near it
which is relatively empty of debris, so maybe as these big Jupiters migrated in they then
stopped near the star because there was an absence of this frictional drag very close
to the star, or maybe some actually did get eaten we're not sure, but in any case this
spiraling in of the big Jupiters that were formed far out and felt friction against the
debris surrounding them thus losing energy and coming closer to the star is analogous
to two stars orbiting one another releasing gravitational waves and in a sense this is
kind of a friction, it's a gravitational friction that releases energy and causes the
two stars to spiral in toward one another, so I just thought I'd bring that up because
it ties together two seemingly very different subjects. Now as the orbits get smaller and
the orbital period decreases the pulses of the pulsar from the neutron star that you
see as a pulsar start arriving at different times because if the thing were stationary
it would go beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, now if it's orbiting something sometimes it goes
beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep,
beep, beep, that kind of thing, but if the orbital period is changing and in this case
specifically decreasing then you can measure this change of beep, beep, beep, beep, beep,
And it starts going faster, you know, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep,
you know, it's changing.
I'm really bad about getting sound effects, so you'll pardon me, but I think you get what's
going on.
By measuring the pulsar, which is a great clock, they could measure the orbital period changing.
And here is the effect.
If you measure the time at which the two stars are closest together, and if they remained
closest together in a way expected from elliptical orbits that aren't changing with time, that
is, that are not getting closer and closer together, you would get a horizontal line
of zero here.
But if the orbits are getting closer and closer together, then the time at which the two stars
are closest together in their elliptical orbits changes.
And this is a measure of the cumulative effect of the change over the course of about three
decades.
The dots are the data, the measurements, and the curve is the prediction from general
relativity, and you can see that the prediction matches the data perfectly.
And this is a big effect, and so it's just fantastic that this was actually measured.
And Russell Hulse, who was a graduate student at the time that he discovered the binary
pulsar, and his advisor, Joe Taylor, measured this effect over many years and showed that
it exactly confirms what the prediction was from general relativity.
And they received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1993 for their discovery of the binary
pulsar and for the subsequent measurement of this general relativistic effect, the single
best known test of general relativity that we have right now.
In 2003, an even more closely spaced binary pulsar was found, one with an orbital period
of just two hours or so.
And in this case, both of the neutron stars are actually visible as pulsars.
One has a period of 23 milliseconds, and the other has a period of 2.8 seconds.
But anyway, they orbit each other in about two and a half hours, much shorter than the
original binary pulsar where the orbital period was eight hours.
And you can actually measure that the orbit is shrinking by seven millimeters a day.
Now this doesn't sound like much to you, right?
But it's a lot.
I mean, an orbit shrinking by seven millimeters per day is really quite a lot and is easily
measurable, and this system as well then has confirmed quantitatively the predictions of
general relativity in a very, very strong way.
Well a related effect is gravitational lensing.
And we've already encountered this when we considered the deflection of starlight by
the sun or by other massive objects.
Here's the starlight that would have gone in a straight line, a Euclidean line had there
not been the sun's presence there.
But in the sun's presence, it gets bent or deflected, and this is what Eddington measured.
Well if you have an object in between us and a background object, then all the light rays
from that background object traveling toward us get bent.
And you get sort of a gravitational focusing of the rays toward us.
So here an observer looking at an intrinsically point-like particle might actually see a ring,
what's called an Einstein ring, because Einstein actually predicted that this effect should
happen although he thought it would never actually be observed.
He thought it was too small an effect to observe.
But here this light ray got bent toward our line of sight, so we think it's coming from
over here.
And this one got bent toward our line of sight, and so we think it's coming from here.
And the ones out of the plane of the screen are also bent, and in a perfectly symmetric
situation you get this ring.
Now usually the ring is not so perfect as is shown in this extremely idealized situation.
Usually they're small deviations from symmetry that cause the ring to break up a little bit
into smaller units, into little blobs.
But in some cases you do see rings like this, and first I want to show you an animation
of what would be seen if say a black hole were traveling across our field of view.
And we see background galaxies back there, and the black hole's gravity distorts them,
and right there you got an Einstein ring.
Did you see that one?
It was an actual Einstein ring, and all these other ones, there was another one where the
distortion of the galaxies is so strong around the gravitational field of the black hole
that you can actually see these rings.
And I particularly like the one where the black hole passed right between us and this
bright galaxy here.
The other ones just sort of curved around, but if I stop the animation right when the
black hole is between us and that background galaxy, you can see the beautiful Einstein
ring.
Now this is just an animation you might say, and so have we really seen these things in
real life?
Well we have.
Here's a case where there's a foreground object along the line of sight toward a background
object, and the background object has been lensed, has been gravitationally lensed by
the foreground object into a nicely symmetrical ring with a few little lumps and things in
it.
But that's a beautiful ring seen at visible wavelengths with the Hubble Space Telescope.
Here's a slightly distorted ring seen at radio wavelengths, and again this is thought to be
gravitational lensing of a background galaxy by a foreground galaxy or cluster of galaxies.
As I mentioned, deviations from symmetry usually lead to the appearance of several discrete
objects, so an observer might see not a ring, but several images or mirages of the background
green object that was lensed by this foreground yellow object.
And we will encounter this when we consider quasars later on.
There have been a number of quasars where the configuration is much like what is seen
in this diagram, where the background object actually gets imaged into several discrete
objects or mirages, in this case four.
So here's a foreground galaxy, gravitationally lensing a single background quasar, making
it look like four quasars, and each of these images is a mirage of what you would have
seen had the galaxy not been in the foreground not gravitationally lensing the light from
the background quasar.
So that's really great.
Now suppose your resolution, your clarity isn't sufficient to show you the individual
dots into which the quasar was lensed, or the ring into which it was lensed.
Even if your clarity isn't great enough to see that, you will see an apparent brightening
of that object because of the focusing of light rays toward you.
So suppose there's a ring or four dots or whatever, the cumulative brightness of the
ring or the four dots is greater than what would have been the case had there not been
this gravitational focusing of light.
So you get a brightening of the object if it's exactly along your line of sight toward
a foreground lensing object.
This is a great effect because it can be used to detect the presence of foreground gravitationally
lensing objects, even if you can't see them using visible light.
Because what they do is they get along the line of sight toward some background star,
focus that star's light toward us, and that star's light gets brighter because of this
focusing effect.
Now if the focusing is due to a foreground star rather than a massive galaxy or cluster
of galaxies, it's usually called gravitational microlensing rather than just gravitational
lensing.
But the idea is that it travels across your line of sight, say it's a star that's moving,
and if it travels exactly along your line of sight to a background star, that star's
light can be focused toward you and amplified, making it look like that star is brighter.
Now this can be used to detect invisible objects like brown dwarfs.
Suppose instead of a star passing between us and a background star, you have something
that's hard to see, like a brown dwarf or even a black hole.
There would still be this focusing effect and you would see the background star brighten.
So here's an animation that shows this.
We're going to zoom into a cluster of stars, and if you look at one star in particular,
this one right there, and watch its apparent brightness there.
It's brightening because a dark foreground object, a black hole or a brown dwarf or something
else that's pretty dark, passed exactly along the line of sight to that star, temporarily
brightening the appearance of that star.
And indeed, some brown dwarfs have been detected this way, some lone black holes wandering
around in the galaxy have been detected this way, and even some isolated free-floating
planets have been apparently detected by their gravitational microlensing of a background
star.
In the case of exoplanets, you even have a situation like this where you might have
an exoplanet orbiting a star and the star produces some gravitational microlensing,
but then the planet orbiting the star also produces some gravitational microlensing.
So here's what I mean.
The apparent brightness of a background star rises with time and then declines as the foreground
star passes across our line of sight to the background star.
But then there's a sharp spike as the planet orbiting that foreground star also passes
exactly along our line of sight to the background star.
So here we are.
We've got this background star.
First the foreground star passes directly along our line of sight to the background
star, causing this gradual brightening and fading.
But later on, the planet that is right next to this foreground star passes exactly along
our line of sight to the background star, and that's what causes this sharp spike.
In a sense, you could call it gravitational nanolensing instead of microlensing by a star.
It's nanolensing by a planet, but people don't call it that.
I just kind of thought of that right now.
Anyway, as I mentioned when I discussed exoplanets many lectures ago, recently in 2005, the discovery
of a five EarthMast planet was discovered through this gravitational microlensing effect.
This effect has the potential to lead to the discovery of many more exoplanets having
relatively small mass, because even an EarthMast planet passing directly along the line of
sight to a background star will cause a rather noticeable sudden brightening of that star's
light due to this gravitational focusing effect.
So you can find relatively low mass planets this way.
Now the disadvantage is you can't just point to a particular star and say, I want to find
an exoplanet around that star, because the chances that that star and whatever exoplanet
is orbiting it passes exactly along the line of sight to a background star are small.
Those chances are small.
But statistically, if you look at many, many stars, some of them will pass along the line
of sight to background stars and cause this effect, and so you can statistically find
many exoplanets this way as the technique gets refined.
Finally, there's another test that I want to tell you about general relativity, and
that is that a rotating object drags space around it, drags space time.
In other words, space itself rotates around a rotating object.
There's a satellite that completed its data gathering in 2006 after just a couple of years.
It's called Gravity Probe B, and the data are now being analyzed.
The satellite knew its orientation at all times by having a telescope that pointed at
a particular star called IM Pegasi, and within the satellite there were some gyroscopes,
which are these spinning balls, and you can tell the orientation of the gyroscope very
precisely using a special technique using superconducting magnets and all that.
And if the gyroscopes are changing their orientation, you can measure it, and there are two effects,
one called the geodetic effect, which is 6.6 arc seconds per year.
That's well known already, and the other, which has never been tested, is this frame
dragging, which is a rotation of 0.042 arc seconds per year.
It's a very small effect, and you can see here just 0.042 of an arc second per year
is the rate at which the orientation of this gyroscope should be changing as a result of
this frame dragging of the fact that the gyroscope, the spinning top, finds itself in a space
around the rotating earth, which itself is dragged by the rotating earth, and that would
be really cool to measure.
So they're measuring the orientation of these gyroscopes by having the gyroscopes be superconducting,
they have a superconducting layer of niobium on the gyroscope, and it generates a magnetic
field, and you can measure the direction of that magnetic field with a superconducting
loop and a squid, a superconducting quantum interference device.
And so, this orientation can be measured, the effect should be measurable given the
precision with which the physicists made this spacecraft and its contents, and I'm really
hoping that they will confirm this effect of general relativity soon.
If they do, it'll be great.
If they don't, I actually believe in relativity so much that I'll actually possibly even think
that maybe there was something wrong with the experiment.
Now I know that's not the way you're supposed to think, but I hope I've shown you that there's
been so many tests already of relativity that we really do think that on large scales it's
true, it's correct, quantitatively, but it's always possible, and we should keep our minds
open to the possibility that it might be false, and so any experimental new test is welcomed
with open arms.
