My discussion of general relativity had been motivated in part by the existence of neutron
stars, very dense stars that form as a result of the collapse of the core of a massive star.
And I said that near a neutron star, relativistic effects are important because it's so dense
and the gravitational field is so strong.
Well, as weird as neutron stars are, it turns out there's something even weirder, even more
dense with even stronger gravity, and that's the black hole.
A black hole is a region of space where material is compressed to such a high density and the
local gravitational field is so strong that nothing, not even light, can escape, hence
the name black hole.
If you shine a light on it, nothing gets reflected, no light gets emitted from the black hole,
nothing gets transmitted through the black hole, it's just black.
And here is my award-winning photograph of a black hole.
Now, normally this goes for $10,000, but for you, I'll sell it at a special price.
If you get a special price, or you can just make one yourself if you want, keep the lens
cap on your camera if you have a traditional camera while you're taking the exposure, it'll
be black.
Or if you're using a computer software program like I did, just choose a black slide background
and you'll get this prize-winning photograph.
So don't contact me, I won't sell it to you.
Anyway, black holes appear very frequently, of course, in pop culture and especially in
science fiction, books and movies, they're all over the place, you know, people use them
to travel from one universe to another and I'll discuss that in a few lectures, doesn't
really happen, but I'll discuss why mathematically one might think that it happens.
And I've seen many cartoons featuring black holes.
One of my favorite came on a greeting card, it said something like, you know, this card
is late and there was a guy standing in a room and a black hole suddenly appeared for
no reason in his black hole, in his room and his TV set and his dog and the couch were
all sort of being sucked in by this black hole and that was his excuse for sending the
card late.
But anyway, you know, there are all these cartoons and stuff and I'm sure you've seen
them.
Well, why would a black hole form?
I mentioned that a neutron star held up by neutron degeneracy pressure can have only
a maximum mass.
It's kind of like a white dwarf's maximum mass, which is the Chandrasekhar limit.
In the case of the white dwarf, it's the mass beyond which electron degeneracy pressure simply
can't hold it up anymore.
But neutron degeneracy pressure suffers from the same problem.
You can't just keep on piling up more and more material and expect these neutrons to
keep on supporting this against collapse.
I mean, the neutrons themselves don't really exert any pressure.
It's their configuration in these lowest energy levels of the apartment diagram that I've
shown several times now that causes the majority of them to have significant amounts of energy
and hence pressure keeping the star from collapsing.
But if you pile up more and more material, there's only a certain limit to which these
neutrons can exert this weird quantum mechanical degeneracy pressure and the whole thing becomes
unstable to collapse.
Exactly what the limiting mass is for a neutron star is not really known.
We think it's something like two to three solar masses.
Rather, general arguments suggest that it's around three solar masses, but we don't know
more specifically than that because we don't really know the structure of matter at nuclear
densities very well.
The best we can measure in laboratories are atomic nuclei, but there are small things
sitting there all alone.
What if you had a whole bunch of neutrons, like in a neutron star, 1.4 solar masses of
them sitting in a sphere like this, the diameter of a city?
That may behave very differently from single atomic nuclei, so we just don't know how they
behave in great detail.
People use these general arguments and they say, well, they probably can't exist beyond
about three solar masses.
But if you include rotation, you can actually get a neutron star to be stable, perhaps up
to something like five solar masses.
But beyond five, nearly all physicists agree that unless you have some really weird form
of matter unlike that of a typical neutron star, the thing will have to collapse to form
a black hole, to form a region where the gravity is so strong that nothing, not even
light, can escape.
You can call this gravity's ultimate victory.
Nothing has enough pressure or energy to prevent eventual gravitational collapse if
the thing is massive enough.
What kinds of stars ultimately give rise to neutron stars at the end of their lives and
what other kinds of stars give rise to black holes?
We're not sure.
Clearly it's the massive stars that give rise to both.
Now, I mentioned that we have stars of 10, 20, 30, 40 solar masses initially.
It turns out that the most massive star ever found definitively, with a definitively measured
mass, is about 60 solar masses.
And there are some other stars which we think have masses up to about 100 solar masses.
And so that's about the limit that we think we've observed.
Theoretically, they should not be any more massive than about 100 solar masses because
beyond that mass, the radiation pressure of a star itself tends to tear it apart and prevent
its formation as the material is gravitationally accumulating.
If there's too much material, the radiation being emitted by that material prevents more
material from being accumulated.
So that's sort of the limiting mass of a star initially, about 100 solar masses.
And people for a long time thought that, well, maybe the stars that have 10 to 30 solar masses
initially form neutron stars at the end, having a mass of 1.4 solar masses and the rest gets
blown away.
And maybe the ones between 30 and 100 solar masses initially are the ones that finally
collapse to become black holes.
That was the standard line for a long time.
But we now know that the most massive stars have strong winds.
They generate this pressure, which tends to evaporate away the outer layers.
And here's an actual picture of a star whose winds are blowing away the outer layers of
the star in a roughly spherically symmetric way in this case, or in a more bipolar way,
in the case of Ada Karina, a very massive, bright star in the southern hemisphere.
So massive stars lose mass over the course of their lives through winds.
And they can also lose mass through accretion or transfer of matter onto a companion object.
And I've illustrated this several times already.
So there's a number of ways in which stars can lose mass.
And it is now thought that mass loss through winds occurs best for the most massive stars
because their radiation pressure is the strongest.
So maybe the most massive stars are the ones that are most able to get rid of the majority
of their envelope and end up with a relatively small core that could conceivably become a
neutron star rather than a black hole.
And maybe it's the less massive, sort of pretty massive stars that aren't able to get rid
of as much material and end up with a more massive core than the more massive stars.
And then that core might collapse to form a black hole.
So some people think that, well, maybe there's a window between 20 and 40 solar masses initially
where a black hole forms at the end.
And below 20 solar masses initially, a neutron star forms at the end.
And above 40 solar masses initially maybe a neutron star forms at the end.
That's sort of speculative.
But it might be this 20 to 40 solar mass window where the star ultimately collapses to a black hole.
And there is some recent, although still controversial, evidence for this.
There's a cluster that's been studied called Westerland 1.
And in this cluster, the Chandra X-ray Observatory has discovered a neutron star.
There it is right there.
Yet in this cluster, there are also some stars that are 40 solar masses.
Okay?
Now, if all the stars formed at the same time, and if there's already a neutron star there,
that neutron star came from a star more massive than 40 solar masses.
Because the more massive stars have a shorter evolutionary time scale.
They burn up their fuel more quickly because they're more luminous.
So if there are 40 solar mass stars observed in this cluster, that means that whatever
produced the neutron star was initially more than 40 solar masses.
And it produced a neutron star, not a black hole.
That's suggestive of this idea that the most massive stars get rid of a lot of their mass
and form neutron stars.
But you know, maybe not all the stars formed at the same time.
How do we know that exactly all of them formed at the same time?
So this is still controversial, but it's interesting evidence.
There's also evidence from Supernova 1987A that stars at about 20 solar masses might
form a black hole.
And the reason that we think that is that Supernova 87A had a core that collapsed and
it at least temporarily formed a neutron star.
We really do know that because this burst of neutrinos was emitted from the hot neutron
star that was formed at least for a while.
And even at a distance of 170,000 light years from us, there were so many of these neutrinos
that 50 billion of them passed through every square centimeter of your bodies in 1987.
And every square centimeter of these large underground tanks of water through which the
neutrinos passed.
Every square centimeter had 50 billion of them, yet only a few were detected in each
tank, only 10 were detected in each tank.
From these numbers, you can calculate how many total there were knowing the interaction
cross-section of a neutrino and all that.
And you figure out that there were something like 10 to the 58 power neutrinos, some unbelievable
number of neutrinos was emitted by the object inside Supernova 1987A when the core finally
collapsed.
And that just couldn't have been a black hole.
You have to have a neutron star.
Only a neutron star emits this gargantuan number of neutrinos.
So definitely a neutron star formed in Supernova 1987A.
Yet now when we look at the remains of Supernova 1987A, we see neither a pulsar in the middle
nor any other evidence for a neutron star accreting or gathering material from its surroundings.
There's just nothing much going on in the center.
Now maybe the neutron star is there, but it's not pulsing it.
It's not a pulsar that's on.
That's conceivable.
But you'd still expect some accretion of material by the neutron star from its surroundings,
and we just don't see that happening.
Well, maybe some sort of a wind or something from it prevents the accretion.
We just, we're not sure yet.
But I and many other people think that there's a 50-50 chance that the neutron star was temporarily
formed in Supernova 1987A, but subsequently collapsed to form a black hole.
And the progenitor star of Supernova 1987A was a 20-solar mass star.
So if at 20 solar masses you get a black hole, and at 15 maybe you get a neutron star, then
again this suggests that there may be this window between 20 and 40 solar masses, which
at least for single solitary stars leads to black holes at the end rather than a neutron
star.
If the star is a companion to another star, then there can be transfer of matter and life
gets more complicated when you have a companion sometimes, and that's the case for stars.
And so life becomes better as well if you have a companion.
Maybe that's the case for stars as well.
I'm not a star, so I don't know.
But in any case, the calculations are more complicated when you have a companion star
interacting with it.
But in the case of 87A, maybe there's a black hole there.
We just don't know.
We need to do some more research.
Okay, so why should an object that's compressed to a high density appear black?
Why should no light be emitted from it?
You can consider a Newtonian plausibility argument.
Looking at Newton's law of gravity, F, the force is equal to G times the mass of one
object times the mass of the other object divided by the square of the distance between
their centers of mass.
Now suppose M1 and M2 are constant, so suppose M1 is the Earth and M2 is a ball, and there's
a distance between them, there's a certain force acting on the ball.
And if I were to throw the ball up, you know, the force brings it back down.
Now I could in principle throw the ball faster and faster and faster, and it would go higher
and higher up.
And if I threw it really fast, had I eaten my Wheaties this morning, I could maybe throw
it at a speed at which it would never come back down to the Earth, and that's called
the escape velocity, the minimum speed which is needed to get an object to escape from,
that is never come back down to the Earth, or whatever object you're tossing it from.
So we consider this escape velocity argument, and then we go back to the diagram and we
say, suppose we were to squish the Earth down to half of its present radius, keeping its
mass the same.
Well then M1 and M2 remain constant in that equation, but the distance went to one-half
of the previous distance, one-half squared is one-fourth, and the reciprocal of that
is four.
So the force is four times greater, and it turns out I have to throw the ball faster
by a certain amount to get it to escape, the escape velocity increases.
If I then go and squish the Earth down even more, keeping its mass the same, the force
increases still more, and the escape velocity increases as well.
Now the escape velocity actually increases in proportion to one over the square root
of the radius of the massive object, so even though the force is quadrupled, if I made
the object half as large, the escape velocity only goes up by something like one over the
square root of the distance, so it goes up by the square root of two, that gets mathematical.
I don't really care about the math here.
I just want to illustrate that with a more and more compressed object, the escape velocity
increases, and you might conceive of an object that's been compressed so much that the escape
velocity reaches the speed of light.
And such an argument indeed was used in the late 18th century by John Mitchell and Pierre
Simon de Laplace to suggest that there may be objects in the universe that are so dense
that nothing can get out, not even light, and that would be a black hole.
So they used sort of a Newtonian plausibility argument.
Now the Newtonian plausibility argument gives fortuitously the right formula for the radius
to which you would need to compress an object in order for its escape velocity to reach
the speed of light.
So you have to compress an object to some radius or smaller for its escape velocity
to be at the speed of light or bigger.
And that radius is called the Schwarzschild radius.
It's given by two times g times the mass of the object divided by the square of the speed
of light.
And as I said, the Newtonian argument just gives you the right answer, but to do it right,
you have to use general relativity, and this was first done by the German physicist Karl
Schwarzschild in 1916, shortly after Einstein published the general theory of relativity.
So this Schwarzschild radius sort of marks the boundary of a black hole.
You can't see anything that's beyond that boundary, that's within that radius.
And curiously, Schwarzschild in German means black shield.
Schwarz's black shield is shield.
So you can't see beyond this black shield, and I actually doubt that's why Karl Schwarzschild
was doing these calculations, but it's funny that it turns out that his name is extremely
relevant to what this object ends up being.
So this Schwarzschild radius is the radius beyond which, if you compress the star, nothing
not even light could get out.
And the formula, r sub s equals 2 gm over c squared, shows that the radius of this, shows
that the radius of this object is proportional to its mass.
So the more mass of the object, the bigger is the minimum mass radius to which you need
to compress it in order for it to become a black hole.
And you can calculate how big that would be, say for a 10 solar mass star, and it turns
out that the Schwarzschild radius is about 30 kilometers.
So if you took a 10 solar mass star, and if you compressed it down to 30 kilometers or
less, as gravity might do, then it would form a black hole.
Now some black holes are very massive, we'll discuss later, black holes in the centers
of galaxies, and they might have a mass up to 1 billion solar masses, and in that case
you'd have a 3 billion kilometer radius for the Schwarzschild radius, and that's comparable
to the distance between the sun and Uranus.
So the Schwarzschild radii of these supermassive black holes in galaxies are comparable to the
size of the solar system.
Now you can also go down to small masses and simply ask yourself, what would the Earth's
radius have to be in order for the Earth to be a black hole?
Now the Earth isn't going to be a black hole, but suppose you had some giant cosmic vice
and you squeezed the Earth, you know, how much would you have to squeeze it to turn it into
a black hole?
Turns out to a radius of about 1 centimeter.
Now the Earth's mass is pretty big, it's 6 times 10 to the 24th power kilograms, okay,
and all this mass, right, and you have to squeeze it down to 1 centimeter for it to
become a black hole.
Unlikely, in fact, there's no physical process we know of that would do that, but it's fun
to play with these numbers.
A human is, say, 60 kilograms.
To what radius would you have to squeeze a human to make a black hole?
Turns out to be a radius of 10 to the minus 23rd centimeters.
That's 10 orders of magnitude smaller than a proton.
Now a proton is yay big and I exaggerate a lot, okay, so you'd have to squeeze me down
60 kilometers, 60 kilograms of me, down to 10 to the minus 23 centimeters to get me to
be a black hole.
You'd need nearly a trillion kilograms to have a black hole the size of a proton, okay,
so black holes are really small.
The spherical surface having a radius equal to the Schwarzschild radius is called an event
horizon, and it's a horizon because you can't see beyond it, and it's an event because if
you were beyond this horizon, you would never get out.
I mean, it's bye-bye to you, right?
That's a really serious event in your life if you go beyond the event horizon, so once
you're inside, you're always inside.
You can't get out because nothing, not even light, can get out, and so you could say abandon
hope, all ye who enter here, quoting Dante's Inferno.
It's kind of like if you go to Oakland Raiders games, you'll notice that there's a zone called
the black hole zone, and you're sort of drawn into it, and then you can't get out because
none of the fans will let you out once you're in the black hole zone, so here they all are,
the black hole and atomic moss, and I don't know, anyway, all these signs, kind of funny.
So this matter, once it's inside the black hole, it can't get out, and gravity is still
acting on it, so it keeps on collapsing, and technically it goes down to a point of
infinite density, a point called a singularity.
Now quantum mechanical effects will surely modify this, and I'll discuss the basics of
string theory later on, and I'll tell you a little bit about what physicists are thinking
nowadays, not that we know for sure what's going on inside a black hole, but you know,
it probably doesn't become a point of infinite density, it might become some little package
of energy of very small size, and not quite mathematically infinite density, but at least
according to classical general relativity, that's what happens to stuff inside a black
hole, and it's interesting that William Jefferson Clinton, the 42nd president of the United
States, was interested in questions like what's inside a black hole.
He said in an address on the 21st of January 2000, there are so many more questions yet
to be answered, and so I wonder, are we alone in the universe, well we've already discussed
that, what causes gamma ray bursts, I'll discuss that later, what makes up the missing
mass of the universe, well that'll be another topic of my course, and then what's in those
black holes anyway?
And maybe the biggest question of all, how in the wide world can you add three billion
dollars in market capitalization simply by adding .com to the end of a name?
I'm not going to discuss that in this course, okay?
So we don't know quite what will happen to material in a black hole, but we can sort
of answer Clinton's question, it'll turn into a singularity.
Now despite the correct equation given by the Newtonian argument, the only really correct
way to treat a black hole and its surroundings is to use general relativity, because the gravity
is so strong.
So really in relativity what happens is that light is trapped not by the gravitational
force GMM over D squared, because light doesn't have any mass, M, so that formula really breaks
down.
Instead light is trapped by the extreme curvature of space-time around a dense object.
So we go back to our favorite diagram of a ball distorting a rubber sheet, making it
sort of bulge out into a dimension different from the original dimensions of the sheet.
And if you make the ball denser and denser, that bulge becomes deeper and steeper, okay?
It's harder and harder for light to get out.
And indeed light coming from a strong gravitational field gets gravitationally bent and redshifted.
So here's a flashlight emitting a beam of light from the surface of a star that's collapsing,
and that beam of light gets gravitationally redshifted.
I discussed that in the previous lecture, and it also gets bent.
Now if you collapse the star some more, you can get to a situation where, okay, if you
point the light straight up, it doesn't get bent because it's going straight up, but it
does get gravitationally redshifted.
If it goes at an angle, it gets bent, but if you shine it tangent to the surface of
the star, that is in this direction here, it gets bent so much that it actually goes
into orbit around the star, and it'll hit you in the back of the head here.
So this is called the photon sphere.
If you're at this point, which happens to be one and a half times the short-shell radius
and you shine a flashlight off of a mirror or your bald spot or whatever, it reflects
off, goes around all the way in a circle, and you could see your bald spot, you know,
in front of you by shining the flashlight off of your bald spot there.
So not that that's a very practical application of a mirror, but this is sort of a gravitational
mirror.
So light can orbit at this photon sphere.
And now let's contract the star even further.
It turns out that most of the light starts getting completely absorbed by the star because
the gravity bends it so much that it just falls into the star.
And the only light that's able to get out is the narrow beam of light that comes out
through what's called the exit cone, pointing basically upwards but having a certain opening
angle.
That's the only light that would actually get out.
And once you contract the star enough so that the exit cone's radius squishes down
to zero, then no light can escape whatsoever, and you have a black hole.
And that happens when the star collapses to the short-shell radius or below.
So at that point you have an event horizon surrounded by a sphere of photons that go around
in circles at about one and a half times the radius of the event horizon.
This would be the structure of a collapsed star.
Now as the warping gets stronger and stronger, as shown in this diagram, you get these steeper
and steeper sides to the well.
And when the sides are vertical, then you get a black hole, and that's where the event
horizon is, as shown in this little picture here.
So the light gets trapped either by going around sort of in circles like this, round
and around and around, or you can think of it another way.
You can say that maybe the light is going along this direction, the radial direction,
trying to get out, but in so doing, it loses all of its energy due to gravitational redshifting.
The gravitational redshift is infinity, and so by the time the light gets out, there's
no energy left, so in a sense the light didn't get out.
So the light gets trapped by a black hole because of this extreme curving of space-time.
And here's a picture of a black hole in the Large Magellanic Cloud where you can see sort
of this representation of the warped space-time, where the space in particular, shown here,
becomes so steeply warped that light can't get out because it would be like trying to
climb up the sides of a well that's vertical, and there's oil in the well, and you just
can't do it.
I mean, maybe you can do it, maybe attach some footholds or something, but it's such
a steep well that by the time you get to the top, you've lost all of your energy, and if
you're light, you cease to exist.
Far from a black hole, the properties of space are basically normal.
So if the sun were to turn into a black hole, and it won't, okay, but if you had some cosmic
vice that did this to the sun, first of all, it had to have a Schwarzschild radius of only
three kilometers, so that would be the size of its event horizon.
And far from a black hole, you wouldn't notice that the gravity is any different from what
it was when the sun was just the sun, a gaseous ball.
I mean, F equals GMM over D squared already tells you that.
The distance hasn't changed between you and the center of mass, and the mass of you and
the sun hasn't changed.
You've just turned the sun into a black hole, but you don't care at this big distance.
So it's not true that black holes are some giant cosmic vacuum cleaners sucking up everything
around them, like that.
I mean, they're often portrayed that way in the comic strips, but that's not actually
what happens, all right?
Far from a black hole, the nature of space and time is basically normal, and you don't
notice the effects unless you're actually quite close to the black hole or have atomic
clocks, like the ones used in the GPS satellites.
There's another interesting aspect of black holes, and that is that once a black hole
from a collapsing star has reached equilibrium, that is, during the collapse, all sorts of
weird stuff might be going on, but once, in a sense, you've settled down and formed a
black hole that's just sitting there and not experiencing the collapse of the star anymore.
That black hole is very easy to describe.
It only has mass, charge, and spin, or angular momentum.
It has no other details.
Physicists say that this is the no-hair theorem.
A black hole has no hair.
In the sense that there are no details that you need to describe the properties of the
black hole.
It's completely described by its mass, its charge, and its angular momentum, so no black
holes with hair, okay?
Very simple objects.
You might say, well, okay, but these black holes, they're kind of weird.
Are there any alternatives to them?
Do we really know that they form?
Well, first of all, we think that neutron star material is about as dense as it can get,
but some physicists have recently suggested that there could be even denser material,
kind of like that of a neutron star, which leads to an object smaller than a normal neutron
star, but nevertheless bigger than the event horizon of a black hole.
Some physicists have suggested such material, and there's been some observational evidence
for it.
For example, an object called 3C58 is a neutron star-like thing, but the temperature derived
for this neutron star from Chandra X-ray Observatory data is lower than you would have anticipated
for a classical neutron star.
You can get a lower temperature if the object consists of some sort of weird material, not
just a bunch of neutrons.
Maybe it consists of things called kaons and pions and other weird kinds of particles,
and they could achieve a denser configuration than a neutron star and avoid being a black
hole.
This is still controversial, but maybe there are pion and kaon stars, and those are weird
particles, and you can take the teaching company particle physics course if you want to learn
more about them.
More controversially still is an object that was called a quark star some time ago.
This is an object that again looks like a neutron star, but the data suggests that it's considerably
smaller than a normal neutron star, and the astronomers suggested that maybe it consists
not of neutrons, but of the constituent particles of neutrons called quarks.
So, here's a bunch of neutrons.
Each neutron consists of three quarks, the constituent particles, and they're kept a
bit far apart from each other in a sense because each neutron is a little sphere, a little
ball of these quarks.
And that gives rise to a neutron star having a radius of, say, 10 kilometers.
If the quarks instead of being confined to neutrons were free, then they could get closer
together and you would have a denser object with a smaller radius.
Now there are much more mundane explanations for the data that explain it pretty well,
so I actually don't think that the quark star hypothesis has been substantiated with experimental
data.
Nevertheless, it's possible that there are types of stars that are smaller and denser
than a classical neutron star, yet not truly a black hole, not smaller than the horizon.
Nevertheless, if you have enough mass, even those objects would become unstable, and at
least theoretically should collapse to form a black hole if they have enough mass.
And in the next lecture, I will show you that indeed we have abundant evidence for the existence
of black holes in the universe.
